
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Mar 29. pii: S0006-291X(16)30432-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.119. [Epub ahead of print]

The CCR4-NOT deadenylase activity contributes to generation of induced
pluripotent stem cells.

Zukeran A(1), Takahashi A(2), Takaoka S(3), Aly Mohamed HM(3), Suzuki T(3),
Ikematsu S(4), Yamamoto T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signal Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate
University, 1919-1 Tancha, Onna, Okinawa, 904-0495, Japan; Department of
Bioresources Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Okinawa College, 905 
Henoko, Nago, Okinawa, 905-2192, Japan. (2)Cell Signal Unit, Okinawa Institute of
Science and Technology Graduate University, 1919-1 Tancha, Onna, Okinawa,
904-0495, Japan. Electronic address: akinori.takahashi@oist.jp. (3)Cell Signal
Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, 1919-1
Tancha, Onna, Okinawa, 904-0495, Japan. (4)Department of Bioresources
Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Okinawa College, 905 Henoko, Nago,
Okinawa, 905-2192, Japan. (5)Cell Signal Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and
Technology Graduate University, 1919-1 Tancha, Onna, Okinawa, 904-0495, Japan.
Electronic address: tadashi.yamamoto@oist.jp.

Somatic cells can be reprogrammed as induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) by
introduction of the transcription factors, OCT3/4, KLF4, SOX2, and c-MYC. The
CCR4-NOT complex is the major deadenylase in eukaryotes. Its subunits Cnot1,
Cnot2, and Cnot3 maintain pluripotency and self-renewal of mouse and human
embryonic stem (ES) cells and contribute to the transition from partial to full
iPSCs. However, little is known about how the CCR4-NOT complex
post-transcriptionally regulates the reprograming process. Here, we show that the
CCR4-NOT deadenylase subunits Cnot6, Cnot6l, Cnot7, and Cnot8, participate in
regulating iPSC generation. Cnot1 knockdown suppresses expression levels of
Cnot6, Cnot6l, Cnot7, and Cnot8 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and
decreases the number of alkaline phosphatase (ALP)-positive colonies after iPSC
induction. Intriguingly, Cnot1 depletion allows Eomes and p21 mRNAs to persist,
increasing their expression levels. Both mRNAs have longer poly(A) tails in
Cnot1-depleted cells. Conversely, forced expression of a combination of Cnot6,
Cnot6l, Cnot7, and Cnot8 increases the number of ALP-positive colonies after iPSC
induction and decreases expression levels of Eomes and p21 mRNAs. Based on these 
observations, we propose that the CCR4-NOT deadenylase activity contributes to
iPSC induction.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 27037025  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Virology. 2016 Mar 18;493:52-59. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2016.03.005. [Epub ahead of
print]

Type 1 interferon licenses naïve CD8 T cells to mediate anti-viral cytotoxicity.

Urban SL(1), Berg LJ(1), Welsh RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Microbiology Program, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, United States. (2)Department
of Pathology, Immunology and Microbiology Program, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, United States. Electronic address:
Raymond.Welsh@umassmed.edu.

Naïve T cells, unlike memory T cells, exhibit very limited effector function in
response to cognate antigen, but exposure to type 1 interferon (IFN) prior to
cognate antigen allows for rapid manifestation of effector functions. A full
assessment of the functions of these IFN-sensitized otherwise naïve T cells has
not been made, nor has their capacity to be effector cells in vivo. We describe
here that IFN-sensitized naïve T cells in the absence of cognate antigen adopt a 
partial activated phenotype distinguished by the upregulation of the surface
activation marker CD69, effector-associated transcription factors Eomes and IRF4,
and cytotoxicity effector molecule granzyme B. IFN-sensitized naive T cells lysed
target cells in vivo and responded to low concentrations and affinities of
cognate ligands. We suggest that this rapid and sensitive effector function of
IFN-conditioned naïve CD8 T cells may play a role in pathogen control and help
ward off superinfections.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26999026  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Immunol. 2016 Mar 18. pii: 1501921. [Epub ahead of print]

Effector <U+03B3>d T Cell Differentiation Relies on Master but Not Auxiliary Th Cell
Transcription Factors.

Barros-Martins J(1), Schmolka N(1), Fontinha D(1), Pires de Miranda M(1), Simas
JP(1), Brok I(1), Ferreira C(2), Veldhoen M(2), Silva-Santos B(3), Serre K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal; (2)Laboratory for Lymphocyte Signalling and
Development, Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom; and.
(3)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal; Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, 2781-901
Oeiras, Portugal karineserre@medicina.ulisboa.pt bssantos@medicina.ulisboa.pt.
(4)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal; karineserre@medicina.ulisboa.pt
bssantos@medicina.ulisboa.pt.

<U+03B3>d T lymphocytes are programmed into distinct IFN-<U+03B3>-producing CD27(+) (<U+03B3>d27(+))
and IL-17-producing CD27(-) (<U+03B3>d27(-)) subsets that play key roles in protective
or pathogenic immune responses. Although the signature cytokines are shared with 
their aß Th1 (for <U+03B3>d27(+)) and Th17 (for <U+03B3>d27(-)) cell counterparts, we dissect
in this study similarities and differences in the transcriptional requirements of
murine effector <U+03B3>d27(+), <U+03B3>d27(-)CCR6(-), and <U+03B3>d27(-)CCR6(+) <U+03B3>d T cell subsets and
aß T cells. We found they share dependence on the master transcription factors
T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t for IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 production, respectively. However, Eomes is
fully dispensable for IFN-<U+03B3> production by <U+03B3>d T cells. Furthermore, the Th17 cell 
auxiliary transcription factors RORa and BATF are not required for IL-17
production by <U+03B3>d27(-) cell subsets. We also show that <U+03B3>d27(-) (but not <U+03B3>d27(+))
cells become polyfunctional upon IL-1ß plus IL-23 stimulation, cosecreting
IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-22, GM-CSF, and IFN-<U+03B3>. Collectively, our in vitro and in vivo 
data firmly establish the molecular segregation between <U+03B3>d27(+) and <U+03B3>d27(-) T
cell subsets and provide novel insight on the nonoverlapping transcriptional
networks that control the differentiation of effector <U+03B3>d versus aß T cell
subsets.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26994218  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 15;11(3):e0149871. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149871.
eCollection 2016.

A Single 17D Yellow Fever Vaccination Provides Lifelong Immunity;
Characterization of Yellow-Fever-Specific Neutralizing Antibody and T-Cell
Responses after Vaccination.

Wieten RW(1), Jonker EF(2), van Leeuwen EM(3), Remmerswaal EB(3,)(4), Ten Berge
IJ(3,)(4), de Visser AW(2), van Genderen PJ(5), Goorhuis A(1), Visser LG(2),
Grobusch MP(1), de Bree GJ(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Tropical Medicine and Travel Medicine, Department of Infectious
Diseases, Division of Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Department of Infectious Diseases,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands. (3)Department of
Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Renal Transplant Unit, Division of Internal
Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (5)Travel Clinic Havenziekenhuis, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Amsterdam Institute for Global Health and Development, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Prompted by recent amendments of Yellow Fever (YF) vaccination
guidelines from boost to single vaccination strategy and the paucity of clinical 
data to support this adjustment, we used the profile of the YF-specific CD8+
T-cell subset profiles after primary vaccination and neutralizing antibodies as a
proxy for potentially longer lasting immunity.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: PBMCs and serum were collected in six individuals on days
0, 3, 5, 12, 28 and 180, and in 99 individuals >10 years after YF-vaccination.
Phenotypic characteristics of YF- tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells were determined using
class I tetramers. Antibody responses were measured using a standardized plaque
reduction neutralization test (PRNT). Also, characteristics of YF-tetramer
positive CD8+ T-cells were compared between individuals who had received a
primary- and a booster vaccination. YF-tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells were detectable on 
day 12 (median tetramer+ cells as percentage of CD8+ T-cells 0.2%, range
0.07-3.1%). On day 180, these cells were still present (median 0.06%, range
0.02-0.78%). The phenotype of YF-tetramer positive CD8+ T-cells shifted from
acute phase effector cells on day 12, to late differentiated or effector memory
phenotype (CD45RA-/+CD27-) on day 28. Two subsets of YF-tetramer positive T-cells
(CD45RA+CD27- and CD45RA+CD27+) persisted until day 180. Within all phenotypic
subsets, the T-bet: Eomes ratio tended to be high on day 28 after vaccination and
shifted towards predominant Eomes expression on day 180 (median 6.0 (day 28) vs. 
2.2 (day 180) p = 0.0625), suggestive of imprinting compatible with long-lived
memory properties. YF-tetramer positive CD8+ T-cells were detectable up to 18
years post vaccination, YF-specific antibodies were detectable up to 40 years
after single vaccination. Booster vaccination did not increase titers of
YF-specific antibodies (mean 12.5 vs. 13.1, p = 0.583), nor induce frequencies or
alter phenotypes of YF-tetramer+ CD8+ T-cells.
CONCLUSION: The presence of a functionally competent YF-specific memory T-cell
pool 18 years and sufficient titers of neutralizing antibodies 35-40 years after 
first vaccination suggest that single vaccination may be sufficient to provide
long-term immunity.

PMCID: PMC4792480
PMID: 26977808  [PubMed - in process]


5. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 9;7:10933. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10933.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies discovers multiple loci for
chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Berndt SI, Camp NJ, Skibola CF, Vijai J, Wang Z, Gu J, Nieters A, Kelly RS,
Smedby KE, Monnereau A, Cozen W, Cox A, Wang SS, Lan Q, Teras LR, Machado M,
Yeager M, Brooks-Wilson AR, Hartge P, Purdue MP, Birmann BM, Vajdic CM, Cocco P, 
Zhang Y, Giles GG, Zeleniuch-Jacquotte A, Lawrence C, Montalvan R, Burdett L,
Hutchinson A, Ye Y, Call TG, Shanafelt TD, Novak AJ, Kay NE, Liebow M, Cunningham
JM, Allmer C, Hjalgrim H, Adami HO, Melbye M, Glimelius B, Chang ET, Glenn M,
Curtin K, Cannon-Albright LA, Diver WR, Link BK, Weiner GJ, Conde L, Bracci PM,
Riby J, Arnett DK, Zhi D, Leach JM, Holly EA, Jackson RD, Tinker LF, Benavente Y,
Sala N, Casabonne D, Becker N, Boffetta P, Brennan P, Foretova L, Maynadie M,
McKay J, Staines A, Chaffee KG, Achenbach SJ, Vachon CM, Goldin LR, Strom SS,
Leis JF, Weinberg JB, Caporaso NE, Norman AD, De Roos AJ, Morton LM, Severson RK,
Riboli E, Vineis P, Kaaks R, Masala G, Weiderpass E, Chirlaque MD, Vermeulen RC, 
Travis RC, Southey MC, Milne RL, Albanes D, Virtamo J, Weinstein S, Clavel J,
Zheng T, Holford TR, Villano DJ, Maria A, Spinelli JJ, Gascoyne RD, Connors JM,
Bertrand KA, Giovannucci E, Kraft P, Kricker A, Turner J, Ennas MG, Ferri GM,
Miligi L, Liang L, Ma B, Huang J, Crouch S, Park JH, Chatterjee N, North KE,
Snowden JA, Wright J, Fraumeni JF, Offit K, Wu X, de Sanjose S, Cerhan JR,
Chanock SJ, Rothman N, Slager SL.

Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a common lymphoid malignancy with strong
heritability. To further understand the genetic susceptibility for CLL and
identify common loci associated with risk, we conducted a meta-analysis of four
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) composed of 3,100 cases and 7,667 controls
with follow-up replication in 1,958 cases and 5,530 controls. Here we report
three new loci at 3p24.1 (rs9880772, EOMES, P=2.55 × 10(-11)), 6p25.2
(rs73718779, SERPINB6, P=1.97 × 10(-8)) and 3q28 (rs9815073, LPP, P=3.62 ×
10(-8)), as well as a new independent SNP at the known 2q13 locus (rs9308731,
BCL2L11, P=1.00 × 10(-11)) in the combined analysis. We find suggestive evidence 
(P<5 × 10(-7)) for two additional new loci at 4q24 (rs10028805, BANK1, P=7.19 ×
10(-8)) and 3p22.2 (rs1274963, CSRNP1, P=2.12 × 10(-7)). Pathway analyses of new 
and known CLL loci consistently show a strong role for apoptosis, providing
further evidence for the importance of this biological pathway in CLL
susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4786871
PMID: 26956414  [PubMed - in process]


6. Development. 2016 Mar 7. pii: dev.127936. [Epub ahead of print]

Activation of a T-box-Otx2-Gsc gene network independent of TBP and TBP-related
factors.

Gazdag E(1), Jacobi UG(1), van Kruijsbergen I(1), Weeks DL(2), Veenstra GJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University, Department of Molecular Developmental Biology, Faculty of 
Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. (2)University of Iowa, Department of Biochemistry, Iowa City, IA,
USA. (3)Radboud University, Department of Molecular Developmental Biology,
Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands g.veenstra@science.ru.nl.

The developmental program relies on activating and repressing regulatory
influences which are faithfully integrated at the core promoter of individual
genes. In vertebrates, the basal machinery recognizing the core promoter includes
TATA binding protein (TBP) and two TBP-related factors. In Xenopus embryos the
three TBP family factors are all essential for development and required for
expression of distinct subsets of genes. Here we report on a non-canonical TBP
family-insensitive (TFI) mechanism of transcription initiation that involves
mesoderm and organizer gene expression. Using TBP family single and triple
knockdown experiments, a-amanitin treatment, transcriptome profiling and
chromatin immunoprecipitation, we found that TFI gene expression cannot be
explained by functional redundancy, is supported by active transcription, and
shows normal recruitment of the initiating form of RNA polymerase II to the
promoter. Strikingly, recruitment of Gcn5 (Kat2a), a co-activator which has been 
implicated in transcription initiation, to TFI promoters is increased upon
depletion of TBP family factors. TFI genes are part of a densely connected TBP
family-insensitive T-box-Otx2-Gsc interaction network. The results indicate that 
this network of genes bound by Vegt, Eomes, Otx2 and Gsc utilizes a novel,
flexible and non-canonical mechanism of transcription that does not require TBP
or TBP-related factors.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26952988  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Oncoimmunology. 2015 Aug 20;5(1):e1072671.

Comparison of naïve and central memory derived CD8(+) effector cell engraftment
fitness and function following adoptive transfer.

Wang X(1), Wong CW(1), Urak R(1), Taus E(1), Aguilar B(1), Chang WC(1), Mardiros 
A(1), Budde LE(1), Brown CE(1), Berger C(2), Forman SJ(1), Jensen MC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology & Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation, City of Hope
National Medical Center , Duarte, CA, USA. (2)Program in Immunology, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Medicine,
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. (3)Program in
Immunology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA; Ben Towne
Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute,
Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.

Human CD8(+) effector T cells derived from CD45RO(+)CD62L(+) precursors enriched 
for central memory (TCM) precursors retain the capacity to engraft and
reconstitute functional memory upon adoptive transfer, whereas effectors derived 
from CD45RO(+)CD62L(-) precursors enriched for effector memory precursors do not.
Here we sought to compare the engraftment fitness and function of CD8(+) effector
T cells derived from CD45RA(+)CD62L(+) precursors enriched for naïve and stem
cell memory precursors (TN/SCM) with that of TCM. We found that cytotoxic T cells
(CTLs) derived from TCM transcribed higher levels of CD28, FOS, INF<U+03B3>,
Eomesodermin (Eomes), and lower levels of BCL2L11, maintained higher levels of
phosphorylated AKT, and displayed enhanced sensitivity to the proliferative and
anti-apoptotic effects of <U+03B3>-chain cytokines compared to CTLs derived from TN/SCM.
Higher frequencies of CTLs derived from TCM retained CD28 expression and upon
activation secreted higher levels of IL-2. In NOD/Scid IL-2R<U+03B3>C(null) mice, CD8(+)
TCM derived CTLs engrafted to higher frequencies in response to human IL-15 and
mounted robust proliferative responses to an immunostimulatory vaccine.
Similarly, CD8(+) TCM derived CD19CAR(+) CTLs exhibited superior antitumor
potency following adoptive transfer compared to their CD8(+) TN/SCM derived
counterparts. These studies support the use of TCM enriched cell products for
adoptive therapy of cancer.

PMCID: PMC4760301 [Available on 2016-08-20]
PMID: 26942092  [PubMed]


8. Front Immunol. 2016 Feb 19;7:43. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00043. eCollection 2016.

The Residual Innate Lymphoid Cells in NFIL3-Deficient Mice Support Suboptimal
Maternal Adaptations to Pregnancy.

Boulenouar S(1), Doisne JM(2), Sferruzzi-Perri A(3), Gaynor LM(1), Kieckbusch
J(1), Balmas E(1), Yung HW(3), Javadzadeh S(2), Volmer L(1), Hawkes DA(2),
Phillips K(4), Brady HJ(5), Fowden AL(3), Burton GJ(3), Moffett A(6), Colucci
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Cambridge School of
Clinical Medicine, National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical
Research Centre, The Rosie Hospital, Cambridge, UK. (2)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, National
Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, The Rosie
Hospital , Cambridge , UK. (3)Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (4)University of Cambridge Metabolic
Research Laboratories , Cambridge , UK. (5)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial 
College London , London , UK. (6)Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

Uterine NK cells are innate lymphoid cells (ILC) that populate the uterus and
expand during pregnancy, regulating placental development and fetal growth in
humans and mice. We have recently characterized the composition of uterine ILCs
(uILCs), some of which require the transcription factor NFIL3, but the extent to 
which NFIL3-dependent cells support successful reproduction in mice is unknown.
By mating Nfil3 (-/-) females with wild-type males, here we show the effects of
NFIL3 deficiency in maternal cells on both the changes in uILCs during pregnancy 
and the downstream consequences on reproduction. Despite the presence of
CD49a(+)Eomes(-) uILC1s and the considerable expansion of residual
CD49a(+)Eomes(+) tissue-resident NK cells and uILC3s in pregnant Nfil3 (-/-)
mice, we found incomplete remodeling of uterine arteries and decidua, placental
defects, and fetal growth restriction in litters of normal size. These results
show that maternal NFIL3 mediates non-redundant functions in mouse reproduction.

PMCID: PMC4759249
PMID: 26925058  [PubMed]


9. Neurobiol Dis. 2016 May;89:190-201. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2016.02.004. Epub 2016 Feb
3.

Specific promoter deacetylation of histone H3 is conserved across mouse models of
Huntington's disease in the absence of bulk changes.

Guiretti D(1), Sempere A(2), Lopez-Atalaya JP(1), Ferrer-Montiel A(2), Barco
A(3), Valor LM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, Universidad Miguel Hernández-Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Av. Santiago Ramón y Cajal s/n, Sant Joan d'Alacant,
03550 Alicante, Spain. (2)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular, Universidad 
Miguel Hernández, Av. de la Universidad s/n, 03202 Elche, Spain. (3)Instituto de 
Neurociencias, Universidad Miguel Hernández-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas, Av. Santiago Ramón y Cajal s/n, Sant Joan d'Alacant, 03550 Alicante,
Spain. Electronic address: abarco@umh.es. (4)Instituto de Neurociencias,
Universidad Miguel Hernández-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Av.
Santiago Ramón y Cajal s/n, Sant Joan d'Alacant, 03550 Alicante, Spain; Unidad de
Investigación, Hospital Universitario Puerta del Mar, Av. Ana de Viya 21, 11009
Cádiz, Spain. Electronic address: luism.valor.exts@juntadeandalucia.es.

Defective epigenetic regulation has been postulated as a possible cause for the
extensive and premature transcriptional dysregulation observed in experimental
models of Huntington's disease (HD). In this study, we extended our observations 
in the N171-82Q mouse strain relating to the limited impact of polyQ pathology on
the global histone acetylation to other animal and cellular models of HD, namely 
the R6/1 and YAC128 strains, striatal-electroporated mice, primary neuronal
cultures and stably transfected PC12 cells. In the absence of bulk chromatin
changes, we nonetheless documented histone deacetylation events at the
transcription start sites (TSS) of genes relevant to neuronal functions (e.g.,
Rin1, Plk5, Igfbp5, Eomes, and Fos). In some instances, these local deficits were
associated with an increased susceptibility to transcriptional dysregulation
(e.g., Camk1g and Rasl11b) and the defective trimethylation of histone H3 at
lysine 4 (H3K4me3), another covalent modification of histone tails that is
related to active transcription and is also altered in HD. Overall, this study
provides further insight into the nature and extent of epigenetic dysregulation
in HD pathology.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26851501  [PubMed - in process]


10. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 25;11(1):e0147477. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147477.
eCollection 2016.

Distribution of T Cells in Rainbow Trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) Skin and
Responsiveness to Viral Infection.

Leal E(1), Granja AG(1), Zarza C(2), Tafalla C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación en Sanidad Animal (CISA-INIA), Valdeolmos (Madrid),
Spain. (2)Skretting Aquaculture Research Centre, PO Box 48, Stavanger, 4001,
Norway.

Although the skin constitutes the first line of defense against waterborne
pathogens, there is a great lack of information regarding the skin associated
lymphoid tissue (SALT) and whether immune components of the skin are
homogeneously distributed through the surface of the fish is still unknown. In
the current work, we have analyzed the transcription of several immune genes
throughout different rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) skin areas. We found
that immunoglobulin and chemokine gene transcription levels were higher in a skin
area close to the gills. Furthermore, this skin area as well as other anterior
sections also transcribed significantly higher levels of many different immune
genes related to T cell immunity such as T cell receptor a (TCRa), TCR<U+03B3>, CD3,
CD4, CD8, perforin, GATA3, Tbet, FoxP3, interferon <U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>), CD40L and Eomes in
comparison to posterior skin sections. In agreement with these results,
immunohistochemical analysis revealed that anterior skin areas had a higher
concentration of CD3+ T cells and flow cytometry analysis confirmed that the
percentage of CD8+ T lymphocytes was also higher in anterior skin sections. These
results demonstrate for the first time that T cells are not homogeneously
distributed throughout the teleost skin. Additionally, we studied the
transcriptional regulation of these and additional T cell markers in response to 
a bath infection with viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus (VHSV). We found that
VHSV regulated the transcription of several of these T cell markers in both the
skin and the spleen; with some differences between anterior and posterior skin
sections. Altogether, our results point to skin T cells as major players of
teleost skin immunity in response to waterborne viral infections.

PMCID: PMC4726708
PMID: 26808410  [PubMed - in process]


11. Cell Rep. 2016 Feb 9;14(5):1206-17. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.095. Epub 2016 
Jan 21.

Mammalian Target of Rapamycin Complex 2 Controls CD8 T Cell Memory
Differentiation in a Foxo1-Dependent Manner.

Zhang L(1), Tschumi BO(2), Lopez-Mejia IC(3), Oberle SG(4), Meyer M(5), Samson
G(2), Rüegg MA(6), Hall MN(6), Fajas L(3), Zehn D(4), Mach JP(7), Donda A(2),
Romero P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Center for Cancer Research, University of Lausanne, 1066 Epalinges,
Switzerland. Electronic address: lianjun.zhang@unil.ch. (2)Ludwig Center for
Cancer Research, University of Lausanne, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Physiology, University of Lausanne, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland. 
(4)Swiss Vaccine Research Institute, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland. (5)German
Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Biozentrum, University of
Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland. (7)Department of Biochemistry, University of
Lausanne, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland. (8)Ludwig Center for Cancer Research,
University of Lausanne, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland. Electronic address:
pedro.romero@unil.ch.

Upon infection, antigen-specific naive CD8 T cells are activated and
differentiate into short-lived effector cells (SLECs) and memory precursor cells 
(MPECs). The underlying signaling pathways remain largely unresolved. We show
that Rictor, the core component of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2
(mTORC2), regulates SLEC and MPEC commitment. Rictor deficiency favors memory
formation and increases IL-2 secretion capacity without dampening effector
functions. Moreover, mTORC2-deficient memory T cells mount more potent recall
responses. Enhanced memory formation in the absence of mTORC2 was associated with
Eomes and Tcf-1 upregulation, repression of T-bet, enhanced mitochondrial spare
respiratory capacity, and fatty acid oxidation. This transcriptional and
metabolic reprogramming is mainly driven by nuclear stabilization of Foxo1.
Silencing of Foxo1 reversed the increased MPEC differentiation and IL-2
production and led to an impaired recall response of Rictor KO memory T cells.
Therefore, mTORC2 is a critical regulator of CD8 T cell differentiation and may
be an important target for immunotherapy interventions.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26804903  [PubMed - in process]


12. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2016 Jan;55(1):40-4. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0578-1426.2016.01.010.

[The expression of triggering receptor expresses on myeloid cells receptor-1, T
cell-specific transcription factor, and eomesodermin in Aspergillus infected
immunosuppressed rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Cui N, Su LX, Xiao M, Yang F, Liu DW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing
100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the function of triggering receptor expresses on
myeloid cells receptor-1 (TREM-1) in lymphocyte differentiation and regulation of
Aspergillus infected immunosuppressed rats.
METHODS: Cyclophosphamide (CTX) was intraperitoneally injected and Fumigatus
spore suspension was inhaled by percutaneous tracheostomy to establish the
immunosuppressive invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) rat model. After 24 h,
48 h, 72 h and 96 h inoculation, rats were sacrificed. Lung tissue specimens,
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF), and plasma samples were collected. Plasma
and BALF sTREM-1, plasma T cell-specific transcription factor (T-box expressed in
T cells, T-bet) and eomesodermin(Eomes) were detected by ELISA. Biopsy specimens 
of lung tissue were used for periodic acid-schiff (PAS) staining and culture.
RESULTS: The mortality rate of immunosuppressed rats after Aspergillus inhalation
for 96 h was as high as 54.4%. Biopsy of lung tissue suggested acute inflammatory
cell infiltration, interstitial lung congestion, alveolar structural damage, and 
visible Aspergillus hyphae in alveoli. Compared with normal control
group[(110.50±7.70)ng/L], plasma sTREM-1 in study groups were significantly
increased[IPA: (146.77±10.41)ng/L; CXT+ IPA at 24 h: (226.00±11.88)ng/L; CTX+ IPA
at 48 h: (200.77±10.63)ng/L; P<0.05], so were T-bet levels[IPA:
(561.17±7.23)µg/L; CXT+ IPA at 24 h: (647.00±33.03)µg/L; CTX+ IPA at 48 h:
(619.23±87.44)µg/L; control group: (340.03±26.32)µg/L; respectively, P<0.05].
However, plasma Eomes levels in IPA group, CTX+ IPA at 24 h and 48 h were
significantly lower compared with that in normal controls[IPA: (7.96±0.65)ng/L;
CXT+ IPA at 24 h: (3.97±0.35)ng/L; CTX+ IPA at 48 h: (4.00±0.74)ng/L; control
group: (8.38±0.51)ng/L; respectively, P<0.001]. Compared with those in CTX+ IPA
vaccination after 24 h and 48 h, plasma sTREM-1 [(106.67±7.64)ng/L;
(133.27±32.79)ng/L] and T-bet [(299.64±63.07)µg/L; (398.02±109.22)µg/L] in CTX+
IPA at 72 h and 96 h inoculation were significantly lower (P<0.001). While Eomes 
[(8.38±0.54)ng/L; (8.40±0.70) ng/L]raised significantly higher (P<0.001).
Compared with the control group, sTREM-1 levels in BALF of IPA+ CTX 24 h, 48 h,
72 h, and 96 h groups were consistently high (P<0.05). Pearson correlation
analysis showed that sTREM-1 and T-bet had a significant positive correlation
(r=0.91, P<0.001), yet Eomes was negatively correlated with them (r=-0.788,
P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: sTREM-1 in rat plasma and BALF appears highly expressed in immune
compromised Aspergillus infected rat model. Plasma sTREM-1 is closely correlated 
with T-bet and Eomes levels, which suggests that TREM-1 may be involved in
lymphocytic regulation and differentiation during fungal infection.

PMID: 26796652  [PubMed - in process]


13. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 15;196(4):1449-54. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502396. Epub 2016
Jan 20.

Cutting Edge: Eomesodermin Is Sufficient To Direct Type 1 Innate Lymphocyte
Development into the Conventional NK Lineage.

Pikovskaya O(1), Chaix J(1), Rothman NJ(1), Collins A(1), Chen YH(1), Scipioni
AM(1), Vivier E(2), Reiner SL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032; Department of Pediatrics, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032; (2)Centre
d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille University UM2, INSERM U1104,
CNRS UMR7280, Marseille 13288, France; and Service d'Immunologie, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille 13385, France. (3)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032; Department of Pediatrics, College of Physicians
and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032; sr2978@cumc.columbia.edu.

Type 1 innate lymphocytes comprise two developmentally divergent lineages, type 1
helper innate lymphoid cells (hILC1s) and conventional NK cells (cNKs). All type 
1 innate lymphocytes (ILCs) express the transcription factor T-bet, but cNKs
additionally express Eomesodermin (Eomes). We show that deletion of Eomes alleles
at the onset of type 1 ILC maturation using NKp46-Cre imposes a substantial block
in cNK development. Formation of the entire lymphoid and nonlymphoid type 1 ILC
compartment appears to require the semiredundant action of both T-bet and Eomes. 
To determine if Eomes is sufficient to redirect hILC1 development to a cNK fate, 
we generated transgenic mice that express Eomes when and where T-bet is expressed
using Tbx21 locus control to drive expression of Eomes codons. Ectopic Eomes
induces cNK-like properties across the lymphoid and nonlymphoid type 1 ILC
compartments. Subsequent to their divergent lineage specification, hILC1s and
cNKs thus possess substantial developmental plasticity.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4744497 [Available on 2017-02-15]
PMID: 26792802  [PubMed - in process]


14. Stem Cells Int. 2015;2015:218518. doi: 10.1155/2015/218518. Epub 2015 Dec 14.

A Resource for the Transcriptional Signature of Bona Fide Trophoblast Stem Cells 
and Analysis of Their Embryonic Persistence.

Kuales G(1), Weiss M(1), Sedelmeier O(1), Pfeifer D(2), Arnold SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Renal Department, Centre for Clinical Research, University Medical Centre,
Breisacher Strasse 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. (2)Department of Hematology,
Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Centre, Freiburg,
Germany. (3)Renal Department, Centre for Clinical Research, University Medical
Centre, Breisacher Strasse 66, 79106 Freiburg, Germany; Institute of Experimental
and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany; BIOSS, Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, Albert Ludwigs
University, Freiburg, Germany.

Trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) represent the multipotent progenitors that give
rise to the different cells of the embryonic portion of the placenta. Here, we
analysed the expression of key TSC transcription factors Cdx2, Eomes, and Elf5 in
the early developing placenta of mouse embryos and in cultured TSCs and reveal
surprising heterogeneity in protein levels. We analysed persistence of TSCs in
the early placenta and find that TSCs remain in the chorionic hinge until E9.5
and are lost shortly afterwards. To define the transcriptional signature of bona 
fide TSCs, we used inducible gain- and loss-of-function alleles of Eomes or Cdx2,
and Eomes (GFP), to manipulate and monitor the core maintenance factors of TSCs, 
followed by genome-wide expression profiling. Combinatorial analysis of resulting
expression profiles allowed for defining novel TSC marker genes that might
functionally contribute to the maintenance of the TSC state. Analyses by qRT-PCR 
and in situ hybridisation validated novel TSC- and chorion-specific marker genes,
such as Bok/Mtd, Cldn26, Duox2, Duoxa2, Nr0b1, and Sox21. Thus, these expression 
data provide a valuable resource for the transcriptional signature of bona fide
and early differentiating TSCs and may contribute to an increased understanding
of the transcriptional circuitries that maintain and/or establish stemness of
TSCs.

PMCID: PMC4691490
PMID: 26783396  [PubMed]


15. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 14;6:19182. doi: 10.1038/srep19182.

Regulation of Asymmetric Division by Atypical Protein Kinase C Influences Early
Specification of CD8(+) T Lymphocyte Fates.

Metz PJ(1), Lopez J(1), Kim SH(1), Akimoto K(2), Ohno S(2), Chang JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, Yokohama City University School
of Medicine, Kanazawa, Yokohama, Kanagawa Prefecture 236-0027, Japan.

Naïve CD8(+) T lymphocytes responding to microbial pathogens give rise to
effector T cells that provide acute defense and memory T cells that provide
long-lived immunity. Upon activation, CD8(+) T lymphocytes can undergo asymmetric
division, unequally distributing factors to the nascent daughter cells that
influence their eventual fate towards the effector or memory lineages. Individual
loss of either atypical protein kinase C (aPKC) isoform, PKC<U+03B6> or PKC<U+03BB>/<U+03B9>,
partially impairs asymmetric divisions and increases CD8(+) T lymphocyte
differentiation toward a long-lived effector fate at the expense of memory T cell
formation. Here, we show that deletion of both aPKC isoforms resulted in a
deficit in asymmetric divisions, increasing the proportion of daughter cells that
inherit high amounts of effector fate-associated molecules, IL-2Ra, T-bet, IFN<U+03B3>R,
and interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4). However, unlike CD8(+) T cells
deficient in only one aPKC isoform, complete loss of aPKC unexpectedly increased 
CD8(+) T cell differentiation toward a short-lived, terminal effector fate, as
evidenced by increased rates of apoptosis and decreased expression of Eomes and
Bcl2 early during the immune response. Together, these results provide evidence
for an important role for asymmetric division in CD8(+) T lymphocyte fate
specification by regulating the balance between effector and memory precursors at
the initiation of the adaptive immune response.

PMCID: PMC4725917
PMID: 26765121  [PubMed - in process]


16. Clin Immunol. 2016 Feb;163:96-107. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2015.12.015. Epub 2016 Jan
4.

The low EOMES/TBX21 molecular phenotype in multiple sclerosis reflects CD56+ cell
dysregulation and is affected by immunomodulatory therapies.

McKay FC(1), Gatt PN(2), Fewings N(3), Parnell GP(4), Schibeci SD(5), Basuki
MA(6), Powell JE(7), Goldinger A(8), Fabis-Pedrini MJ(9), Kermode AG(10), Burke
T(11), Vucic S(12), Stewart GJ(13), Booth DR(14).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Allergy Research, Westmead Institute for Medical
Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia.
Electronic address: fiona.mckay@sydney.edu.au. (2)Centre for Immunology and
Allergy Research, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address:
prudence.gatt@sydney.edu.au. (3)Centre for Immunology and Allergy Research,
Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address: nicole.fewings@sydney.edu.au.
(4)Centre for Immunology and Allergy Research, Westmead Institute for Medical
Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia.
Electronic address: grant.parnell@sydney.edu.au. (5)Centre for Immunology and
Allergy Research, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address:
Stephen.schibeci@sydney.edu.au. (6)Centre for Immunology and Allergy Research,
Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address: monicabasuki@gmail.com. (7)Institute
for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Saint Lucia, Brisbane, 4072, 
Australia. Electronic address: joseph.powell@uq.edu.au. (8)University of
Queensland Diamantina Institute, Translational Research Institute and The
Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Australia. Electronic
address: a.goldinger@uq.edu.au. (9)Western Australian Neuroscience Research
Institute, University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009,
Australia. Electronic address: marzena.pedrini@wanri.uwa.edu.au. (10)Western
Australian Neuroscience Research Institute, University of Western Australia,
Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia; Institute for Immunology and
Infectious Diseases, Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western Australia 6150,
Australia. Electronic address: kermode@me.com. (11)Western Clinical School,
University of Sydney, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia.
Electronic address: therese.burke@sydney.edu.au. (12)Western Clinical School,
University of Sydney, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia.
Electronic address: s.vucic@neura.edu.au. (13)Centre for Immunology and Allergy
Research, Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, 
New South Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address:
graeme.stewart@sydney.edu.au. (14)Centre for Immunology and Allergy Research,
Westmead Institute for Medical Research, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address: david.booth@sydney.edu.au.

Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease treated by therapies targeting
peripheral blood cells. We previously identified that expression of two MS-risk
genes, the transcription factors EOMES and TBX21 (ET), was low in blood from MS
and stable over time. Here we replicated the low ET expression in a new MS cohort
(p<0.0007 for EOMES, p<0.028 for TBX21) and demonstrate longitudinal stability
(p<10(-4)) and high heritability (h(2)=0.48 for EOMES) for this molecular
phenotype. Genes whose expression correlated with ET, especially those
controlling cell migration, further defined the phenotype. CD56+ cells and other 
subsets expressed lower levels of Eomes or T-bet protein and/or were
under-represented in MS. EOMES and TBX21 risk SNP genotypes, and serum EBNA-1
titres were not correlated with ET expression, but HLA-DRB1*1501 genotype was. ET
expression was normalised to healthy control levels with natalizumab, and was
highly variable for glatiramer acetate, fingolimod, interferon-beta, dimethyl
fumarate.

Crown Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26762769  [PubMed - in process]


17. EMBO Rep. 2016 Mar;17(3):338-48. doi: 10.15252/embr.201541715. Epub 2016 Jan 12.

CRISPR/Cas9-induced disruption of gene expression in mouse embryonic brain and
single neural stem cells in vivo.

Kalebic N(1), Taverna E(1), Tavano S(1), Wong FK(1), Suchold D(1), Winkler S(1), 
Huttner WB(2), Sarov M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics (MPI-CBG),
Dresden, Germany. (2)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics 
(MPI-CBG), Dresden, Germany huttner@mpi-cbg.de sarov@mpi-cbg.de.

We have applied the CRISPR/Cas9 system in vivo to disrupt gene expression in
neural stem cells in the developing mammalian brain. Two days after in utero
electroporation of a single plasmid encoding Cas9 and an appropriate guide RNA
(gRNA) into the embryonic neocortex of Tis21::GFP knock-in mice, expression of
GFP, which occurs specifically in neural stem cells committed to neurogenesis,
was found to be nearly completely (90%) abolished in the progeny of the targeted
cells. Importantly, upon in utero electroporation directly of recombinant
Cas9/gRNA complex, near-maximal efficiency of disruption of GFP expression was
achieved already after 24 h. Furthermore, by using microinjection of the Cas9
protein/gRNA complex into neural stem cells in organotypic slice culture, we
obtained disruption of GFP expression within a single cell cycle. Finally, we
used either Cas9 plasmid in utero electroporation or Cas9 protein complex
microinjection to disrupt the expression of Eomes/Tbr2, a gene fundamental for
neocortical neurogenesis. This resulted in a reduction in basal progenitors and
an increase in neuronal differentiation. Thus, the present in vivo application of
the CRISPR/Cas9 system in neural stem cells provides a rapid, efficient and
enduring disruption of expression of specific genes to dissect their role in
mammalian brain development.

© 2016 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

PMID: 26758805  [PubMed - in process]


18. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2016 Feb;65(2):181-92. doi: 10.1007/s00262-015-1786-1.
Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Favorable prognostic influence of T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin in
metastatic renal cell cancer patients.

Dielmann A(1), Letsch A(1), Nonnenmacher A(1), Miller K(2), Keilholz U(1), Busse 
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III (Hematology, Oncology and Tumor Immunology),
Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Urology, Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine III (Hematology, Oncology and Tumor Immunology),
Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Germany.
antonia.busse@charite.de.

T-box transcription factors, T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) encoded by Tbx21 
and Eomesodermin (Eomes), drive the differentiation of effector/memory T cell
lineages and NK cells. The aim of the study was to determine the prognostic
influence of the expression of these transcription factors in peripheral blood
(pB) in a cohort of 41 metastatic (m) RCC patients before receiving sorafenib
treatment and to analyze their association with the immunophenotype in pB. In
contrast to Tbx21, in the multivariate analysis including clinical features,
Eomes mRNA expression was identified as an independent good prognostic factor for
progression-free survival (PFS, p = 0.042) and overall survival (OS, p = 0.001)
in addition to a favorable ECOG performance status (p = 0.01 and p = 0.008,
respectively). Eomes expression correlated positively not only with expression of
Tbx21 and TGFß1 mRNA, but also with mRNA expression of the activation marker
ICOS, and with in vivo activated HLA-DR(+) T cells. Eomes expression was
negatively associated with TNFa-producing T cells. On protein level, Eomes was
mainly expressed by CD56(+)CD3(-) NK cells in pB. In conclusion, we identified a 
higher Eomes mRNA expression as an independent good prognostic factor for OS and 
PFS in mRCC patients treated with sorafenib.

PMID: 26753694  [PubMed - in process]


19. Immunology. 2016 Apr;147(4):476-87. doi: 10.1111/imm.12580. Epub 2016 Feb 9.

Gfi1, a transcriptional repressor, inhibits the induction of the T helper type 1 
programme in activated CD4 T cells.

Suzuki J(1,)(2), Maruyama S(3), Tamauchi H(4), Kuwahara M(2,)(3,)(5), Horiuchi
M(3), Mizuki M(3), Ochi M(3,)(6), Sawasaki T(6), Zhu J(7), Yasukawa M(1),
Yamashita M(2,)(3,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Clinical Immunology and Infectious Diseases,
Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime University, Toon, Ehime, Japan. (2)Department 
of Translational Immunology, Translational Research Center, Ehime University
Hospital, Toon, Ehime, Japan. (3)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Ehime University, Toon, Ehime, Japan. (4)Division of Fundamental
Medical Technology, Department of Medical Technology, Ehime Prefectural
University of Health Science, Iyo-gun, Ehime, Japan. (5)Division of Immune
Regulation, Department of Proteo-Inovation, Proteo-Science Centre, Ehime
University, Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan. (6)Division of Cell-Free Sciences,
Department of Proteo-Research, Proteo-Science Centre, Ehime University,
Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan. (7)Molecular and Cellular Immunoregulation Unit,
Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.

A transcriptional repressor Gfi1 promotes T helper type 2 (Th2) cell development 
and inhibits Th17 and inducible regulatory T-cell differentiation. However, the
role of Gfi1 in regulating Th1 cell differentiation and the Th1-type immune
response remains to be investigated. We herein demonstrate that Gfi1 inhibits the
induction of the Th1 programme in activated CD4 T cells. The activated
Gfi1-deficient CD4 T cells spontaneously develop into Th1 cells in an
interleukin-12- and interferon-<U+03B3>-independent manner. The increase of Th1-type
immune responses was confirmed in vivo in Gfi1-deficient mice using a murine
model of nickel allergy and delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH). The expression
levels of Th1-related transcription factors were found to increase in
Gfi1-deficient activated CD4 T cells. Tbx21, Eomes and Runx2 were identified as
possible direct targets of Gfi1. Gfi1 binds to the Tbx21, Eomes and Runx2 gene
loci and reduces the histone H3K4 methylation levels in part by modulating Lsd1
recruitment. Together, these findings demonstrate a novel regulatory role of Gfi1
in the regulation of the Th1-type immune response.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26749286  [PubMed - in process]


20. Genes Cells. 2016 Feb;21(2):146-62. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12328. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

Eomesodermin promotes interferon-<U+03B3> expression and binds to multiple conserved
noncoding sequences across the Ifng locus in mouse thymoma cell lines.

Fukuoka N(1), Harada M(1), Nishida A(1), Ito Y(1), Shiota H(2), Kataoka T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Matsugasaki,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8585, Japan. (2)Center for Biological Resources and
Informatics, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku,
Yokohama, 226-8501, Japan.

The T-box transcription factors T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes) have been shown to
regulate the lineage-specific expression of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>). However, in
contrast to T-bet, the role of Eomes in the expression of IFN-<U+03B3> remains unclear. 
In this study, we investigated the Eomes-dependent expression of IFN-<U+03B3> in the
mouse thymoma BW5147 and EL4 cells, which do not express T-bet or Eomes. The
ectopic expression of Eomes induced BW5147 and EL4 cells to produce IFN-<U+03B3> in
response to phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and ionomycin (IM). In BW5147
cells, Eomes augmented luciferase activity driven by the Ifng promoter encoding
from -2500 to +113 bp; however, it was not increased by a stimulation with PMA
and IM. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that Eomes bound to the Ifng
promoter and conserved noncoding sequence (CNS) -22 kb across the Ifng locus with
high efficacy in BW5147 cells. Moreover, Eomes increased permissive histone
modifications in the Ifng promoter and multiple CNSs. The stimulation with PMA
and IM greatly augmented Eomes binding to CNS-54, CNS-34, CNS+19 and CNS+30,
which was inhibited by FK506. These results indicated that Eomes bound to the
Ifng promoter and multiple CNSs in stimulation-dependent and
stimulation-independent manners.

© 2016 The Molecular Biology Society of Japan and John Wiley & Sons Australia,
Ltd.

PMID: 26749212  [PubMed - in process]


21. Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Mar 3;18(3):341-53. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.11.019. Epub
2015 Dec 31.

Stepwise Clearance of Repressive Roadblocks Drives Cardiac Induction in Human
ESCs.

Rao J(1), Pfeiffer MJ(1), Frank S(1), Adachi K(2), Piccini I(3), Quaranta R(1),
Araúzo-Bravo M(4), Schwarz J(5), Schade D(6), Leidel S(5), Schöler HR(2), Seebohm
G(3), Greber B(7).

Author information: 
(1)Human Stem Cell Pluripotency Laboratory, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, 48149 Münster, Germany; Chemical Genomics Centre of the Max Planck
Society, 44227 Dortmund, Germany. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, 48149 Münster, Germany. 
(3)Institute of Genetics of Heart Diseases (IfGH), Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine, University Hospital Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany. (4)Group of
Computational Biology and Systems Biomedicine, Biodonostia Health Research
Institute, 20014 San Sebastián, Spain; IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science,
48009 Bilbao, Spain. (5)Max Planck Research Group for RNA Biology, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, 48149 Münster, Germany; Cells-in-Motion
Cluster of Excellence, Faculty of Medicine, University of Münster, 48149 Münster,
Germany. (6)Technical University of Dortmund, 44227 Dortmund, Germany. (7)Human
Stem Cell Pluripotency Laboratory, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Biomedicine, 48149 Münster, Germany; Chemical Genomics Centre of the Max Planck
Society, 44227 Dortmund, Germany. Electronic address:
boris.greber@mpi-muenster.mpg.de.

Cardiac induction requires stepwise integration of BMP and WNT pathway activity. 
Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are developmentally and clinically relevant
for studying the poorly understood molecular mechanisms downstream of these
cascades. We show that BMP and WNT signaling drive cardiac specification by
removing sequential roadblocks that otherwise redirect hESC differentiation
toward competing fates, rather than activating a cardiac program per se. First,
BMP and WNT signals pattern mesendoderm through cooperative repression of SOX2, a
potent mesoderm antagonist. BMP signaling promotes miRNA-877 maturation to induce
SOX2 mRNA degradation, while WNT-driven EOMES induction transcriptionally
represses SOX2. Following mesoderm formation, cardiac differentiation requires
inhibition of WNT activity. We found that WNT inhibition serves to restrict
expression of anti-cardiac regulators MSX1 and CDX2/1. Conversely, their
simultaneous disruption partially abrogates the requirement for WNT inactivation.
These results suggest that human cardiac induction depends on multi-stage
repression of alternate lineages, with implications for deriving expandable
cardiac stem cells.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26748419  [PubMed - in process]


22. Development. 2016 Jan 1;143(1):66-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.127100.

The evolution of basal progenitors in the developing non-mammalian brain.

Nomura T(1), Ohtaka-Maruyama C(2), Yamashita W(3), Wakamatsu Y(4), Murakami Y(5),
Calegari F(6), Suzuki K(7), Gotoh H(3), Ono K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, INAMORI 
Memorial Building, 1-5 Shimogamo-hangi cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-0823, Japan Japan
Science and Technology Agency (JST), PRESTO, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama
332-0012, Japan tadnom@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp. (2)Neural Network Project, Department of
Neural Development and Regeneration, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical
Science, 2-1-6, Kamikitazawa, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan.
(3)Developmental Neurobiology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, INAMORI 
Memorial Building, 1-5 Shimogamo-hangi cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-0823, Japan.
(4)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, United Centers for Advanced Research
and Translational Medicine (ART), Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan. (5)Graduate School of Science and Engineering,
Ehime University, Matsuyama, Ehime 790-8577, Japan. (6)DFG-Centre for
Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Faculty of Medicine, TUD, Fetscherstrasse 105,
01307 Dresden, Germany. (7)Department of Biology, Nihon University School of
Dentistry at Matsudo, Chiba 271-8587, Japan Division of Companion Diagnostics,
Department of Pathology and Microbiology, Nihon University School of Medicine,
Tokyo 173-8610, Japan.

The amplification of distinct neural stem/progenitor cell subtypes during
embryogenesis is essential for the intricate brain structures present in various 
vertebrate species. For example, in both mammals and birds, proliferative
neuronal progenitors transiently appear on the basal side of the ventricular zone
of the telencephalon (basal progenitors), where they contribute to the
enlargement of the neocortex and its homologous structures. In placental mammals,
this proliferative cell population can be subdivided into several groups that
include Tbr2(+) intermediate progenitors and basal radial glial cells (bRGs).
Here, we report that basal progenitors in the developing avian pallium show
unique morphological and molecular characteristics that resemble the
characteristics of bRGs, a progenitor population that is abundant in
gyrencephalic mammalian neocortex. Manipulation of LGN (Leu-Gly-Asn
repeat-enriched protein) and Cdk4/cyclin D1, both essential regulators of neural 
progenitor dynamics, revealed that basal progenitors and Tbr2(+) cells are
distinct cell lineages in the developing avian telencephalon. Furthermore, we
identified a small population of subapical mitotic cells in the developing brains
of a wide variety of amniotes and amphibians. Our results suggest that unique
progenitor subtypes are amplified in mammalian and avian lineages by modifying
common mechanisms of neural stem/progenitor regulation during amniote brain
evolution.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4725208
PMID: 26732839  [PubMed - in process]


23. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 29;10(12):e0144826. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144826.
eCollection 2015.

IRF4 Regulates the Ratio of T-Bet to Eomesodermin in CD8+ T Cells Responding to
Persistent LCMV Infection.

Nayar R(1), Schutten E(1), Jangalwe S(2), Durost PA(2), Kenney LL(1), Conley
JM(1), Daniels K(1), Brehm MA(2), Welsh RM(1), Berg LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605, United States of America. (2)Program in Molecular Medicine, 
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, United States of
America.

CD8+ T cell exhaustion commonly occurs in chronic infections and cancers. During 
T cell exhaustion there is a progressive and hierarchical loss of effector
cytokine production, up-regulation of inhibitory co-stimulatory molecules, and
eventual deletion of antigen specific cells by apoptosis. A key factor that
regulates T cell exhaustion is persistent TCR stimulation. Loss of this
interaction results in restoration of CD8+ T cell effector functions in
previously exhausted CD8+ T cells. TCR stimulation is also important for the
differentiation of Eomeshi anti-viral CD8+ effector T cells from T-bethi
precursors, both of which are required for optimal viral control. However, the
molecular mechanisms regulating the differentiation of these two cell subsets and
the relative ratios required for viral clearance have not been described. We show
that TCR signal strength regulates the relative expression of T-bet and Eomes in 
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells by modulating levels of IRF4. Reduced IRF4
expression results in skewing of this ratio in the favor of Eomes, leading to
lower proportions and numbers of T-bet+ Eomes- precursors and poor control of
LCMV-clone 13 infection. Manipulation of this ratio in the favor of T-bet
restores the differentiation of T-bet+ Eomes- precursors and the protective
balance of T-bet to Eomes required for efficient viral control. These data
highlight a critical role for IRF4 in regulating protective anti-viral CD8+ T
cell responses by ensuring a balanced ratio of T-bet to Eomes, leading to the
ultimate control of this chronic viral infection.

PMCID: PMC4699851
PMID: 26714260  [PubMed - in process]


24. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 19;7(3):2754-64. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6666.

An epigenetic biomarker combination of PCDH17 and POU4F2 detects bladder cancer
accurately by methylation analyses of urine sediment DNA in Han Chinese.

Wang Y(1,)(2), Yu Y(3), Ye R(3), Zhang D(3), Li Q(3), An D(3), Fang L(4), Lin
Y(5), Hou Y(3), Xu A(5), Fu Y(6), Lu W(4), Chen X(1), Chen M(4), Zhang M(4),
Jiang H(7), Zhang C(8), Dong P(1), Li C(9), Chen J(10), Yang G(6), Liu C(5), Cai 
Z(11), Zhou F(1), Wu S(2,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South 
China, Guangzhou, 510060, China. (2)The Affiliated Luohu Hospital of Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen Luohu Hospital Group, Shenzhen 518000, China.
(3)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China. (4)Anhui Medical University, Hefei
230032, China. (5)Department of Urology, Zhujiang Hospital of Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510280, China. (6)The Second People's Hospital of Guangdong
Province, Guangzhou 510310, China. (7)The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou 510080, China. (8)Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China. (9)CAS Key Laboratory of Infection and
Immunity, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101,
China. (10)The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou
510630, China. (11)Department of Urological Surgery, Shenzhen Second People's
Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518000, 
China.

To develop a routine and effectual procedure of detecting bladder cancer (BlCa), 
an optimized combination of epigenetic biomarkers that work synergistically with 
high sensitivity and specificity is necessary. In this study, methylation levels 
of seven biomarkers (EOMES, GDF15, NID2, PCDH17, POU4F2, TCF21, and ZNF154) in
148 individuals-which including 58 urothelial cell carcinoma (UCC) patients, 20
infected urinary calculi (IUC) patients, 20 kidney cancer (KC) patients,20
prostate cancer (PC) patients, and 30 healthy volunteers (HV)-were quantified by 
qMSP using the urine sediment DNA. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves
were generated for each biomarker. The combining predictors of possible
combinations were calculated through logistic regression model. Subsequently, ROC
curves of the three best performing combinations were constructed. Then, we
validated the three best performing combinations and POU4F2 in another 72 UCC, 21
IUC, 26 KC and 22 PC, and 23 HV urine samples. The combination of POU4F2/PCDH17
has yielded the highest sensitivity and specificity of 90.00% and 93.96% in all
the 312 individuals, showing the capability of detecting BlCa effectively among
pathologically varied sample groups.

PMID: 26700620  [PubMed - in process]


25. J Exp Med. 2016 Jan 11;213(1):123-38. doi: 10.1084/jem.20150519. Epub 2015 Dec
22.

CRTAM determines the CD4+ cytotoxic T lymphocyte lineage.

Takeuchi A(1), Badr Mel S(2), Miyauchi K(3), Ishihara C(4), Onishi R(4), Guo
Z(5), Sasaki Y(6), Ike H(7), Takumi A(4), Tsuji NM(8), Murakami Y(9), Katakai
T(10), Kubo M(11), Saito T(12).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cell Signaling, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, 
Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan Department of Immunology, Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata University, Niigata 951-8510, Japan.
(2)Laboratory for Cell Signaling, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, 
Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (3)Laboratory for Cytokine Regulation, 
RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045,
Japan. (4)Laboratory for Cell Signaling, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (5)Laboratory for Cell Signaling,
RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan
Laboratory for Intestinal Ecosystem, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (6)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Physiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Yoshida-konoe-cho, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (7)WPI Immunology Frontier Research
Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (8)Immune Homeostasis
Lab, Biomedial Research Institute, National Institute for Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan. (9)Division of
Molecular Pathology, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo,
Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan. (10)Department of Immunology, Graduate School
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata University, Niigata 951-8510, Japan.
(11)Laboratory for Cytokine Regulation, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan Division of Molecular Pathology,
Research Institute for Biomedical Science, Tokyo University of Science, Chiba
278-0022, Japan. (12)Laboratory for Cell Signaling, RIKEN Center for Integrative 
Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan WPI Immunology Frontier
Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan
takashi.saito@riken.jp.

Naive T cells differentiate into various effector T cells, including CD4(+)
helper T cell subsets and CD8(+) cytotoxic T cells (CTL). Although cytotoxic
CD4(+) T cells (CD4 +: CTL) also develop from naive T cells, the mechanism of
development is elusive. We found that a small fraction of CD4(+) T cells that
express class I-restricted T cell-associated molecule (CRTAM) upon activation
possesses the characteristics of both CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells. CRTAM(+) CD4(+) 
T cells secrete IFN-<U+03B3>, express CTL-related genes, such as eomesodermin (Eomes),
Granzyme B, and perforin, after cultivation, and exhibit cytotoxic function,
suggesting that CRTAM(+) T cells are the precursor of CD4(+)CTL. Indeed, ectopic 
expression of CRTAM in T cells induced the production of IFN-<U+03B3>, expression of
CTL-related genes, and cytotoxic activity. The induction of CD4(+)CTL and IFN-<U+03B3>
production requires CRTAM-mediated intracellular signaling. CRTAM(+) T cells
traffic to mucosal tissues and inflammatory sites and developed into CD4(+)CTL,
which are involved in mediating protection against infection as well as inducing 
inflammatory response, depending on the circumstances, through IFN-<U+03B3> secretion
and cytotoxic activity. These results reveal that CRTAM is critical to instruct
the differentiation of CD4(+)CTL through the induction of Eomes and CTL-related
gene.

© 2016 Takeuchi et al.

PMCID: PMC4710199 [Available on 2016-07-11]
PMID: 26694968  [PubMed - in process]


26. Immunity. 2015 Dec 15;43(6):1101-11. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.11.008.

T-box Transcription Factors Combine with the Cytokines TGF-ß and IL-15 to Control
Tissue-Resident Memory T Cell Fate.

Mackay LK(1), Wynne-Jones E(2), Freestone D(2), Pellicci DG(3), Mielke LA(4),
Newman DM(2), Braun A(2), Masson F(5), Kallies A(4), Belz GT(4), Carbone FR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia. Electronic address: lkmackay@unimelb.edu.au. (2)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The Peter Doherty
Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, The
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia; Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Advanced
Molecular Imaging, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia. 
(4)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3050,
Australia. (5)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville,
Victoria 3050, Australia; Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute,
Heidelberg, Victoria 3084, Australia; School of Cancer Medicine, La Trobe
University, Melbourne, Victoria 3086, Australia.

Tissue-resident memory T (Trm) cells contribute to local immune protection in
non-lymphoid tissues such as skin and mucosa, but little is known about their
transcriptional regulation. Here we showed that CD8(+)CD103(+) Trm cells,
independent of circulating memory T cells, were sufficient for protection against
infection and described molecular elements that were crucial for their
development in skin and lung. We demonstrated that the T-box transcription
factors (TFs) Eomes and T-bet combined to control CD8(+)CD103(+) Trm cell
formation, such that their coordinate downregulation was crucial for TGF-ß
cytokine signaling. TGF-ß signaling, in turn, resulted in reciprocal T-box TF
downregulation. However, whereas extinguishment of Eomes was necessary for
CD8(+)CD103(+) Trm cell development, residual T-bet expression maintained cell
surface interleukin-15 (IL-15) receptor ß-chain (CD122) expression and thus IL-15
responsiveness. These findings indicate that the T-box TFs control the two
cytokines, TGF-ß and IL-15, which are pivotal for CD8(+)CD103(+) Trm cell
development and survival.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26682984  [PubMed - in process]


27. Transplantation. 2016 Jan;100(1):91-102.

Eomesoderminlo CTLA4hi Alloreactive CD8+ Memory T Cells Are Associated With
Prolonged Renal Transplant Survival Induced by Regulatory Dendritic Cell Infusion
in CTLA4 Immunoglobulin-Treated Nonhuman Primates.

Ezzelarab MB(1), Lu L, Guo H, Zahorchak AF, Shufesky WF, Cooper DK, Morelli AE,
Thomson AW.

Author information: 
(1)1 Starzl Transplantation Institute, Department of Surgery, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA.2 Department of Immunology,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA.

BACKGROUND: Memory T cells (Tmem), particularly those resistant to costimulation 
blockade (CB), are a major barrier to transplant tolerance. The transcription
factor Eomesodermin (Eomes) is critical for Tmem development and maintenance, but
its expression by alloactivated T cells has not been examined in nonhuman
primates.
METHODS: We evaluated Eomes and coinhibitory cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4
(CTLA4) expression by alloactivated rhesus monkey T cells in the presence of
CTLA4 immunoglobulin, both in vitro and in renal allograft recipients treated
with CTLA4Ig, with or without regulatory dendritic cell (DCreg) infusion.
RESULTS: In normal monkeys, CD8 T cells expressed significantly more Eomes than
CD4 T cells. By contrast, CD8 T cells displayed minimal CTLA4. Among T cell
subsets, central Tmem (Tcm) expressed the highest levels of Eomes. Notably,
EomesCTLA4 cells displayed higher levels of CD25 and Foxp3 than EomesCTLA4 CD8 T 
cells. After allostimulation, distinct proliferating EomesCTLA4 and EomesCTLA4
CD8 T cell populations were identified, with a high proportion of Tcm being
EomesCTLA4. CB with CTLA4Ig during allostimulation of CD8 T cells reduced CTLA4
but not Eomes expression, significantly reducing EomesCTLA4 cells. After
transplantation with CB and rapamycin, donor-reactive EomesCTLA4 CD8 T cells were
reduced. However, in monkeys also given DCreg, absolute numbers of these cells
were elevated significantly.
CONCLUSIONS: Low Eomes and high CTLA4 expression by donor-reactive CD8 Tmem is
associated with prolonged renal allograft survival induced by DCreg infusion in
CTLA4Ig-treated monkeys. Prolonged allograft survival associated with DCreg
infusion may be related to maintenance of donor-reactive EomesCTLA4 Tcm.

PMCID: PMC4685739 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26680373  [PubMed - in process]


28. Immunology. 2016 Mar;147(3):305-20. doi: 10.1111/imm.12563. Epub 2016 Jan 17.

Natural killer group 2D and CD28 receptors differentially activate
mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin to alter murine effector CD8(+) T-cell 
differentiation.

McQueen B(1), Trace K(1), Whitman E(1), Bedsworth T(1), Barber A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Longwood University,
Farmville, VA, USA.

Memory CD8(+) T cells are an essential component of anti-tumour and anti-viral
immunity. Activation of the mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR)
pathway has been implicated in regulating the differentiation of effector and
memory T cells. However, the mechanisms that control mTOR activity during
immunity to tumours and infections are not well known. Activation of
co-stimulatory receptors, including CD28 and natural killer group 2D (NKG2D),
activate phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and subsequently may activate the mTOR
pathway in CD8(+) T cells. This study compared the activation of the mTOR
signalling pathway after co-stimulation through CD28 or NKG2D receptors in murine
effector CD8(+) T cells. Compared with CD28 co-stimulation, activation through
CD3 and NKG2D receptors had weaker activation of mTORc1, as shown by decreased
phosphorylation of mTORc1 targets S6K1, ribosomal protein S6 and eukaryotic
initiation factor 4E binding protein 1. NKG2D co-stimulation also showed
increased gene expression of tuberous sclerosis protein 2, a negative regulator
of mTORc1, whereas CD28 co-stimulation increased gene expression of Ras homologue
enriched in brain, an activator of mTORc1, and hypoxia-inducible factor-1a and
vascular endothelial growth factor-a, pro-angiogenic factors downstream of
mTORc1. Strong mTORc1 activation in CD28-co-stimulated cells also increased
expression of transcription factors that support effector cell differentiation,
namely T-bet, B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein (BLIMP-1), interferon
regulatory factor 4, and inhibitor of DNA binding 2, whereas low levels of mTORc1
activation allowed for the expression of Eomes, B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6), and
inhibitor of DNA binding 3 during NKG2D stimulation, and increased expression of 
memory markers CD62 ligand and CD127. These data show that compared with CD28,
co-stimulation through the NKG2D receptor leads to the differential activation of
the mTOR signalling pathway and potentially supports memory CD8(+) T-cell
differentiation.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4754608 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26661515  [PubMed - in process]


29. J Immunol. 2016 Jan 1;196(1):484-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1403039. Epub 2015 Nov
25.

CD137 Agonist Therapy Can Reprogram Regulatory T Cells into Cytotoxic CD4+ T
Cells with Antitumor Activity.

Akhmetzyanova I(1), Zelinskyy G(1), Littwitz-Salomon E(1), Malyshkina A(1),
Dietze KK(1), Streeck H(2), Brandau S(3), Dittmer U(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virology of the University Hospital in Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany; (2)Institute for Medical Biology of the
University Hospital in Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany;
and. (3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology of the University Hospital Essen,
University of Duisburg-Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany. (4)Institute for Virology of 
the University Hospital in Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, 45147 Essen,
Germany; ulf.dittmer@uni-due.de.

Recent successes in immune therapeutic strategies aimed to improve control over
tumor growth have sparked hope that long-lived control of cancer through
stimulation of the immune system can be possible. However, the underlying
immunological mechanisms that are induced by immunotherapeutic strategies are not
well understood. In this study, we used the highly immunogenic Friend
virus-induced FBL-3 tumor as a model to study the mechanisms of immunological
tumor control by CD4(+) T cells in the course of CD137 (4-1BB) agonist
immunotherapy in the absence of a CD8 T cell response. We demonstrate that
treatment with a CD137 agonist resulted in complete FBL-3 tumor regression in
CD8(+) T cell-deficient mice. CD137 signaling enhanced the production of
proinflammatory cytokines and cytotoxic molecules in tumor-specific CD4(+) T
cells. Interestingly, a subset of CD4(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells was
reprogrammed to eliminate immunogenic virus-induced tumor cells in response to
CD137 agonist treatment. These cells expressed markers characteristic for Th
cells (CD154) and produced the cytokine TNF-a or the T-box transcriptional factor
Eomesodermin and granzyme B without loss of Foxp3 expression. Foxp3 Eomes
double-positive CD4(+) T cells were capable of eliminating immunogenic
virus-induced tumor cells in vivo. Thus, our data show that tumor-induced
Foxp3(+)CD4(+) T cells can be reprogrammed into cytotoxic effector cells upon
therapeutic costimulatory signaling and restore antitumor immunity.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26608920  [PubMed - in process]


30. Genes Dev. 2015 Dec 1;29(23):2435-48. doi: 10.1101/gad.268821.115. Epub 2015 Nov 
19.

Elf5-centered transcription factor hub controls trophoblast stem cell
self-renewal and differentiation through stoichiometry-sensitive shifts in target
gene networks.

Latos PA(1), Sienerth AR(1), Murray A(1), Senner CE(1), Muto M(2), Ikawa M(2),
Oxley D(3), Burge S(4), Cox BJ(5), Hemberger M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United
Kingdom; Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 
3EG, United Kingdom; (2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Animal
Resource Center for Infectious Diseases, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan; (3)Proteomics Group,
The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom; (4)Epigenetics
Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom;
(5)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada; Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1E2, Canada.

Elf5 is a transcription factor with pivotal roles in the trophoblast compartment,
where it reinforces a trophoblast stem cell (TSC)-specific transcriptional
circuit. However, Elf5 is also present in differentiating trophoblast cells that 
have ceased to express other TSC genes such as Cdx2 and Eomes. In the present
study, we aimed to elucidate the context-dependent role of Elf5 at the interface 
between TSC self-renewal and the onset of differentiation. We demonstrate that
precise levels of Elf5 are critical for normal expansion of the TSC compartment
and embryonic survival, as Elf5 overexpression triggers precocious trophoblast
differentiation. Through integration of protein interactome, transcriptome, and
genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation data, we reveal that this
abundance-dependent function is mediated through a shift in preferred
Elf5-binding partners; in TSCs, Elf5 interaction with Eomes recruits Tfap2c to
triply occupied sites at TSC-specific genes, driving their expression. In
contrast, the Elf5 and Tfap2c interaction becomes predominant as their protein
levels increase. This triggers binding to double- and single-occupancy sites that
harbor the cognate Tfap2c motif, causing activation of the associated
differentiation-promoting genes. These data place Elf5 at the center of a
stoichiometry-sensitive transcriptional network, where it acts as a molecular
switch governing the balance between TSC proliferation and differentiation.

© 2015 Latos et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4691948
PMID: 26584622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Genes Dev. 2015 Oct 15;29(20):2108-22. doi: 10.1101/gad.268979.115.

Lhx1 functions together with Otx2, Foxa2, and Ldb1 to govern anterior
mesendoderm, node, and midline development.

Costello I(1), Nowotschin S(2), Sun X(1), Mould AW(1), Hadjantonakis AK(2),
Bikoff EK(1), Robertson EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1
3RE, United Kingdom; (2)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute,
New York, New York 10065, USA.

Gene regulatory networks controlling functional activities of spatially and
temporally distinct endodermal cell populations in the early mouse embryo remain 
ill defined. The T-box transcription factor Eomes, acting downstream from
Nodal/Smad signals, directly activates the LIM domain homeobox transcription
factor Lhx1 in the visceral endoderm. Here we demonstrate Smad4/Eomes-dependent
Lhx1 expression in the epiblast marks the entire definitive endoderm lineage, the
anterior mesendoderm, and midline progenitors. Conditional inactivation of Lhx1
disrupts anterior definitive endoderm development and impedes node and midline
morphogenesis in part due to severe disturbances in visceral endoderm
displacement. Transcriptional profiling and ChIP-seq (chromatin
immunoprecipitation [ChIP] followed by high-throughput sequencing) experiments
identified Lhx1 target genes, including numerous anterior definitive endoderm
markers and components of the Wnt signaling pathway. Interestingly, Lhx1-binding 
sites were enriched at enhancers, including the Nodal-proximal epiblast enhancer 
element and enhancer regions controlling Otx2 and Foxa2 expression. Moreover, in 
proteomic experiments, we characterized a complex comprised of Lhx1, Otx2, and
Foxa2 as well as the chromatin-looping protein Ldb1. These partnerships
cooperatively regulate development of the anterior mesendoderm, node, and midline
cell populations responsible for establishment of the left-right body axis and
head formation.

© 2015 Costello et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4617976
PMID: 26494787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Development. 2015 Dec 1;142(23):4010-25. doi: 10.1242/dev.122846. Epub 2015 Oct
19.

Human stem cells from single blastomeres reveal pathways of embryonic or
trophoblast fate specification.

Zdravkovic T(1), Nazor KL(2), Larocque N(1), Gormley M(1), Donne M(3),
Hunkapillar N(1), Giritharan G(4), Bernstein HS(5), Wei G(6), Hebrok M(7), Zeng
X(8), Genbacev O(1), Mattis A(9), McMaster MT(10), Krtolica A(4), Valbuena D(11),
Simón C(11), Laurent LC(12), Loring JF(2), Fisher SJ(13).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Sciences, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Obstetrics, 
Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA The Eli & Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA Human Embryonic Stem Cell Program, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Center for
Regenerative Medicine, Department of Chemical Physiology, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (3)Center for Reproductive Sciences,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Division of 
Maternal Fetal Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department
of Anatomy, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(4)StemLifeLine, San Carlos, CA 94070, USA. (5)The Eli & Edythe Broad Center for 
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Pediatrics, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (6)The Eli & Edythe Broad
Center for Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Diabetes Center, Department of
Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.
(7)Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (8)Buck Institute for Research on Aging,
Novato, CA 94945, USA. (9)The Eli & Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration Medicine
and Stem Cell Research, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA Department of Pathology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (10)The Eli & Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA Human Embryonic Stem Cell Program, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Cell and
Tissue Biology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, 
USA. (11)Fundación Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad (IVI), Parc Científic
Universitat de València, 46980, Valencia, Spain. (12)Center for Regenerative
Medicine, Department of Chemical Physiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (13)Center for Reproductive
Sciences, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive
Sciences, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA
The Eli & Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA Human
Embryonic Stem Cell Program, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA Department of Anatomy, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA sfisher@cgl.ucsf.edu.

Mechanisms of initial cell fate decisions differ among species. To gain insights 
into lineage allocation in humans, we derived ten human embryonic stem cell lines
(designated UCSFB1-10) from single blastomeres of four 8-cell embryos and one
12-cell embryo from a single couple. Compared with numerous conventional lines
from blastocysts, they had unique gene expression and DNA methylation patterns
that were, in part, indicative of trophoblast competence. At a transcriptional
level, UCSFB lines from different embryos were often more closely related than
those from the same embryo. As predicted by the transcriptomic data,
immunolocalization of EOMES, T brachyury, GDF15 and active ß-catenin revealed
differential expression among blastomeres of 8- to 10-cell human embryos. The
UCSFB lines formed derivatives of the three germ layers and CDX2-positive
progeny, from which we derived the first human trophoblast stem cell line. Our
data suggest heterogeneity among early-stage blastomeres and that the UCSFB lines
have unique properties, indicative of a more immature state than conventional
lines.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4712832
PMID: 26483210  [PubMed - in process]


33. J Immunol. 2015 Nov 15;195(10):4742-52. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501159. Epub 2015 
Oct 9.

Eomesodermin Expression in CD4+ T Cells Restricts Peripheral Foxp3 Induction.

Lupar E(1), Brack M(2), Garnier L(3), Laffont S(3), Rauch KS(4), Schachtrup K(5),
Arnold SJ(6), Guéry JC(3), Izcue A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, D-79108 Freiburg,
Germany; Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg 
and University of Freiburg, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany; Faculty of Biology,
University of Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany; (2)Max-Planck-Institute of
Immunobiology and Epigenetics, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany; Center for Chronic
Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg and University of Freiburg, 
D-79106 Freiburg, Germany; (3)INSERM, U1043, Toulouse, F-31300, France; Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, U5282, Toulouse, F-31300, France;
Université de Toulouse, Université Paul Sabatier, Centre de Physiopathologie de
Toulouse Purpan, Toulouse, F-31300, France; (4)Center for Chronic
Immunodeficiency, University Medical Center Freiburg and University of Freiburg, 
D-79106 Freiburg, Germany; Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, D-79104
Freiburg, Germany; (5)Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical
Center Freiburg and University of Freiburg, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany;
(6)University Medical Centre, Renal Department, Centre for Clinical Research,
D-79106 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre of Biological Signalling Studies,
Albert-Ludwigs-University, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany; and Institute of
Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Freiburg,
D-79102 Freiburg, Germany. (7)Max-Planck-Institute of Immunobiology and
Epigenetics, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany; Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency,
University Medical Center Freiburg and University of Freiburg, D-79106 Freiburg, 
Germany; izcue@ie-freiburg.mpg.de.

CD4(+) T cells polarize into effector Th subsets characterized by signature
transcription factors and cytokines. Although T-bet drives Th1 responses and
represses the alternative Th2, Th17, and Foxp3(+) regulatory T cell fates, the
role of the T-bet-related transcription factor eomesodermin (Eomes) in CD4(+) T
cells is less well understood. In this study, we analyze the expression and
effects of Eomes in mouse CD4(+) T lymphocytes. We find that Eomes is readily
expressed in activated CD4(+) Th1 T cells in vivo. Eomes(+) CD4(+) T cells
accumulated in old mice, under lymphopenic conditions in a T cell transfer model 
of colitis, and upon oral Ag administration. However, despite its expression,
genetic deletion of Eomes in CD4(+) T cells did not impact on IFN-<U+03B3> production
nor increase Th2 or Th17 responses. In contrast, Eomes deficiency favored the
accumulation of Foxp3(+) cells in old mice, after in vivo differentiation of
Eomes-deficient naive CD4(+) T cells, and in response to oral Ag in a
cell-intrinsic way. Enforced Eomes expression during in vitro regulatory T cell
induction also reduced Foxp3 transcription. Likewise, bystander Eomes-deficient
CD4(+) T cells were more efficient at protecting from experimental autoimmune
encephalitis compared with wild-type CD4(+) T cells. This enhanced capacity of
Eomes-deficient CD4(+) T cells to inhibit EAE in trans was associated with an
enhanced frequency of Foxp3(+) cells. Our data identify a novel role for Eomes in
CD4(+) T cells and indicate that Eomes expression may act by limiting Foxp3
induction, which may contribute to the association of EOMES to susceptibility to 
multiple sclerosis.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26453746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Oct;45(10):2762-5. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545959.

Hobit and human effector T-cell differentiation: The beginning of a long journey.

Braun J(1), Frentsch M(1), Thiel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Immunology and Aging, Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative 
Therapies (BCRT), Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Besides growing plants, eating a lot, and drinking beer, Tolkien's Hobbits enjoy 
maintaining a quiet state. Regarding the latter, the name chosen for a recently
discovered transcription factor seems to be unintentionally appropriate. The zinc
finger protein ZNF683 was originally named "Hobit" for Homolog of Blimp-1 in T
cells. In this issue of the European Journal of Immunology, Braga et al. [Eur. J.
Immunol. 2015. 45: 2945-2958] demonstrate that in humans, Hobit is almost
exclusively expressed in effector T cells, in particular in quiescent and
long-lived effector-type CD8(+) T cells. Hobit may initially appear as another
"player" in the quest for transcription factors guiding T-cell differentiation;
the discoveries of T-bet, Eomes, Blimp-1, and others have significantly
contributed to our understanding of how this process is tightly regulated.
However, Hobit may be special--the currently available results suggest
substantial differences in Hobit's regulatory functions between mice and humans, 
such as expression patterns and IFN-<U+03B3> regulation. And it may turn out that
Hobit's function in human T cells is highly adapted to lifelong, periodic
challenges with varying, physiological doses of pathogens. Thus, the new study
about Hobit in human T cells may be the beginning of a long journey.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26440905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Immunol. 2015 Nov 15;195(10):4712-20. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501522. Epub 2015 
Oct 5.

NK Cell Functional Impairment after Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell
Transplantation Is Associated with Reduced Levels of T-bet and Eomesodermin.

Simonetta F(1), Pradier A(2), Bosshard C(2), Masouridi-Levrat S(2), Chalandon
Y(2), Roosnek E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medical Specialties, Geneva University
Hospitals, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva 14, Switzerland
federico.simonetta@hcuge.ch. (2)Division of Hematology, Department of Medical
Specialties, Geneva University Hospitals, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva
14, Switzerland.

NK cells play a major role in protection against tumor recurrence and infection
after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). It has been
shown that NK cell function after HSCT is impaired, but underlying molecular
mechanisms are not well-known. In this report we show that the level of T-bet and
Eomesodermin (Eomes), two T-box transcription factors regulating lymphocyte
effector functions, is strongly reduced in NK cells from HSCT recipients compared
with healthy control subjects. Reduction of T-bet and Eomes expression appeared
early and persisted for years after HSCT, affecting all peripheral blood NK cells
independently of their differentiation status. Reduced T-bet levels in NK cells
from allogeneic HSCT recipients significantly correlated with reduced perforin
expression. Acute, but not chronic, graft-versus-host disease, as well as CMV
reactivation, was associated with further downregulation of T-bet expression in
NK cells. Lower levels of T-bet expression in NK cells were associated with less 
favorable outcome after HSCT as a result of increased nonrelapse mortality.
Collectively, our results provide a possible molecular explanation for the
previously reported functional exhaustion of NK cells after allogeneic HSCT and
suggest an impact of the NK transcriptional machinery status on HSCT outcome.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26438526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Nat Commun. 2015 Oct 5;6:8437. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9437.

Eomesodermin-expressing T-helper cells are essential for chronic
neuroinflammation.

Raveney BJ(1), Oki S(1), Hohjoh H(2), Nakamura M(1,)(3), Sato W(1,)(3), Murata
M(4), Yamamura T(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center 
of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawa-Higashi,Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan. 
(2)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, National Institute of Neuroscience,
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan. (3)Multiple
Sclerosis Center, National Center Hospital, National Center of Neurology and
Psychiatry, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan. (4)Department of Neurology, National Center
Hospital, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan.

Development of acute experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) depends on
Th17 cells expressing the nuclear factor NR4A2. However, in mice lacking NR4A2 in
T cells, a late-onset disease is still inducible, despite a great reduction in
acute inflammation. We here reveal that development of this late onset disease
depends on cytotoxic T-cell-like CD4(+) T cells expressing the T-box
transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes). T-cell-specific deletion of the Eomes 
gene remarkably ameliorates the late-onset EAE. Strikingly, similar Eomes(+)
CD4(+) T cells are increased in the peripheral blood and cerebrospinal fluid from
patients in a progressive state of multiple sclerosis. Collective data indicate
an involvement of granzyme B and protease-activated receptor-1 in the
neuroinflammation mediated by Eomes(+) CD4(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC4600741
PMID: 26436530  [PubMed - in process]


37. Genetics. 2015 Nov;201(3):1017-30. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.179176. Epub 2015
Sep 28.

MicroRNAs and Their Targets Are Differentially Regulated in Adult and Neonatal
Mouse CD8+ T Cells.

Wissink EM(1), Smith NL(2), Spektor R(3), Rudd BD(4), Grimson A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Field of Biochemistry, Molecular, and Cell Biology, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York 14853. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853. (3)Graduate Field of Genetics,
Genomics, and Development, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New
York 14853 bdr54@cornell.edu agrimson@cornell.edu. (5)Department of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853
bdr54@cornell.edu agrimson@cornell.edu.

Immunological memory, which protects organisms from re-infection, is a hallmark
of the mammalian adaptive immune system and the underlying principle of
vaccination. In early life, however, mice and other mammals are deficient at
generating memory CD8+ T cells, which protect organisms from intracellular
pathogens. The molecular basis that differentiates adult and neonatal CD8+ T
cells is unknown. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are both developmentally regulated and
required for normal adult CD8+ T cell functions. We used next-generation
sequencing to identify mouse miRNAs that are differentially regulated in adult
and neonatal CD8+ T cells, which may contribute to the impaired development of
neonatal memory cells. The miRNA profiles of adult and neonatal cells were
surprisingly similar during infection; however, we observed large differences
prior to infection. In particular, miR-29 and miR-130 have significant
differential expression between adult and neonatal cells before infection.
Importantly, using RNA-Seq, we detected reciprocal changes in expression of
messenger RNA targets for both miR-29 and miR-130. Moreover, targets that we
validated include Eomes and Tbx21, key genes that regulate the formation of
memory CD8+ T cells. Notably, age-dependent changes in miR-29 and miR-130 are
conserved in human CD8+ T cells, further suggesting that these developmental
differences are biologically relevant. Together, these results demonstrate that
miR-29 and miR-130 are likely important regulators of memory CD8+ T cell
formation and suggest that neonatal cells are committed to a short-lived effector
cell fate prior to infection.

Copyright © 2015 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4649632
PMID: 26416483  [PubMed - in process]


38. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):543-56. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.08.006. Epub
2015 Sep 24.

Extensive Nuclear Reprogramming Underlies Lineage Conversion into Functional
Trophoblast Stem-like Cells.

Benchetrit H(1), Herman S(1), van Wietmarschen N(2), Wu T(3), Makedonski K(1),
Maoz N(1), Yom Tov N(1), Stave D(1), Lasry R(1), Zayat V(1), Xiao A(3), Lansdorp 
PM(4), Sebban S(1), Buganim Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, The Institute for
Medical Research Israel-Canada, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School,
Jerusalem 91120, Israel. (2)European Research Institute for the Biology of
Ageing, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Antonius Deusinglaan 1, AV Groningen 9713, the Netherlands. (3)Yale Stem Cell
Center and Department of Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(4)European Research Institute for the Biology of Ageing, University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, AV Groningen
9713, the Netherlands; Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech),
Novaya str. 100, Skolkovo Moscow Region 143025, Russia. (5)Department of
Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, The Institute for Medical Research
Israel-Canada, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120,
Israel. Electronic address: yossibug@ekmd.huji.ac.il.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):499-500.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) undergo extensive nuclear reprogramming
and are generally indistinguishable from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) in their
functional capacity and transcriptome and DNA methylation profiles. However,
direct conversion of cells from one lineage to another often yields incompletely 
reprogrammed, functionally compromised cells, raising the question of whether
pluripotency is required to achieve a high degree of nuclear reprogramming. Here,
we show that transient expression of Gata3, Eomes, and Tfap2c in mouse
fibroblasts induces stable, transgene-independent trophoblast stem-like cells
(iTSCs). iTSCs possess transcriptional profiles highly similar to
blastocyst-derived TSCs, with comparable methylation and H3K27ac patterns and
genome-wide H2A.X deposition. iTSCs generate trophoectodermal lineages upon
differentiation, form hemorrhagic lesions, and contribute to developing placentas
in chimera assays, indicating a high degree of nuclear reprogramming, with no
evidence of passage through a transient pluripotent state. Together, these data
demonstrate that extensive nuclear reprogramming can be achieved independently of
pluripotency.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26412562  [PubMed - in process]


39. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):557-68. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.08.005. Epub
2015 Sep 24.

Direct Induction of Trophoblast Stem Cells from Murine Fibroblasts.

Kubaczka C(1), Senner CE(2), Cierlitza M(1), Araúzo-Bravo MJ(3), Kuckenberg P(1),
Peitz M(4), Hemberger M(2), Schorle H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany. (2)Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK; Centre for Trophoblast
Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (3)Group of
Computational Biology and Systems Biomedicine, Biodonostia Health Research
Institute, 20014 San Sebastian, Spain; IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science,
48013 Bilbao, Spain. (4)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, Life and Brain 
Center, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany; German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 53127 Bonn, Germany. (5)Department of
Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, 
Germany. Electronic address: hubert.schorle@ukb.uni-bonn.de.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Nov 5;17(5):499-500.

Trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) arise from the first cell fate decision in the
developing embryo and generate extra-embryonic lineages, giving rise to the fetal
portion of the placenta. Mouse embryonic and extra-embryonic lineages are
strictly separated by a distinct epigenetic barrier, which is not fully overcome 
following expression of TSC-determining factors in embryonic stem cells. Here, we
show that transient expression of Tfap2c, Gata3, Eomes, and Ets2 is sufficient to
reprogram mouse embryonic fibroblasts and post-natal tail-tip-derived fibroblasts
into induced TSCs (iTSCs) and surmount the epigenetic barrier separating somatic 
from extra-embryonic lineages. iTSCs share nearly identical morphological
characteristics, gene expression profiles, and DNA methylation patterns with
blastocyst-derived TSCs. Furthermore, iTSCs display transgene-independent
self-renewal, differentiate along extra-embryonic lineages, and chimerize host
placentas following blastocyst injection. These findings provide insights into
the transcription factor networks governing TSC identity and opportunities for
studying the epigenetic barriers underlying embryonic and extra-embryonic lineage
segregation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26412560  [PubMed - in process]


40. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 8;6(26):21795-6.

Natural Th1 cells: escape from neglect.

Park SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Research Institute, Medical Research Center, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PMCID: PMC4673124
PMID: 26392409  [PubMed - in process]


41. J Vet Med Sci. 2016 Feb 1;78(1):149-52. doi: 10.1292/jvms.14-0596. Epub 2015 Sep 
14.

Murine somatic cell nuclear transfer using reprogrammed donor cells expressing
male germ cell-specific genes.

Kang H(1), Park JI, Roh S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Reprogramming and Embryo Biotechnology Laboratory and Dental Research
Institute, Seoul National University School of Dentistry, Seoul 03080, Republic
of Korea.

In vivo-matured mouse oocytes were enucleated, and a single murine embryonic
fibroblast (control or reprogrammed by introducing extracts from murine testis
tissue, which showed expression of male germ cell-specific genes) was injected
into the cytoplasm of the oocytes. The rate of blastocyst development and
expression levels of Oct-4, Eomes and Cdx-2 were not significantly different in
both experimental groups. However, the expression levels of Nanog, Sox9 and
Glut-1 were significantly increased when reprogrammed cells were used as donor
nuclei. Increased expression of Nanog can be supportive of complete reprogramming
of somatic cell nuclear transfer murine embryos. The present study suggested that
donor cells expressing male germ cell-specific genes can be reconstructed and can
develop into embryos with normal high expression of developmentally essential
genes.

PMCID: PMC4751136
PMID: 26369430  [PubMed - in process]


42. Br J Cancer. 2015 Sep 15;113(6):902-13. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2015.255. Epub 2015 Sep 
8.

Impaired T-bet-pSTAT1a and perforin-mediated immune responses in the tumoral
region of lung adenocarcinoma.

Andreev K(1), Trufa ID(1,)(2), Siegemund R(1), Rieker R(3), Hartmann A(3),
Schmidt J(4), Sirbu H(2), Finotto S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pneumology, Friedrich-Alexander-University of
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen 91054, Germany. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Friedrich-Alexander-University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen 91054, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology, Friedrich-Alexander-University of Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen 91054, Germany. (4)Institute of Anesthesiology,
Friedrich-Alexander-University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91054, Germany.

BACKGROUND: In spite of modern therapies for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), 
prognosis for many patients is still poor and survival rates are low.
Immunotherapy is the possibility to improve the lung immune response surrounding 
the tumour. However, this approach requires detailed understanding of the local
immune-responses of NSCLC patients.
METHODS: We analysed samples from three different regions within the lungs of
NSCLC patients, whereas we distinguished between patients suffering from
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. Expression of type 1 T helper
(Th1)/type 1 cytotoxic (Tc1) factors was assessed by quantitative real-time PCR, 
western blot analyses or immunohistochemistry. Cytotoxic cell activity of CD8(+) 
T cells was determined via co-culture with autologous tumour cells and apoptosis 
assay.
RESULTS: We found decreased levels of the transcription factor T-box expressed in
T cells (T-bet or Tbx21) and of the downstream activated IFN-<U+03B3>-dependent pSTAT1a 
isoform in the lung tumour areas of patients with NSCLC as compared with
tumour-free control regions. In these patients, reduced T-bet and pSTAT1a levels 
were found associated with increased immunosuppressive markers like cytotoxic T
lymphocyte-associated protein 4, programmed cell death 1 and with a suppression
of the Th1 cell cytokine production and Tc1 cell activity.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings confirm a central role of T-bet in targeted
immunotherapy for patients with NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4578079 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26348446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Development. 2015 Sep 1;142(17):2904-15. doi: 10.1242/dev.121939.

Brain oxygen tension controls the expansion of outer subventricular zone-like
basal progenitors in the developing mouse brain.

Wagenführ L(1), Meyer AK(2), Braunschweig L(1), Marrone L(3), Storch A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Department of Neurology, Technische
Universität Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 74, Dresden 01307, Germany. (2)Division of
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Department of Neurology, Technische Universität
Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 74, Dresden 01307, Germany Leibniz Institute for Solid
State and Material Research, IFW Dresden, Institute for Integrative Nanosciences,
Helmholtzstrasse 20, Dresden 01069, Germany. (3)Division of Neurodegenerative
Diseases, Department of Neurology, Technische Universität Dresden,
Fetscherstrasse 74, Dresden 01307, Germany Center for Regenerative Therapies
Dresden (CRTD), Technische Universität Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 105, Dresden
01307, Germany. (4)Division of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Department of
Neurology, Technische Universität Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 74, Dresden 01307,
Germany Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden (CRTD), Technische Universität 
Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 105, Dresden 01307, Germany German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Dresden, Arnoldstrasse 18, Dresden 01307,
Germany alexander.storch@neuro.med.tu-dresden.de.

The mammalian neocortex shows a conserved six-layered structure that differs
between species in the total number of cortical neurons produced owing to
differences in the relative abundance of distinct progenitor populations. Recent 
studies have identified a new class of proliferative neurogenic cells in the
outer subventricular zone (OSVZ) in gyrencephalic species such as primates and
ferrets. Lissencephalic brains of mice possess fewer OSVZ-like progenitor cells
and these do not constitute a distinct layer. Most in vitro and in vivo studies
have shown that oxygen regulates the maintenance, proliferation and
differentiation of neural progenitor cells. Here we dissect the effects of fetal 
brain oxygen tension on neural progenitor cell activity using a novel mouse model
that allows oxygen tension to be controlled within the hypoxic microenvironment
in the neurogenic niche of the fetal brain in vivo. Indeed, maternal oxygen
treatment of 10%, 21% and 75% atmospheric oxygen tension for 48 h translates into
robust changes in fetal brain oxygenation. Increased oxygen tension in fetal
mouse forebrain in vivo leads to a marked expansion of a distinct proliferative
cell population, basal to the SVZ. These cells constitute a novel neurogenic cell
layer, similar to the OSVZ, and contribute to corticogenesis by heading for
deeper cortical layers as a part of the cortical plate.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26329599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Immunol. 2015 Oct 1;195(7):3190-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501118. Epub 2015 Aug
21.

Vaccination Produces CD4 T Cells with a Novel CD154-CD40-Dependent Cytolytic
Mechanism.

Coler RN(1), Hudson T(2), Hughes S(2), Huang PW(2), Beebe EA(2), Orr MT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98102; Department of Global
Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105; and PAI Life Sciences,
Seattle, WA 98102. (2)Infectious Disease Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98102;
(3)Infectious Disease Research Institute, Seattle, WA 98102; Department of Global
Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105; and Mark.orr@idri.org.

The discovery of new vaccines against infectious diseases and cancer requires the
development of novel adjuvants with well-defined activities. The TLR4 agonist
adjuvant GLA-SE elicits robust Th1 responses to a variety of vaccine Ags and is
in clinical development for both infectious diseases and cancer. We demonstrate
that immunization with a recombinant protein Ag and GLA-SE also induces granzyme 
A expression in CD4 T cells and produces cytolytic cells that can be detected in 
vivo. Surprisingly, these in vivo CTLs were CD4 T cells, not CD8 T cells, and
this cytolytic activity was not dependent on granzyme A/B or perforin. Unlike
previously reported CD4 CTLs, the transcription factors Tbet and Eomes were not
necessary for their development. CTL activity was also independent of the Fas
ligand-Fas, TRAIL-DR5, and canonical death pathways, indicating a novel mechanism
of CTL activity. Rather, the in vivo CD4 CTL activity induced by vaccination
required T cell expression of CD154 (CD40L) and target cell expression of CD40.
Thus, vaccination with a TLR4 agonist adjuvant induces CD4 CTLs, which kill
through a previously unknown CD154-dependent mechanism.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4575887 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26297758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Aug 21;11(8):e1005072. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005072.
eCollection 2015.

Arming of MAIT Cell Cytolytic Antimicrobial Activity Is Induced by IL-7 and
Defective in HIV-1 Infection.

Leeansyah E(1), Svärd J(2), Dias J(1), Buggert M(3), Nyström J(3), Quigley MF(1),
Moll M(1), Sönnerborg A(4), Nowak P(4), Sandberg JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Unit of Infectious
Diseases, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University
Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Division of Clinical Microbiology,
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University
Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Unit of Infectious Diseases, Department 
of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge,
Stockholm, Sweden; Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Mucosa-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells represent a large innate-like
evolutionarily conserved antimicrobial T-cell subset in humans. MAIT cells
recognize microbial riboflavin metabolites from a range of microbes presented by 
MR1 molecules. MAIT cells are impaired in several chronic diseases including
HIV-1 infection, where they show signs of exhaustion and decline numerically.
Here, we examined the broader effector functions of MAIT cells in this context
and strategies to rescue their functions. Residual MAIT cells from HIV-infected
patients displayed aberrant baseline levels of cytolytic proteins, and failed to 
mobilize cytolytic molecules in response to bacterial antigen. In particular, the
induction of granzyme B (GrzB) expression was profoundly defective. The
functionally impaired MAIT cell population exhibited abnormal T-bet and Eomes
expression patterns that correlated with the deficiency in cytotoxic capacity and
cytokine production. Effective antiretroviral therapy (ART) did not fully restore
these aberrations. Interestingly, IL-7 was capable of arming resting MAIT cells
from healthy donors into cytotoxic GrzB+ effector T cells capable of killing
bacteria-infected cells and producing high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines
in an MR1-dependent fashion. Furthermore, IL-7 treatment enhanced the sensitivity
of MAIT cells to detect low levels of bacteria. In HIV-infected patients, plasma 
IL-7 levels were positively correlated with MAIT cell numbers and function, and
IL-7 treatment in vitro significantly restored MAIT cell effector functions even 
in the absence of ART. These results indicate that the cytolytic capacity in MAIT
cells is severely defective in HIV-1 infected patients, and that the broad-based 
functional defect in these cells is associated with deficiency in critical
transcription factors. Furthermore, IL-7 induces the arming of effector functions
and enhances the sensitivity of MAIT cells, and may be considered in
immunotherapeutic approaches to restore MAIT cells.

PMCID: PMC4546682
PMID: 26295709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Development. 2015 Sep 15;142(18):3151-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.123547. Epub 2015 Aug 
20.

Defining the three cell lineages of the human blastocyst by single-cell RNA-seq.

Blakeley P(1), Fogarty NM(1), del Valle I(1), Wamaitha SE(1), Hu TX(2), Elder
K(3), Snell P(3), Christie L(3), Robson P(4), Niakan KK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Human Embryology and Stem Cell Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, Mill
Hill Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, UK. (2)Genome Institute of Singapore, A-STAR,
Singapore 138672, Singapore MRC Functional Genomics Unit, Department of
Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK.
(3)Bourn Hall Clinic, Bourn, Cambridge CB23 2TN, UK. (4)Genome Institute of
Singapore, A-STAR, Singapore 138672, Singapore The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic
Medicine, Farmington, CT 06030, USA. (5)Human Embryology and Stem Cell
Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, UK
kathy.niakan@crick.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Development. 2015 Oct 15;142(20):3613.

Here, we provide fundamental insights into early human development by single-cell
RNA-sequencing of human and mouse preimplantation embryos. We elucidate conserved
transcriptional programs along with those that are human specific. Importantly,
we validate our RNA-sequencing findings at the protein level, which further
reveals differences in human and mouse embryo gene expression. For example, we
identify several genes exclusively expressed in the human pluripotent epiblast,
including the transcription factor KLF17. Key components of the TGF-ß signalling 
pathway, including NODAL, GDF3, TGFBR1/ALK5, LEFTY1, SMAD2, SMAD4 and TDGF1, are 
also enriched in the human epiblast. Intriguingly, inhibition of TGF-ß signalling
abrogates NANOG expression in human epiblast cells, consistent with a requirement
for this pathway in pluripotency. Although the key trophectoderm factors Id2,
Elf5 and Eomes are exclusively localized to this lineage in the mouse, the human 
orthologues are either absent or expressed in alternative lineages. Importantly, 
we also identify genes with conserved expression dynamics, including Foxa2/FOXA2,
which we show is restricted to the primitive endoderm in both human and mouse
embryos. Comparison of the human epiblast to existing embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) reveals conservation of pluripotency but also additional pathways more
enriched in hESCs. Our analysis highlights significant differences in human
preimplantation development compared with mouse and provides a molecular
blueprint to understand human embryogenesis and its relationship to stem cells.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4582176
PMID: 26293300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Aug 6. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22332. [Epub ahead of print]

Prospective separation and transcriptome analyses of cortical projection neurons 
and interneurons based on lineage tracing by Tbr2 (Eomes)-GFP/Dcx-mRFP reporters.

Liu J(1), Wu X(2), Zhang H(1), Qiu R(1), Yoshikawa K(3), Lu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope,
Duarte, California, 91010. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, California, 91010.
(3)Laboratory of Regulation of Neuronal Development, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

In the cerebral cortex, projection neurons and interneurons work coordinately to 
establish neural networks for normal cortical functions. While the specific
mechanisms that control productions of projection neurons and interneurons are
beginning to be revealed, a global characterization of the molecular differences 
between these two neuron types is crucial for a more comprehensive understanding 
of their developmental specifications and functions. In this study, using lineage
tracing power of combining Tbr2(Eomes)-GFP and Dcx-mRFP reporter mice, we
prospectively separated intermediate progenitor cell (IPC)-derived neurons (IPNs)
from non-IPC-derived neurons (non-IPNs) of the embryonic cerebral cortex.
Molecular characterizations revealed that IPNs and non-IPNs were enriched with
projection neurons and interneurons, respectively. Expression profiling
documented cell-specific genes including differentially expressed transcriptional
regulators that might be involved in cellular specifications, for instance, our
data found that SOX1 and SOX2, which were known for important functions in neural
stem/progenitor cells, continued to be expressed by interneurons but not by
projection neurons. Transcriptome analyses of cortical neurons isolated at
different stages of neurogenesis revealed distinct temporal patterns of
expression of genes involved in early-born or late-born neuron specification.
These data present a resource useful for further investigation of the molecular
regulations and functions of projection neurons and interneurons. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. Develop Neurobiol, 2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4744584 [Available on 2017-02-06]
PMID: 26248544  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. J Biol Chem. 2015 Sep 4;290(36):22019-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.674127. Epub 2015
Jul 28.

Activin Regulates Self-renewal and Differentiation of Trophoblast Stem Cells by
Down-regulating the X Chromosome Gene Bcor.

Zhu G(1), Fei T(1), Li Z(1), Yan X(1), Chen YG(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the The State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Tsinghua-Peking Center 
for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, 
China. (2)From the The State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Tsinghua-Peking 
Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China ygchen@tsinghua.edu.cn.

The development of a functional placenta is largely dependent upon proper
proliferation and differentiation of trophoblast stem cells (TSCs). Activin
signaling has long been regarded to play important roles during this process, but
the exact mechanism is largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that the X
chromosome gene BCL-6 corepressor (Bcor) is a critical downstream effector of
activin to fine-tune mouse TSC fate decision. Bcor was specifically
down-regulated by activin A in TSCs in a dose-dependent manner, and immediately
up-regulated upon TSC differentiation. Knockdown of Bcor partially compensated
for the absence of activin A in maintaining the self-renewal of TSCs together
with FGF4, while promoting syncytiotrophoblast differentiation in the absence of 
FGF4. Moreover, the impaired trophoblast giant cell and spongiotrophoblast
differentiation upon Bcor knockdown also resembled the function of activin.
Reporter analysis showed that BCOR inhibited the expression of the key
trophoblast regulator genes Eomes and Cebpa by binding to their promoter regions.
Our findings provide us with a better understanding of placental development and 
placenta-related diseases.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4571955 [Available on 2016-09-04]
PMID: 26221038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mucosal Immunol. 2016 Mar;9(2):401-13. doi: 10.1038/mi.2015.69. Epub 2015 Jul 29.

CD161(int)CD8+ T cells: a novel population of highly functional, memory CD8+ T
cells enriched within the gut.

Fergusson JR(1), Hühn MH(2), Swadling L(1), Walker LJ(1,)(3), Kurioka A(1),
Llibre A(1), Bertoletti A(4), Holländer G(5), Newell EW(6,)(7), Davis MM(7),
Sverremark-Ekström E(8), Powrie F(2,)(9), Capone S(10), Folgori A(10), Barnes
E(1), Willberg CB(1), Ussher JE(1,)(11), Klenerman P(1,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Peter Medawar Building for Pathogen Research, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UK. (2)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical
Medicine, Experimental Medicine Division, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK. (3)Newcastle University Institute of Cellular Medicine,
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. (4)Program Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-NUS
Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. (5)Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (6)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
(7)Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore Immunology
Network (SIgN), Singapore, Singapore. (8)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The
Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden. (9)Kennedy
Institute of Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and 
Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (10)Okairos, Pomezia,
Rome, Italy. (11)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, 
Dunedin, New Zealand. (12)NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Oxford, UK.

The C-type lectin-like receptor CD161 is expressed by lymphocytes found in human 
gut and liver, as well as blood, especially natural killer (NK) cells, T helper
17 (Th17) cells, and a population of unconventional T cells known as
mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells. The association of high CD161
expression with innate T-cell populations including MAIT cells is established.
Here we show that CD161 is also expressed, at intermediate levels, on a prominent
subset of polyclonal CD8+ T cells, including antiviral populations that display a
memory phenotype. These memory CD161(int)CD8+ T cells are enriched within the
colon and express both CD103 and CD69, markers associated with tissue residence. 
Furthermore, this population was characterized by enhanced polyfunctionality,
increased levels of cytotoxic mediators, and high expression of the transcription
factors T-bet and eomesodermin (EOMES). Such populations were induced by novel
vaccine strategies based on adenoviral vectors, currently in trial against
hepatitis C virus. Thus, intermediate CD161 expression marks potent polyclonal,
polyfunctional tissue-homing CD8+ T-cell populations in humans. As induction of
such responses represents a major aim of T-cell prophylactic and therapeutic
vaccines in viral disease and cancer, analysis of these populations could be of
value in the future.

PMCID: PMC4732939 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26220166  [PubMed - in process]


50. Immunol Invest. 2015;44(6):578-89. doi: 10.3109/08820139.2015.1052145. Epub 2015 
Jul 27.

The Clinical Significance of Abnormal Tim-3 Expression on NK Cells from Patients 
with Gastric Cancer.

Wang Z(1), Zhu J, Gu H, Yuan Y, Zhang B, Zhu D, Zhou J, Zhu Y, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and.

AIM: To investigate the clinical significance of Tim-3 (T-cell immunoglobulin-
and mucin-domain-containing molecule 3) expression in natural killer (NK) cells
from patients with gastric cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sixty-two patients with gastric cancer and 32 healthy
controls were recruited for this study. Tim-3 expression in peripheral blood
samples was analyzed using flow cytometry. The expression pattern of Tim-3 on NK 
cells was also confirmed using a gastric cancer-bearing mouse model. To further
investigate the mechanisms that regulate Tim-3 expression, T-bet(-/-),
Eomes(-/-), and Eomes/T-bet double knockout mice were utilized. Additionally, we 
statistically analyzed the clinical significance of Tim-3 expression on NK cells.
RESULTS: We found that the levels of Tim-3 in NK cells obtained from patients
with gastric cancer were significantly higher than the levels in healthy
controls. Clinical analyses showed that Tim-3 levels on NK cells were associated 
with advanced tumor stage. In a tumor-bearing mouse model, Tim-3 levels in NK
cells increased with tumor growth, indicating that tumor progression could induce
Tim-3 expression in NK cells. Finally, we report that T-bet is a key factor
involved in regulating Tim-3 expression.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that Tim-3 expression on NK cells is regulated by
T-bet, and that Tim-3 levels correlate with advanced stages of gastric cancer.

PMID: 26214042  [PubMed - in process]


51. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 24;6:7776. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8776.

Fgf and Esrrb integrate epigenetic and transcriptional networks that regulate
self-renewal of trophoblast stem cells.

Latos PA(1), Goncalves A(2), Oxley D(3), Mohammed H(4), Turro E(5), Hemberger
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK [2] Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of
Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK. (2)Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. (3)Proteomics Group, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. (4)Epigenetics Programme, The
Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. (5)1]
Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, NHS Blood and Transplant,
Long Road, Cambridge CB2 0PT, UK [2] Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit,
Cambridge Institute of Public Health, Robinson Way, Forvie Site, Cambridge CB2
0SR, UK.

Esrrb (oestrogen-related receptor beta) is a transcription factor implicated in
embryonic stem (ES) cell self-renewal, yet its knockout causes intrauterine
lethality due to defects in trophoblast development. Here we show that in
trophoblast stem (TS) cells, Esrrb is a downstream target of fibroblast growth
factor (Fgf) signalling and is critical to drive TS cell self-renewal. In
contrast to its occupancy of pluripotency-associated loci in ES cells, Esrrb
sustains the stemness of TS cells by direct binding and regulation of TS
cell-specific transcription factors including Elf5 and Eomes. To elucidate the
mechanisms whereby Esrrb controls the expression of its targets, we characterized
its TS cell-specific interactome using mass spectrometry. Unlike in ES cells,
Esrrb interacts in TS cells with the histone demethylase Lsd1 and with the RNA
Polymerase II-associated Integrator complex. Our findings provide new insights
into both the general and context-dependent wiring of transcription factor
networks in stem cells by master transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4525203
PMID: 26206133  [PubMed - in process]


52. Stem Cells. 2015 Nov;33(11):3254-65. doi: 10.1002/stem.2111. Epub 2015 Aug 18.

Genome-Wide Identification of MESP1 Targets Demonstrates Primary Regulation Over 
Mesendoderm Gene Activity.

Soibam B(1,)(2), Benham A(1), Kim J(2), Weng KC(3), Yang L(1), Xu X(4), Robertson
M(1), Azares A(1), Cooney AJ(4), Schwartz RJ(1,)(2), Liu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Texas Heart Institute, Texas Medical Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas,
USA. (3)The Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A & M University
Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

MESP1 is considered the first sign of the nascent cardiac mesoderm and plays a
critical role in the appearance of cardiac progenitors, while exhibiting a
transient expression in the developing embryo. We profiled the transcriptome of a
pure population of differentiating MESP1-marked cells and found that they chiefly
contribute to the mesendoderm lineage. High-throughput sequencing of endogenous
MESP1-bound DNA revealed that MESP1 preferentially binds to two variants of E-box
sequences and activates critical mesendoderm modulators, including Eomes, Gata4, 
Wnt5a, Wnt5b, Mixl1, T, Gsc, and Wnt3. These mesendoderm markers were enriched in
the MESP1 marked population before the appearance of cardiac progenitors and
myocytes. Further, MESP1-binding is globally associated with H(3)K(27)
acetylation, supporting a novel pivotal role of it in regulating target gene
epigenetics. Therefore, MESP1, the pioneer cardiac factor, primarily directs the 
appearance of mesendoderm, the intermediary of the earliest progenitors of
mesoderm and endoderm organogenesis.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26205879  [PubMed - in process]


53. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2015 Jun;19(12):2246-53.

Predicting transcription factors in human alcoholic hepatitis from gene
regulatory network.

Mohammadnia A(1), Yaqubi M, Fallahi H.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran,
Iran. h.fallahi@razi.ac.ir.

OBJECTIVE: Alcoholic hepatitis (AH) is a type of alcoholic liver disorder caused 
by overconsumption of alcohol. The involvement of several transcription factors
(TF), as the main regulators of disease related gene expression has been
documented previously. However, despite the importance of analysis of gene
regulatory network for understanding the molecular basis in any disease, so far, 
there is no report on construction of such network for AH in human.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Here, we used microarray analysis to construct a rather
complete gene regulatory network and used it to predict TFs and pathways that
affected by this disease.
RESULTS: Ten TFs were shown to undergo significant alteration in AH. These TFs
are AR, EGR1, MYC, TCF4, ATF3, JUN, FOXO3, STAT1, HIF1A and EOMES, where ATF3,
TCF4 and MYC are the new TFs with a role in AH. Comparisons of gene expression
profile of patients with those of healthy persons indicates 820 differentially
expressed (DE) genes. Network analysis indicates that, these ten TFs regulate
expression of 516 DE genes (out of 820 genes), by 1057 interactions. Furthermore,
we report pathways that significantly affected by these ten TFs.
CONCLUSIONS: These results may contribute to our limited understanding of the
molecular basis of AH.

PMID: 26166650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 7;10(7):e0131889. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131889.
eCollection 2015.

Filtration Device for On-Site Collection, Storage and Shipment of Cells from
Urine and Its Application to DNA-Based Detection of Bladder Cancer.

Andersson E(1), Dahmcke CM(2), Steven K(3), Larsen LK(1), Guldberg P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Danish Cancer
Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Pathology, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark. (3)Department of Urology, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2015 Aug;12(8):420.

Molecular analysis of cells from urine provides a convenient approach to
non-invasive detection of bladder cancer. The practical use of urinary cell-based
tests is often hampered by difficulties in handling and analyzing large sample
volumes, the need for rapid sample processing to avoid degradation of cellular
content, and low sensitivity due to a high background of normal cells. We present
a filtration device, designed for home or point-of-care use, which enables
collection, storage and shipment of urinary cells. A special feature of this
device is a removable cartridge housing a membrane filter, which after filtration
of urine can be transferred to a storage unit containing an appropriate
preserving solution. In spiking experiments, the use of this device provided
efficient recovery of bladder cancer cells with elimination of >99% of excess
smaller-sized cells. The performance of the device was further evaluated by
DNA-based analysis of urinary cells collected from 57 patients subjected to
transurethral resection following flexible cystoscopy indicating the presence of 
a tumor. All samples were tested for FGFR3 mutations and seven DNA methylation
markers (BCL2, CCNA1, EOMES, HOXA9, POU4F2, SALL3 and VIM). In the group of
patients where a transitional cell tumor was confirmed at histopathological
evaluation, urine DNA was positive for one or more markers in 29 out of 31 cases 
(94%), including 19 with FGFR3 mutation (61%). In the group of patients with
benign histopathology, urine DNA was positive for methylation markers in 13 out
of 26 cases (50%). Only one patient in this group was positive for a FGFR3
mutation. This patient had a stage Ta tumor resected 6 months later. The ability 
to easily collect, store and ship diagnostic cells from urine using the presented
device may facilitate non-invasive testing for bladder cancer.

PMCID: PMC4495058
PMID: 26151138  [PubMed - in process]


55. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 Sep;21(9):711-22. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav036. Epub 2015 Jun 
24.

WNT3 and membrane-associated ß-catenin regulate trophectoderm lineage
differentiation in human blastocysts.

Krivega M(1), Essahib W(2), Van de Velde H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Group of Reproduction and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103, Brussels 1090, Belgium
krivega@gmail.com mkrivega@vub.ac.be. (2)Research Group of Reproduction and
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB),
Laarbeeklaan 103, Brussels 1090, Belgium. (3)Research Group of Reproduction and
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB),
Laarbeeklaan 103, Brussels 1090, Belgium Centre for Reproductive Medicine (CRG), 
UZ Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 101, Brussels 1090, Belgium.

WNT/ß-catenin signaling has been described as a crucial regulator of embryonic
stem cells and embryogenesis. However, little is known on its role during human
preimplantation embryo development, besides the RNA expression of its multiple
players. In this study, we performed ß-catenin loss- and gain-of-function studies
on human preimplantation embryos by adding either Cardamonin or GSK3 inhibitor,
1-Azakenpaullone, to the embryo culture medium from the cleavage until blastocyst
stages (Days 3-5/6). ß-Catenin was displayed in the cortical region underneath
the membrane during all stages, but it only showed nuclear localization at
cleavage stages after stabilization with 1-Azakenpaullone. We did not observe any
effects on the inner cell mass markers NANOG, POU5F1, SOX2 and SALL4 in these
functional experiments. However, both ß-catenin degradation and stabilization
caused inhibition of the trophectoderm (TE) fate, illustrated by KRT18 and GATA3 
RNA, and CDX2 protein expression. Based on the TE-specific WNT3 protein
expression in blastocysts, we postulated that this protein may be an upstream
regulator for the observed membrane ß-catenin function. The addition of either
WNT3 or 1-Azakenpaullone to the culture medium promoted EOMES expression specific
for trophoblast development. In both studies, the canonical WNT pathway target
gene, TCF1, was not affected. Therefore, we conclude that WNT3 and
membrane-associated ß-catenin promote progenitor trophoblast development in human
blastocysts. These results have important implications in assisted reproduction
and stem cell biology.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26108805  [PubMed - in process]


56. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 15;10(6):e0129787. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129787.
eCollection 2015.

Morphological and Gene Expression Changes in Cattle Embryos from Hatched
Blastocyst to Early Gastrulation Stages after Transfer of In Vitro Produced
Embryos.

van Leeuwen J(1), Berg DK(2), Pfeffer PL(3).

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch Ruakura, Animal Productivity Section, Hamilton, New Zealand;
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand. 
(2)AgResearch Ruakura, Animal Productivity Section, Hamilton, New Zealand.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, 
New Zealand.

A detailed morphological staging system for cattle embryos at stages following
blastocyst hatching and preceding gastrulation is presented here together with
spatiotemporal mapping of gene expression for BMP4, BRACHYURY, CERBERUS1 (CER1), 
CRIPTO, EOMESODERMIN, FURIN and NODAL. Five stages are defined based on distinct 
developmental events. The first of these is the differentiation of the visceral
hypoblast underlying the epiblast, from the parietal hypoblast underlying the
mural trophoblast. The second concerns the formation of an asymmetrically
positioned, morphologically recognisable region within the visceral hypoblast
that is marked by the presence of CER1 and absence of BMP4 expression. We have
termed this the anterior visceral hypoblast or AVH. Intra-epiblast cavity
formation and the disappearance of the polar trophoblast overlying the epiblast
(Rauber's layer) have been mapped in relation to AVH formation. The third
chronological event involves the transition of the epiblast into the embryonic
ectoderm with concomitant onset of posterior NODAL, EOMES and BRACHYURY
expression. Lastly, gastrulation commences as the posterior medial embryonic
ectoderm layer thickens to form the primitive streak and cells ingress between
the embryonic ectoderm and hypoblast. At this stage a novel domain of CER1
expression is seen whereas the AVH disappears. Comparison with the mouse reveals 
that while gene expression patterns at the onset of gastrulation are well
conserved, asymmetry establishment, which relies on extraembryonic tissues such
as the hypoblast and trophoblast, has diverged in terms of both gene expression
and morphology.

PMCID: PMC4468082
PMID: 26076128  [PubMed - in process]


57. Biol Reprod. 2015 Aug;93(2):31. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.126474. Epub 2015 Jun
10.

Reduced Gene Dosage of Tfap2c Impairs Trophoblast Lineage Differentiation and
Alters Maternal Blood Spaces in the Mouse Placenta.

Kaiser S(1), Koch Y(1), Kühnel E(1), Sharma N(2), Gellhaus A(1), Kuckenberg P(2),
Schorle H(2), Winterhager E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University Hospital, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (2)Department of Developmental Pathology,
Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Institute of Molecular Biology, University Hospital, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany elke.winterhager@uk-essen.de.

Tfap2c is required for placental development and trophoblast stem cell
maintenance. Deletion of Tfap2c results in early embryonic loss because of
failure in placental development. We evaluated the effect of reduced Tfap2c
expression on fetal outcome and placental development. Sixty percent of the
heterozygous mice were lost directly after birth. Labyrinthine differentiation
was impaired, as indicated by enhanced proliferation and inclusions of
cobblestone-shaped cell clusters characterized by expression of Tfap2c and
glycogen stores. Moreover, expression of marker genes such as Cdx2, Eomes, Gata3,
and Ascl2 are decreased in the spongiotrophoblast and indicate a lowered stem
cell potential. On Day 18.5 postcoitum, the labyrinth layer of Tfap2c(+/-)
placentas exhibited massive hemorrhages in the maternal blood spaces; these
hemorrhages might have contributed to the significantly reduced number of
live-born pups. These morphological alterations were accompanied by a shift
toward sinusoidal trophoblast giant cells as the cell subpopulation lining the
maternal sinusoids and toward reduction in expression of the prolactin gene
family member Prl2c2, a finding characteristic of the spiral arteries lining
trophoblast cells. The trophoblast stem cells heterozygous for Tfap2c exhibited a
reduction in the expression level of stem cell markers and in their proliferation
and differentiation capacity but did not exhibit changes in marker genes of the
trophoblast giant cell lineage. Taken together, these findings indicate that a
reduction in the gene dosage of placental Tfap2c leads to morphological changes
in the labyrinth at midgestation and in the maternal blood spaces during late
pregnancy.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 26063869  [PubMed - in process]


58. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 16;112(24):7551-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1506357112. Epub 2015 Jun 1.

Focusing and sustaining the antitumor CTL effector killer response by agonist
anti-CD137 mAb.

Weigelin B(1), Bolaños E(2), Teijeira A(2), Martinez-Forero I(2), Labiano S(2),
Azpilikueta A(2), Morales-Kastresana A(2), Quetglas JI(2), Wagena E(1),
Sánchez-Paulete AR(2), Chen L(3), Friedl P(1), Melero I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, 6525
GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands; (2)Centro de Investigación Médica Aplicada (CIMA)
and Clinica Universidad de Navarra, University of Navarra, 31008 Pamplona, Spain;
(3)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06511. (4)Centro de Investigación Médica Aplicada (CIMA) and Clinica Universidad 
de Navarra, University of Navarra, 31008 Pamplona, Spain; imelero@unav.es.

Cancer immunotherapy is undergoing significant progress due to recent clinical
successes by refined adoptive T-cell transfer and immunostimulatory monoclonal Ab
(mAbs). B16F10-derived OVA-expressing mouse melanomas resist curative
immunotherapy with either adoptive transfer of activated anti-OVA OT1 CTLs or
agonist anti-CD137 (4-1BB) mAb. However, when acting in synergistic combination, 
these treatments consistently achieve tumor eradication. Tumor-infiltrating
lymphocytes that accomplish tumor rejection exhibit enhanced effector functions
in both transferred OT-1 and endogenous cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). This is
consistent with higher levels of expression of eomesodermin in transferred and
endogenous CTLs and with intravital live-cell two-photon microscopy evidence for 
more efficacious CTL-mediated tumor cell killing. Anti-CD137 mAb treatment
resulted in prolonged intratumor persistence of the OT1 CTL-effector cells and
improved function with focused and confined interaction kinetics of OT-1 CTL with
target cells and increased apoptosis induction lasting up to six days
postadoptive transfer. The synergy of adoptive T-cell therapy and agonist
anti-CD137 mAb thus results from in vivo enhancement and sustainment of effector 
functions.

PMCID: PMC4475992
PMID: 26034288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Development. 2015 Jun 15;142(12):2121-35. doi: 10.1242/dev.117838. Epub 2015 May 
26.

Brachyury and SMAD signalling collaboratively orchestrate distinct mesoderm and
endoderm gene regulatory networks in differentiating human embryonic stem cells.

Faial T(1), Bernardo AS(2), Mendjan S(3), Diamanti E(4), Ortmann D(3), Gentsch
GE(5), Mascetti VL(3), Trotter MW(6), Smith JC(5), Pedersen RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Wellcome Trust-MRC
Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK The
Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK
Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK
tiago.faial@cantab.net. (2)The Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine,
Wellcome Trust-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, The
Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK Department of Surgery, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK. (3)The Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, 
Wellcome Trust-MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK Department of Surgery, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 0QQ, UK. (4)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and Wellcome Trust-MRC
Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.
(5)The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, The Ridgeway, London NW7
1AA, UK Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK.
(6)The Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Wellcome Trust-MRC
Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK.

The transcription factor brachyury (T, BRA) is one of the first markers of
gastrulation and lineage specification in vertebrates. Despite its wide use and
importance in stem cell and developmental biology, its functional genomic targets
in human cells are largely unknown. Here, we use differentiating human embryonic 
stem cells to study the role of BRA in activin A-induced endoderm and
BMP4-induced mesoderm progenitors. We show that BRA has distinct genome-wide
binding landscapes in these two cell populations, and that BRA interacts and
collaborates with SMAD1 or SMAD2/3 signalling to regulate the expression of its
target genes in a cell-specific manner. Importantly, by manipulating the levels
of BRA in cells exposed to different signalling environments, we demonstrate that
BRA is essential for mesoderm but not for endoderm formation. Together, our data 
illuminate the function of BRA in the context of human embryonic development and 
show that the regulatory role of BRA is context dependent. Our study reinforces
the importance of analysing the functions of a transcription factor in different 
cellular and signalling environments.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4483767
PMID: 26015544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 15;194(12):5861-71. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401628. Epub 2015 
May 13.

Thymic low affinity/avidity interaction selects natural Th1 cells.

Kang BH(1), Park HJ(2), Yum HI(1), Park SP(3), Park JK(4), Kang EH(5), Lee JI(6),
Lee EB(4), Park CG(7), Jung KC(8), Park SH(9).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Immunology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul 110-799, Korea; (2)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; Department of Pathology, Seoul
National University Bundang Hospital, SungNam 463-707, Korea; (3)Transplantation 
Research Institute, Medical Research Center, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; Division of
Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University
Hospital, Seoul 110-744, Korea; (5)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; Division of
Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang 
Hospital, SungNam 463-707, Korea; (6)Graduate School of Immunology, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; Transplantation
Research Institute, Medical Research Center, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; (7)Transplantation Research Institute, Medical
Research Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799,
Korea; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; Translational Xenotransplantation
Research Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799,
Korea; and. (8)Graduate School of Immunology, Seoul National University College
of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; Department of Pathology, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; Transplantation Research
Institute, Medical Research Center, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; Department of Pathology, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul 110-744, Korea pshoe@snu.ac.kr jungkc66@snu.ac.kr.
(9)Graduate School of Immunology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
Seoul 110-799, Korea; Transplantation Research Institute, Medical Research
Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea;
pshoe@snu.ac.kr jungkc66@snu.ac.kr.

Identification of intrathymic eomesodermin(+) (Eomes(+)) CD4 T cells creates a
novel idea that there is more than one way for the generation of innate CD4 T
cells. Promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein(+) T cells and natural Th17
cells are known to be generated by sensing a high and persistent TCR strength,
whereas this is not the case for Eomes(+) CD4 T cells. These cells go through
low-level signal during the entire maturation pathway, which subsequently leads
to induction of high susceptibility to cytokine IL-4. This event seems to be a
major determinant for the generation of this type of cell. These T cells are
functionally equivalent to Th1 cells that are present in the periphery, and this 
event takes place both in transgenic and in wild-type mice. There is additional
evidence that this type of Eomes(+) innate CD4 T cell is also present in human
cord blood.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4456632
PMID: 25972479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Neurosci. 2015 May 13;35(19):7552-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0169-15.2015.

The Specification of Cortical Subcerebral Projection Neurons Depends on the
Direct Repression of TBR1 by CTIP1/BCL11a.

Cánovas J(1), Berndt FA(1), Sepúlveda H(2), Aguilar R(2), Veloso FA(2), Montecino
M(2), Oliva C(1), Maass JC(3), Sierralta J(4), Kukuljan M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute and Program of Physiology and Biophysics,
Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, Santiago 8380453, Chile. (2)Center for
Biomedical Research and FONDAP Center for Genome Regulation, Universidad Andrés
Bello, Santiago 8370146, Chile, and. (3)Biomedical Neuroscience Institute and
Program of Physiology and Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad de Chile, 
Santiago 8380453, Chile, Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Clínico,
Universidad de Chile, Santiago 8380456, Chile. (4)Biomedical Neuroscience
Institute and Program of Physiology and Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine,
Universidad de Chile, Santiago 8380453, Chile, kukuljan@med.uchile.cl
jimena@neuro.med.uchile.cl.

The acquisition of distinct neuronal fates is fundamental for the function of the
cerebral cortex. We find that the development of subcerebral projections from
layer 5 neurons in the mouse neocortex depends on the high levels of expression
of the transcription factor CTIP1; CTIP1 is coexpressed with CTIP2 in neurons
that project to subcerebral targets and with SATB2 in those that project to the
contralateral cortex. CTIP1 directly represses Tbr1 in layer 5, which appears as 
a critical step for the acquisition of the subcerebral fate. In contrast, lower
levels of CTIP1 in layer 6 are required for TBR1 expression, which directs the
corticothalamic fate. CTIP1 does not appear to play a critical role in the
acquisition of the callosal projection fate in layer 5. These findings unravel a 
key step in the acquisition of cell fate for closely related corticofugal neurons
and indicate that differential dosages of transcriptions factors are critical to 
specify different neuronal identities.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357552-13$15.00/0.

PMID: 25972180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;843:77-128. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2480-6_4.

Molecular biology of the stress response in the early embryo and its stem cells.

Puscheck EE(1), Awonuga AO, Yang Y, Jiang Z, Rappolee DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ob/Gyn, REI Division, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, MI, USA.

Stress is normal during early embryogenesis and transient, elevated stress is
commonplace. Stress in the milieu of the peri-implantation embryo is a summation 
of maternal hormones, and other elements of the maternal milieu, that signal
preparedness for development and implantation. Examples discussed here are
leptin, adrenaline, cortisol, and progesterone. These hormones signal maternal
nutritional status and provide energy, but also signal stress that diverts
maternal and embryonic energy from an optimal embryonic developmental trajectory.
These hormones communicate endocrine maternal effects and local embryonic effects
although signaling mechanisms are not well understood. Other in vivo stresses
affect the embryo such as local infection and inflammation, hypoxia,
environmental toxins such as benzopyrene, dioxin, or metals, heat shock, and
hyperosmotic stress due to dehydration or diabetes. In vitro, stresses include
shear during handling, improper culture media and oxygen levels,
cryopreservation, and manipulations of the embryo to introduce sperm or
mitochondria. We define stress as any stimulus that slows stem cell accumulation 
or diminishes the ability of cells to produce normal and sufficient parenchymal
products upon differentiation. Thus stress deflects downwards the normal
trajectories of development, growth and differentiation. Typically stress is
inversely proportional to embryonic developmental and proliferative rates, but
can be proportional to induction of differentiation of stem cells in the
peri-implantation embryo. When modeling stress it is most interesting to produce 
a 'runting model' where stress exposures slow accumulation but do not create
excessive apoptosis or morbidity. Windows of stress sensitivity may occur when
major new embryonic developmental programs require large amounts of energy and
are exacerbated if nutritional flow decreases and removes energy from the normal 
developmental programs and stress responses. These windows correspond to zygotic 
genome activation, the large mRNA program initiated at compaction, ion pumping
required for cavitation, the differentiation of the first lineages, integration
with the uterine environment at implantation, rapid proliferation of stem cells, 
and production of certain lineages which require the highest energy and are most 
sensitive to mitochondrial inhibition. Stress response mechanisms insure that
stem cells for the early embryo and placenta survive at lower stress exposures,
and that the organism survives through compensatory and prioritized stem cell
differentiation, at higher stress exposures. These servomechanisms include a
small set of stress enzymes from the 500 protein kinases in the kinome; the part 
of the genome coding for protein kinases that hierarchically regulate the
activity of other proteins and enzymes. Important protein kinases that mediate
the stress response of embryos and their stem cells are SAPK, p38MAPK, AMPK,
PI3K, Akt, MEK1/2, MEKK4, PKA, IRE1 and PERK. These stress enzymes have cytosolic
function in cell survival at low stress exposures and nuclear function in
modifying transcription factor activity at higher stress exposures. Some of the
transcription factors (TFs) that are most important in the stress response are
JunC, JunB, MAPKAPs, ATF4, XBP1, Oct1, Oct4, HIFs, Nrf2/KEAP, NFKB, MT1, Nfat5,
HSF1/2 and potency-maintaining factors Id2, Cdx2, Eomes, Sox2, Nanog, Rex1, and
Oct4. Clearly the stress enzymes have a large number of cytosolic and nuclear
substrates and the TFs regulate large numbers of genes. The interaction of stress
enzymes and TFs in the early embryo and its stem cells are a continuing central
focus of research. In vitro regulation of TFs by stress enzymes leads to
reprogramming of the stem cell when stress diminishes stem cell accumulation.
Since more differentiated product is produced by fewer cells, the process
compensates for fewer cells. Coupled with stress-induced compensatory
differentiation of stem cells is a tendency to prioritize differentiation by
increasing the first essential lineage and decreasing later lineages. These
mechanisms include stress enzymes that regulate TFs and provide stress-specific, 
shared homeostatic cellular and organismal responses of prioritized
differentiation.

PMID: 25956296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nat Commun. 2015 May 8;6:7089. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8089.

Type I interferons regulate eomesodermin expression and the development of
unconventional memory CD8(+) T cells.

Martinet V(1), Tonon S(1), Torres D(1), Azouz A(1), Nguyen M(1), Kohler A(1),
Flamand V(1), Mao CA(2), Klein WH(2), Leo O(1), Goriely S(1).

Author information: 
(1)WELBIO and Institute for Medical Immunology (IMI), Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Gosselies 6041, Belgium. (2)Department of Systems Biology, University 
of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

CD8(+) T-cell memory phenotype and function are acquired after antigen-driven
activation. Memory-like cells may also arise in absence of antigenic exposure in 
the thymus or in the periphery. Eomesodermin (Eomes) is a key transcription
factor for the development of these unconventional memory cells. Herein, we show 
that type I interferon signalling in CD8(+) T cells directly activates Eomes gene
expression. Consistent with this observation, the phenotype, function and
age-dependent expansion of 'virtual memory' CD8(+) T cells are strongly affected 
in absence of type I interferon signalling. In addition, type I interferons
induce a sustained expansion of 'virtual memory' CD8(+) T cells in an
Eomes-dependent fashion. We further show that the development of 'innate thymic' 
CD8(+) T cells is dependent on the same pathway. In conclusion, we demonstrate
that type I interferon signalling in CD8(+) T cells drives Eomes expression and
thereby regulates the function and homeostasis of memory-like CD8(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC4432629
PMID: 25953241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Neural Dev. 2015 May 2;10:13. doi: 10.1186/s13064-015-0040-z.

The methyl binding domain 3/nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase complex
regulates neural cell fate determination and terminal differentiation in the
cerebral cortex.

Knock E(1,)(2), Pereira J(3,)(4), Lombard PD(5), Dimond A(6), Leaford D(7),
Livesey FJ(8,)(9,)(10), Hendrich B(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust - Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK. erin.knock@gmail.com. (2)Tanz Centre for
Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Krembil Discovery Tower, 6KD-404, 60
Leonard Avenue, Toronto, ON, Canada. erin.knock@gmail.com. (3)Gurdon Institute,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QW, UK. jdpereira@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QN, UK.
jdpereira@gmail.com. (5)Wellcome Trust - Medical Research Council Stem Cell
Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK. pdl30@cam.ac.uk.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QN, UK.
amd79@cam.ac.uk. (7)Wellcome Trust - Medical Research Council Stem Cell
Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK.
donna.leaford@cruk.cam.ac.uk. (8)Wellcome Trust - Medical Research Council Stem
Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK.
rick@gurdon.cam.ac.uk. (9)Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
CB2 1QW, UK. rick@gurdon.cam.ac.uk. (10)Department of Biochemistry, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QN, UK. rick@gurdon.cam.ac.uk. (11)Wellcome Trust -
Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
CB2 1QR, UK. brian.hendrich@cscr.cam.ac.uk. (12)Department of Biochemistry,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 1QN, UK. brian.hendrich@cscr.cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Chromatin-modifying complexes have key roles in regulating various
aspects of neural stem cell biology, including self-renewal and neurogenesis. The
methyl binding domain 3/nucleosome remodelling and deacetylation (MBD3/NuRD)
co-repressor complex facilitates lineage commitment of pluripotent cells in early
mouse embryos and is important for stem cell homeostasis in blood and skin, but
its function in neurogenesis had not been described. Here, we show for the first 
time that MBD3/NuRD function is essential for normal neurogenesis in mice.
RESULTS: Deletion of MBD3, a structural component of the NuRD complex, in the
developing mouse central nervous system resulted in reduced cortical thickness,
defects in the proper specification of cortical projection neuron subtypes and
neonatal lethality. These phenotypes are due to alterations in PAX6+ apical
progenitor cell outputs, as well as aberrant terminal neuronal differentiation
programmes of cortical plate neurons. Normal numbers of PAX6+ apical neural
progenitor cells were generated in the MBD3/NuRD-mutant cortex; however, the
PAX6+ apical progenitor cells generate EOMES+ basal progenitor cells in reduced
numbers. Cortical progenitor cells lacking MBD3/NuRD activity generate neurons
that express both deep- and upper-layer markers. Using laser capture
microdissection, gene expression profiling and chromatin immunoprecipitation, we 
provide evidence that MBD3/NuRD functions to control gene expression patterns
during neural development.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that although MBD3/NuRD is not required for neural 
stem cell lineage commitment, it is required to repress inappropriate
transcription in both progenitor cells and neurons to facilitate appropriate cell
lineage choice and differentiation programmes.

PMCID: PMC4432814
PMID: 25934499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Reproduction. 2015 Jul;150(1):21-30. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0019. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Histone methyltransferase Smyd3 regulates early embryonic lineage commitment in
mice.

Suzuki S(1), Nozawa Y(1), Tsukamoto S(1), Kaneko T(1), Imai H(1), Minami N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive BiologyGraduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8052, JapanLaboratory of Animal and Genome Sciences
SectionNational Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba 263-8555, JapanGraduate
School of MedicineInstitute of Laboratory Animals, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8501, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Reproductive BiologyGraduate School of
Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8052, JapanLaboratory of Animal and
Genome Sciences SectionNational Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba
263-8555, JapanGraduate School of MedicineInstitute of Laboratory Animals, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan oog1nao@kais.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

SET and MYND domain-containing protein 3 (Smyd3) is a histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) 
di- and tri-methyltransferase that forms a transcriptional complex with RNA
polymerase II and activates the transcription of oncogenes and cell cycle genes
in human cancer cells. However, the study of Smyd3 in mammalian early embryonic
development has not yet been addressed. In the present study, we investigated the
expression pattern of Smyd3 in mouse preimplantation embryos and the effects of
RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated Smyd3 repression on the development of mouse
embryos. We showed that Smyd3 mRNA levels increased after the two-cell stage,
peaked at the four-cell stage, and gradually decreased thereafter. Moreover, in
two-cell to eight-cell embryos, SMYD3 staining was more intense in the nuclei
than it was in the cytoplasm. In Smyd3-knockdown embryos, the percentage of inner
cell mass (ICM)-derived colony formation and trophectoderm (TE)-derived cell
attachment were significantly decreased, which resulted in a reduction in the
number of viable offspring. Furthermore, the expression of Oct4 and Cdx2 during
mid-preimplantation gene activation was significantly decreased in
Smyd3-knockdown embryos. In addition, the transcription levels of ICM and
epiblast markers, such as Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2, the transcription levels of
primitive endoderm markers, such as Gata6, and the transcription levels of TE
markers, such as Cdx2 and Eomes, were significantly decreased in Smyd3-knockdown 
blastocysts. These findings indicate that SMYD3 plays an important role in early 
embryonic lineage commitment and peri-implantation development through the
activation of lineage-specific genes.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25918436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jul;45(7):1926-33. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545539. Epub 2015 May 
20.

Evidence for eomesodermin-expressing innate-like CD8(+) KIR/NKG2A(+) T cells in
human adults and cord blood samples.

Jacomet F(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Cayssials E(1,)(3,)(4), Basbous S(1,)(4), Levescot
A(1,)(5,)(6), Piccirilli N(3), Desmier D(1,)(3,)(4), Robin A(3,)(6), Barra
A(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Giraud C(1,)(3,)(7), Guilhot F(3,)(4,)(8,)(9), Roy
L(3,)(4,)(8,)(9), Herbelin A(3,)(4,)(6), Gombert JM(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR S935, Poitiers and Villejuif, France. (2)Service d'Immunologie et
Inflammation, Poitiers, France. (3)CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(4)Université de Poitiers, Poitiers, France. (5)Université Paris-Sud 11, Orsay,
France. (6)INSERM 1082, Poitiers, France. (7)Etablissement Français du Sang
Centre-Atlantique, Site de Poitiers, Poitiers, France. (8)Centre d'investigation 
clinique INSERM-1402, Poitiers, France. (9)Service d'Oncologie Hématologique et
Thérapie Cellulaire, Poitiers, France.

Polyclonal CD8(+) T cells, with a marked innate/memory phenotype, high
eomesodermin (Eomes) expression, and the capacity to generate IFN-<U+03B3> rapidly
without prior exposure to antigen, have been described in mice. However, even
though a pool of human CD8(+) T cells expressing killer Ig-like receptors (KIRs) 
was recently documented, the existence of a human equivalent of murine
innate/memory CD8(+) T cells remains to be established. Here, we provide evidence
for a population of KIR/NKG2A(+) CD8(+) T cells in healthy human adults sharing
the same features, namely increased Eomes expression, prompt IFN-<U+03B3> production in 
response to innate-like stimulation by IL-12+IL-18, and a potent
antigen-independent cytotoxic activity along with a preferential terminally
differentiated effector memory phenotype. None of the above functional
characteristics applied to the KIR/NKG2A(-) fraction of the Eomes(+) CD8(+)
T-cell population, thereby underlining the ability of KIR/NKG2A to distinguish
between "innate/memory-like" and "conventional/memory" pools of CD8(+) T cells.
Remarkably, KIR/NKG2A(+) Eomes(+) CD8(+) T cells with innate-like functions and a
memory/terminally differentiated effector memory phenotype were also identified
in human cord blood, suggesting that their development did not depend on cognate 
antigens. Taken together, our results support the conclusion that CD8(+) T cells 
co-expressing Eomes and KIR/NKG2A may represent a new, functionally distinct
"innate/memory-like" subset in humans.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25903796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Toxicol Ind Health. 2015 Apr 22. pii: 0748233715579805. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of hexavalent chromium-treated sperm on in vitro fertilization and embryo 
development.

Yoisungnern T(1), Das J(2), Choi YJ(2), Parnpai R(3), Kim JH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, Animal Resources Research Center, College 
of Animal Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul, South Korea
Embryo Technology and Stem Cell Research Center, School of Biotechnology,
Suranaree University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand. (2)Department of
Animal Biotechnology, Animal Resources Research Center, College of Animal
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul, South Korea. (3)Embryo
Technology and Stem Cell Research Center, School of Biotechnology, Suranaree
University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand. (4)Department of Animal
Biotechnology, Animal Resources Research Center, College of Animal Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul, South Korea jhkim541@konkuk.ac.kr.

Hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)) is an environmental contaminant that is associated
with reproductive abnormalities in both humans and animals. In the present study,
we evaluated the cytotoxic effect of Cr(VI) on sperm function and subsequent
embryo development after in vitro fertilization (IVF). Sperm obtained from BDF1
male mice were treated with potassium dichromate (0, 3.125, 6.25, 12.5, 25, or 50
µM) for 3 h. Cr(VI) significantly decreased sperm viability and acrosome reaction
with increasing dose. These Cr(VI)-treated sperms were further used for IVF of
oocytes obtained from BDF1 female mice. Results showed that Cr(VI)-treated sperm 
caused a significant reduction in IVF success, higher developmental arrest at the
two-cell stage of embryos, and delayed blastocyst formation with increasing dose.
In particular, most blastocysts from the Cr(VI)-treated sperm resulted in
hatching failure as well as decreased inner cell mass and trophectoderm (TE).
Furthermore, blastocysts obtained from Cr(VI)-treated sperm showed lower
expression of not only TE-associated genes (eomes, cdx2, and krt8) but also
pluripotent marker genes (sox2, pou5f1, and klf4) that are responsible for
further embryo development of blastocyst embryos. The results of our current
study showed that Cr(VI)-treated sperm had negative effects on oocyte
fertilization and subsequent embryo development.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25903088  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


68. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10924-39.

Quantitative phosphoproteome analysis of embryonic stem cell differentiation
toward blood.

Piazzi M(1), Williamson A(2), Lee CF(2), Pearson S(3), Lacaud G(4), Kouskoff
V(3), McCubrey JA(5), Cocco L(1), Whetton AD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Science (DIBINEM),
University of Bologna, Italy. (2)Stem Cell and Leukaemia Proteomics Laboratory,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK. (3)Stem Cell Research Group, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (4)Stem Cell Biology Group
Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. (5)Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University, Greenville,
NC, USA.

Murine embryonic stem (ES) cells can differentiate in vitro into three germ
layers (endodermic, mesodermic, ectodermic). Studies on the differentiation of
these cells to specific early differentiation stages has been aided by an ES cell
line carrying the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) targeted to the Brachyury (Bry)
locus which marks mesoderm commitment. Furthermore, expression of the Vascular
Endothelial Growth Factor receptor 2 (Flk1) along with Bry defines hemangioblast 
commitment. Isobaric-tag for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ(TM)) and
phosphopeptide enrichment coupled to liquid chromatography separation and mass
spectrometry allow the study of phosphorylation changes occurring at different
stages of ES cell development using Bry and Flk1 expression respectively. We
identified and relatively quantified 37 phosphoentities which are modulated
during mesoderm-induced ES cells differentiation, comparing epiblast-like, early 
mesoderm and hemangioblast-enriched cells. Among the proteins differentially
phosphorylated toward mesoderm differentiation were: the epigenetic regulator
Dnmt3b, the protein kinase GSK3b, the chromatin remodeling factor Smarcc1, the
transcription factor Utf1; as well as protein specifically related to stem cell
differentiation, as Eomes, Hmga2, Ints1 and Rif1. As most key factors regulating 
early hematopoietic development have also been implicated in various types of
leukemia, understanding the post-translational modifications driving their
regulation during normal development could result in a better comprehension of
their roles during abnormal hematopoiesis in leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4484429
PMID: 25890499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Jul 15;21(14):3347-55. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-0057. 
Epub 2015 Apr 15.

POLE Proofreading Mutations Elicit an Antitumor Immune Response in Endometrial
Cancer.

van Gool IC(1), Eggink FA(2), Freeman-Mills L(3), Stelloo E(1), Marchi E(4), de
Bruyn M(2), Palles C(3), Nout RA(5), de Kroon CD(6), Osse EM(1), Klenerman P(4), 
Creutzberg CL(5), Tomlinson IP(7), Smit VT(1), Nijman HW(2), Bosse T(1), Church
DN(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. (3)Molecular and
Population Genetics Laboratory, The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford. Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, United Kingdom. (4)Immunity Theme,
NIHR Oxford Comprehensive Biomedical Research Centre, The Peter Medawar Building 
for Pathogen Research, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands. (6)Department of Gynecology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands. (7)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, The
Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford. Roosevelt Drive, 
Oxford, United Kingdom. Genomic Medicine Theme, Oxford Comprehensive Biomedical
Research Centre, The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (8)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, 
The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford. Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford, United Kingdom. Oxford Cancer Centre, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, 
United Kingdom. dchurch@well.ox.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: Recent studies have shown that 7% to 12% of endometrial cancers are
ultramutated due to somatic mutation in the proofreading exonuclease domain of
the DNA replicase POLE. Interestingly, these tumors have an excellent prognosis. 
In view of the emerging data linking mutation burden, immune response, and
clinical outcome in cancer, we investigated whether POLE-mutant endometrial
cancers showed evidence of increased immunogenicity.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined immune infiltration and activation according to 
tumor POLE proofreading mutation in a molecularly defined endometrial cancer
cohort including 47 POLE-mutant tumors. We sought to confirm our results by
analysis of RNAseq data from the TCGA endometrial cancer series and used the same
series to examine whether differences in immune infiltration could be explained
by an enrichment of immunogenic neoepitopes in POLE-mutant endometrial cancers.
RESULTS: Compared with other endometrial cancers, POLE mutants displayed an
enhanced cytotoxic T-cell response, evidenced by increased numbers of CD8(+)
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and CD8A expression, enrichment for a
tumor-infiltrating T-cell gene signature, and strong upregulation of the T-cell
cytotoxic differentiation and effector markers T-bet, Eomes, IFNG, PRF, and
granzyme B. This was accompanied by upregulation of T-cell exhaustion markers,
consistent with chronic antigen exposure. In silico analysis confirmed that
POLE-mutant cancers are predicted to display more antigenic neoepitopes than
other endometrial cancers, providing a potential explanation for our findings.
CONCLUSIONS: Ultramutated POLE proofreading-mutant endometrial cancers are
characterized by a robust intratumoral T-cell response, which correlates with,
and may be caused by an enrichment of antigenic neopeptides. Our study provides a
plausible mechanism for the excellent prognosis of these cancers.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4627582
PMID: 25878334  [PubMed - in process]


70. J Neurosci. 2015 Apr 15;35(15):6142-52. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0335-15.2015.

Neural precursor lineages specify distinct neocortical pyramidal neuron types.

Tyler WA(1), Medalla M(1), Guillamon-Vivancos T(1), Luebke JI(2), Haydar TF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02118. (2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118 thaydar@bu.edu
jluebke@bu.edu.

Several neural precursor populations contemporaneously generate neurons in the
developing neocortex. Specifically, radial glial stem cells of the dorsal
telencephalon divide asymmetrically to produce excitatory neurons, but also
indirectly to produce neurons via three types of intermediate progenitor cells.
Why so many precursor types are needed to produce neurons has not been
established; whether different intermediate progenitor cells merely expand the
output of radial glia or instead generate distinct types of neurons is unknown.
Here we use a novel genetic fate mapping technique to simultaneously track
multiple precursor streams in the developing mouse brain and show that layer 2
and 3 pyramidal neurons exhibit distinctive electrophysiological and structural
properties depending upon their precursor cell type of origin. These data
indicate that individual precursor subclasses synchronously produce functionally 
different neurons, even within the same lamina, and identify a primary mechanism 
leading to cortical neuronal diversity.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/356142-11$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4397608
PMID: 25878286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Cell Prolif. 2015 Jun;48(3):356-62. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12183. Epub 2015 Apr 13.

TGF-ß signalling prevents pancreatic beta cell death after proliferation.

Lei C(1), Zhou X, Pang Y, Mao Y, Lu X, Li M, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Xi'an Jiaotong University Medical School, Department of Physiology, Xian,
710061, China; Department of Endocrinology, The General Hospital of Ningxia
Medical University, Yinchuan, 750004, China.

OBJECTIVES: Maintenance of functional beta cell mass is critical for prevention
of diabetes. The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-ß) receptor signalling
pathway plays an essential role in pancreatic development. However, its
involvement in control of post-natal beta cell growth has only been recently
reported.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Here, we studied the role of TGF-ß receptor signalling in 
beta cell proliferation after 50% partial pancreatectomy (PPx), using beta
cell-specific TGF-ß receptor II (TBR2)-mutated mice.
RESULTS: Consistent with previous reports, we found that inhibition of TGF-ß
receptor signalling in beta cells resulted in slightly higher beta cell mass
1 week after PPx, due to greater beta cell proliferation. However, beta cell mass
in these beta cell-specific TBR2-mutated mice significantly decreased by 12 weeks
after PPx, resulting from increase in beta cell apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data thus suggest that TGF-ß receptor signalling may be required
for prevention of beta cell death after proliferation, and highlight this pathway
as an essential regulator during post-natal beta cell homoeostasis.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25871744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jul;45(7):2061-71. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445326. Epub 2015 May 
12.

IL-1ß inhibits ILC3 while favoring NK-cell maturation of umbilical cord blood
CD34(+) precursors.

Ambrosini P(1,)(2), Loiacono F(2,)(3), Conte R(2), Moretta L(3), Vitale C(1,)(2),
Mingari MC(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Medicina Sperimentale (DIMES), Università degli Studi di Genova, 
Genova, Italy. (2)UO Immunologia, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria San
Martino-Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AOUSM-IST), Genova, Italy. 
(3)Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy.

Erratum in
    Eur J Immunol. 2015 Aug;45(8):2420.

NK cells are innate lymphocytes characterized by the expression of nuclear factor
interleukin 3 regulated (NFIL3 or E4BP4), eomesodermin (EOMES) transcription
factors (TFs), and by the ability to exert cytolytic activity and release IFN-<U+03B3>. 
In the haploidentical-hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (haplo-HSCT)
setting, CD34(+) donor derived NK cells play a major role in the control of
leukemic relapses. Therefore, it is important to better define cytokines that
influence NK-cell differentiation from CD34(+) precursors. We analyzed the
effects of IL-1ß on NK-cell differentiation from umbilical cord blood (UCB)
CD34(+) cells. While IL-1ß inhibited CD161(+) CD56(+) cell proliferation, an
increased expression of LFA-1, CD94/NKG2A, KIRs, and perforin on CD56(+) cells
was detected. In addition, within the CD161(+) CD56(+) IL-1RI(+) LFA-1(-) cell
fraction (representing group 3 innate lymphoid cells, ILC3-like cells), a
significant increase of EOMES, NKp46, and CD94/NKG2A receptors, cytolytic
granules, and IFN-<U+03B3> was detected. This increase was paralleled by a decrease of
related orphan receptors (ROR<U+03B3>t) TF, NKp44 expression, and IL-22 production.
These data suggest that IL-1ß inhibits ILC3- while favoring NK-cell maturation.
Since in haplo-HSCT conditioning regimen, infections or residual leukemia cells
may induce IL-1ß production, this may influence the NK/ILC3 development from
donor-derived CD34(+) precursors.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25847448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jun;45(6):1794-807. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445209. Epub 2015 Apr
27.

Activated NKT cells imprint NK-cell differentiation, functionality and education.

Riese P(1), Trittel S(1,)(2), May T(3), Cicin-Sain L(2), Chambers BJ(4), Guzmán
CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vaccinology and Applied Microbiology, Helmholtz Centre for
Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany. (2)Junior Research Group Immune Aging 
and Chronic Infections, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig,
Germany. (3)Model Systems for Infection and Immunity, Helmholtz Centre for
Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany. (4)Center for Infectious Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Karolinska University Hospital
Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

NK cells represent a vital component of the innate immune system. The recent
discoveries demonstrating that the functionality of NK cells depends on their
differentiation and education status underscore their potential as targets for
immune intervention. However, to exploit their full potential, a detailed
understanding of the cellular interactions involved in these processes is
required. In this regard, the cross-talk between NKT cells and NK cells needs to 
be better understood. Our results provide strong evidence for NKT cell-induced
effects on key biological features of NK cells. NKT-cell activation results in
the generation of highly active CD27(high) NK cells with improved functionality. 
In this context, degranulation activity and IFN<U+03B3> production were mainly detected 
in the educated subset. In a mCMV infection model, we also demonstrated that
NKT-cell stimulation induced the generation of highly functional educated and
uneducated NK cells, crucial players in viral control. Thus, our findings reveal 
new fundamental aspects of the NKT-NK cell axis that provide important hints for 
the manipulation of NK cells in clinical settings.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25808315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 19;11(3):e1004947. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004947.
eCollection 2015.

A genomic duplication is associated with ectopic eomesodermin expression in the
embryonic chicken comb and two duplex-comb phenotypes.

Dorshorst B(1), Harun-Or-Rashid M(2), Bagherpoor AJ(2), Rubin CJ(3), Ashwell
C(4), Gourichon D(5), Tixier-Boichard M(6), Hallböök F(2), Andersson L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Science for Life Laboratory, Dept. of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden; Dept. of Animal and Poultry Sciences,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, United States of America. (2)Dept. of
Neuroscience, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (3)Science for Life
Laboratory, Dept. of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. (4)Prestage Dept. of Poultry Science, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, North Carolina, United States of America. (5)INRA, UE 1295
PEAT Pôle d'Expérimentation Avicole de Tours, Nouzilly, France. (6)INRA,
AgroParisTech, UMR1313 Animal Genetics and Integrative Biology, Jouy-en-Josas,
France. (7)Science for Life Laboratory, Dept. of Medical Biochemistry and
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden; Science for Life Laboratory,
Dept. of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar;11(3):e1004979.

Duplex-comb (D) is one of three major loci affecting comb morphology in the
domestic chicken. Here we show that the two Duplex-comb alleles, V-shaped (D*V)
and Buttercup (D*C), are both associated with a 20 Kb tandem duplication
containing several conserved putative regulatory elements located 200 Kb upstream
of the eomesodermin gene (EOMES). EOMES is a T-box transcription factor that is
involved in mesoderm specification during gastrulation. In D*V and D*C chicken
embryos we find that EOMES is ectopically expressed in the ectoderm of the
comb-developing region as compared to wild-type embryos. The confinement of the
ectopic expression of EOMES to the ectoderm is in stark contrast to the causal
mechanisms underlying the two other major comb loci in the chicken (Rose-comb and
Pea-comb) in which the transcription factors MNR2 and SOX5 are ectopically
expressed strictly in the mesenchyme. Interestingly, the causal mutations of all 
three major comb loci in the chicken are now known to be composed of large-scale 
structural genomic variants that each result in ectopic expression of
transcription factors. The Duplex-comb locus also illustrates the evolution of
alleles in domestic animals, which means that alleles evolve by the accumulation 
of two or more consecutive mutations affecting the phenotype. We do not yet know 
whether the V-shaped or Buttercup allele correspond to the second mutation that
occurred on the haplotype of the original duplication event.

PMCID: PMC4366209
PMID: 25789773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jun;45(6):1727-35. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445200. Epub 2015 Apr 
17.

IL-12/15/18-preactivated NK cells suppress GvHD in a mouse model of mismatched
hematopoietic cell transplantation.

Hüber CM(1), Doisne JM(1), Colucci F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Cambridge School of
Clinical Medicine, National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Cambridge
Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, UK.

Mismatched hematopoietic cell transplants for treating leukemia are complicated
by graft versus host disease (GvHD). Here, we show that adoptively transferred
IL-12/15/18-preactivated NK cells suppress GvHD in a mouse model of fully
mismatched hematopoietic cell transplantation. These IL-12/15/18-preactivated
NK cells maintained Eomesodermin (Eomes) and T-bet expression upon transfer and, 
while there was no evidence of direct killing of donor T cells or host DCs by the
IL-12/15/18-preactivated NK cells, proliferation of donor T cells was inhibited. 
Strikingly, the graft versus leukemia effect mediated by donor T cells was
retained, resulting in improved overall survival of mice that received lymphoma
cells, donor allogeneic T cells, and IL-12/15/18-preactivated NK cells. These
results suggest that IL-12/15/18-preactivated NK cells may be useful in improving
immunotherapy of mismatched hematopoietic cell transplantation. Compared with
previously proposed protocols, our findings suggest that in vitro NK-cell
preactivation with this cytokine cocktail offers the significant advantage that
cytokines do not need to be administered systemically to sustain NK-cell
activity, thus avoiding toxicity.

© 2015 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by Wiley-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4687420
PMID: 25778912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Mar 13;11(3):e1004740. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004740.
eCollection 2015.

Characterization of CD8+ T cell differentiation following SIV<U+0394>nef vaccination by 
transcription factor expression profiling.

Billingsley JM(1), Rajakumar PA(1), Connole MA(2), Salisch NC(3), Adnan S(1),
Kuzmichev YV(2), Hong HS(2), Reeves RK(4), Kang HJ(5), Li W(5), Li Q(6), Haase
AT(7), Johnson RP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical
School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America; Yerkes National
Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of
America. (2)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(3)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical
School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America; Crucell Holland
BV, Leiden, The Netherlands. (4)Division of Immunology, New England Primate
Research Center, Harvard Medical School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United
States of America; Center for Virology and Vaccine Research, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(5)Division of Preventive and Behavioral Medicine, University of Massachusetts
Medical Center, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of America. (6)Nebraska
Center for Virology and School of Biological Sciences, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska, United States of America. (7)University of
Minnesota, Microbiology Department, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of
America. (8)Division of Immunology, New England Primate Research Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Southborough, Massachusetts, United States of America; Yerkes
National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United
States of America; Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2015 Jun;11(6):e1004968.

The onset of protective immunity against pathogenic SIV challenge in
SIV<U+0394>nef-vaccinated macaques is delayed for 15-20 weeks, a process that is related
to qualitative changes in CD8+ T cell responses induced by SIV<U+0394>nef. As a novel
approach to characterize cell differentiation following vaccination, we used
multi-target qPCR to measure transcription factor expression in naïve and memory 
subsets of CD8++ T cells, and in SIV-specific CD8+ T cells obtained from
SIV<U+0394>nef-vaccinated or wild type SIVmac239-infected macaques. Unsupervised
clustering of expression profiles organized naïve and memory CD8+ T cells into
groups concordant with cell surface phenotype. Transcription factor expression
patterns in SIV-specific CD8+ T cells in SIV<U+0394>nef-vaccinated animals were distinct
from those observed in purified CD8+ T cell subsets obtained from naïve animals, 
and were intermediate to expression profiles of purified central memory and
effector memory T cells. Expression of transcription factors elicited by SIV<U+0394>nef 
vaccination also varied over time: cells obtained at later time points,
temporally associated with greater protection, appeared more central-memory like 
than cells obtained at earlier time points, which appeared more effector
memory-like. Expression of transcription factors associated with effector
differentiation, such as ID2 and RUNX3, were decreased over time, while
expression of transcription factors associated with quiescence or memory
differentiation, such as TCF7, BCOR and EOMES, increased. CD8+ T cells specific
for a more conserved epitope expressed higher levels of TBX21 and BATF, and
appeared more effector-like than cells specific for an escaped epitope,
consistent with continued activation by replicating vaccine virus. These data
suggest transcription factor expression profiling is a novel method that can
provide additional data complementary to the analysis of memory cell
differentiation based on classical phenotypic markers. Additionally, these data
support the hypothesis that ongoing stimulation by SIV<U+0394>nef promotes a distinct
protective balance of CD8+ T cell differentiation and activation states.

PMCID: PMC4358830
PMID: 25768938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 10;11(3):e1005034. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005034.
eCollection 2015.

The lysine acetyltransferase activator Brpf1 governs dentate gyrus development
through neural stem cells and progenitors.

You L(1), Yan K(2), Zou J, Zhao H(4), Bertos NR(4), Park M(5), Wang E(3), Yang
XJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research Center, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada. (2)The Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research Center, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Biochemistry, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (3)National Research Council Canada,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (4)The Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research
Center, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (5)The Rosalind & Morris
Goodman Cancer Research Center, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada;
Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department
of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; McGill University
Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Jun;11(6):e1005329. Zhou, Jinfeng [corrected to Zou, Jinfeng].

Lysine acetylation has recently emerged as an important post-translational
modification in diverse organisms, but relatively little is known about its roles
in mammalian development and stem cells. Bromodomain- and PHD finger-containing
protein 1 (BRPF1) is a multidomain histone binder and a master activator of three
lysine acetyltransferases, MOZ, MORF and HBO1, which are also known as KAT6A,
KAT6B and KAT7, respectively. While the MOZ and MORF genes are rearranged in
leukemia, the MORF gene is also mutated in prostate and other cancers and in four
genetic disorders with intellectual disability. Here we show that
forebrain-specific inactivation of the mouse Brpf1 gene causes hypoplasia in the 
dentate gyrus, including underdevelopment of the suprapyramidal blade and
complete loss of the infrapyramidal blade. We trace the developmental origin to
compromised Sox2+ neural stem cells and Tbr2+ intermediate neuronal progenitors. 
We further demonstrate that Brpf1 loss deregulates neuronal migration, cell cycle
progression and transcriptional control, thereby causing abnormal morphogenesis
of the hippocampus. These results link histone binding and acetylation control to
hippocampus development and identify an important epigenetic regulator for
patterning the dentate gyrus, a brain structure critical for learning, memory and
adult neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4355587
PMID: 25757017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Virol. 2015 May;89(9):5110-23. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03478-14. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Infection history determines the differentiation state of human CD8+ T cells.

van Aalderen MC(1), Remmerswaal EB(2), Verstegen NJ(2), Hombrink P(3), ten Brinke
A(3), Pircher H(4), Kootstra NA(5), ten Berge IJ(2), van Lier RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands Renal Transplant Unit, Division of Internal Medicine, Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands m.c.vanaalderen@amc.uva.nl.
(2)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands Renal Transplant Unit, Division of Internal Medicine, Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Sanquin Research and Landsteiner
Laboratory, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Institute for Immunology, University
Medical Centre Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (5)Department of Experimental
Immunology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

After the resolution of the acute phase of infection, otherwise quiescent
antigen-experienced CD8(+) T cells confer rapid protection upon reinfection with 
viral pathogens or, in the case of persistent viruses, help to maintain control
of the infection. Depending on the type of virus, antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells
have distinct traits, ranging from typical memory cell properties in the case of 
rapidly cleared viruses to immediate effector functions for persistent viruses.
We here show that both the differentiation stage, defined by the expression of
cell surface markers, such as CD45RA, CCR7, CD28, and CD27, and distinct
expression levels of T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes) predict the functional
profile of antigen-experienced CD8(+) T cells. Furthermore, virus-specific CD8(+)
T cells targeting different respiratory syncytial virus-, influenza A virus-,
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-, human cytomegalovirus (hCMV)-, and HIV-1-specific
epitopes adopt distinct T-bet and Eomes expression patterns that appear to be
installed early during the primary response. Importantly, the associations
between surface phenotype, T-bet/Eomes expression levels, and the expression of
markers that predict CD8(+) T-cell function change according to viral infection
history, particularly against the background of HIV-1 and, to lesser extent, of
human cytomegalovirus and/or Epstein-Barr virus infection. Thus, the
functionality of human antigen-experienced CD8(+) T cells follows at least two
dimensions, one outlined by the surface phenotype and another by the T-bet/Eomes 
expression levels, which are determined by previous or persistent viral
challenges.IMPORTANCE: Functional human CD8(+) T-cell subsets have been defined
using surface markers like CD45RA, CCR7, CD28, and CD27. However, the induction
of function-defining traits, like granzyme B expression, is controlled by
transcription factors like T-bet and Eomes. Here, we describe how T-bet and Eomes
levels distinctly relate to the expression of molecules predictive for CD8(+)
T-cell function in a surface phenotype-independent manner. Importantly, we found 
that central memory and effector memory CD8(+) T-cell subsets differentially
express T-bet, Eomes, and molecules predictive for function according to viral
infection history, particularly so in the context of HIV-1 infection and, to
lesser extent, of latent EBV- and/or hCMV-infected, otherwise healthy adults.
Finally, we show that the distinct phenotypes and T-bet/Eomes levels of different
virus-specific CD8(+) T-cell populations are imprinted early during the acute
phase of primary infection in vivo. These findings broaden our understanding of
CD8(+) T-cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4403462
PMID: 25717102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cytokine. 2015 May;73(1):44-52. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.01.018. Epub 2015 Feb
16.

LPS stimulates and Hsp70 down-regulates TLR4 to orchestrate differential cytokine
response of culture-differentiated innate memory CD8(+) T cells.

Ghosh AK(1), Sinha D(1), Mukherjee S(1), Biswas R(2), Biswas T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases,
Kolkata, India. (2)Division of Immunology, National Institute of Cholera and
Enteric Diseases, Kolkata, India. Electronic address:
immuneprolactin@yahoo.co.in. (3)Division of Immunology, National Institute of
Cholera and Enteric Diseases, Kolkata, India. Electronic address:
shigellaporin@yahoo.com.

Nonconventional innate memory CD8(+) T cells characteristically expressing CD44, 
CD122, eomesodermin (Eomes) and promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF) were
derived in culture from CD4(+)CD8(+) double positive (DP) thymocytes of normal
BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice. These culture-differentiated cells constitutively
express toll-like receptor (TLR)4 and release interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> and interleukin 
(IL)-10. We show the TLR4-ligand lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulate the TLR and
up-regulate IFN-<U+03B3> skewing the cells towards type 1 polarization. In presence of
LPS these cells also express suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)1 and thus
suppress IL-10 expression. In contrast, heat shock protein (Hsp)70 down-regulated
TLR4 augmenting the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. In association with IL-10
release IFN-<U+03B3> was abrogated. The programmed cell death (PD)-1 mostly present in
regulatory T cells was stimulated in these IL-10 producing cells by Hsp70 and not
LPS indicating the cells can be driven to two contrast outcomes by the two TLR4
ligands. Our work provides a scope for in vitro monitoring of CD8(+) T cells to
decipher important immune therapeutic option during infection or sepsis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25697138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Aging Cell. 2015 Apr;14(2):191-9. doi: 10.1111/acel.12303. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

The aged nonhematopoietic environment impairs natural killer cell maturation and 
function.

Shehata HM(1), Hoebe K, Chougnet CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunobiology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center and the University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 45229, 
USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells are critical in eliminating tumors and viral
infections, both of which occur at a high incidence in the elderly. Previous
studies showed that aged NK cells are less cytotoxic and exhibit impaired
maturation compared to young NK cells. We evaluated whether extrinsic or
intrinsic factors were responsible for the impaired maturation and function of NK
cells in aging and whether impaired maturation correlated with functional
hyporesponsiveness. We confirmed that aged mice have a significant decrease in
the frequency of mature NK cells in all lymphoid organs. Impaired NK cell
maturation in aged mice correlated with a reduced capacity to eliminate
allogeneic and B16 tumor targets in vivo. This could be explained by impaired
degranulation, particularly by mature NK cells of aged mice. Consistent with
impaired aged NK cell maturation, expression of T-bet and Eomes, which regulate
NK cell functional maturation, was significantly decreased in aged bone marrow
(BM) NK cells. Mixed BM chimeras revealed that the nonhematopoietic environment
was a key determinant of NK cell maturation and T-bet and Eomes expression. In
mixed BM chimeras, NK cells derived from both young or aged BM cells adopted an
'aged' phenotype in an aged host, that is, were hyporesponsive to stimuli in
vitro, while adopting a 'young' phenotype following transfer in young hosts.
Overall, our data suggest that the aged nonhematopoietic environment is
responsible for the impaired maturation and function of NK cells. Defining these 
nonhematopoietic factors could have important implications for improving NK cell 
function in the elderly.

© 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4364831
PMID: 25677698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Immunol. 2015 Mar 15;194(6):2467-71. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402756. Epub 2015
Feb 11.

Cutting edge: identification and characterization of human intrahepatic CD49a+ NK
cells.

Marquardt N(1), Béziat V(1), Nyström S(1), Hengst J(2), Ivarsson MA(1),
Kekäläinen E(1), Johansson H(3), Mjösberg J(1), Westgren M(4), Lankisch TO(2),
Wedemeyer H(2), Ellis EC(3), Ljunggren HG(1), Michaëlsson J(1), Björkström NK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden; (2)Department 
of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School, 30625
Hannover, Germany; (3)Division of Transplantation Surgery, Department of Clinical
Science, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska
University Hospital Huddinge, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden; and. (4)Center for Fetal 
Medicine, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 141 86 Stockholm, Sweden;
niklas.bjorkstrom@ki.se.

Although NK cells are considered innate, recent studies in mice revealed the
existence of a unique lineage of hepatic CD49a(+)DX5(-) NK cells with
adaptive-like features. Development of this NK cell lineage is, in contrast to
conventional NK cells, dependent on T-bet but not Eomes. In this study, we
describe the identification of a T-bet(+)Eomes(-)CD49a(+) NK cell subset readily 
detectable in the human liver, but not in afferent or efferent hepatic venous or 
peripheral blood. Human intrahepatic CD49a(+) NK cells express killer cell
Ig-like receptor and NKG2C, indicative of having undergone clonal-like expansion,
are CD56(bright), and express low levels of CD16, CD57, and perforin. After
stimulation, CD49a(+) NK cells express high levels of inflammatory cytokines but 
degranulate poorly. CD49a(+) NK cells retain their phenotype after expansion in
long-term in vitro cultures. These results demonstrate the presence of a likely
human counterpart of mouse intrahepatic NK cells with adaptive-like features.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25672754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;45(3):851-64. doi: 10.3233/JAD-142214.

Linking Genetics of Brain Changes to Alzheimer's Disease: Sparse Whole Genome
Association Scan of Regional MRI Volumes in the ADNI and AddNeuroMed Cohorts.

Khondoker M(1), Newhouse S(1), Westman E(2), Muehlboeck JS(2), Mecocci P(3),
Vellas B(4), Tsolaki M(4), Kloszewska I(5), Soininen H(6), Lovestone S(7), Dobson
R(8), Simmons A(8); AddNeuroMed consortium; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience and 
NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health, London, United Kingdom King's 
College London, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, Department of
Biostatistics, London, United Kingdom. (2)King's College London, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience and NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for
Mental Health, London, United Kingdom Departments of Neurobiology, Care Sciences 
and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Institute of
gerontology and Geriatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy. (4)INSERM U
558, University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France. (5)Medical University of Lodz,
Lodz, Poland. (6)Department of Neurology, University of Eastern Finland and
Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland. (7)Department of Psychiatry,
University of Oxford, United Kingdom. (8)King's College London, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience and NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for
Mental Health, London, United Kingdom NIHR Biomedical Research Unit Dementia,
London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a highly heritable disease, but until
recently few replicated genetic markers have been identified. Markers identified 
so far are likely to account for only a tiny fraction of the heritability of AD
and many more genetic risk alleles are thought to be undiscovered.
OBJECTIVE: Identifying genetic markers for AD using combined analysis of genetics
and brain imaging data.
METHODS: Imaging quantitative trait loci (iQTLs) has recently emerged as an
interesting research area for linking genetics of brain changes to AD. We
consider a genome-wide association scan of 109 brain-wide regional imaging
phenotypes to identify genetic susceptibility loci for AD from a combined set of 
1,045 subjects from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and
the AddNeuroMed studies. We use one-SNP-at-a-time as well as multi-SNP Hyperlasso
based iQTL methods for the analysis.
RESULTS: We identified several novel markers associated with AD, namely HOMER2
(rs1256429; intronic, p = 8.7 × 10<U+207B>¹°), EOMES (rs2724509; flanking), JAM2
(rs2829841; intronic), and WEE1 (rs10770042; coding). The SNP rs1256429 (HOMER2) 
was one of the top hits in Hyperlasso as well as in the single-SNP analysis
showing an association with the volume of the right thalamus and AD, a brain
region reported to be linked with AD in several studies.
CONCLUSION: We believe that the markers identified in this study are novel
additions to the existing list of genetic variants associated with AD which can
be validated in future replicated studies.

PMID: 25649652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Jan 22;11(1):e1004622. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004622.
eCollection 2015.

Specificity and dynamics of effector and memory CD8 T cell responses in human
tick-borne encephalitis virus infection.

Blom K(1), Braun M(1), Pakalniene J(2), Dailidyte L(2), Béziat V(3), Lampen
MH(1), Klingström J(1), Lagerqvist N(1), Kjerstadius T(4), Michaëlsson J(1),
Lindquist L(5), Ljunggren HG(1), Sandberg JK(1), Mickiene A(6), Gredmark-Russ
S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Department of
Infectious Diseases, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(3)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden; Human Genetics of
Infectious Diseases Laboratory, Imagine Institute-INSERM U1163, Paris, France.
(4)Karolinska University Laboratory, Department of Clinical Microbiology,
Karolinska University Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Department of
Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden; 
Unit of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. (6)Department of
Infectious Diseases, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania;
Unit of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. (7)Center for
Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska
University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Infectious
Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

Tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) is transferred to humans by ticks. The virus
causes tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) with symptoms such as meningitis and
meningoencephalitis. About one third of the patients suffer from long-lasting
sequelae after clearance of the infection. Studies of the immune response during 
TBEV-infection are essential to the understanding of host responses to
TBEV-infection and for the development of therapeutics. Here, we studied in
detail the primary CD8 T cell response to TBEV in patients with acute TBE.
Peripheral blood CD8 T cells mounted a considerable response to TBEV-infection as
assessed by Ki67 and CD38 co-expression. These activated cells showed a
CD45RA-CCR7-CD127- phenotype at day 7 after hospitalization, phenotypically
defining them as effector cells. An immunodominant HLA-A2-restricted TBEV epitope
was identified and utilized to study the characteristics and temporal dynamics of
the antigen-specific response. The functional profile of TBEV-specific CD8 T
cells was dominated by variants of mono-functional cells as the effector response
matured. Antigen-specific CD8 T cells predominantly displayed a distinct
Eomes+Ki67+T-bet+ effector phenotype at the peak of the response, which
transitioned to an Eomes-Ki67-T-bet+ phenotype as the infection resolved and
memory was established. These transcription factors thus characterize and
discriminate stages of the antigen-specific T cell response during acute
TBEV-infection. Altogether, CD8 T cells responded strongly to acute TBEV
infection and passed through an effector phase, prior to gradual differentiation 
into memory cells with distinct transcription factor expression-patterns
throughout the different phases.

PMCID: PMC4303297
PMID: 25611738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015 Apr;3(4):356-67. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0186.
Epub 2015 Jan 19.

Identification of chimeric antigen receptors that mediate constitutive or
inducible proliferation of T cells.

Frigault MJ(1), Lee J(1), Basil MC(1), Carpenito C(1), Motohashi S(2), Scholler
J(1), Kawalekar OU(1), Guedan S(1), McGettigan SE(1), Posey AD Jr(1), Ang S(3),
Cooper LJ(3), Platt JM(1), Johnson FB(1), Paulos CM(4), Zhao Y(1), Kalos M(1),
Milone MC(1), June CH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (2)Department of
Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Division of Pediatrics, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Hollings Cancer Center at the
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina. Department of
Surgery, Hollings Cancer Center at the Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina. (5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. cjune@exchange.upenn.edu.

This study compared second-generation chimeric antigen receptors (CAR) encoding
signaling domains composed of CD28, ICOS, and 4-1BB (TNFRSF9). Here, we report
that certain CARs endow T cells with the ability to undergo long-term autonomous 
proliferation. Transduction of primary human T cells with lentiviral vectors
encoding some of the CARs resulted in sustained proliferation for up to 3 months 
following a single stimulation through the T-cell receptor (TCR). Sustained
numeric expansion was independent of cognate antigen and did not require the
addition of exogenous cytokines or feeder cells after a single stimulation of the
TCR and CD28. Results from gene array and functional assays linked sustained
cytokine secretion and expression of T-bet (TBX21), EOMES, and GATA-3 to the
effect. Sustained expression of the endogenous IL2 locus has not been reported in
primary T cells. Sustained proliferation was dependent on CAR structure and high 
expression, the latter of which was necessary but not sufficient. The mechanism
involves constitutive signaling through NF-<U+03BA>B, AKT, ERK, and NFAT. The propagated
CAR T cells retained a diverse TCR repertoire, and cellular transformation was
not observed. The CARs with a constitutive growth phenotype displayed inferior
antitumor effects and engraftment in vivo. Therefore, the design of CARs that
have a nonconstitutive growth phenotype may be a strategy to improve efficacy and
engraftment of CAR T cells. The identification of CARs that confer constitutive
or nonconstitutive growth patterns may explain observations that CAR T cells have
differential survival patterns in clinical trials.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4390458
PMID: 25600436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Mar;97(3):583-98. doi: 10.1189/jlb.4A0714-326R. Epub 2015 Jan
12.

NKG2D ligand overexpression in lupus nephritis correlates with increased NK cell 
activity and differentiation in kidneys but not in the periphery.

Spada R(1), Rojas JM(1), Pérez-Yagüe S(1), Mulens V(1), Cannata-Ortiz P(1),
Bragado R(1), Barber DF(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid, Spain; and
Department of Immunology and Pathology, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz-Universidad Autónoma Madrid, Spain.
(2)*Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid, Spain; and
Department of Immunology and Pathology, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz-Universidad Autónoma Madrid, Spain
dfbarber@cnb.csic.es.

NK cells are a major component of the immune system, and alterations in their
activity are correlated with various autoimmune diseases. In the present work, we
observed an increased expression of the NKG2D ligand MICA in SLE patients'
kidneys but not healthy subjects. We also show glomerulus-specific expression of 
the NKG2D ligands Rae-1 and Mult-1 in various murine SLE models, which correlated
with a higher number of glomerular-infiltrating NK cells. As the role of NK cells
in the immunopathogenesis of SLE is poorly understood, we explored NK cell
differentiation and activity in tissues and organs in SLE-prone murine models by 
use of diseased and prediseased MRL/MpJ and MRL/lpr mice. We report here that
phenotypically iNK cells accumulate only in the spleen but not in BM or kidneys
of diseased mice. Infiltrating NK cells in kidneys undergoing a lupus nephritic
process showed a more mature, activated phenotype compared with kidney, as well
as peripheral NK cells from prediseased mice, as determined by IFN-<U+03B3> and STAT5
analysis. These findings and the presence of glomerulus-specific NKG2D ligands in
lupus-prone mice identify a role for NK cells and NKG2D ligands in the lupus
nephritic process, which could aid in understanding their role in human SLE.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 25583577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 8;5:7688. doi: 10.1038/srep07688.

The tyrosine kinase Itk suppresses CD8+ memory T cell development in response to 
bacterial infection.

Huang F(1), Huang W(1), Briggs J(1), Chew T(1), Bai Y(1), Deol S(1), August A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology &Immunology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853.

Vaccine efficacy depends on strong long-term development of immune memory and the
formation of memory CD8(+) T cells is critical for recall responses to infection.
Upon antigen recognition by naïve T cells, the strength of the TcR signal
influences the subsequent effector and memory cells differentiation. Here, we
have examined the role of Itk, a tyrosine kinase critical for TcR signaling, in
CD8(+) effector and memory T cell differentiation during Listeria monocytogenes
infection. We found that the reduced TcR signal strength in Itk deficient naïve
CD8(+) T cells enhances the generation of memory T cells during infection. This
is accompanied by increased early Eomesodermin, IL-7Ra expression and memory
precursor effector cells. Furthermore, Itk is required for optimal cytokine
production in responding primary effector cells, but not secondary memory
responses. Our data suggests that Itk-mediated signals control the expression of 
Eomesodermin and IL-7Ra, thus regulating the development of memory CD8(+) T
cells, but not subsequent response of memory cells.

PMCID: PMC4286740
PMID: 25567129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jan 13;112(2):494-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1423011112.
Epub 2014 Dec 30.

Intracellular osteopontin regulates homeostasis and function of natural killer
cells.

Leavenworth JW(1), Verbinnen B(2), Wang Q(3), Shen E(4), Cantor H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and
Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Division of Immunology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; (2)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and. (3)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Immunology, Medical College of
Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China; and. (4)Department of Cancer
Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Pathogenic
Biology and Immunology, Guangzhou Hoffmann Institute of Immunology, School of
Basic Sciences, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510182, China.
(5)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and
Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Division of Immunology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; harvey_cantor@dfci.harvard.edu.

Natural killer (NK) cells play an essential role in the immune response to
infection and cancer. After infection or during homeostatic expansion NK cells
express a developmental program that includes a contraction phase followed by the
formation of long-lived mature memory-like cells. Although this NK cell response 
pattern is well established, the underlying mechanisms that ensure efficient
transition to long-lived NK cells remain largely undefined. Here we report that
deficient expression of intracellular osteopontin (OPN-i) by NK cells results in 
defective responses to IL-15 associated with a substantial increase in the NK
cell contraction phase of homeostatic expansion, defective expression of the
Eomes transcription factor, and diminished responses to metastatic tumors. The
OPN-i-deficient phenotype is accompanied by increased NK cell apoptosis, impaired
transition from immature to mature NK cells, and diminished ability to develop
memory-like NK cells that respond to mouse cytomegalovirus. Gene pathway analysis
of OPN-i-deficient NK cells suggests that the mechanistic target of rapamycin
pathway may connect OPN-i to Eomes and T-bet expression by mature NK cells
following up-regulation of OPN-i after IL-15 stimulation. Identification of OPN-i
as an essential molecular component for maintenance of functional NK cell
expansion provides insight into the NK cell response and may provide the basis
for improved approaches to immunotherapy for infectious disease and cancer.

PMCID: PMC4299239
PMID: 25550515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Front Immunol. 2016 Jan 7;6:646. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00646. eCollection 2015.

Unique Eomes(+) NK Cell Subsets Are Present in Uterus and Decidua During Early
Pregnancy.

Montaldo E(1), Vacca P(2), Chiossone L(1), Croxatto D(2), Loiacono F(1), Martini 
S(3), Ferrero S(4), Walzer T(5), Moretta L(6), Mingari MC(7).

Author information: 
(1)G. Gaslini Institute , Genoa , Italy. (2)Department of Experimental Medicine
(DIMES), Università degli Studi di Genova , Genoa , Italy. (3)IRCCS AOU San
Martino-IST , Genoa , Italy. (4)IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST, Genoa, Italy;
Department of Neurosciences Rehabilitation Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and 
Child Health (DiNOGMI), Università degli Studi di Genova, Genoa, Italy. (5)CIRI, 
Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie<U+2009>-<U+2009>INSERM, Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Lyon, Université Lyon 1 , CNRS, Lyon , France. (6)Department of
Immunology, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital , Rome , Italy. (7)Department 
of Experimental Medicine (DIMES), Università degli Studi di Genova, Genoa, Italy;
IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST, Genoa, Italy.

Decidual and uterine natural killer (NK) cells have been shown to contribute to
the successful pregnancy both in humans and mice. NK cells represent "cytotoxic" 
group 1 innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) and are distinct from the recently described
"helper" ILC1. Here, we show that both in humans and mice the majority of group 1
ILC in endometrium/uterus and decidua express Eomesodermin (Eomes), thus
suggesting that they are developmentally related to conventional NK cells.
However, they differ from peripheral NK cells. In humans, Eomes(+) decidual NK
(dNK) cells express CD49a and other markers of tissue residency, including CD103,
integrin ß7, CD9, and CD69. The expression of CD103 allows the identification of 
different subsets of IFN<U+03B3>-producing Eomes(+) NK cells. We show that TGFß can
sustain/induce CD103 and CD9 expression in dNK cells and decidual CD34-derived NK
cells, indicating that the decidual microenvironment can instruct the phenotype
of Eomes(+) NK cells. In murine decidua and uterus, Eomes(+) cells include
CD49a(-)CD49b(+) conventional NK cells and CD49a(+) cells. Notably,
Eomes(+)CD49a(+) cells are absent in spleen and liver. Decidual and uterine
Eomes(+)CD49a(+) cells can be dissected in two peculiar cell subsets according to
CD49b expression. CD49a(+)CD49b ((-)) and CD49a(+)CD49b(+) cells are enriched in 
immature CD11b(low)CD27(high) cells, while CD49a(-)CD49b(+) cells contain higher 
percentages of mature CD11b(high)CD27(low) cells, both in uterus and decidua.
Moreover, Eomes(+)CD49a(+)CD49b(-) cells decrease during gestation, thus
suggesting that this peculiar subset may be required in early pregnancy rather
than on later phases. Conversely, a minor Eomes(-)CD49a(+) ILC1 population
present in decidua and uterus increases during pregnancy. CD49b(-)Eomes(±) cells 
produce mainly TNF, while CD49a(-)CD49b(+) conventional NK cells and
CD49a(+)CD49b(+) cells produce both IFN<U+03B3> and TNF. Thus, human and murine decidua 
contains unique subsets of group 1 ILCs, including Eomes(+) and Eomes(-) cells,
with peculiar phenotypic and functional features. Our study contributes to
re-examination of the complexity of uterine and decidual ILC subsets in humans
and mice and highlights the role of the decidual microenvironment in shaping the 
features of these cells.

PMCID: PMC4794975
PMID: 27004067  [PubMed]


89. EMBO J. 2015 Apr 1;34(7):896-910. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490061. Epub 2014 Dec 19.

Tox: a multifunctional transcription factor and novel regulator of mammalian
corticogenesis.

Artegiani B(1), de Jesus Domingues AM(2), Bragado Alonso S(1), Brandl E(1),
Massalini S(1), Dahl A(2), Calegari F(3).

Author information: 
(1)DFG-Research Center for Regenerative Therapies, Cluster of Excellence,
TU-Dresden, Dresden, Germany. (2)Deep Sequencing Group-SFB655, Biotechnology
Center, TU-Dresden, Dresden, Germany. (3)DFG-Research Center for Regenerative
Therapies, Cluster of Excellence, TU-Dresden, Dresden, Germany
federico.calegari@crt-dresden.de.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2015 Apr 1;34(7):832-4.

Major efforts are invested to characterize the factors controlling the
proliferation of neural stem cells. During mammalian corticogenesis, our group
has identified a small pool of genes that are transiently downregulated in the
switch of neural stem cells to neurogenic division and reinduced in newborn
neurons. Among these switch genes, we found Tox, a transcription factor with
hitherto uncharacterized roles in the nervous system. Here, we investigated the
role of Tox in corticogenesis by characterizing its expression at the tissue,
cellular and temporal level. We found that Tox is regulated by calcineurin/Nfat
signalling. Moreover, we combined DNA adenine methyltransferase identification
(DamID) with deep sequencing to characterize the chromatin binding properties of 
Tox including its motif and downstream transcriptional targets including Sox2,
Tbr2, Prox1 and other key factors. Finally, we manipulated Tox in the developing 
brain and validated its multiple roles in promoting neural stem cell
proliferation and neurite outgrowth of newborn neurons. Our data provide a
valuable resource to study the role of Tox in other tissues and highlight a novel
key player in brain development.

© 2014 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4388598
PMID: 25527292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Genome Biol. 2014 Dec 3;15(12):533. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0533-9.

Integrated analyses of DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation reveal tumor
suppressive roles of ECM1, ATF5, and EOMES in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gao F, Xia Y, Wang J, Lin Z, Ou Y, Liu X, Liu W, Zhou B, Luo H, Zhou B, Wen B,
Zhang X, Huang J.

BACKGROUND: Differences in 5-hydroxymethylcytosine, 5hmC, distributions may
complicate previous observations of abnormal cytosine methylation statuses that
are used for the identification of new tumor suppressor gene candidates that are 
relevant to human hepatocarcinogenesis. The simultaneous detection of
5-methylcytosine and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine is likely to stimulate the discovery
of aberrantly methylated genes with increased accuracy in human hepatocellular
carcinoma.
RESULTS: Here, we performed ultra-performance liquid chromatography/tandem mass
spectrometry and single-base high-throughput sequencing, Hydroxymethylation and
Methylation Sensitive Tag sequencing, HMST-seq, to synchronously measure these
two modifications in human hepatocellular carcinoma samples. After identification
of differentially methylated and hydroxymethylated genes in human hepatocellular 
carcinoma, we integrate DNA copy-number alterations, as determined using
array-based comparative genomic hybridization data, with gene expression to
identify genes that are potentially silenced by promoter hypermethylation.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a high enrichment of genes with epigenetic aberrations in 
cancer signaling pathways. Six genes were selected as tumor suppressor gene
candidates, among which, ECM1, ATF5 and EOMES are confirmed via siRNA experiments
to have potential anti-cancer functions.

PMCID: PMC4253612
PMID: 25517360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015 Feb;3(2):116-24. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0159.
Epub 2014 Dec 16.

Checkpoint blockade immunotherapy relies on T-bet but not Eomes to induce
effector function in tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells.

Berrien-Elliott MM(1), Yuan J(1), Swier LE(1), Jackson SR(1), Chen CL(1), Donlin 
MJ(2), Teague RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Saint Louis University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. (2)Department of Molecular Microbiology 
and Immunology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Saint Louis University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. (3)Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. Saint
Louis University Cancer Center, St. Louis, Missouri. rteague@slu.edu.

Coinhibitory receptor blockade is a promising strategy to boost T-cell immunity
against a variety of human cancers. However, many patients still do not benefit
from this treatment, and responders often experience immune-related toxicities.
These issues highlight the need for advanced mechanistic understanding to improve
patient outcomes and uncover clinically relevant biomarkers of treatment
efficacy. However, the T-cell-intrinsic signaling pathways engaged during
checkpoint blockade treatment are not well defined, particularly for combination 
approaches. Using a murine model to study how effector CD8(+) T-cell responses to
tumors may be enhanced in a tolerizing environment, we identified a critical role
for the T-box transcription factor T-bet. Combination blockade of CTLA-4, PD-1,
and LAG-3 induced T-bet expression in responding tumor/self-reactive CD8(+) T
cells. Eradication of established leukemia using this immunotherapy regimen
depended on T-bet induction, which was required for IFN<U+03B3> production and
cytotoxicity by tumor-infiltrating T cells, and for efficient trafficking to
disseminated tumor sites. These data provide new insight into the success of
checkpoint blockade for cancer immunotherapy, revealing T-bet as a key
transcriptional regulator of tumor-reactive CD8(+) T-cell effector
differentiation under otherwise tolerizing conditions.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4324019
PMID: 25516478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Sci Rep. 2014 Dec 17;4:7477. doi: 10.1038/srep07477.

Establishment of a primed pluripotent epiblast stem cell in FGF4-based
conditions.

Joo JY(1), Choi HW(2), Kim MJ(2), Zaehres H(3), Tapia N(3), Stehling M(3), Jung
KS(4), Do JT(2), Schöler HR(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany [2] Department
of Animal Biotechnology, College of Animal Bioscience and Technology, Konkuk
University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea [3] Infertility Clinic Center,
Haesung Hospital, Chun An 331-950, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Animal
Biotechnology, College of Animal Bioscience and Technology, Konkuk University,
Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149
Münster, Germany. (4)Infertility Clinic Center, Haesung Hospital, Chun An
331-950, Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    Sci Rep. 2015;5:8180.

Several mouse pluripotent stem cell types have been established either from mouse
blastocysts and epiblasts. Among these, embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are
considered to represent a "naïve", epiblast stem cells (EpiSCs) a "primed"
pluripotent state. Although EpiSCs form derivatives of all three germ layers
during in vitro differentiation, they rarely incorporate into the inner cell mass
of blastocysts and rarely contribute to chimera formation following blastocyst
injection. Here we successfully established homogeneous population of EpiSC lines
with efficient chimera-forming capability using a medium containing fibroblast
growth factor (FGF)-4. The expression levels of Rex1 and Nanog was very low
although Oct4 level is comparable to ESCs. EpiSCs also expressed higher levels of
epiblast markers, such as Cer1, Eomes, Fgf5, Sox17, and T, and further showed
complete DNA methylation of Stella and Dppa5 promoters. However, the EpiSCs were 
clustered separately from E3 and T9 EpiSC lines and showed a completely different
global gene expression pattern to ESCs. Furthermore, the EpiSCs were able to
differentiate into all three germ layers in vitro and efficiently formed
teratomas and chimeric embryos (21.4%) without germ-line contribution.

PMCID: PMC4268649
PMID: 25515008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Zygote. 2016 Feb;24(1):18-30. doi: 10.1017/S0967199414000677. Epub 2014 Dec 11.

Splitting of IVP bovine blastocyst affects morphology and gene expression of
resulting demi-embryos during in vitro culture and in vivo elongation.

Velasquez AE(1), Castro FO(1), Veraguas D(1), Cox JF(1), Lara E(1), Briones M(1),
Rodriguez-Alvarez L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science,Faculty of Veterinary Sciences,Universidad de
Concepcion,Chillan,Chile. (2)Department of Animal Science,Faculty of Veterinary
Sciences,Universidad de Concepcion.Avenida Vicente Mendez 595,Chillan,Chile.

Embryo splitting might be used to increase offspring yield and for molecular
analysis of embryo competence. How splitting affects developmental potential of
embryos is unknown. This research aimed to study the effect of bovine blastocyst 
splitting on morphological and gene expression homogeneity of demi-embryos and on
embryo competence during elongation. Grade I bovine blastocyst produced in vitro 
were split into halves and distributed in nine groups (3 × 3 setting according to
age and stage before splitting; age: days 7-9; stage: early, expanded and hatched
blastocysts). Homogeneity and survival rate in vitro after splitting (12 h, days 
10 and 13) and the effect of splitting on embryo development at elongation after 
embryo transfer (day 17) were assessed morphologically and by RT-qPCR. The genes 
analysed were OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, CDX2, TP1, TKDP1, EOMES, and BAX. Approximately 
90% of split embryos had a well conserved defined inner cell mass (ICM), 70% of
the halves had similar size with no differences in gene expression 12 h after
splitting. Split embryos cultured further conserved normal and comparable
morphology at day 10 of development; this situation changes at day 13 when embryo
morphology and gene expression differed markedly among demi-embryos. Split and
non-split blastocysts were transferred to recipient cows and were recovered at
day 17. Fifty per cent of non-split embryos were larger than 100 mm (33% for
split embryos). OCT4, SOX2, TP1 and EOMES levels were down-regulated in elongated
embryos derived from split blastocysts. In conclusion, splitting day-8
blastocysts yields homogenous demi-embryos in terms of developmental capability
and gene expression, but the initiation of the filamentous stage seems to be
affected by the splitting.

PMID: 25496989  [PubMed - in process]


94. J Immunol. 2015 Jan 15;194(2):553-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402058. Epub 2014 Dec
5.

IFN-<U+03B3> regulates CD8+ memory T cell differentiation and survival in response to
weak, but not strong, TCR signals.

Stoycheva D(1), Deiser K(1), Stärck L(2), Nishanth G(3), Schlüter D(3), Uckert
W(4), Schüler T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Clinical Immunology, Medical Faculty,
Otto-von-Guericke University, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany; Institute of Immunology, 
Charité Berlin, 12200 Berlin, Germany; (2)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular
Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany; (3)Institute of Medical Microbiology and
Hospital Hygiene, Medical Faculty, Otto-von-Guericke University, 39120 Magdeburg,
Germany; Organ-Specific Immune Regulation, Helmholtz Centre for Infection
Research, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany; and. (4)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular 
Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany; Institute of Biology, Humboldt University
Berlin, 10115 Berlin, Germany. (5)Institute of Molecular and Clinical Immunology,
Medical Faculty, Otto-von-Guericke University, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany;
Institute of Immunology, Charité Berlin, 12200 Berlin, Germany;
thomas.schueler@med.ovgu.de.

In response to primary Ag contact, naive mouse CD8(+) T cells undergo clonal
expansion and differentiate into effector T cells. After pathogen clearance, most
effector T cells die, and only a small number of memory T cell precursors (TMPs) 
survive to form a pool of long-lived memory T cells (TMs). Although high- and
low-affinity CD8(+) T cell clones are recruited into the primary response, the TM
pool consists mainly of high-affinity clones. It remains unclear whether the more
efficient expansion of high-affinity clones and/or cell-intrinsic processes
exclude low-affinity T cells from the TM pool. In this article, we show that the 
lack of IFN-<U+03B3>R signaling in CD8(+) T cells promotes TM formation in response to
weak, but not strong, TCR agonists. The IFN-<U+03B3>-sensitive accumulation of TMs
correlates with reduced mammalian target of rapamycin activation and the
accumulation of long-lived CD62L(hi)Bcl-2(hi)Eomes(hi) TMPs. Reconstitution of
mammalian target of rapamycin or IFN-<U+03B3>R signaling is sufficient to block this
process. Hence, our data suggest that IFN-<U+03B3>R signaling actively blocks the
formation of TMPs responding to weak TCR agonists, thereby promoting the
accumulation of high-affinity T cells finally dominating the TM pool.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25480562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Int Immunol. 2015 Apr;27(4):205-15. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxu104. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Bcl11b prevents the intrathymic development of innate CD8 T cells in a cell
intrinsic manner.

Hirose S(1), Touma M(2), Go R(3), Katsuragi Y(3), Sakuraba Y(4), Gondo Y(4), Abe 
M(5), Sakimura K(5), Mishima Y(3), Kominami R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata University, Niigata 951-8510,
Japan hirose@med.niigata-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science,
Niigata University, Niigata 950-2181, Japan. (3)Division of Molecular Biology,
Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Niigata University, Niigata 951-8510, Japan. (4)Mutagenesis and Genomics Team,
RIKEN BioResource Center, Ibaragi 305-0074, Japan. (5)Basic Neuroscience Branch, 
Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, Niigata 951-8510, Japan.

If Bcl11b activity is compromised, CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) thymocytes
produce a greatly increased fraction of innate CD8(+) single-positive (SP) cells 
highly producing IFN-<U+03B3>, which are also increased in mice deficient of genes such 
as Itk, Id3 and NF-<U+03BA>B1 that affect TCR signaling. Of interest, the increase in
the former two is due to the bystander effect of IL-4 that is secreted by
promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger-expressing NKT and <U+03B3>dT cells whereas the
increase in the latter is cell intrinsic. Bcl11b zinc-finger proteins play key
roles in T cell development and T cell-mediated immune response likely through
TCR signaling. We examined thymocytes at and after the DP stage in Bcl11b
(F/S826G) CD4cre, Bcl11b (F/+) CD4cre and Bcl11b (+/S826G) mice, carrying the
allele that substituted serine for glycine at the position of 826. Here we show
that Bcl11b impairment leads to an increase in the population of
TCRaß(high)CD44(high)CD122(high) innate CD8SP thymocytes, together with two
different developmental abnormalities: impaired positive and negative selection
accompanying a reduction in the number of CD8SP cells, and developmental arrest
of NKT cells at multiple steps. The innate CD8SP thymocytes express Eomes and
secrete IFN-<U+03B3> after stimulation with PMA and ionomycin, and in this case their
increase is not due to a bystander effect of IL-4 but cell intrinsic. Those
results indicate that Bcl11b regulates development of different thymocyte subsets
at multiple stages and prevents an excess of innate CD8SP thymocytes.

© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2014. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25422283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015 Feb;3(2):149-60. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0118.
Epub 2014 Nov 11.

Combination of 4-1BB agonist and PD-1 antagonist promotes antitumor
effector/memory CD8 T cells in a poorly immunogenic tumor model.

Chen S(1), Lee LF(2), Fisher TS(3), Jessen B(4), Elliott M(3), Evering W(4),
Logronio K(2), Tu GH(2), Tsaparikos K(3), Li X(2), Wang H(3), Ying C(2), Xiong
M(2), VanArsdale T(3), Lin JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rinat Laboratories, Pfizer Inc., South San Francisco, California.
shihao.chen@pfizer.com john.lin@pfizer.com. (2)Rinat Laboratories, Pfizer Inc.,
South San Francisco, California. (3)Oncology Research Unit, Pfizer Inc., San
Diego, California. (4)Drug Safety R&D, Pfizer Inc., San Diego, California.

Immunotherapies targeting the programmed death 1 (PD-1) coinhibitory receptor
have shown great promise for a subset of patients with cancer. However, robust
and safe combination therapies are still needed to bring the benefit of cancer
immunotherapy to broader patient populations. To search for an optimal strategy
of combinatorial immunotherapy, we have compared the antitumor activity of the
anti-4-1BB/anti-PD-1 combination with that of the anti-PD-1/anti-LAG-3
combination in the poorly immunogenic B16F10 melanoma model. Pronounced tumor
inhibition occurred only in animals receiving anti-PD-1 and anti-4-1BB
concomitantly, while combining anti-PD-1 with anti-LAG-3 led to a modest degree
of tumor suppression. The activity of the anti-4-1BB/anti-PD-1 combination was
dependent on IFN<U+03B3> and CD8(+) T cells. Both 4-1BB and PD-1 proteins were elevated 
on the surface of CD8(+) T cells by anti-4-1BB/anti-PD-1 cotreatment. In the
tumor microenvironment, an effective antitumor immune response was induced as
indicated by the increased CD8(+)/Treg ratio and the enrichment of genes such as 
Cd3e, Cd8a, Ifng, and Eomes. In the spleen, the combination treatment shaped the 
immune system to an effector/memory phenotype and increased the overall activity 
of tumor-specific CD8(+) CTLs, reflecting a long-lasting systemic antitumor
response. Furthermore, combination treatment in C57BL/6 mice showed no additional
safety signals, and only minimally increased severity of the known toxicity
relative to 4-1BB agonist alone. Therefore, in the absence of any cancer vaccine,
anti-4-1BB/anti-PD-1 combination therapy is sufficient to elicit a robust
antitumor effector/memory T-cell response in an aggressive tumor model and is
therefore a candidate for combination trials in patients.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25387892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 7;9(11):e111405. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111405.
eCollection 2014.

Fluorescently activated cell sorting followed by microarray profiling of helper T
cell subtypes from human peripheral blood.

Ono C(1), Yu Z(1), Kasahara Y(1), Kikuchi Y(1), Ishii N(2), Tomita H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Disaster Psychiatry, Internal Research Institute of Disaster
Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan; Department of Biological Psychiatry,
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (2)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan; Tohoku Medical Megabank Organization, Tohoku University, Sendai,
Japan. (3)Department of Disaster Psychiatry, Internal Research Institute of
Disaster Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan; Department of Biological
Psychiatry, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; Tohoku 
Medical Megabank Organization, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Peripheral blood samples have been subjected to comprehensive gene
expression profiling to identify biomarkers for a wide range of diseases.
However, blood samples include red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.
White blood cells comprise polymorphonuclear leukocytes, monocytes, and various
types of lymphocytes. Blood is not distinguishable, irrespective of whether the
expression profiles reflect alterations in (a) gene expression patterns in each
cell type or (b) the proportion of cell types in blood. CD4+ Th cells are
classified into two functionally distinct subclasses, namely Th1 and Th2 cells,
on the basis of the unique characteristics of their secreted cytokines and their 
roles in the immune system. Th1 and Th2 cells play an important role not only in 
the pathogenesis of human inflammatory, allergic, and autoimmune diseases, but
also in diseases that are not considered to be immune or inflammatory disorders. 
However, analyses of minor cellular components such as CD4+ cell subpopulations
have not been performed, partly because of the limited number of these cells in
collected samples.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We describe fluorescently activated cell sorting 
followed by microarray (FACS-array) technology as a useful experimental strategy 
for characterizing the expression profiles of specific immune cells in the
circulation. We performed reproducible gene expression profiling of Th1 and Th2, 
respectively. Our data suggest that this procedure provides reliable information 
on the gene expression profiles of certain small immune cell populations.
Moreover, our data suggest that GZMK, GZMH, EOMES, IGFBP3, and STOM may be novel 
markers for distinguishing Th1 cells from Th2 cells, whereas IL17RB and CNTNAP1
can be Th2-specific markers.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our approach may help in identifying aberrations and
novel therapeutic or diagnostic targets for diseases that affect Th1 or Th2
responses and elucidating the involvement of a subpopulation of immune cells in
some diseases.

PMCID: PMC4224392
PMID: 25379667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 1;193(11):5709-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401436. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

T-bet:Eomes balance, effector function, and proliferation of
cytomegalovirus-specific CD8+ T cells during primary infection differentiates the
capacity for durable immune control.

Popescu I(1), Pipeling MR(1), Shah PD(2), Orens JB(2), McDyer JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; and.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205. (3)Division of 
Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213; and
mcdyerjf@upmc.edu.

CMV remains an important opportunistic pathogen in solid organ transplantation,
particularly in lung transplant recipients (LTRs). LTRs mismatched for CMV
(donor+/recipient-; D+R-) are at high-risk for active CMV infection and increased
mortality, however the immune correlates of viral control remain incompletely
understood. We prospectively studied 23 D+R- LTRs during primary CMV infection to
determine whether acute CD8(+) T cell parameters differentiated the capacity for 
viral control in early chronic infection. T-box transcription factors expression 
patterns of T-bet > Eomesodermin (Eomes) differentiated LTR controllers from
viremic relapsers and reciprocally correlated with granzyme B loading, and CMV
phosphoprotein 65 (pp65)-specific CD8(+)IFN-<U+03B3>(+) and CD107a(+) frequencies. LTR
relapsers demonstrated reduced CD8(+)Ki67(+) cells ex vivo and substantially
impaired CD8(+)pp65-specific in vitro proliferative responses at 6 d, with
concomitantly lower pp65-specific CD4(+)IL-2(+) frequencies, as compared with LTR
controllers. However, CMV-specific in vitro proliferative responses could be
significantly rescued, most effectively with pp65 Ag and exogenous IL-2,
resulting in an increased T-bet:Eomes balance, and enhanced effector function.
Using class I CMV tetramers, we observed similar frequencies between relapsers
and controllers, although reduced T-bet:Eomes balance in tetramer(+) cells from
relapsers, along with impaired CD8(+) effector responses to tetramer-peptide
restimulation. Taken together, these data show impaired CMV-specific CD8(+)
effector responses is not for complete lack of CMV-specific cells but rather
underscores the importance of the T-bet:Eomes balance, with CMV-specific
proliferation a key factor driving early T-bet expression and effector function
in CD8(+) T cells during primary infection and differentiating the capacity of
high-risk LTRs to establish immune control during early chronic infection.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4239205
PMID: 25339676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Genes Immun. 2014 Dec;15(8):584-7. doi: 10.1038/gene.2014.55. Epub 2014 Oct 16.

NK cell development in bone marrow and liver: site matters.

Gotthardt D(1), Prchal-Murphy M(1), Seillet C(2), Glasner A(3), Mandelboim O(3), 
Carotta S(4), Sexl V(1), Putz EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department for Biomedical Sciences, 
University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (2)1] Molecular
Immunology Division, Department of Medical Biology, Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia [2]
Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia. (3)The Lautenberg Center for General and Tumor Immunology, The
BioMedical Research Institute Israel Canada of the Faculty of Medicine, The
Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel. (4)1] Molecular
Immunology Division, Department of Medical Biology, Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia [2]
Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia [3] Department of New Therapeutic Concept Discoveries, Boehringer
Ingelheim RCV, Vienna, Austria.

The NKp46 protein is found on resting and activated natural killer (NK) cells and
is involved in the recognition of malignant and infected cells. The expression of
NKp46 is believed to precede that of DX5 in early NK cell development. We show
that this is not the case in the bone marrow (BM). Here, NKp46 is predominantly
expressed after DX5, whereas the liver harbors a subpopulation that expresses
NKp46 but not DX5. NK cell precursors in the liver show much lower levels of
Eomesodermin than NK cell precursors in the BM, although they express higher
levels of granzymes and unlike the NK cell precursors in the BM are fully able to
degranulate and produce interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>). The development of NK cells
thus differs between the two organs. This needs to be considered when using NKp46
and DX5 as NK cell markers and when performing NK cell-specific gene deletion in 
Ncr1 transgenic mice.

PMID: 25319498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. BMC Biol. 2014 Oct 3;12:81. doi: 10.1186/s12915-014-0081-5.

Global identification of Smad2 and Eomesodermin targets in zebrafish identifies a
conserved transcriptional network in mesendoderm and a novel role for
Eomesodermin in repression of ectodermal gene expression.

Nelson AC, Cutty SJ, Niini M, Stemple DL, Flicek P, Houart C, Bruce AE, Wardle
FC.

BACKGROUND: Nodal signalling is an absolute requirement for normal mesoderm and
endoderm formation in vertebrate embryos, yet the transcriptional networks acting
directly downstream of Nodal and the extent to which they are conserved is
largely unexplored, particularly in vivo. Eomesodermin also plays a role in
patterning mesoderm and endoderm in vertebrates, but its mechanisms of action,
and how it interacts with the Nodal signalling pathway are still unclear.
RESULTS: Using a combination of ChIP-seq and expression analysis we identify
direct targets of Smad2, the effector of Nodal signalling in blastula stage
zebrafish embryos, including many novel target genes. Through comparison of these
data with published ChIP-seq data in human, mouse and Xenopus we show that the
transcriptional network driven by Smad2 in mesoderm and endoderm is conserved in 
these vertebrate species. We also show that Smad2 and zebrafish Eomesodermin a
(Eomesa) bind common genomic regions proximal to genes involved in mesoderm and
endoderm formation, suggesting Eomesa forms a general component of the Smad2
signalling complex in zebrafish. Combinatorial perturbation of Eomesa and
Smad2-interacting factor Foxh1 results in loss of both mesoderm and endoderm
markers, confirming the role of Eomesa in endoderm formation and its functional
interaction with Foxh1 for correct Nodal signalling. Finally, we uncover a novel,
role for Eomesa in repressing ectodermal genes in the early blastula.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that evolutionarily conserved developmental
functions of Nodal signalling occur through maintenance of the transcriptional
network directed by Smad2. This network is modulated by Eomesa in zebrafish which
acts to promote mesoderm and endoderm formation in combination with Nodal
signalling, whilst Eomesa also opposes ectoderm gene expression. Eomesa therefore
regulates the formation of all three germ layers in the early zebrafish embryo.

PMCID: PMC4206766
PMID: 25277163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Neurosci. 2014 Sep 24;34(39):13083-95. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1027-14.2014.

T-box transcription regulator Tbr2 is essential for the formation and maintenance
of Opn4/melanopsin-expressing intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion
cells.

Mao CA(1), Li H(2), Zhang Z(2), Kiyama T(2), Panda S(3), Hattar S(4), Ribelayga
CP(5), Mills SL(5), Wang SW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, cmao@mdanderson.org
steven.wang@uth.tmc.edu. (2)Ruiz Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science
and. (3)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La 
Jolla, California 92037, and. (4)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland 21218. (5)Ruiz Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science
and Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Medical School at
Houston, Houston, Texas 77030. (6)Ruiz Department of Ophthalmology and Visual
Science and Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Texas Medical
School at Houston, Houston, Texas 77030, cmao@mdanderson.org
steven.wang@uth.tmc.edu.

Opsin 4 (Opn4)/melanopsin-expressing intrinsically photosensitive retinal
ganglion cells (ipRGCs) play a major role in non-image-forming visual system.
Although advances have been made in understanding their morphological features
and functions, the molecular mechanisms that regulate their formation and
survival remain unknown. Previously, we found that mouse T-box brain 2 (Tbr2)
(also known as Eomes), a T-box-containing transcription factor, was expressed in 
a subset of newborn RGCs, suggesting that it is involved in the formation of
specific RGC subtypes. In this in vivo study, we used complex mouse genetics,
single-cell dye tracing, and behavioral analyses to determine whether Tbr2
regulates ipRGC formation and survival. Our results show the following: (1) Opn4 
is expressed exclusively in Tbr2-positive RGCs; (2) no ipRGCs are detected when
Tbr2 is genetically ablated before RGC specification; and (3) most ipRGCs are
eliminated when Tbr2 is deleted in established ipRGCs. The few remaining ipRGCs
display abnormal dendritic morphological features and functions. In addition,
some Tbr2-expressing RGCs can activate Opn4 expression on the loss of native
ipRGCs, suggesting that Tbr2-expressing RGCs may serve as a reservoir of ipRGCs
to regulate the number of ipRGCs and the expression levels of Opn4.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3413083-13$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4172803
PMID: 25253855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 10;9(9):e106659. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106659.
eCollection 2014.

Interleukin-4 regulates eomesodermin in CD8+ T cell development and
differentiation.

Carty SA(1), Koretzky GA(2), Jordan MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (2)Department
of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Abramson Family Cancer
Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (3)Department of Pathology 
and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Interleukin (IL)-4 is a cytokine classically associated with CD4(+) T helper type
2 differentiation, but has been recently shown to also be required for the
development of CD8(+) innate-like lymphocytes. CD8(+) innate-like lymphocytes are
non-conventional lymphocytes that exhibit characteristics typically associated
with memory CD8(+) T cells, including expression of the T-box transcription
factor Eomesodermin (Eomes). Here we investigate the signaling pathways required 
for IL-4 induction of Eomes and CD8(+) innate-like lymphocyte markers in murine
CD8SP thymocytes and peripheral CD8(+) T cells. We demonstrate that IL-4 is
sufficient to drive Eomes expression and the CD8(+) innate-like lymphocyte
phenotype through cooperation between STAT6- and Akt-dependent pathways.
Furthermore, we show that while IL-4 has little effect on the induction of Eomes 
in the setting of robust T cell receptor (TCR) activation, this cytokine promotes
Eomes in the setting of attenuated TCR stimulation in mature CD8(+) T cells
suggesting that cytokine signaling pathways may direct cell fate when TCR signals
are limiting.

PMCID: PMC4160212
PMID: 25207963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 9;9(9):e107308. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107308. eCollection
2014.

Establishment of trophoblast stem cells under defined culture conditions in mice.

Ohinata Y(1), Tsukiyama T(2).

Author information: 
(1)PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi, Saitama, Japan; Life
Science Experimental Facility, Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Life and
Environmental Sciences, University of Yamanashi, Kofu, Yamanashi, Japan;
Laboratory for Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies, Center for Developmental Biology,
RIKEN Kobe institute, Kobe Chuo-ku, Hyogo, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Pluripotent
Stem Cell Studies, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN Kobe institute, Kobe
Chuo-ku, Hyogo, Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0121167.

The inner cell mass (ICM) and trophoblast cell lineages duet early embryonic
development in mammals. After implantation, the ICM forms the embryo proper as
well as some extraembryonic tissues, whereas the trophoectoderm (TE) exclusively 
forms the fetal portion of the placenta and the trophoblast giant cells. Although
embryonic stem (ES) cells can be derived from ICM in cultures of mouse
blastocysts in the presence of LIF and/or combinations of small-molecule chemical
compounds, and the undifferentiated pluripotent state can be stably maintained
without use of serum and feeder cells, defined culture conditions for derivation 
and maintenance of undifferentiated trophoblast stem (TS) cells have not been
established. Here, we report that addition of FGF2, activin A, XAV939, and Y27632
are necessary and sufficient for derivation of TS cells from both of E3.5
blastocysts and E6.5 early postimplantation extraembryonic ectoderm. Moreover,
the undifferentiated TS cell state can be stably maintained in chemically defined
culture conditions. Cells derived in this manner expressed TS cell marker genes, 
including Eomes, Elf5, Cdx2, Klf5, Cdh1, Esrrb, Sox2, and Tcfap2c; differentiated
into all trophoblast subtypes (trophoblast giant cells, spongiotrophoblast, and
labyrinthine trophoblast) in vitro; and exclusively contributed to trophoblast
lineages in chimeric animals. This delineation of minimal requirements for
derivation and self-renewal provides a defined platform for precise description
and dissection of the molecular state of TS cells.

PMCID: PMC4159327
PMID: 25203285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Front Neurosci. 2014 Aug 21;8:257. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00257. eCollection
2014.

A multi-resource data integration approach: identification of candidate genes
regulating cell proliferation during neocortical development.

Vied CM(1), Freudenberg F(2), Wang Y(3), Raposo AA(4), Feng D(5), Nowakowski
RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Florida State
University Tallahassee, FL, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and 
Psychotherapy, University Hospital of Frankfurt Frankfurt, Germany. (3)NUS
Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of 
Singapore Singapore, Singapore. (4)Molecular Neurobiology, Instituto Gulbenkian
de Ciência Oeiras, Portugal. (5)Allen Institute for Brain Science Seattle, WA,
USA.

Neurons of the mammalian neocortex are produced by proliferating cells located in
the ventricular zone (VZ) lining the lateral ventricles. This is a complex and
sequential process, requiring precise control of cell cycle progression, fate
commitment and differentiation. We have analyzed publicly available databases
from mouse and human to identify candidate genes that are potentially involved in
regulating early neocortical development and neurogenesis. We used a mouse in
situ hybridization dataset (The Allen Institute for Brain Science) to identify 13
genes (Cdon, Celsr1, Dbi, E2f5, Eomes, Hmgn2, Neurog2, Notch1, Pcnt, Sox3, Ssrp1,
Tead2, Tgif2) with high correlation of expression in the proliferating cells of
the VZ of the neocortex at early stages of development (E15.5). We generated a
similar human brain network using microarray and RNA-seq data (BrainSpan Atlas)
and identified 407 genes with high expression in the developing human VZ and
subventricular zone (SVZ) at 8-9 post-conception weeks. Seven of the human genes 
were also present in the mouse VZ network. The human and mouse networks were
extended using available genetic and proteomic datasets through GeneMANIA. A gene
ontology search of the mouse and human networks indicated that many of the genes 
are involved in the cell cycle, DNA replication, mitosis and transcriptional
regulation. The reported involvement of Cdon, Celsr1, Dbi, Eomes, Neurog2,
Notch1, Pcnt, Sox3, Tead2, and Tgif2 in neural development or diseases resulting 
from the disruption of neurogenesis validates these candidate genes. Taken
together, our knowledge-based discovery method has validated the involvement of
many genes already known to be involved in neocortical development and extended
the potential number of genes by 100's, many of which are involved in functions
related to cell proliferation but others of which are potential candidates for
involvement in the regulation of neocortical development.

PMCID: PMC4139594
PMID: 25191221  [PubMed]


105. Neuron. 2014 Sep 3;83(5):1085-97. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.08.004.

A transcriptional mechanism integrating inputs from extracellular signals to
activate hippocampal stem cells.

Andersen J(1), Urbán N(2), Achimastou A(1), Ito A(1), Simic M(3), Ullom K(3),
Martynoga B(1), Lebel M(1), Göritz C(4), Frisén J(4), Nakafuku M(3), Guillemot
F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. (2)Division of Molecular Neurobiology,
MRC National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.
Electronic address: nurban@nimr.mrc.ac.uk. (3)Division of Developmental Biology, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039,
USA. (4)Department for Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, 17177
Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute 
for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. Electronic address:
fguille@nimr.mrc.ac.uk.

The activity of adult stem cells is regulated by signals emanating from the
surrounding tissue. Many niche signals have been identified, but it is unclear
how they influence the choice of stem cells to remain quiescent or divide. Here
we show that when stem cells of the adult hippocampus receive activating signals,
they first induce the expression of the transcription factor Ascl1 and only
subsequently exit quiescence. Moreover, lowering Ascl1 expression reduces the
proliferation rate of hippocampal stem cells, and inactivating Ascl1 blocks
quiescence exit completely, rendering them unresponsive to activating stimuli.
Ascl1 promotes the proliferation of hippocampal stem cells by directly regulating
the expression of cell-cycle regulatory genes. Ascl1 is similarly required for
stem cell activation in the adult subventricular zone. Our results support a
model whereby Ascl1 integrates inputs from both stimulatory and inhibitory
signals and converts them into a transcriptional program activating adult neural 
stem cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4157576
PMID: 25189209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Virol. 2014 Oct;88(20):11861-71. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02013-14. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

High eomesodermin expression among CD57+ CD8+ T cells identifies a CD8+ T cell
subset associated with viral control during chronic human immunodeficiency virus 
infection.

Simonetta F(1), Hua S(2), Lécuroux C(2), Gérard S(2), Boufassa F(3), Sáez-Cirión 
A(4), Pancino G(4), Goujard C(5), Lambotte O(6), Venet A(2), Bourgeois C(7).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U1012, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France Université Paris-Sud, UMR-S1012, Le 
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France Division of Hematology, Department of Medical
Specialties, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland. (2)INSERM, U1012, 
Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France Université Paris-Sud, UMR-S1012, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre,
France. (3)INSERM UMR-S 1018, Centre d'études en santé publique, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. (4)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Régulation des Infections 
Rétrovirales, Paris, France. (5)Université Paris-Sud, UMR-S1012, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France AP-HP, Hôpital Bicêtre, Service de Médecine Interne et
Immunologie clinique, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. (6)INSERM, U1012, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France Université Paris-Sud, UMR-S1012, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre,
France AP-HP, Hôpital Bicêtre, Service de Médecine Interne et Immunologie
clinique, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. (7)INSERM, U1012, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre,
France Université Paris-Sud, UMR-S1012, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France
christine.bourgeois@u-psud.fr.

During HIV infection, increased CD57 expression among CD8(+) T cells has been
associated with immune senescence and defective immune responses. Interestingly, 
CD57-expressing CD8(+) T cells exhibit a dual profile, being simultaneously
highly cytotoxic (terminally differentiated effectors) and poorly proliferative
(replicative senescent). Recent publications point toward a positive role of
CD57-expressing CD8(+) T cell subsets, presumably due to their high cytolytic
activity. We further investigated the phenotype of CD57-expressing CD8(+) T cells
in healthy donors and during HIV infection combining CD57 expression to
Eomesodermin (EOMES), a T box transcription factor which determines, coordinately
with T-bet, effector and memory CD8(+) T cell differentiation. We defined in
healthy donors two functionally distinct CD57-expressing CD8(+) T cell subsets
exhibiting different levels of EOMES expression: EOMES(hi) CD57(+) and EOMES(int)
CD57(+) CD8(+) T cells. EOMES(hi) CD57(+) cells exhibited low cytotoxic activity 
but preserved proliferative capacity and interleukin 7 (IL-7) receptor
expression, whereas EOMES(int) CD57(+) cells exhibited obvious cytotoxic
functions and a more terminally differentiated phenotype. We next performed a
similar analysis in different contexts of HIV infection: primary infected
patients, long-term viremic patients, aviremic patients treated with
antiretroviral therapy, and HIV controllers; we demonstrated a higher percentage 
of CD57-expressing cells in all HIV-infected patients regardless of virological
status. When heterogeneity in EOMES expression among CD57 cells was taken into
account, we detected significantly higher proportions of EOMES(hi) CD57(+) cells 
among HIV-specific and nonspecific CD8(+) T cells from HIV controllers than in
aviremic antiretroviral-treated patients and viremic patients. Importantly, such 
a peculiar non-terminally differentiated EOMES(hi) CD57(+) phenotypic profile was
associated with viral control. Importance: This study demonstrates that
functional heterogeneity exists among CD57-expressing CD8 T cells, which include 
both terminally differentiated, highly cytotoxic EOMES(int) CD57(+) CD8(+) T
cells and less differentiated EOMES(hi) CD57(+) CD8 T cells, which do not exhibit
immediate cytotoxic functions but present high proliferative capacity.
Interestingly, HIV controllers present a high proportion of EOMES(hi) CD57 cells 
among CD57-expressing HIV-specific CD8 T cells compared to both long-term viremic
and aviremic antiretroviral therapy (ART)-treated patients, suggesting a
beneficial role for this cell subset in viral control.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4178742
PMID: 25100841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Oncoimmunology. 2014 Apr 8;3:e28328. eCollection 2014.

KLRG1(+) natural killer cells protect against pulmonary metastatic disease by
immunosurveillance.

Renner P(1), Rovira J(2), Klein C(3), Schlitt HJ(1), Geissler EK(1), Kroemer
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery; University Hospital Regensburg; University of
Regensburg; Regensburg, Germany. (2)Department of Nephrology and Renal
Transplantation; Hospital Clinic de Barcelona; Barcelona, Spain. (3)Experimental 
Medicine and Therapy Research; University of Regensburg; Regensburg, Germany.

Natural killer cells (NK cells) play a key role in cancer immunosurveillance.
However, their activity is highly dependent upon their maturation stage, which in
turn relates to organ distribution. Here, we discuss the role of intrinsic master
transcription factors and extrinsic IL-15 signaling on NK cell-mediated immune
protection against murine pulmonary metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4063134
PMID: 25050205  [PubMed]


108. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jul 17;10(7):e1004251. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004251.
eCollection 2014.

T-bet and Eomes are differentially linked to the exhausted phenotype of CD8+ T
cells in HIV infection.

Buggert M(1), Tauriainen J(1), Yamamoto T(2), Frederiksen J(3), Ivarsson MA(4),
Michaëlsson J(4), Lund O(3), Hejdeman B(5), Jansson M(6), Sönnerborg A(7), Koup
RA(2), Betts MR(8), Karlsson AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Immunology Laboratory, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. (3)Center for
Biological Sequence Analysis, Department of Systems Biology, Technical University
of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark. (4)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of
Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Department of
Infectious Diseases Venhälsan, Stockholm South General Hospital (Södersjukhuset),
Stockholm, Sweden. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden; Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (7)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department
of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Unit of
Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. (8)Department of
Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.

CD8(+) T cell exhaustion represents a major hallmark of chronic HIV infection.
Two key transcription factors governing CD8(+) T cell differentiation, T-bet and 
Eomesodermin (Eomes), have previously been shown in mice to differentially
regulate T cell exhaustion in part through direct modulation of PD-1. Here, we
examined the relationship between these transcription factors and the expression 
of several inhibitory receptors (PD-1, CD160, and 2B4), functional
characteristics and memory differentiation of CD8(+) T cells in chronic and
treated HIV infection. The expression of PD-1, CD160, and 2B4 on total CD8(+) T
cells was elevated in chronically infected individuals and highly associated with
a T-bet(dim)Eomes(hi) expressional profile. Interestingly, both resting and
activated HIV-specific CD8(+) T cells in chronic infection were almost
exclusively T-bet(dim)Eomes(hi) cells, while CMV-specific CD8(+) T cells
displayed a balanced expression pattern of T-bet and Eomes. The
T-bet(dim)Eomes(hi) virus-specific CD8(+) T cells did not show features of
terminal differentiation, but rather a transitional memory phenotype with poor
polyfunctional (effector) characteristics. The transitional and exhausted
phenotype of HIV-specific CD8(+) T cells was longitudinally related to persistent
Eomes expression after antiretroviral therapy (ART) initiation. Strikingly, these
characteristics remained stable up to 10 years after ART initiation. This study
supports the concept that poor human viral-specific CD8(+) T cell functionality
is due to an inverse expression balance between T-bet and Eomes, which is not
reversed despite long-term viral control through ART. These results aid to
explain the inability of HIV-specific CD8(+) T cells to control the viral
replication post-ART cessation.

PMCID: PMC4102564
PMID: 25032686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Immunol. 2014 Aug 15;193(4):1873-85. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400348. Epub 2014
Jul 11.

Antigen-specific naive CD8+ T cells produce a single pulse of IFN-<U+03B3> in vivo
within hours of infection, but without antiviral effect.

Hosking MP(1), Flynn CT(2), Whitton JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037 mhosking@scripps.edu. (2)Department of Immunology
and Microbial Science, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

In vitro studies have shown that naive CD8(+) T cells are unable to express most 
of their effector proteins until after at least one round of cell division has
taken place. We have reassessed this issue in vivo and find that naive CD8(+) T
cells mount Ag-specific responses within hours of infection, before proliferation
has commenced. Newly activated naive Ag-specific CD8(+) T cells produce a rapid
pulse of IFN-<U+03B3> in vivo and begin to accumulate granzyme B and perforin. Later, in
vivo cytolytic activity is detectable, coincident with the initiation of cell
division. Despite the rapid development of these functional attributes, no
antiviral effect was observed early during infection, even when the cells are
present in numbers similar to those of virus-specific memory cells. The
evolutionary reason for the pulse of IFN-<U+03B3> synthesis by naive T cells is
uncertain, but the lack of antiviral impact suggests that it may be regulatory.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4119517
PMID: 25015828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Brain Res. 2014 Aug 12;1576:27-34. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.06.015. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

Transgenic increase of Wnt7b in neural progenitor cells decreases expression of
T-domain transcription factors and impairs neuronal differentiation.

Papachristou P(1), Dyberg C(2), Lindqvist M(2), Horn Z(2), Ringstedt T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Research Unit, Astrid Lindgren Children<U+05F3>s Hospital, Q2:07, Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address:
panos.papachristou@ki.se. (2)Neonatal Research Unit, Astrid Lindgren Children<U+05F3>s
Hospital, Q2:07, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling plays an important role in neural development,
instructing both progenitor cell division and differentiation. During early
corticogenesis, Wnt7b is expressed in a restricted expression pattern in the
ventricular zone progenitor cells. However, its influence on progenitor cell
behavior has not been fully studied. We report that transgenic overexpression of 
Wnt7b in neural progenitor cells impairs neuronal differentiation and the
development of forebrain structures at embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5). This was
accompanied by a decreased expression of T-domain transcription factors Tbr1 and 
Tbr2, in both progenitor cells and post-mitotic neurons. However, proliferation, 
apoptosis and the overall proportion of pax6(+) neural progenitor cells were
similar to wild-type litter mates. These results suggest that Wnt signaling may
affect early neural progenitor differentiation by regulating the expression of
pro-neural transcription factors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24953933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cell Rep. 2014 Jul 10;8(1):150-62. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.05.042. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

The transcription Factor AHR prevents the differentiation of a stage 3 innate
lymphoid cell subset to natural killer cells.

Hughes T(1), Briercheck EL(2), Freud AG(3), Trotta R(1), McClory S(2), Scoville
SD(2), Keller K(1), Deng Y(1), Cole J(1), Harrison N(1), Mao C(1), Zhang J(4),
Benson DM(5), Yu J(5), Caligiuri MA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Integrated Biomedical Graduate Program,
Medical Scientist Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA;
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; 
The James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (4)Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (5)Division of Hematology, Department of
Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA;
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; 
The James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (6)Division of Hematology, Department of
Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Integrated
Biomedical Graduate Program, Medical Scientist Program, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; The James Cancer Hospital and Solove
Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
Electronic address: michael.caligiuri@osumc.edu.

Accumulating evidence indicates that human natural killer (NK) cells develop in
secondary lymphoid tissue (SLT) through a so-called "stage 3" developmental
intermediate minimally characterized by a CD34(-)CD117(+)CD94(-) immunophenotype 
that lacks mature NK cell function. This stage 3 population is heterogeneous,
potentially composed of functionally distinct innate lymphoid cell (ILC) types
that include interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R1)-positive, IL-22-producing ILC3s.
Whether human ILC3s are developmentally related to NK cells is a subject of
ongoing investigation. Here, we show that antagonism of the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) or silencing of AHR gene expression promotes the differentiation
of tonsillar IL-22-producing IL-1R1(hi) human ILC3s to CD56(bright)CD94(+)
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>-producing cytolytic mature NK cells expressing eomesodermin
(EOMES) and T-Box Protein 21 (TBX21 or TBET). Hence, we demonstrate the lineage
plasticity of human ILCs by identifying AHR as a transcription factor that
prevents IL-1R1(hi) ILC3s from differentiating into NK cells.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4133146
PMID: 24953655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Immunol. 2014 Jul 15;193(2):688-99. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302059. Epub 2014
Jun 18.

Development of innate CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in Itk-deficient mice is regulated by
distinct pathways.

Prince AL(1), Kraus Z(2), Carty SA(3), Ng C(3), Yin CC(1), Jordan MS(3),
Schwartzberg PL(2), Berg LJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655; (2)National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; and. (3)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655; Leslie.Berg@umassmed.edu.

T cell development in the thymus produces multiple lineages of cells, including
innate T cells such as <U+03B3>d TCR(+) cells, invariant NKT cells, mucosal-associated
invariant T cells, and H2-M3-specific cells. Although innate cells are generally 
a minor subset of thymocytes, in several strains of mice harboring mutations in T
cell signaling proteins or transcriptional regulators, conventional CD8(+) T
cells develop as innate cells with characteristics of memory T cells. Thus, in
Itk-deficient mice, mature CD4(-)CD8(+) (CD8 single-positive [SP]) thymocytes
express high levels of the transcription factor eomesodermin (Eomes) and are
dependent on IL-4 being produced in the thymic environment by a poorly
characterized subset of CD4(+) thymocytes expressing the transcriptional
regulator promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger. In this study, we show that a
sizeable proportion of mature CD4(+)CD8(-) (CD4SP) thymocytes in itk(-/-) mice
also develop as innate Eomes-expressing T cells. These cells are dependent on MHC
class II and IL-4 signaling for their development, indicating that they are
conventional CD4(+) T cells that have been converted to an innate phenotype.
Surprisingly, neither CD4SP nor CD8SP innate Eomes(+) thymocytes in itk(-/-) or
SLP-76(Y145F) mice are dependent on <U+03B3>d T cells for their development. Instead, we
find that the predominant population of Eomes(+) innate itk(-/-) CD4SP thymocytes
is largely absent in mice lacking CD1d-specific invariant NKT cells, with no
effect on innate itk(-/-) CD8SP thymocytes. In contrast, both subsets of innate
Eomes(+)itk(-/-) T cells require the presence of a novel promyelocytic leukemia
zinc finger-expressing, SLAM family receptor adapter protein-dependent thymocyte 
population that is essential for the conversion of conventional CD4(+) and CD8(+)
T cells into innate T cells with a memory phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4114307
PMID: 24943215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;6(4):272-85. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mju028. Epub 2014 Jun
12.

Maternal Eomesodermin regulates zygotic nodal gene expression for mesendoderm
induction in zebrafish embryos.

Xu P(1), Zhu G(1), Wang Y(1), Sun J(1), Liu X(1), Chen YG(1), Meng A(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Engineering, Tsinghua-Peking 
Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Engineering,
Tsinghua-Peking Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China mengam@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

Development of animal embryos before zygotic genome activation at the midblastula
transition (MBT) is essentially supported by egg-derived maternal products. Nodal
proteins are crucial signals for mesoderm and endoderm induction after the MBT.
It remains unclear which maternal factors activate zygotic expression of nodal
genes in the ventrolateral blastodermal margin of the zebrafish blastulas. In
this study, we show that loss of maternal Eomesodermin a (Eomesa), a T-box
transcription factor, impairs zygotic expression of the nodal genes ndr1 and ndr2
as well as mesodermal and endodermal markers, indicating an involvement in
mesendoderm induction. Maternal Eomesa is also required for timely zygotic
expression of the transcription factor gene mxtx2, a regulator of nodal gene
expression. Eomesa directly binds to the Eomes-binding sites in the promoter or
enhancer of ndr1, ndr2, and mxtx2 to activate their transcription. Furthermore,
human and mouse Nodal genes are also regulated by Eomes. Transfection of
zebrafish eomesa into murine embryonic stem cells promotes mesendodermal
differentiation with constant higher levels of endogenous Nodal expression,
suggesting a conserved function of Eomes. Taken together, our findings reveal a
conserved role of maternal T-box transcription factors in regulating nodal gene
expression and mesendoderm induction in vertebrate embryos.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24924767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Stem Cells. 2014 Oct;32(10):2744-55. doi: 10.1002/stem.1755.

Mesenchymal stem cells differentially modulate effector CD8+ T cell subsets and
exacerbate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Glenn JD(1), Smith MD, Calabresi PA, Whartenby KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) have emerged as a promising candidate for
inflammatory suppression and disease amelioration, especially of
neuro-inflammatory diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS). Auto-reactive CD4+
and CD8+ T cells acquire pathogenic IFN<U+03B3>-producing- (Type I) and
IL-17A-producing- (Type 17) effector phenotypes in MS and its animal model
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Although MSC have been
extensively demonstrated to suppress pathogenic effector CD4+ T cells and CD4+ T 
cell-mediated EAE, surprisingly few studies have addressed their modulation of
effector CD8+ T cells represented in MS or their impact on CD8+ T cell-mediated
EAE. We find that MSC differentially modulate CD8+ T cell development depending
on effector T cell subtype. MSC drive activated low-IFN<U+03B3> producers toward an
enhanced high-IFN<U+03B3> Tc1-like phenotype but strongly inhibit the production of
IL-17A and Tc17 polarization in vitro. These observations are underscored by
differential MSC modulation of T cell activation, proliferation, and signature
transcription factor up-regulation. In addition, effector CD8+ T cells
co-cultured with MSC exhibited increased production of IL-2, a molecule known to 
enhance IFN<U+03B3>, yet suppress IL-17A, production. Based on these in vitro effects on
CD8+ T cells, we next evaluated their impact on the severity of EAE. To better
evaluate CD8+ T cells, we immunized mice with MOG37-50 , which is a CD8-targeted 
epitope. Our results revealed a worsening of disease, consistent with their in
vitro stimulation of Tc1 cells. These findings highlight the emerging duality of 
MSC in immune modulation and provide implications for their future use in
immune-related diseases.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24911892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Front Immunol. 2014 May 14;5:217. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00217. eCollection
2014.

Characterization of T-bet and eomes in peripheral human immune cells.

Knox JJ(1), Cosma GL(2), Betts MR(1), McLane LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Perelman Institute for Immunology, University of
Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, PA , USA. (2)Department of Immunology, Thomas
Jefferson University , Philadelphia, PA , USA.

The T-box transcription factors T-bet and Eomesodermin (Eomes) have been well
defined as key drivers of immune cell development and cytolytic function. While
the majority of studies have defined the roles of these factors in the context of
murine T-cells, recent results have revealed that T-bet, and possibly Eomes, are 
expressed in other immune cell subsets. To date, the expression patterns of these
factors in subsets of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells beyond T-cells
remain relatively uncharacterized. In this study, we used multiparametric flow
cytometry to characterize T-bet and Eomes expression in major human blood cell
subsets, including total CD4(+) and CD8(+) T-cells, <U+03B3>d T-cells, invariant NKT
cells, natural killer cells, B-cells, and dendritic cells. Our studies identified
novel cell subsets that express T-bet and Eomes and raise implications for their 
possible functions in the context of other human immune cell subsets besides
their well-known roles in T-cells.

PMCID: PMC4030168
PMID: 24860576  [PubMed]


116. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Sep;96(3):397-410. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1A0913-500RR. Epub 2014
May 13.

Inflammation programs self-reactive CD8+ T cells to acquire T-box-mediated
effector function but does not prevent deletional tolerance.

Jackson SR(1), Yuan J(1), Berrien-Elliott MM(1), Chen CL(1), Meyer JM(1), Donlin 
MJ(2), Teague RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology and. (2)Departments of
Molecular Microbiology and Immunology and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, St.
Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA; and.
(3)Departments of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology and St. Louis University 
Cancer Center, St. Louis, Missouri, USA rteague@slu.edu.

CD8(+) T cells must detect foreign antigens and differentiate into effector cells
to eliminate infections. But, when self-antigen is recognized instead, mechanisms
of peripheral tolerance prevent acquisition of effector function to avoid
autoimmunity. These distinct responses are influenced by inflammatory and
regulatory clues from the tissue environment, but the mechanism(s) by which naive
T cells interpret these signals to generate the appropriate immune response are
unclear. The identification of the molecules operative in these cell-fate
decisions is crucial for developing new treatment options for patients with
cancer or autoimmunity, where manipulation of T cell activity is desired to alter
the course of disease. With the use of an in vivo murine model to examine CD8(+) 
T cell responses to healthy self-tissue, we correlated self-tolerance with a
failure to induce the T-box transcription factors T-bet and Eomes. However,
inflammation associated with acute microbial infection induced T-bet and Eomes
expression and promoted effector differentiation of self-reactive T cells under
conditions that normally favor tolerance. In the context of a Listeria infection,
these functional responses relied on elevated T-bet expression, independent of
Eomes. Alternatively, infection with LCMV induced higher Eomes expression, which 
was sufficient in the absence of T-bet to promote effector cytokine production.
Our results place T-box transcription factors at a molecular crossroads between
CD8(+) T cell anergy and effector function upon recognition of peripheral
self-antigen, and suggest that inflammation during T cell priming directs these
distinct cellular responses.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMCID: PMC4138202
PMID: 24823810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Front Immunol. 2014 Apr 23;5:186. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00186. eCollection
2014.

SAP-Dependent and -Independent Regulation of Innate T Cell Development Involving 
SLAMF Receptors.

De Calisto J(1), Wang N(1), Wang G(1), Yigit B(1), Engel P(2), Terhorst C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School , Boston, MA , USA. (2)Immunology Unit, Department of Cell Biology,
Immunology and Neurosciences, Medical School , University of Barcelona, Barcelona
, Spain.

Signaling lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM)-associated protein (SAP) plays
an essential role in the immune system mediating the function of several members 
of the SLAM family (SLAMF) of receptors, whose expression is essential for T, NK,
and B-cell responses. Additionally, the expression of SAP in double-positive
thymocytes is mandatory for natural killer T (NKT) cells and, in mouse, for
innate CD8(+) T cell development. To date, only two members of the SLAMF of
receptors, Slamf1 and Slamf6, have been shown to positively cooperate during NKT 
cell differentiation in mouse. However, it is less clear whether other members of
this family may also participate in the development of these innate T cells.
Here, we show that Slamf[1<U+2009>+<U+2009>6](-/-) and Slamf[1<U+2009>+<U+2009>5<U+2009>+<U+2009>6](-/-) B6 mice have ~70% 
reduction of NKT cells compared to wild-type B6 mice. Unexpectedly, the
proportion of innate CD8(+) T cells slightly increased in the
Slamf[1<U+2009>+<U+2009>5<U+2009>+<U+2009>6](-/-) , but not in the Slamf[1<U+2009>+<U+2009>6](-/-) strain, suggesting that 
Slamf5 may function as a negative regulator of innate CD8(+) T cell development. 
Accordingly, Slamf5(-/-) B6 mice showed an exclusive expansion of innate CD8(+) T
cells, but not NKT cells. Interestingly, the SAP-independent Slamf7(-/-) strain
showed an expansion of both splenic innate CD8(+) T cells and thymic NKT cells.
On the other hand, and similar to what was recently shown in Slamf3(-/-) BALB/c
mice, the proportions of thymic promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (PLZF(hi)) NKT
cells and innate CD8(+) T cells significantly increased in the SAP-independent
Slamf8(-/-) BALB/c strain. In summary, these results show that NKT and innate
CD8(+) T cell development can be regulated in a SAP-dependent and -independent
fashion by SLAMF receptors, in which Slamf1, Slamf6, and Slamf8 affect
development of NKT cells, and that Slamf5, Slamf7, and Slamf8 affect the
development of innate CD8(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC4005954
PMID: 24795728  [PubMed]


118. J Immunol. 2014 Jun 15;192(12):5643-51. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301755. Epub 2014 
May 2.

Increased peripheral IL-4 leads to an expanded virtual memory CD8+ population.

Kurzweil V(1), LaRoche A(2), Oliver PM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Program, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; and. (2)Cell Pathology Division, Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104. (3)Cell and Molecular Biology
Program, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA 19104; and Cell Pathology Division, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104 paulao@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Memory-phenotype CD8(+) T cells can arise even in the absence of overt Ag
stimulation. Virtual memory (VM) CD8(+) T cells are CD8(+) T cells that develop a
memory phenotype in the periphery of wild-type mice in an IL-15-dependent manner.
Innate CD8(+) T cells, in contrast, are memory-phenotype CD8(+) T cells that
develop in the thymus in response to elevated thymic IL-4. It is not clear
whether VM cells and innate CD8(+) T cells represent two independent T cell
lineages or whether they arise through similar processes. In this study, we use
mice deficient in Nedd4-family interacting protein 1 to show that overproduction 
of IL-4 in the periphery leads to an expanded VM population. Nedd4-family
interacting protein 1(-/-) CD4(+) T cells produce large amounts of IL-4 due to a 
defect in JunB degradation. This IL-4 induces a memory-like phenotype in
peripheral CD8(+) T cells that includes elevated expression of CD44, CD122, and
Eomesodermin and decreased expression of CD49d. Thus, our data show that excess
peripheral IL-4 is sufficient to cause an increase in the VM population. Our
results suggest that VM and innate CD8(+) T cells may be more similar than
previously appreciated.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4097049
PMID: 24795452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncoimmunology. 2014 Jan 1;3(1):e27680. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Eomesodermin is required for antitumor immunity mediated by 4-1BB-agonist
immunotherapy.

Song C(1), Sadashivaiah K(1), Furusawa A(1), Davila E(2), Tamada K(3), Banerjee
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Oncology; Greenebaum Cancer Center; Center for Stem Cell Research
and Regenerative Medicine; Department of Medicine; University of Maryland School 
of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA. (2)Department of Otolaryngology; University of
Maryland School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA. (3)Department of Immunology and
Cellular Signal Analysis; Yamaguchi University School of Medicine; Ube, Japan.

CD8(+) T cells in progressing tumors frequently fail to mount an effective
antitumor response often in association with the expression of inhibitory
receptors, including programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) and lymphocyte-activation
gene 3 (Lag3). Using a lymphoma tumor model, we demonstrate that
tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells from growing tumors co-express inhibitory
receptors and co-stimulatory receptors, including 4-1BB (TNFRSF9) as well as high
levels of 2 transcription factors, Eomesodermin (Eomes) and T-bet (Tbx21),
critical determinants of CD8(+) T cell fate. Immunotherapy with an agonistic
anti-4-1-BB antibody altered the ratio of Eomes to T-bet expression in
tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells by increasing Eomes and decreasing T-bet
expression. 4-1BB-agonist immunotherapy was also associated with downregulated
expression of the inhibitory receptors PD-1 and Lag3 on tumor-infiltrating CD8(+)
T cells, a molecular phenotype associated with subsequent attenuation of tumor
growth. Furthermore, 4-1BB-agonist immunotherapy failed to effect tumor
progression in mice with Eomes deficient T cells. However, upon resumption of
tumor growth, tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells from treated animals continued to
express high levels of Eomes as well as elevated levels of the inhibitory
receptors PD-1 and Lag3. Our data suggest that tumor-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells 
are poised between activation and inhibition as dictated by expression of both
co-stimulatory receptors and inhibitory receptors and demonstrate that T cell
expression of Eomes is necessary, but not sufficient, for efficacious
4-1BB-agonist-mediated immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4002624
PMID: 24790793  [PubMed]


120. Cancer Immunol Res. 2014 Feb;2(2):142-53. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0031-T.
Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Combined targeting of costimulatory (OX40) and coinhibitory (CTLA-4) pathways
elicits potent effector T cells capable of driving robust antitumor immunity.

Redmond WL(1), Linch SN, Kasiewicz MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Robert W. Franz Cancer Research Center, Earle A. Chiles 
Research Institute, Providence Portland Medical Center, Portland, Oregon.

Ligation of the TNF receptor family costimulatory molecule OX40 (CD134) with an
agonist anti-OX40 monoclonal antibody (mAb) enhances antitumor immunity by
augmenting T-cell differentiation as well as turning off the suppressive activity
of the FoxP3(+)CD4(+) regulatory T cells (Treg). In addition, antibody-mediated
blockade of the checkpoint inhibitor CTLA-4 releases the "brakes" on T cells to
augment tumor immunotherapy. However, monotherapy with these agents has limited
therapeutic benefit particularly against poorly immunogenic murine tumors.
Therefore, we examined whether the administration of agonist anti-OX40 therapy in
the presence of CTLA-4 blockade would enhance tumor immunotherapy. Combined
anti-OX40/anti-CTLA-4 immunotherapy significantly enhanced tumor regression and
the survival of tumor-bearing hosts in a CD4 and CD8 T cell-dependent manner.
Mechanistic studies revealed that the combination immunotherapy directed the
expansion of effector T-bet(high)/Eomes(high) granzyme B(+) CD8 T cells. Dual
immunotherapy also induced distinct populations of Th1 [interleukin (IL)-2,
IFN-<U+03B3>], and, surprisingly, Th2 (IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13) CD4 T cells exhibiting
increased T-bet and Gata-3 expression. Furthermore, IL-4 blockade inhibited the
Th2 response, while maintaining the Th1 CD4 and effector CD8 T cells that
enhanced tumor-free survival. These data demonstrate that refining the global
T-cell response during combination immunotherapy can further enhance the
therapeutic efficacy of these agents.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4007342
PMID: 24778278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Neurosci. 2014 Apr 16;34(16):5447-53. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0035-14.2014.

Tbr2 is required to generate a neural circuit mediating the pupillary light
reflex.

Sweeney NT(1), Tierney H, Feldheim DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Cruz, California 95064.

There are ~20 types of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) in mice, each of which has
distinct molecular, morphological, and physiological characteristics. Each RGC
type sends axon projections to specific brain areas that execute light-dependent 
behaviors. Here, we show that the T-box transcription factor Tbr2 is required for
the development of several RGC types that participate in non-image-forming
circuits. These types are molecularly distinct, project to non-image-forming
targets, and include intrinsically photosensitive RGCs. Tbr2 mutant mice have
reduced retinal projections to non-image-forming nuclei and an attenuated
pupillary light reflex. These data demonstrate that Tbr2 acts to execute RGC type
choice and/or survival in a set of RGCs that mediates light-induced subconscious 
behaviors.

PMCID: PMC3988404
PMID: 24741035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Aug 15;23(16):1910-22. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0504. Epub 2014
Jun 6.

The differential effects of 2% oxygen preconditioning on the subsequent
differentiation of mouse and human pluripotent stem cells.

Fynes K(1), Tostoes R, Ruban L, Weil B, Mason C, Veraitch FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Engineering, The Advanced Centre for Biochemical
Engineering, University College London , London, United Kingdom .

A major challenge facing the development of effective cell therapies is the
efficient differentiation of pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) into pure populations.
Lowering oxygen tension to physiological levels can affect both the expansion and
differentiation stages. However, to date, there are no studies investigating the 
knock-on effect of culturing PSCs under low oxygen conditions on subsequent
lineage commitment at ambient oxygen levels. PSCs were passaged three times at 2%
O2 before allowing cells to spontaneously differentiate as embryoid bodies (EBs) 
in high oxygen (20% O2) conditions. Maintenance of mouse PSCs in low oxygen was
associated with a significant increase in the expression of early differentiation
markers FGF5 and Eomes, while conversely we observed decreased expression of
these genes in human PSCs. Low oxygen preconditioning primed mouse PSCs for their
subsequent differentiation into mesodermal and endodermal lineages, as confirmed 
by increased gene expression of Eomes, Goosecoid, Brachyury, AFP, Sox17, FoxA2,
and protein expression of Brachyury, Eomes, Sox17, FoxA2, relative to high oxygen
cultures. The effects extended to the subsequent formation of more mature
mesodermal lineages. We observed significant upregulation of cardiomyocyte marker
Nkx2.5, and critically a decrease in the number of contaminant pluripotent cells 
after 12 days using a directed cardiomyocyte protocol. However, the impact of low
oxygen preconditioning was to prime human cells for ectodermal lineage commitment
during subsequent EB differentiation, with significant upregulation of Nestin and
ß3-tubulin. Our research demonstrates the importance of oxygen tension control
during cell maintenance on the subsequent differentiation of both mouse and human
PSCs, and highlights the differential effects.

PMID: 24734982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Exp Med. 2014 Apr 7;211(4):635-42. doi: 10.1084/jem.20132398. Epub 2014 Mar 24.

The transcription factor E4bp4/Nfil3 controls commitment to the NK lineage and
directly regulates Eomes and Id2 expression.

Male V(1), Nisoli I, Kostrzewski T, Allan DS, Carlyle JR, Lord GM, Wack A, Brady 
HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, England,
UK.

The transcription factor E4bp4 (Nfil3) is essential for natural killer (NK) cell 
production. Here, we show that E4bp4 is required at the NK lineage commitment
point when NK progenitors develop from common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs) and
that E4bp4 must be expressed at the CLP stage for differentiation toward the NK
lineage to occur. To elucidate the mechanism by which E4bp4 promotes NK
development, we identified a central core of transcription factors that can
rescue NK production from E4bp4(-/-) progenitors, suggesting that they act
downstream of E4bp4. Among these were Eomes and Id2, which are expressed later in
development than E4bp4. E4bp4 binds directly to the regulatory regions of both
Eomes and Id2, promoting their transcription. We propose that E4bp4 is required
for commitment to the NK lineage and promotes NK development by directly
regulating the expression of the downstream transcription factors Eomes and Id2.

PMCID: PMC3978281
PMID: 24663216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 20;9(3):e90791. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090791. eCollection
2014.

HHEX promotes hepatic-lineage specification through the negative regulation of
eomesodermin.

Watanabe H(1), Takayama K(2), Inamura M(1), Tachibana M(1), Mimura N(3), Katayama
K(1), Tashiro K(4), Nagamoto Y(5), Sakurai F(1), Kawabata K(4), Furue MK(6),
Mizuguchi H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan. (2)Laboratory of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan; Laboratory of Hepatocyte Differentiation,
National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Osaka, Japan; iPS Cell-Based
Research Project on Hepatic Toxicity and Metabolism, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan. (3)Laboratory of
Hepatocyte Differentiation, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Osaka,
Japan. (4)Laboratory of Stem Cell Regulation, National Institute of Biomedical
Innovation, Osaka, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan;
Laboratory of Hepatocyte Differentiation, National Institute of Biomedical
Innovation, Osaka, Japan. (6)Laboratory of Embryonic Stem Cell Cultures,
Department of Disease Bioresources Research, National Institute of Biomedical
Innovation, Osaka, Japan; Department of Embryonic Stem Cell Research, Field of
Stem Cell Research, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan. (7)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan; Laboratory of 
Hepatocyte Differentiation, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation, Osaka,
Japan; iPS Cell-Based Research Project on Hepatic Toxicity and Metabolism,
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan; The
Center for Advanced Medical Engineering and Informatics, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) could provide a major window into human
developmental biology, because the differentiation methods from hESCs mimic human
embryogenesis. We previously reported that the overexpression of
hematopoietically expressed homeobox (HHEX) in the hESC-derived definitive
endoderm (DE) cells markedly promotes hepatic specification. However, it remains 
unclear how HHEX functions in this process. To reveal the molecular mechanisms of
hepatic specification by HHEX, we tried to identify the genes directly targeted
by HHEX. We found that HHEX knockdown considerably enhanced the expression level 
of eomesodermin (EOMES). In addition, HHEX bound to the HHEX response element
located in the first intron of EOMES. Loss-of-function assays of EOMES showed
that the gene expression levels of hepatoblast markers were significantly
upregulated, suggesting that EOMES has a negative role in hepatic specification
from the DE cells. Furthermore, EOMES exerts its effects downstream of HHEX in
hepatic specification from the DE cells. In conclusion, the present results
suggest that HHEX promotes hepatic specification by repressing EOMES expression.

PMCID: PMC3961246
PMID: 24651531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Immunology. 2014 Jul;142(3):506-16. doi: 10.1111/imm.12282.

Lack of transglutaminase 2 diminished T-cell responses in mice.

Kim JH(1), Hong JM, Jeong EM, Lee WJ, Kim HR, Kang JS, Kim IG, Hwang YI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) has been reported to play a role in dendritic cell
activation and B-cell differentiation after immunization. Its presence and role
in T cells, however, has not been explored. In the present study, we determined
the expression of TG2 on mouse T cells, and evaluated its role by comparing the
behaviours of wild-type and TG2(-/-) T cells after activation. In our results,
naive T cells minimally expressed TG2, expression of which was increased after
activation. T-cell proliferation, expression of activation markers such as CD69
and CD25, and secretions of interleukin-2 and interferon-<U+03B3> were suppressed in the
absence of TG2, presumably due, in part, to diminished nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
activation. These effects on T cells seemed to be reflected in the in vivo immune
response, the contact hypersensitivity reaction elicited by
2,4-dinitro-1-fluorobenzene, with lowered peak responses in the TG2(-/-) mice.
When splenic T cells from mice immunized with tumour lysate-loaded wild-type
dendritic cells were re-challenged ex vivo with the same antigen, the profile of 
surface markers including CD44, CD62L, and CD127 strongly indicated lesser
generation of memory CD8(+) T cells in TG2(-/-) mice. In the TG2(-/-)  CD8(+) T
cells, moreover, Eomes expression was markedly decreased. These results indicate 
possible roles of TG2 in CD8(+) T-cell activation and CD8(+) memory T-cell
generation.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4080966
PMID: 24628083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Sep;25(9):2395-408. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhu039. Epub 2014 Mar 
7.

CB1 Cannabinoid Receptor-Dependent Activation of mTORC1/Pax6 Signaling Drives
Tbr2 Expression and Basal Progenitor Expansion in the Developing Mouse Cortex.

Díaz-Alonso J(1), Aguado T(1), de Salas-Quiroga A(1), Ortega Z(1), Guzmán M(1),
Galve-Roperh I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas
(CIBERNED), Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS),
Instituto Universitario de Investigaciones Neuroquímicas (IUIN), Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology I, Complutense University, Madrid 28040,
Spain.

The CB1 cannabinoid receptor regulates cortical progenitor proliferation during
embryonic development, but the molecular mechanism of this action remains
unknown. Here, we report that CB1-deficient mouse embryos show premature cell
cycle exit, decreased Pax6- and Tbr2-positive cell number, and reduced mammalian 
target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) activation in the ventricular and
subventricular cortical zones. Pharmacological stimulation of the CB1 receptor in
cortical slices and progenitor cell cultures activated the mTORC1 pathway and
increased the number of Pax6- and Tbr2-expressing cells. Likewise, acute CB1
knockdown in utero reduced mTORC1 activation and cannabinoid-induced
Tbr2-positive cell generation. Luciferase reporter and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that the CB1 receptor drives Tbr2 expression 
downstream of Pax6 induction in an mTORC1-dependent manner. Altogether, our
results demonstrate that the CB1 receptor tunes dorsal telencephalic progenitor
proliferation by sustaining the transcriptional activity of the Pax6-Tbr2 axis
via the mTORC1 pathway, and suggest that alterations of CB1 receptor signaling,
by producing the missexpression of progenitor identity determinants may
contribute to neurodevelopmental alterations.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24610119  [PubMed - in process]


127. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2014 Mar 7;2:27. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-2-27.

a4-integrins control viral meningoencephalitis through differential recruitment
of T helper cell subsets.

Rothhammer V, Muschaweckh A, Gasteiger G, Petermann F, Heink S, Busch DH,
Heikenwälder M, Hemmer B, Drexler I, Korn T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinikum rechts der Isar, Department of Neurology, Technische Universität
München, Ismaninger Str, 22, 81675 Munich, Germany. korn@lrz.tum.de.

INTRODUCTION: Natalizumab blocks a4-integrins and is a prototypic agent for a
series of anti-inflammatory drugs that impair trafficking of immune cells into
the CNS. However, modulation of the access of immune cells to the CNS is
associated with impaired immune surveillance and detrimental viral infections of 
the CNS. Here, we explored the potency of cellular immune responses within the
CNS to protect against viral encephalitis in mice with T cell conditional
disruption of VLA-4 integrin (a4ß1) expression.
RESULTS: While VLA-4 expression in virus specific Th1 cells is non-redundant for 
their ability to access the CNS, a4-integrin deficient Th17 cells enter the CNS
compartment and generate an inflammatory milieu upon intrathecal vaccinia virus
(VV) infection. However, in contrast to Th1 cells that can adopt direct cytotoxic
properties, Th17 cells fail to clear the virus due to insufficient Eomes induced 
perforin-1 expression.
CONCLUSION: The quality of the intrathecal cellular antiviral response under
conditions of impaired VLA-4 function jeopardizes host protection. Our functional
in vivo data extend our mechanistic understanding of anti-viral immunity in the
CNS and help to estimate the risk potential of upcoming therapeutic agents that
target the trafficking of immune cells into distinct anatomical compartments.

PMCID: PMC4029267
PMID: 24606807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1501-14. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0329. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Establishment of bovine trophoblast stem-like cells from in vitro-produced
blastocyst-stage embryos using two inhibitors.

Huang X(1), Han X, Uyunbilig B, Zhang M, Duo S, Zuo Y, Zhao Y, Yun T, Tai D, Wang
C, Li J, Li X, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)1 The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University , Hohhot, China .

The trophoblast (TR) is the first to differentiate during mammalian embryogenesis
and play a pivotal role in the development of the placenta. We used a dual
inhibitor system (PD0325901 and CHIR99021) with mixed feeders to successfully
obtain bovine trophoblast stem-like (bTS) cells, which were similar in phenotype 
to mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs). The bTS cells that were generated using
this system continually proliferated, displayed a normal diploid karyotype, and
had no signs of altered morphology or differentiation even after 150 passages.
These cells exhibited alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and expressed
pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, SSEA-1, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and
TRA-1-81, and TR lineage markers such as CDX2, as determined by both
immunofluorescence and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
Additionally, these cells generated dome-like structures, formed teratomas when
injected into NOD-SCID mice, and differentiated into placenta TR cells in vitro. 
The microarray analysis of bTS cells showed high expression levels of many TR
markers, such as TEAD4, EOMES, GATA3, ETS2, TFAP2A, ELF5, SMARCA4 (BRG1), CDH3,
MASH2, HSD17B1, CYP11A1, PPARG, ID2, GCM1, HAND1, TDK, PAG, IFN-t, and THAP11.
The expression of many pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and GDF3,
was lower in bTS cells compared with in vitro-produced blastocysts; however,
compared with bovine fetal fibroblasts, the expression of these pluripotency
markers was elevated in bTS cells. The DNA methylation status of the promoter
regions of OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2 was investigated, which were significantly
higher in bTS cells (OCT4 23.90%, NANOG 74.40%, and SOX2 8.50%) compared with
blastocysts (OCT4 8.90%, NANOG 34.4%, and SOX2 3.80%). In contrast, two promoter 
regions of CDX2 were hypomethylated in bTS cells (13.80% and 3.90%) compared with
blastocysts (18.80% and 9.10%). The TSC lines that were established in this study
may be used either for basic research that is focused on peri-implantation and
placenta development or as donor cells for transgenic animal production.

PMID: 24605918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Hum Gene Ther. 2014 Apr;25(4):350-63. doi: 10.1089/hum.2013.218. Epub 2014 Mar
31.

Adenovirus vector-induced CD8<U+207A> T effector memory cell differentiation and
recirculation, but not proliferation, are important for protective immunity
against experimental Trypanosoma cruzi Infection.

Vasconcelos JR(1), Dominguez MR, Neves RL, Ersching J, Araújo A, Santos LI,
Virgilio FS, Machado AV, Bruna-Romero O, Gazzinelli RT, Rodrigues MM.

Author information: 
(1)1 Centro de Terapia Celular e Molecular (CTCMol), Universidade Federal de São 
Paulo-Escola Paulista de Medicina , São Paulo, SP 04044-010, Brazil .

Heterologous prime-boost vaccination using plasmid DNA followed by
replication-defective adenovirus vector generates a large number of specific CD8<U+207A>
T effector memory (TEM) cells that provide long-term immunity against a variety
of pathogens. In the present study, we initially characterized the frequency,
phenotype, and function of these T cells in vaccinated mice that were subjected
to infectious challenge with the human protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi. We
observed that the frequency of the specific CD8<U+207A> T cells in the spleens of the
vaccinated mice increased after challenge. Specific TEM cells differentiated into
cells with a KLRG1(High) CD27(Low) CD43(Low) CD183(Low)T-bet(High) Eomes(Low)
phenotype and capable to produce simultaneously the antiparasitic mediators IFN<U+03B3> 
and TNF. Using the gzmBCreERT2/ROSA26EYFP transgenic mouse line, in which the
cells that express Granzyme B after immunization, are indelibly labeled with
enhanced yellow fluorescent protein, we confirmed that CD8<U+207A> T cells present after
challenge were indeed TEM cells that had been induced by vaccination.
Subsequently, we observed that the in vivo increase in the frequency of the
specific CD8<U+207A> T cells was not because of an anamnestic immune response. Most
importantly, after challenge, the increase in the frequency of specific cells and
the protective immunity they mediate were insensitive to treatment with the
cytostatic toxic agent hydroxyurea. We have previously described that the
administration of the drug FTY720, which reduces lymphocyte recirculation,
severely impairs protective immunity, and our evidence supports the model that
when large amounts of antigen-experienced CD8<U+207A> TEM cells are present after
heterologous prime-boost vaccination, differentiation, and recirculation, rather 
than proliferation, are key for the resultant protective immunity.

PMCID: PMC3997096
PMID: 24568548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Dev Dyn. 2014 Mar;243(3):440-50. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24090. Epub 2013 Nov 29.

Conditional ablation of Tbr2 results in abnormal development of the olfactory
bulbs and subventricular zone-rostral migratory stream.

Kahoud RJ(1), Elsen GE, Hevner RF, Hodge RD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, University of Washington and
Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington; Center for Integrative Brain
Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle, Washington.

BACKGROUND: Development of the olfactory bulb (OB) is a complex process that
requires contributions from several progenitor cell niches to generate neuronal
diversity. Previous studies showed that Tbr2 is expressed during the generation
of glutamatergic OB neurons in rodents. However, relatively little is known about
the role of Tbr2 in the developing OB or in the subventricular zone-rostral
migratory stream (SVZ-RMS) germinal niche that gives rise to many OB neurons.
RESULTS: Here, we use conditional gene ablation strategies to knockout Tbr2
during embryonic mouse olfactory bulb morphogenesis, as well as during perinatal 
and adult neurogenesis from the SVZ-RMS niche, and describe the resulting
phenotypes. We find that Tbr2 is important for the generation of mitral cells in 
the OB, and that the olfactory bulbs themselves are hypoplastic and disorganized 
in Tbr2 mutant mice. Furthermore, we show that the SVZ-RMS niche is expanded and 
disordered following loss of Tbr2, which leads to ectopic accumulation of
neuroblasts in the RMS. Lastly, we show that adult glutamatergic neurogenesis
from the SVZ is impaired by loss of Tbr2.
CONCLUSIONS: Tbr2 is essential for proper morphogenesis of the OB and SVZ-RMS,
and is important for the generation of multiple lineages of glutamatergic
olfactory bulb neurons.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3992892
PMID: 24550175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Immunol. 2014 Mar 15;192(6):2677-88. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302765. Epub 2014
Feb 17.

The transcription factor E4BP4 is not required for extramedullary pathways of NK 
cell development.

Crotta S(1), Gkioka A, Male V, Duarte JH, Davidson S, Nisoli I, Brady HJ, Wack A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunoregulation, Medical Research Council National Institute for 
Medical Research, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

NK cells contribute to antitumor and antiviral immunosurveillance. Their
development in the bone marrow (BM) requires the transcription factor
E4BP4/NFIL3, but requirements in other organs are less well defined. In this
study, we show that CD3(-)NK1.1(+)NKp46(+)CD122(+) NK cells of immature phenotype
and expressing low eomesodermin levels are found in thymus, spleen, and liver of 
E4BP4-deficient mice, whereas numbers of mature, eomesodermin(high) conventional 
NK cells are drastically reduced. E4BP4-deficient CD44(+)CD25(-) double-negative 
1 thymocytes efficiently develop in vitro into NK cells with kinetics, phenotype,
and functionality similar to wild-type controls, whereas no NK cells develop from
E4BP4-deficient BM precursors. In E4BP4/Rag-1 double-deficient (DKO) mice, NK
cells resembling those in Rag-1-deficient controls are found in similar numbers
in the thymus and liver. However, NK precursors are reduced in DKO BM, and no NK 
cells develop from DKO BM progenitors in vitro. DKO thymocyte precursors readily 
develop into NK cells, but DKO BM transfers into nude recipients and NK cells in 
E4BP4/Rag-1/IL-7 triple-KO mice indicated thymus-independent NK cell development.
In the presence of T cells or E4BP4-sufficient NK cells, DKO NK cells have a
selective disadvantage, and thymic and hepatic DKO NK cells show reduced survival
when adoptively transferred into lymphopenic hosts. This correlates with higher
apoptosis rates and lower responsiveness to IL-15 in vitro. In conclusion, we
demonstrate E4BP4-independent development of NK cells of immature phenotype,
reduced fitness, short t1/2, and potential extramedullary origin. Our data
identify E4BP4-independent NK cell developmental pathways and a role for E4BP4 in
NK cell homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3948112
PMID: 24534532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Mar;74(3):e13. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204749. Epub
2014 Feb 14.

High-density genotyping of immune loci in Koreans and Europeans identifies eight 
new rheumatoid arthritis risk loci.

Kim K(1), Bang SY(2), Lee HS(2), Cho SK(2), Choi CB(2), Sung YK(2), Kim TH(2),
Jun JB(2), Yoo DH(2), Kang YM(3), Kim SK(4), Suh CH(5), Shim SC(6), Lee SS(7),
Lee J(8), Chung WT(9), Choe JY(4), Shin HD(10), Lee JY(11), Han BG(11), Nath
SK(12), Eyre S(13), Bowes J(13), Pappas DA(14), Kremer JM(15), Gonzalez-Gay
MA(16), Rodriguez-Rodriguez L(17), Ärlestig L(18), Okada Y(19), Diogo D(20), Liao
KP(21), Karlson EW(21), Raychaudhuri S(22), Rantapää-Dahlqvist S(18), Martin
J(23), Klareskog L(24), Padyukov L(24), Gregersen PK(25), Worthington J(12),
Greenberg JD(26), Plenge RM(20), Bae SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic
Diseases, Seoul, Republic of Korea Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and
Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Program in Medical and Population
Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Department of
Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul, Republic
of Korea. (3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kyungpook
National University School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (4)Division of 
Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Arthritis & Autoimmunity Research 
Center, Catholic University of Daegu School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of
Korea. (5)Department of Rheumatology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, 
Republic of Korea. (6)Division of Rheumatology, Daejeon Rheumatoid & Degenerative
Arthritis Center, Chungnam National University Hospital, Daejeon, Republic of
Korea. (7)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chonnam
National University Medical School and Hospital, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(8)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Ewha Womans
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (9)Division of
Rheumatology, Department of internal medicine, Dong-A University, Busan, Republic
of Korea. (10)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (11)Center for Genome Science, Korea National Institute of Health, Osong
Health Technology, Chungcheongbuk-do, Republic of Korea. (12)Arthritis and
Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. (13)Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit,
University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Manchester,
UK. (14)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Columbia University,
New York, New York, USA. (15)The Center of Rheumatology, Albany, New York, USA.
(16)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Marques de Valdecilla, IFIMAV,
Santander, Spain. (17)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Clinico San Carlos,
Madrid, Spain. (18)Department of Clinical Medicine/Rheumatoloy, Umeå University, 
Umeå, Sweden. (19)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Division of 
Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA Department of Human Genetics and Disease Diversity,
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, Japan Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan. (20)Division of Rheumatology,
Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Program in Medical and
Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (21)Division
of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (22)Division of Rheumatology,
Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Program in Medical and
Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA Arthritis
Research UK Epidemiology Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic
Health Sciences Centre, Manchester, UK. (23)Instituto de Parasitologia y
Biomedicina Lopez-Neyra, CSIC, Granada, Spain. (24)Rheumatology Unit, Department 
of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital Solna,
Stockholm, Sweden. (25)The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, North
Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, Manhasset, New York, USA. (26)Division of
Rheumatology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVE: A highly polygenic aetiology and high degree of allele-sharing between
ancestries have been well elucidated in genetic studies of rheumatoid arthritis. 
Recently, the high-density genotyping array Immunochip for immune disease loci
identified 14 new rheumatoid arthritis risk loci among individuals of European
ancestry. Here, we aimed to identify new rheumatoid arthritis risk loci using
Korean-specific Immunochip data.
METHODS: We analysed Korean rheumatoid arthritis case-control samples using the
Immunochip and genome-wide association studies (GWAS) array to search for new
risk alleles of rheumatoid arthritis with anticitrullinated peptide antibodies.
To increase power, we performed a meta-analysis of Korean data with previously
published European Immunochip and GWAS data for a total sample size of 9299
Korean and 45,790 European case-control samples.
RESULTS: We identified eight new rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility loci
(TNFSF4, LBH, EOMES, ETS1-FLI1, COG6, RAD51B, UBASH3A and SYNGR1) that passed a
genome-wide significance threshold (p<5×10(-8)), with evidence for three
independent risk alleles at 1q25/TNFSF4. The risk alleles from the seven new loci
except for the TNFSF4 locus (monomorphic in Koreans), together with risk alleles 
from previously established RA risk loci, exhibited a high correlation of effect 
sizes between ancestries. Further, we refined the number of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that represent potentially causal variants through a
trans-ethnic comparison of densely genotyped SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the advantage of dense-mapping and
trans-ancestral analysis for identification of potentially causal SNPs. In
addition, our findings support the importance of T cells in the pathogenesis and 
the fact of frequent overlap of risk loci among diverse autoimmune diseases.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4467986
PMID: 24532676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Immunol. 2014 Mar 15;192(6):2667-76. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302605. Epub 2014
Feb 14.

Differential requirement for Nfil3 during NK cell development.

Seillet C(1), Huntington ND, Gangatirkar P, Axelsson E, Minnich M, Brady HJ,
Busslinger M, Smyth MJ, Belz GT, Carotta S.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052,
Australia;

NK cells can be grouped into distinct subsets that are localized to different
organs and exhibit a different capacity to secrete cytokines and mediate
cytotoxicity. Despite these hallmarks that reflect tissue-specific specialization
in NK cells, little is known about the factors that control the development of
these distinct subsets. The basic leucine zipper transcription factor Nfil3
(E4bp4) is essential for bone marrow-derived NK cell development, but it is not
clear whether Nfil3 is equally important for all NK cell subsets or how it
induces NK lineage commitment. In this article, we show that Nfil3 is required
for the formation of Eomes-expressing NK cells, including conventional medullary 
and thymic NK cells, whereas TRAIL(+) Eomes(-) NK cells develop independently of 
Nfil3. Loss of Nfil3 during the development of bone marrow-derived NK cells
resulted in reduced expression of Eomes and, conversely, restoration of Eomes
expression in Nfil3(-/-) progenitors rescued NK cell development and maturation. 
Collectively, these findings demonstrate that Nfil3 drives the formation of
mature NK cells by inducing Eomes expression and reveal the differential
requirements of NK cell subsets for Nfil3.

PMID: 24532575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 10;9(2):e88884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088884. eCollection
2014.

Levels of CD56+TIM-3- effector CD8 T cells distinguish HIV natural virus
suppressors from patients receiving antiretroviral therapy.

Poonia B(1), Pauza CD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Virology, School of Medicine, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Prolonged antiretroviral therapy (ART) with effective HIV suppression and
reconstitution of CD4 T cells, fails to restore CD8 T cell lytic effector
function that is needed to eradicate the viral reservoir. Better understanding of
the phenotype and function of circulating CD8 cells in HIV patients will
contribute to new targeted therapies directed at increasing CD8 T cell lytic
effector function and destruction of the viral reservoir. We show that CD8 T
cells from ART treated patients had sharply reduced expression of CD56 (neural
cell adhesion molecule-1), a marker associated with cytolytic function whereas
elite patients who control HIV in the absence of ART had CD56+ CD8 T cell levels 
similar to uninfected controls. The CD56+ CD8 T cells had higher perforin
upregulation as well as degranulation following stimulation with HIV gag peptides
compared with CD56 negative CD8 T cells. Elite patients had the highest
frequencies of perforin producing CD56+ CD8 T cells among all HIV+ groups. In
patients receiving ART we noted high levels of the exhaustion marker TIM-3 on
CD56+ CD8 T cells, implying that defective effector function was related to
immune exhaustion. CD56+ CD8 T cells from elite or treated HIV patients responded
to PMA plus ionomycin stimulation, and expressed transcription factors T-bet and 
EOMES at levels similar to uninfected controls. Consequently, the lytic effector 
defect in chronic HIV disease is due to immune exhaustion and quantitative loss
of CD56+ CD8 T cells and this defect is not repaired in patients where viremia is
suppressed and CD4 T cells are recovered after ART. Reconstituting the cytotoxic 
CD56+ subset of CD8+ T cells through new interventions might improve the lytic
effector capacity and contribute to reducing the viral reservoir. Our initial
studies indicate that IL-15 treatment partly reverses the CD56 defect, implying
that myeloid cell defects could be targeted for immune therapy during chronic HIV
disease.

PMCID: PMC3919829
PMID: 24520422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Exp Med. 2014 Mar 10;211(3):563-77. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131560. Epub 2014 Feb
10.

T-bet and Eomes instruct the development of two distinct natural killer cell
lineages in the liver and in the bone marrow.

Daussy C(1), Faure F, Mayol K, Viel S, Gasteiger G, Charrier E, Bienvenu J, Henry
T, Debien E, Hasan UA, Marvel J, Yoh K, Takahashi S, Prinz I, de Bernard S,
Buffat L, Walzer T.

Author information: 
(1)CIRI, International Center for Infectiology Research, Université de Lyon; 2
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1111; 3 Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Lyon; 4 Université Lyon 1, Centre International de Recherche en
Infectiologie; and 5 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR5308, 69007
Lyon, France.

Trail(+)DX5(-)Eomes(-) natural killer (NK) cells arise in the mouse fetal liver
and persist in the adult liver. Their relationships with Trail(-)DX5(+) NK cells 
remain controversial. We generated a novel Eomes-GFP reporter murine model to
address this question. We found that Eomes(-) NK cells are not precursors of
classical Eomes(+) NK cells but rather constitute a distinct lineage of innate
lymphoid cells. Eomes(-) NK cells are strictly dependent on both T-bet and IL-15,
similarly to NKT cells. We observed that, in the liver, expression of T-bet in
progenitors represses Eomes expression and the development of Eomes(+) NK cells. 
Reciprocally, the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment restricts T-bet expression in
developing NK cells. Ectopic expression of T-bet forces the development of
Eomes(-) NK cells, demonstrating that repression of T-bet is essential for the
development of Eomes(+) NK cells. Gene profile analyses show that Eomes(-) NK
cells share part of their transcriptional program with NKT cells, including genes
involved in liver homing and NK cell receptors. Moreover, Eomes(-) NK cells
produce a broad range of cytokines, including IL-2 and TNF in vitro and in vivo, 
during immune responses against vaccinia virus. Thus, mutually exclusive
expression of T-bet and Eomes drives the development of different NK cell
lineages with complementary functions.

PMCID: PMC3949572
PMID: 24516120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Development. 2014 Feb;141(4):795-806. doi: 10.1242/dev.101907.

Integrin avß3 and thyroid hormones promote expansion of progenitors in embryonic 
neocortex.

Stenzel D(1), Wilsch-Bräuninger M, Wong FK, Heuer H, Huttner WB.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics,
Pfotenhauerstrasse 108, 01307 Dresden, Germany.

Erratum in
    Development. 2014 Mar 15;141(6):1419.

Neocortex expansion during evolution is associated with the enlargement of the
embryonic subventricular zone, which reflects an increased self-renewal and
proliferation of basal progenitors. In contrast to human, the vast majority of
mouse basal progenitors lack self-renewal capacity, possibly due to lack of a
basal process contacting the basal lamina and downregulation of cell-autonomous
production of extracellular matrix (ECM) constituents. Here we show that targeted
activation of the ECM receptor integrin avß3 on basal progenitors in embryonic
mouse neocortex promotes their expansion. Specifically, integrin avß3 activation 
causes an increased cell cycle re-entry of Pax6-negative, Tbr2-positive
intermediate progenitors, rather than basal radial glia, and a decrease in the
proportion of intermediate progenitors committed to neurogenic division.
Interestingly, integrin avß3 is the only known cell surface receptor for thyroid 
hormones. Remarkably, tetrac, a thyroid hormone analog that inhibits the binding 
of thyroid hormones to integrin avß3, completely abolishes the intermediate
progenitor expansion observed upon targeted integrin avß3 activation, indicating 
that this expansion requires the binding of thyroid hormones to integrin avß3.
Convergence of ECM and thyroid hormones on integrin avß3 thus appears to be
crucial for cortical progenitor proliferation and self-renewal, and hence for
normal brain development and the evolutionary expansion of the neocortex.

PMID: 24496617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Clin Immunol. 2014 Mar;151(1):16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2014.01.003. Epub 2014
Jan 15.

The autoimmune disease-associated transcription factors EOMES and TBX21 are
dysregulated in multiple sclerosis and define a molecular subtype of disease.

Parnell GP(1), Gatt PN(1), Krupa M(2), Nickles D(3), McKay FC(1), Schibeci SD(1),
Batten M(4), Baranzini S(3), Henderson A(1), Barnett M(5), Slee M(2), Vucic S(6),
Stewart GJ(1), Booth DR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology and Allergy Research, Westmead Millennium Institute
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia. (2)School of
Medicine, Flinders University of South Australia, South Australia 5042,
Australia. (3)Department of Neurology, University of California at San Francisco,
CA 94158, USA. (4)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, Sydney, NSW
2010, Australia. (5)Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW 2050 Australia. (6)Westmead Clinical School, University of Sydney,
Westmead Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia. (7)Institute for
Immunology and Allergy Research, Westmead Millennium Institute University of
Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2145, Australia. Electronic address:
david.booth@sydney.edu.au.

We have identified a marked over-representation of transcription factors
controlling differentiation of T, B, myeloid and NK cells among the 110 MS genes 
now known to be associated with multiple sclerosis (MS). To test if the
expression of these genes might define molecular subtypes of MS, we interrogated 
their expression in blood in three independent cohorts of untreated MS (from
Sydney and Adelaide) or clinically isolated syndrome (CIS, from San Francisco)
patients. Expression of the transcription factors (TF) controlling T and NK cell 
differentiation, EOMES, TBX21 and other TFs was significantly lower in MS/CIS
compared to healthy controls in all three cohorts. Expression was tightly
correlated between these TFs, with other T/NK cell TFs, and to another
downregulated gene, CCL5. Expression was stable over time, but did not predict
disease phenotype. Optimal response to therapy might be indicated by
normalization of expression of these genes in blood.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24495857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Immunol. 2014 Mar 1;192(5):2237-43. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303119. Epub 2014
Jan 31.

Human <U+03B3>d thymocytes are functionally immature and differentiate into cytotoxic
type 1 effector T cells upon IL-2/IL-15 signaling.

Ribot JC(1), Ribeiro ST, Correia DV, Sousa AE, Silva-Santos B.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, 1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal.

Cytotoxicity and IFN-<U+03B3> production by human <U+03B3>d T cells underlie their potent
antitumor functions. However, it remains unclear where and how human <U+03B3>d T cells
acquire these key effector properties. Given the recent disclosure of a major
contribution of the thymus to murine <U+03B3>d T cell functional differentiation, in
this study we have analyzed a series of human pediatric thymuses. We found that
ex vivo-isolated <U+03B3>d thymocytes produced negligible IFN-<U+03B3> and lacked cytolytic
activity against leukemia cells. However, these properties were selectively
acquired upon stimulation with IL-2 or IL-15, but not IL-4 or IL-7. Unexpectedly,
TCR activation was dispensable for these stages of functional differentiation.
The effects of IL-2/IL-15 depended on MAPK/ERK signaling and induced de novo
expression of the transcription factors T-bet and eomesodermin, as well as the
cytolytic enzyme perforin, required for the cytotoxic type 1 program. These
findings have implications for the manipulation of <U+03B3>d T cells in cancer
immunotherapy.

PMID: 24489097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Tissue Cell. 2014 Apr;46(2):127-35. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2013.12.006. Epub 2013
Dec 31.

Valproic acid promotes differentiation of hepatocyte-like cells from whole human 
umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

An SY(1), Han J(1), Lim HJ(1), Park SY(1), Kim JH(2), Do BR(2), Kim JH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Biotechnology, College of Life
Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of Korea.
(2)Biotechnology Research Institute, HurimBioCell Inc., Seoul 157-793, Republic
of Korea. (3)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Biotechnology, College 
of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: jhkim@korea.ac.kr.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are mesoderm-derived cells that are considered a
good source of somatic cells for treatment of many degenerative diseases.
Previous studies have reported the differentiation of mesodermal MSCs into
endodermal and ectodermal cell types beyond their embryonic lineages, including
hepatocytes and neurons. However, the molecular pathways responsible for the
direct or indirect cell type conversion and the functional ability of the
differentiated cells remain unclear and need further research. In the present
study, we demonstrated that valproic acid (VPA), which is a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, induced an increase in the expression of endodermal genes including
CXCR4, SOX17, FOXA1, FOXA2, GSC, c-MET, EOMES, and HNF-1ß in human umbilical cord
derived MSCs (hUCMSCs). In addition, we found that VPA is able to increase these 
endodermal genes in hUCMSCs by activating signal transduction of AKT and ERK. VPA
pretreatment increased hepatic differentiation at the expense of adipogenic
differentiation. The effects of VPA on modulating hUCMSCs fate were diminished by
blocking AKT and ERK activation using specific signaling inhibitors. Together,
our results suggest that VPA contributes to the lineage conversion of hUCMSCs to 
hepatic cell fate by upregulating the expression of endodermal genes through AKT 
and ERK activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24472423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Blood Cancer J. 2014 Jan 17;4:e178. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2013.75.

Prostaglandin E2 promotes survival of naive UCB T cells via the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway and alters immune reconstitution after UCBT.

Li L(1), Kim HT(2), Nellore A(1), Patsoukis N(1), Petkova V(3), McDonough S(4),
Politikos I(1), Nikiforow S(4), Soiffer R(4), Antin JH(4), Ballen K(5), Cutler
C(4), Ritz J(4), Boussiotis VA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology and Cancer Biology,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department
of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

The outcome of umbilical cord blood transplantation (UCBT) is compromised by low 
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) doses leading to prolonged time to engraftment,
delayed immunological reconstitution and late memory T-cell skewing. Exposure of 
UCB to dimethyl-prostaglandin E2 (dmPGE2) increases HSC in vivo. We determined
that exposure of UCB T lymphocytes to dmPGE2 modified Wnt signaling resulting in 
T cell factor (TCF)-mediated transcription. Wnt signaling upregulated interleukin
(IL)-7R and IL-2Rß, resulting in enhanced survival mediated by the homeostatic
cytokines IL-7 and IL-15. dmPGE2 also induced components of the Wnt pathway and
Wnt receptors, thereby priming UCB T cells to receive signals via Wnt ligands in 
vivo. We observed that the Wnt transcription factor TCF7 and its target EOMES
were elevated in the T cells of patients who received PGE2-treated UCBs.
Consistent with the role of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling to induce and maintain naive,
memory precursors and long-lived central memory CD8(+) cells, these patients also
had increased fractions of CD8(+)CD45RO(-)CD62L(+) plus CD8(+)CD45RO(+)CD62L(+)
subsets encompassing these T-cell populations. These effects of the
PGE2/Wnt/ß-catenin axis may have significant implications for harnessing immunity
in the context of UCBT, where impaired immune reconstitution is associated with
late memory T-cell skewing.

PMCID: PMC3913944
PMID: 24442207  [PubMed]


141. Cancer Immunol Res. 2013 Nov;1(5):320-31. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0086.

GITR pathway activation abrogates tumor immune suppression through loss of
regulatory T cell lineage stability.

Schaer DA(1), Budhu S(1), Liu C(1), Bryson C(2), Malandro N(3), Cohen A(4), Zhong
H(1), Yang X(1), Houghton AN(1), Merghoub T(1), Wolchok JD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Swim Across America & Ludwig Collaborative Lab Laboratory, Immunology Program,
Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY. (2)Weill Cornell Medical College, Memorial Sloan-Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY. (3)Swim Across America & Ludwig Collaborative Lab
Laboratory, Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY ; Weill Cornell Medical
College, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY. (4)Perelman Center
for Advanced Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. (5)Swim
Across America & Ludwig Collaborative Lab Laboratory, Immunology Program,
Sloan-Kettering Institute for Cancer Research, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY ; Weill Cornell Medical College, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY ; Ludwig Center for Cancer Immunotherapy at Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.

Ligation of GITR (glucocorticoid-induced tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
receptor-related gene, or TNFRSF18) by agonist antibody has recently entered into
early phase clinical trials for the treatment of advanced malignancies. Although 
the ability of GITR modulation to induce tumor regression is well-documented in
preclinical studies, the underlying mechanisms of action, particularly its
effects on CD4(+)foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (Treg), have not been fully
elucidated. We have previously demonstrated that GITR ligation in vivo by agonist
antibody DTA-1 causes a >50% reduction of intra-tumor Treg with down modulation
of Foxp3 expression. Here we show that the loss of Foxp3 is tumor-dependent.
Adoptively-transferred Foxp3(+)Treg from tumor-bearing animals lose Foxp3
expression in the host when treated with DTA-1, whereas Treg from naïve mice
maintain Foxp3 expression. GITR ligation also alters the expression of various
transcription factors and cytokines important for Treg function. Complete Foxp3
loss in intra-tumor Treg correlates with a dramatic decrease in Helios expression
and is associated with the upregulation of transcription factors T-Bet and Eomes.
Changes in Helios correspond with a reduction in IL-10 and an increase in IFN<U+03B3>
expression in DTA-1-treated Treg. Together, these data show that GITR agonist
antibody alters Treg lineage stability inducing an inflammatory effector T cell
phenotype. The resultant loss of lineage stability causes Treg to lose their
intra-tumor immune suppressive function, making the tumor susceptible to killing 
by tumor-specific effector CD8(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC3885345
PMID: 24416730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 15;192(4):1954-61. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300876. Epub 2014
Jan 10.

KLRG1+ NK cells protect T-bet-deficient mice from pulmonary metastatic colorectal
carcinoma.

Malaisé M(1), Rovira J, Renner P, Eggenhofer E, Sabet-Baktach M, Lantow M, Lang
SA, Koehl GE, Farkas SA, Loss M, Agha A, Campistol JM, Schlitt HJ, Geissler EK,
Kroemer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg,
Germany.

We studied the developmental and functional mechanisms behind NK cell-mediated
antitumor responses against metastatic colorectal carcinoma (CRC) in mice. In
particular, we focused on investigating the significance of T-box transcription
factors and the immunotherapeutic relevance of IL-15 in the development and
function of tumor-reactive NK cells. Pulmonary CRC metastases were experimentally
seeded via an adoptive i.v. transfer of luciferase-expressing CT26 CRC cells that
form viewable masses via an in vivo imaging device; genetically deficient mice
were used to dissect the antitumor effects of developmentally different NK cell
subsets. IL-15 precomplexed to IL-15 receptor-a was used in immunotherapy
experiments. We found that mice deficient for the T-box transcription factor
T-bet lack terminally differentiated antitumor CD27(low)KLRG1(+) NK cells,
leading to a terminal course of rapid-onset pulmonary CRC metastases. The
importance of this NK cell subset for effective antitumor immunity was shown by
adoptively transferring purified CD27(low)KLRG1(+) NK cells into T-bet-deficient 
mice and, thereby, restoring immunity against lung metastasis formation.
Importantly, immunity to metastasis formation could also be restored in
T-bet-deficient recipients by treating mice with IL-15 precomplexed to IL-15
receptor-a, which induced the development of eomesodermin(+)KLRG1(+) NK cells
from existing NK cell populations. Thus, contingent upon their T-bet-dependent
development and activation status, NK cells can control metastatic CRC in mice,
which is highly relevant for the development of immunotherapeutic approaches in
the clinic.

PMID: 24415778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Cancer Immunol Res. 2013 Oct;1(4):235-44. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-13-0068.

Enhancement of tumor-reactive cytotoxic CD4+ T cell responses after ipilimumab
treatment in four advanced melanoma patients.

Kitano S(1), Tsuji T(2), Liu C(3), Hirschhorn-Cymerman D(4), Kyi C(5), Mu Z(1),
Allison JP(6), Gnjatic S(7), Yuan JD(1), Wolchok JD(8).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Center for Cancer Immunotherapy, Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065. (2)Center for Immunotherapy, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263. (3)Ludwig Center for Cancer Immunotherapy,
Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065 ; Swim
Across America Laboratory and Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Memorial,
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065. (4)Swim Across America
Laboratory and Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Memorial, Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065. (5)Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, NY 10065. (6)Department of Immunology, The University of
Texas-MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX. (7)Mount Sinai Icahn School of
Medicine, Tisch Cancer Institute, New York, NY 10029. (8)Ludwig Center for Cancer
Immunotherapy, Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065 ; Department of Medicine, Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065
; Swim Across America Laboratory and Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research,
Memorial, Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065 ; Weill Cornell
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10065.

CD4(+) T cells provide help to enhance and sustain cytotoxic CD8(+) T cell
responses. A direct lytic role for this cell population in mouse models further
supports the use of tumor-reactive CD4(+) T cells for cancer immunotherapy.
CTLA-4 blockade has been shown to expand antigen-specific cytotoxic CD4(+) T
cells in mouse models. We took advantage of spontaneous immunity to the NY-ESO-1 
cancer-testis antigen to investigate quantitative and qualitative changes in
antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell responses after ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal
antibody) treatment in advanced melanoma patients. Four NY-ESO-1 seropositive
melanoma patients were chosen upon the availability of suitable blood specimens
for characterizing the functions of NY-ESO-1 antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell
response by enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT), intracellular cytokine staining
(ICS) and cytotoxicity assays. Multiple NY-ESO-1 antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell
responses with Th1 dominance were induced or enhanced after ipilimumab treatment 
in peripheral blood in all four patients. NY-ESO-1 antigen-specific CD4(+) T cell
lines established from all 4 patients after ipilimumab treatment recognized
naturally processed NY-ESO-1 protein in antigen-presenting cells, expressed
master transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes) and secreted perforin and
Granzyme B. Finally, we demonstrated that these NY-ESO-1 antigen-specific CD4(+) 
T cell lines directly lysed autologous melanoma cell lines expressing NY-ESO-1 in
an MHC class II restricted manner. Our results show that antigen specific
cytotoxic CD4(+) T cell responses are induced after ipilimumab therapy in human
cancer patients. Ipilimumab may induce the expression of lytic granules on
antigen specific cytotoxic CD4(+) T cells via Eomes, revealing a novel
consequence of immunologic checkpoint blockade.

PMCID: PMC3880021
PMID: 24396833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Oncoimmunology. 2014 Dec 2;3(12):e970914.

Heteroclitic XBP1 peptides evoke tumor-specific memory cytotoxic T lymphocytes
against breast cancer, colon cancer, and pancreatic cancer cells.

Bae J(1), Samur M(1), Munshi A(1), Hideshima T(1), Keskin D(1), Kimmelman A(1),
Lee AH(2), Dranoff G(1), Anderson KC(1), Munshi NC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute ; Boston, MA USA ; Harvard Medical School ;
Boston, MA USA. (2)Weill Cornell Medical College ; New York, NY USA.
(3)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute ; Boston, MA USA ; Harvard Medical School ;
Boston, MA USA ; VA Boston Healthcare System ; Boston, MA USA.

XBP1 is a critical transcriptional activator of the unfolded protein response
(UPR), which increases tumor cell survival under prolonged endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) stress and hypoxic conditions.This study was designed to evaluate the
immunogenicity of heteroclitic XBP1 unspliced (US)184-192 (YISPWILAV) and
heteroclictic XBP1 spliced (SP)367-375 (YLFPQLISV) HLA-A2 peptides, and to
characterize the specific activities of XBP1 peptides-specific cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (XBP1-CTL) against breast cancer, colon cancer, and pancreatic cancer
cells.The XBP1-CTL had upregulated expression of critical T cell markers and
displayed HLA-A2-restricted and antigen-specific activities against breast
cancer, colon cancer and pancreatic cancer cells. XBP1-CTL were enriched
withCD45RO(+) memory CTL, which showed high expression of critical T cell markers
(CD28, ICOS, CD69, CD40L), cell proliferation and antitumor activities as
compared to CD45RO(-) non-memory CTL. The effector memory (EM: CD45RO(+)CCR7(-)) 
subset had the highest level of cell proliferation while the central memory (CM: 
CD45RO(+)CCR7(+)) subset demonstrated enhanced functional activities (CD107a
degranulation, IFN<U+03B3>/IL-2 production) upon recognition of the respective tumor
cells. Furthermore, both the EM and CM XBP1-CTL subsets expressed high levels of 
Th1 transcription regulators Tbet and Eomes. The highest frequencies of IFN<U+03B3> or
granzyme B producing cells were detected within CM XBP1-CTL subset that were
either Tbet(+) or Eomes(+) in responding to the tumor cells.These results
demonstrate the immunotherapeutic potential of a cocktail of immunogenic HLA-A2
specific heteroclitic XBP1 US184-192 and heteroclictic XBP1 SP367-375 peptides to
induce CD3(+)CD8(+) CTL enriched for CM and EM cells with specific antitumor
activities against a variety of solid tumors.

PMCID: PMC4356023
PMID: 25941601  [PubMed]


145. Immunol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;92(2):181-90. doi: 10.1038/icb.2013.88. Epub 2013 Dec
3.

Phenotypic and transcriptional profile correlates with functional plasticity of
antigen-specific CD4+ T cells.

Edwards ES(1), Smith C(1), Khanna R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunotherapy and Vaccine Development and Tumour Immunology
Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

The role of CD4(+) T cells in the control of infectious pathogens is highly
complex with a myriad of functions but how these T cells acquire differential
functional potentiality remains poorly defined. Here we show that human
cytomegalovirus (CMV)-specific CD4(+) T cells directed towards different viral
antigens expressed predominantly TNF-a alone or TNF-a and IFN-<U+03B3>. TNF-a(+) and
IFN-<U+03B3>(+) CD4(+) T cells expressed significantly higher levels of T-box
transcription factors T-bet with graded loss of Eomesodermin (Eomes) expression
(T-bet(Hi)Eomes(Hi/Lo)) when compared with TNF-a(+) CD4(+) T cells expressing
lower levels of both T-bet and Eomes (T-bet(-)Eomes(-)). Furthermore, TNF-a(+)
and IFN-<U+03B3>(+) CD4(+) T cells expressed significantly higher levels of perforin and
interleukin (IL)-2 and displayed a terminally differentiated phenotype
(CCR7(-)CD27(-)CD45RA(-)CD57(+)CD62L(-)). In contrast, TNF-a(+) alone
CMV-specific CD4(+) T cells were predominantly early-memory phenotype with a
proportion of these cells displaying T memory stem-cell phenotype
(CD95(+)CD45RA(+)CCR7(+)CD27(+)). In vitro stimulation of CMV-specific CD4(+) T
cells with viral antigen in the presence of IL-12 was sufficient to dramatically 
change the transcriptional and functional profile of TNF-a(+) CD4(+) T cells,
whereas TNF-a(+) and IFN-<U+03B3>(+) CD4(+) T cells remained unaltered. These findings
illustrate an intrinsic link between cytokine expression, transcriptional
regulation and cellular differentiation, and their impact on functional
plasticity of virus-specific CD4(+) T cells.

PMID: 24296812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Nat Neurosci. 2014 Jan;17(1):97-105. doi: 10.1038/nn.3596. Epub 2013 Dec 1.

Maternal hematopoietic TNF, via milk chemokines, programs hippocampal development
and memory.

Liu B(1), Zupan B(2), Laird E(1), Klein S(1), Gleason G(1), Bozinoski M(1), Gal
Toth J(3), Toth M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York,
USA. (2)1] Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York,
New York, USA. [2]. (3)The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2014 Jan;17(1):8-9.

Tumor necrosis factor a (TNF) is a proinflammatory cytokine with established
roles in host defense and immune system organogenesis. We studied TNF function
and found a previously unidentified physiological function that extends its
effect beyond the host into the developing offspring. A partial or complete
maternal TNF deficit, specifically in hematopoietic cells, resulted in reduced
milk levels of the chemokines IP-10, MCP-1, MCP-3, MCP-5 and MIP-1ß, which in
turn augmented offspring postnatal hippocampal proliferation, leading to improved
adult spatial memory in mice. These effects were reproduced by the postpartum
administration of a clinically used anti-TNF agent. Chemokines, fed to suckling
pups of TNF-deficient mothers, restored both postnatal proliferation and spatial 
memory to normal levels. Our results identify a TNF-dependent 'lactrocrine'
pathway that programs offspring hippocampal development and memory. The level of 
ambient TNF is known to be downregulated by physical activity, exercise and
adaptive stress. We propose that the maternal TNF-milk chemokine pathway evolved 
to promote offspring adaptation to post-weaning environmental challenges and
competition.

PMID: 24292233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Jan;36(1):215-22. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.11.004.
Epub 2013 Nov 12.

Transcription analysis of two Eomesodermin genes in lymphocyte subsets of two
teleost species.

Takizawa F(1), Araki K(2), Ohtani M(3), Toda H(3), Saito Y(3), Lampe VS(4),
Dijkstra JM(5), Ototake M(6), Moritomo T(3), Nakanishi T(3), Fischer U(7).

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health,
Institute for Infectiology, Insel Riems, Germany; Laboratory of Fish Pathology,
Department of Veterinary Medicine, Nihon University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Fisheries, Kagoshima University, Shimoarata, Kagoshima 890-0056,
Japan. (3)Laboratory of Fish Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Nihon 
University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan. (4)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal
Research Institute for Animal Health, Institute for Infectiology, Insel Riems,
Germany. (5)Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health
University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. (6)Aquatic Animal Health Division, National
Research Institute of Aquaculture, Fisheries Research Agency, 422-1 Minami-Ise,
Mie 516-0193, Japan. (7)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute
for Animal Health, Institute for Infectiology, Insel Riems, Germany. Electronic
address: uwe.fischer@fli.bund.de.

Eomesodermin (Eomes), a T-box transcription factor, is a key molecule associated 
with function and differentiation of CD8(+) T cells and NK cells. Previously, two
teleost Eomes genes (Eomes-a and -b), which are located on different chromosomes,
were identified and shown to be expressed in zebrafish lymphocytes. For the
present study, we identified these genes in rainbow trout and ginbuna crucian
carp. Deduced Eomes-a and -b amino acid sequences in both fish species contain a 
highly conserved T-box DNA binding domain. In RT-PCR, both Eomes transcripts were
readily detectable in a variety of tissues in rainbow trout and ginbuna. The high
expression of Eomes-a and -b in brain and ovary suggests involvement in
neurogenesis and oogenesis, respectively, while their expression in lymphoid
tissues presumably is associated with immune functions. Investigation of
separated lymphocyte populations from pronephros indicated that both Eomes-a and 
-b transcripts were few or absent in IgM(+) lymphocytes, while relatively
abundant in IgM(-)/CD8a(+) and IgM(-)/CD8a(-) populations. Moreover, we sorted
trout CD8a(+) lymphocytes from mucosal and non-mucosal lymphoid tissues and
compared the expression profiles of Eomes-a and -b with those of other T
cell-related transcription factor genes (GATA-3, T-bet and Runx3), a Th1 cytokine
gene (IFN-<U+03B3>) and a Th2 cytokine gene (IL-4/13A). Interestingly, the tissue
distribution of Eomes-a/b, T-bet, and Runx3 versus IFN-<U+03B3> transcripts did not
reveal simple correlations, suggesting tissue-specific properties of CD8a(+)
lymphocytes and/or multiple modes that drive IFN-<U+03B3> expressions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24239596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Immunity. 2013 Nov 14;39(5):819-32. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.09.012.

The polycomb protein Ezh2 regulates differentiation and plasticity of CD4(+) T
helper type 1 and type 2 cells.

Tumes DJ(1), Onodera A, Suzuki A, Shinoda K, Endo Y, Iwamura C, Hosokawa H,
Koseki H, Tokoyoda K, Suzuki Y, Motohashi S, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

After antigen encounter by CD4(+) T cells, polarizing cytokines induce the
expression of master regulators that control differentiation. Inactivation of the
histone methyltransferase Ezh2 was found to specifically enhance T helper 1 (Th1)
and Th2 cell differentiation and plasticity. Ezh2 directly bound and facilitated 
correct expression of Tbx21 and Gata3 in differentiating Th1 and Th2 cells,
accompanied by substantial trimethylation at lysine 27 of histone 3 (H3K27me3).
In addition, Ezh2 deficiency resulted in spontaneous generation of discrete IFN-<U+03B3>
and Th2 cytokine-producing populations in nonpolarizing cultures, and under these
conditions IFN-<U+03B3> expression was largely dependent on enhanced expression of the
transcription factor Eomesodermin. In vivo, loss of Ezh2 caused increased
pathology in a model of allergic asthma and resulted in progressive accumulation 
of memory phenotype Th2 cells. This study establishes a functional link between
Ezh2 and transcriptional regulation of lineage-specifying genes in terminally
differentiated CD4(+) T cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24238339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Nov 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Virus-specific CD4 and CD8 T cell responses in the absence of Th1-associated
transcription factors.

Mollo SB(1), Ingram JT, Kress RL, Zajac AJ, Harrington LE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Cell, Developmental, and Integrative Biology, Biology, and
Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Effector and memory CD4 and CD8 T cell responses are critical for the control of 
many intracellular pathogens. The development of these populations is governed by
transcription factors that molecularly control their differentiation, function,
and maintenance. Two transcription factors known to be involved in these
processes are Tbet and STAT4. Although Tbet has been shown to regulate CD8 T cell
fate decisions and effector CD4 T cell choices, the contribution of STAT4 is less
well understood. To address this, we examined the impact of STAT4 on T cell
responses in the presence or absence of Tbet, following LCMV infection by using
mice lacking Tbet, STAT4, or both transcription factors. STAT4 was not required
for Tbet or Eomes expression; however, virus-specific effector CD8 T cells are
skewed toward a memory-precursor phenotype in the absence of STAT4. This altered 
proportion of memory precursors did not result in an increase in memory CD8 T
cells after the resolution of the infection. We also demonstrate that
virus-specific effector and memory CD4 T cells formed independently of Tbet and
STAT4, although a slight reduction in the number of antigen-specific CD4 T cells 
was apparent in mice lacking both transcription factors. Collectively, we have
discovered distinct roles for Tbet and STAT4 in shaping the phenotype and
function of virus-specific T cell responses.

PMCID: PMC3984968
PMID: 24231259  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


150. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 25;8(10):e78686. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078686.
eCollection 2013.

Persistence of EBV antigen-specific CD8 T cell clonotypes during homeostatic
immune reconstitution in cancer patients.

Iancu EM(1), Gannon PO, Laurent J, Gupta B, Romero P, Michielin O, Romano E,
Speiser DE, Rufer N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lausanne University Hospital Center (CHUV) and
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Persistent viruses are kept in check by specific lymphocytes. The clonal T cell
receptor (TCR) repertoire against Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), once established
following primary infection, exhibits a robust stability over time. However, the 
determinants contributing to this long-term persistence are still poorly
characterized. Taking advantage of an in vivo clinical setting where lymphocyte
homeostasis was transiently perturbed, we studied EBV antigen-specific CD8 T
cells before and after non-myeloablative lympho-depleting chemotherapy of
melanoma patients. Despite more advanced T cell differentiation, patients T cells
showed clonal composition comparable to healthy individuals, sharing a preference
for TRBV20 and TRBV29 gene segment usage and several co-dominant public TCR
clonotypes. Moreover, our data revealed the presence of relatively few dominant
EBV antigen-specific T cell clonotypes, which mostly persisted following
transient lympho-depletion (TLD) and lymphocyte recovery, likely related to
absence of EBV reactivation and de novo T cell priming in these patients.
Interestingly, persisting clonotypes frequently co-expressed
memory/homing-associated genes (CD27, IL7R, EOMES, CD62L/SELL and CCR5)
supporting the notion that they are particularly important for long-lasting CD8 T
cell responses. Nevertheless, the clonal composition of EBV-specific CD8 T cells 
was preserved over time with the presence of the same dominant clonotypes after
non-myeloablative chemotherapy. The observed clonotype persistence demonstrates
high robustness of CD8 T cell homeostasis and reconstitution.

PMCID: PMC3808305
PMID: 24205294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Immunol. 2013 Dec 1;191(11):5559-73. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302293. Epub 2013
Oct 28.

Unique features of naive CD8+ T cell activation by IL-2.

Cho JH(1), Kim HO, Kim KS, Yang DH, Surh CD, Sprent J.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
Darlinghurst, New South Wales 2010, Australia;

IL-2 has a pervasive influence on the immune system and dictates the survival and
differentiation of multiple T cell subsets, including CD4 regulatory T cells, CD4
Th cells, and CD8 memory cells. IL-2 is synthesized by T cells during the early
stages of the immune response and promotes T cell expansion and effector cell
generation after initial activation via TCR signaling. Based on studies with
activated T cell lines maintained in vitro, IL-2 is known to activate multiple
signaling pathways that show considerable overlap with the pathways elicited via 
the TCR. In this paper, we have examined IL-2 signaling under TCR-independent
conditions, namely by culturing purified resting naive CD8 T cells with IL-2 in
the absence of Ag or APC. Under these conditions, we show in this study that IL-2
elicits a unique pattern of signaling associated with strong lymphocyte-specific 
protein tyrosine kinase/JAK3-dependent activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway with
little or no involvement of STAT5, NF-<U+03BA>B, or the calcineurin/NFAT pathways. Such 
signaling induces marked proliferation associated with rapid and selective
expression of eomesodermin but not T-bet and differentiation into long-lived
central memory cells after adoptive transfer.

PMID: 24166977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2549. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3549.

Variation at 3p24.1 and 6q23.3 influences the risk of Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Frampton M(1), da Silva Filho MI, Broderick P, Thomsen H, Försti A,
Vijayakrishnan J, Cooke R, Enciso-Mora V, Hoffmann P, Nöthen MM, Lloyd A, Holroyd
A, Eisele L, Jöckel KH, Ponader S, von Strandmann EP, Lightfoot T, Roman E, Lake 
A, Montgomery D, Jarrett RF, Swerdlow AJ, Engert A, Hemminki K, Houlston RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton,
Surrey SM2 5NG, UK.

In addition to HLA, recent genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of Hodgkin's
lymphoma (HL) have identified susceptibility loci for HL at 2p16.1, 8q24.21 and
10p14. In this study, we perform a GWAS meta-analysis with published GWAS
(totalling 1,465 cases and 6,417 controls of European background), and follow-up 
the most significant association signals in 2,024 cases and 1,853 controls. A
combined analysis identifies new HL susceptibility loci mapping to 3p24.1
(rs3806624; P=1.14 × 10(-12), odds ratio (OR)=1.26) and 6q23.3 (rs7745098; P=3.42
× 10(-9), OR=1.21). rs3806624 localizes 5' to the EOMES (eomesodermin) gene
within a p53 response element affecting p53 binding. rs7745098 maps intergenic to
HBS1L and MYB, a region previously associated with haematopoiesis. These findings
provide further insight into the genetic and biological basis of inherited
susceptibility to HL.

PMID: 24149102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Nov;5(11):1720-39. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201302524. Epub 2013 Oct 
11.

Activin receptor-like kinase5 inhibition suppresses mouse melanoma by ubiquitin
degradation of Smad4, thereby derepressing eomesodermin in cytotoxic T
lymphocytes.

Yoon JH(1), Jung SM, Park SH, Kato M, Yamashita T, Lee IK, Sudo K, Nakae S, Han
JS, Kim OH, Oh BC, Sumida T, Kuroda M, Ju JH, Jung KC, Park SH, Kim DK, Mamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Science, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan; Department of Internal Medicine, 
Research Institute of Aging and Metabolism, Kyungpook National University School 
of Medicine, Daegu, Korea; Department of Molecular Pathology, Tokyo Medical
University, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Microbiology, CHA University, Seoul,
Korea.

Erratum in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2014 May;6(5):703.

Varieties of transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) antagonists have been developed
to intervene with excessive TGF-ß signalling activity in cancer. Activin
receptor-like kinase5 (ALK5) inhibitors antagonize TGF-ß signalling by blocking
TGF-ß receptor-activated Smad (R-Smad) phosphorylation. Here we report the novel 
mechanisms how ALK5 inhibitors exert a therapeutic effect on a mouse B16 melanoma
model. Oral treatment with a novel ALK5 inhibitor, EW-7197 (2.5 mg/kg daily) or a
representative ALK5 inhibitor, LY-2157299 (75 mg/kg bid) suppressed the
progression of melanoma with enhanced cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) responses.
Notably, ALK5 inhibitors not only blocked R-Smad phosphorylation, but also
induced ubiquitin-mediated degradation of the common Smad, Smad4 mainly in CD8(+)
T cells in melanoma-bearing mice. Accordingly, T-cell-specific deletion of Smad4 
was sufficient to suppress the progression of melanoma. We further identified
eomesodermin (Eomes), the T-box transcription factor regulating CTL functions, as
a specific target repressed by TGF-ß via Smad4 and Smad3 in CD8(+) T cells. Thus,
ALK5 inhibition enhances anti-melanoma CTL responses through ubiquitin-mediated
degradation of Smad4 in addition to the direct inhibitory effect on R-Smad
phosphorylation.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3840488
PMID: 24127404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Dev Neurobiol. 2014 Jan;74(1):63-81. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22130. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

Shifts in the vascular endothelial growth factor isoforms result in transcriptome
changes correlated with early neural stem cell proliferation and differentiation 
in mouse forebrain.

Cain JT(1), Berosik MA, Snyder SD, Crawford NF, Nour SI, Schaubhut GJ, Darland
DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, North Dakota.

Regulation of neural stem cell (NSC) fate decisions is critical during the
transition from a multicellular mammalian forebrain neuroepithelium to the
multilayered neocortex. Forebrain development requires coordinated vascular
investment alongside NSC differentiation. Vascular endothelial growth factor A
(Vegf) has proven to be a pleiotrophic gene whose multiple protein isoforms
regulate a broad range of effects in neurovascular systems. To test the
hypothesis that the Vegf isoforms (120, 164, and 188) are required for normal
forebrain development, we analyzed the forebrain transcriptome of mice expressing
specific Vegf isoforms, Vegf120, VegfF188, or a combination of Vegf120/188.
Transcriptome analysis identified differentially expressed genes in embryonic day
(E) 9.5 forebrain, a time point preceding dramatic neuroepithelial expansion and 
vascular investment in the telencephalon. Meta-analysis identified gene pathways 
linked to chromosome-level modifications, cell fate regulation, and neurogenesis 
that were altered in Vegf isoform mice. Based on these gene network shifts, we
predicted that NSC populations would be affected in later stages of forebrain
development. In the E11.5 telencephalon, we quantified mitotic cells
[Phospho-Histone H3 (pHH3)-positive] and intermediate progenitor cells
(Tbr2/Eomes-positive), observing quantitative and qualitative shifts in these
populations. We observed qualitative shifts in cortical layering at P0,
particularly with Ctip2-positive cells in layer V. The results identify a suite
of genes and functional gene networks that can be used to further dissect the
role of Vegf in regulating NSC differentiation and downstream consequences for
NSC fate decisions.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4096862
PMID: 24124161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4440-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301741. Epub 2013
Sep 20.

Double deficiency for ROR<U+03B3>t and T-bet drives Th2-mediated allograft rejection in 
mice.

Sabet-Baktach M(1), Eggenhofer E, Rovira J, Renner P, Lantow M, Farkas SA,
Malaisé M, Edtinger K, Shaotang Z, Koehl GE, Dahlke MH, Schlitt HJ, Geissler EK, 
Kroemer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, University of
Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.

Although Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells are thought to be major effector cells in
adaptive alloimmune responses, their respective contribution to allograft
rejection remains unclear. To precisely address this, we used mice genetically
modified for the Th1 and Th17 hallmark transcription factors T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t,
respectively, which allowed us to study the alloreactive role of each subset in
an experimental transplant setting. We found that in a fully mismatched
heterotopic mouse heart transplantation model, T cells deficient for T-bet (prone
to Th17 differentiation) versus ROR<U+03B3>t (prone to Th1 differentiation) rejected
allografts at a more accelerated rate, indicating a predominance of Th17- over
Th1-driven alloimmunity. Importantly, T cells doubly deficient for both T-bet and
ROR<U+03B3>t differentiated into alloreactive GATA-3-expressing Th2 cells, which
promptly induced allograft rejection characterized by a Th2-type intragraft
expression profile and eosinophilic infiltration. Mechanistically, Th2-mediated
allograft rejection was contingent on IL-4, as its neutralization significantly
prolonged allograft survival by reducing intragraft expression of Th2 effector
molecules and eosinophilic allograft infiltration. Moreover, under IL-4
neutralizing conditions, alloreactive double-deficient T cells upregulated
Eomesodermin (Eomes) and IFN-<U+03B3>, but not GATA-3. Thus, in the absence of T-bet and
ROR<U+03B3>t, Eomes may salvage Th1-mediated alloimmunity that underlies IL-4
neutralization-resistant allograft rejection. We summarize that, whereas Th17
cells predictably promote allograft rejection, IL-4-producing GATA-3(+) Th2
cells, which are generally thought to protect allogeneic transplants, may
actually be potent facilitators of organ transplant rejection in the absence of
T-bet and ROR<U+03B3>t. Moreover, Eomes may rescue Th1-mediated allograft rejection in
the absence of IL-4, T-bet, and ROR<U+03B3>t.

PMID: 24058178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Dev Biol. 2013 Nov 1;383(1):15-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.09.005. Epub 2013
Sep 11.

CTR9/PAF1c regulates molecular lineage identity, histone H3K36 trimethylation and
genomic imprinting during preimplantation development.

Zhang K(1), Haversat JM, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Genome-wide epigenetic reprogramming is required for successful preimplantation
development. Inappropriate or deficient chromatin regulation can result in
defective lineage specification and loss of genomic imprinting, compromising
normal development. Here we report that two members of the RNA polymerase II
associated factor, homolog (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) complex (PAF1 complex)
components, Ctr9 and Rtf1, are required during mammalian preimplantation
development. We demonstrate that Ctr9-deficient embryos fail to correctly specify
lineages at the blastocyst stage. Expression of some lineage specific factors is 
markedly reduced in Ctr9 knockdown embryos, including Eomes, Elf5 and Sox2, while
others are inappropriately expressed (Oct4, Nanog, Gata6, Fgf4 and Sox17). We
also show that several imprinted genes (Mest, Peg3, Snrpn and Meg3) are
aberrantly expressed although allele specific DNA methylation is not altered. We 
document a loss of histone H3 lysine 36 trimethylation (H3K36me3) in
Ctr9-deficient embryos and confirm that knockdown of either Setd2 or Rtf1 results
in similar phenotypes. These findings show that the PAF1 complex is required for 
mammalian development, likely through regulation of H3K36me3, and indicate
functional conservation of the PAF1 complex from yeast to mammals in vivo.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24036311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 1;191(7):3712-24. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300319. Epub 2013
Sep 4.

Active STAT5 regulates T-bet and eomesodermin expression in CD8 T cells and
imprints a T-bet-dependent Tc1 program with repressed IL-6/TGF-ß1 signaling.

Grange M(1), Verdeil G, Arnoux F, Griffon A, Spicuglia S, Maurizio J, Buferne M, 
Schmitt-Verhulst AM, Auphan-Anezin N.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie de Marseille-Luminy, Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille 
13288, France;

In adoptive therapy, CD8 T cells expressing active STAT5 (STAT5CA) transcription 
factors were found to be superior to unmanipulated counterparts in long-term
persistence, capacity to infiltrate autochthonous mouse melanomas, thrive in
their microenvironment, and induce their regression. However, the molecular
mechanisms sustaining these properties were undefined. In this study, we report
that STAT5CA induced sustained expression of genes controlling tissue homing,
cytolytic granule composition, type 1 CD8 cytotoxic T cell-associated effector
molecules granzyme B(+), IFN-<U+03B3>(+), TNF-a(+), and CCL3(+), but not IL-2, and
transcription factors T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing analyses identified the genes possessing
regulatory regions to which STAT5 bound in long-term in vivo maintained
STAT5CA-expressing CD8 T cells. This analysis identified 34% of the genes
differentially expressed between STAT5CA-expressing and nonexpressing effector T 
cells as direct STAT5CA target genes, including those encoding T-bet, Eomes, and 
granzyme B. Additionally, genes encoding the IL-6R and TGFbRII subunits were
stably repressed, resulting in dampened IL-17-producing CD8 T cell polarization
in response to IL-6 and TGF-ß1. The absence of T-bet did not affect
STAT5CA-driven accumulation of the T cells in tissue or their granzyme B
expression but restored IL-2 secretion and IL-6R and TGFbRII expression and
signaling, as illustrated by IL-17 induction. Therefore, concerted
STAT5/T-bet/Eomes regulation controls homing, long-term maintenance, recall
responses, and resistance to polarization towards IL-17-producing CD8 T cells
while maintaining expression of an efficient type 1 CD8 cytotoxic T cell program 
(granzyme B(+), IFN-<U+03B3>(+)).

PMID: 24006458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. AIDS. 2013 Jul 31;27(12):1867-77. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e3283618487.

HIV immune activation drives increased Eomes expression in memory CD8 T cells in 
association with transcriptional downregulation of CD127.

Hasley RB(1), Hong C, Li W, Friesen T, Nakamura Y, Kim GY, Park JH, Hixon JA,
Durum S, Hu Z, Sneller MC, Oguariri R, Imamichi T, Lane HC, Catalfamo M.

Author information: 
(1)aCMRS/Laboratory of Immunoregulation, NIAID bExperimental Immunology Branch,
NCI, NIH, Bethesda cLaboratory of Molecular Immunoregulation, NCI, NIH, Frederick
dBiostatistics Research Branch, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda eCollaborative Clinical
Research Branch, NIAID, NIH, Frederick, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: During HIV infection distinct mechanisms drive immune activation of
the CD4 and CD8 T cells leading to CD4 T-cell depletion and expansion of the CD8 
T-cell pool. This immune activation is polyclonal and extends beyond HIV-specific
T cells. One consequence of this immune activation is a profound decrease in
IL-7Ra (CD127) expression on memory CD8 T cells. The mechanisms leading to this
are unknown and because of the potential impact of reduced IL-7 signaling in
memory T cells specific to HIV and other pathogens, in the present study we
examined the molecular mechanisms implicated in this downregulation of CD127.
METHODS: Membrane bound (mIL7RA) and soluble (sIL7RA) mRNA expression was
determined by qRT-PCR. CD127, Eomesodermin (Eomes) and T-bet expression in
healthy controls and HIV-infected patients were studied by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: CD127 downregulation occurs at the transcriptional level for both mIL7RA
and sIL7RA alternative spliced forms in the CD127 memory CD8 T cells. CD127
memory CD8 T cells exhibited increased Eomes expression and an 'effector-like'
gene profile. These changes were associated with higher HIV-RNA levels. Following
combination antiretroviral therapy (cART), there was an increase in CD127
expression over an extended period of time (>5 months) which was associated with 
decreased Eomes expression.
CONCLUSION: CD127 is downregulated at a transcriptional level in memory CD8 T
cells in association with upregulation of Eomes expression.

PMID: 23965471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Dec;43(12):3361-71. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343635. Epub 2013 Sep
10.

The POSH/JIP-1 scaffold network regulates TCR-mediated JNK1 signals and effector 
function in CD8(+) T cells.

Cunningham CA(1), Knudson KM, Peng BJ, Teixeiro E, Daniels MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology & Department of Surgery,
Center for Cellular and Molecular Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.

Signals from the T-cell recognition of antigen program effector functions are
necessary to clear infections and tumors. The JNK pathway is critically important
in regulating this process. In T lymphocytes, JNK1 and JNK2 have distinct
functions depending on their maturation state and cell-type. However, the
mechanisms that regulate their isoform-specific activity and function are still
unclear. Here, we identify plenty of SH3 (POSH) and JNK-interacting protein 1
(JIP-1) as a multiprotein scaffold network for TCR-mediated JNK1 activation in
CD8(+) T cells. Disruption of the POSH/JIP-1 complex led to profound defects in
the activation of JNK1, as well as deficient activation or induction of the
transcription factors c-Jun, T-bet, and Eomesodermin. Furthermore, disruption of 
the POSH/JIP complex in CD8(+) T cells resulted in impaired proliferation,
decreased cytokine expression, and the inability to control tumors. Collectively,
these data identify a mechanism for the specific regulation of TCR-dependent JNK1
activation and function that is key for CD8(+) T-cell responses.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23963642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cytotechnology. 2014 May;66(3):373-82. doi: 10.1007/s10616-013-9585-z. Epub 2013 
Aug 11.

NF<U+03BA>B attenuates IL-5 production and upregulates T-box transcription factors in
Th2-like T cells.

Hashiguchi M(1), Kobayashi A, Kashiwakura Y, Kojima H, Kanno Y, Kurosu A,
Tokudome S, Kobata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Dokkyo Medical University, 880
Kitakobayashi, Mibu, Tochigi, 321-0293, Japan, mhashi@dokkyomed.ac.jp.

IL-5 plays important roles in eosinophil differentiation, expansion, and
recruitment. The regulation of IL-5 seems critical for the treatment of
eosinophil-mediated allergic reactions. However, the precise mechanisms for IL-5 
regulation remain unknown. In this study, we investigated how IL-5 production is 
regulated. The transduction of GATA-3 into a murine T cell hybridoma resulted in 
acquiring the ability to produce IL-5 in response to an antigenic stimulus like
Th2 cells. This production was dependent on the cAMP-PKA pathway, but not on p38 
activation. Transduction of NIK largely impaired IL-5 production. RelA and RelB
similarly impaired IL-5 production. RelA decreased not only IL-5 protein amount
but mRNA. RelA also inhibited Il5-luciferase reporter activity. The transduction 
of GATA-3 decreased the expression of Tbx21 and Eomes, but the additional
transduction of RelA abrogated the decreased expression of GATA-3-induced Tbx21
and Eomes. Furthermore, the transduction of T-bet or Eomes into the
GATA-3-transduced T cell hybridoma impaired IL-5 production. These results
suggested that strong enhancement of the NF<U+03BA>B pathway downregulates IL-5
production and upregulates T-box protein expression to shift an immune response
from Th2 to inflammatory Th1.

PMCID: PMC3973803
PMID: 23934330  [PubMed]


161. Cell Rep. 2013 Aug 15;4(3):554-65. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.07.008. Epub 2013
Aug 8.

Low-affinity T cells are programmed to maintain normal primary responses but are 
impaired in their recall to low-affinity ligands.

Knudson KM(1), Goplen NP, Cunningham CA, Daniels MA, Teixeiro E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

T cell responses to low-affinity T cell receptor (TCR) ligands occur in the
context of infection, tumors, and autoimmunity despite diminished TCR signal
strength. The processes that enable such responses remain unclear. We show that
distinct mechanisms drive effector/memory development in high- and low-affinity T
cells. Low-affinity cells preferentially differentiate into memory precursors of 
a central memory phenotype that are interleukin (IL)-12R(lo), IL-7R(hi), and
Eomes(hi). Strikingly, in contrast to naive cells, low-affinity memory cells were
impaired in the response to low- but not high-affinity ligands, indicating that
low-affinity cells are programmed to generate diverse immune responses while
avoiding autoreactivity. Affinity and antigen dose directly correlated with
IL-12R signal input and T-bet but not with Eomes expression because low- affinity
signals were more potent inducers of Eomes at a high antigen dose. Our studies
explain how weak antigenic signals induce complete primary immune responses and
provide a framework for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23933258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Immunol. 2013 Dec;56(4):423-33. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.06.008. Epub 2013 
Aug 1.

Wnt signaling inhibits CTL memory programming.

Xiao Z(1), Sun Z, Smyth K, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD 20742 USA. Electronic address: xiao0028@umd.edu.

Induction of functional CTLs is one of the major goals for vaccine development
and cancer therapy. Inflammatory cytokines are critical for memory CTL
generation. Wnt signaling is important for CTL priming and memory formation, but 
its role in cytokine-driven memory CTL programming is unclear. We found that wnt 
signaling inhibited IL-12-driven CTL activation and memory programming. This
impaired memory CTL programming was attributed to up-regulation of eomes and
down-regulation of T-bet. Wnt signaling suppressed the mTOR pathway during CTL
activation, which was different to its effects on other cell types.
Interestingly, the impaired memory CTL programming by wnt was partially rescued
by mTOR inhibitor rapamycin. In conclusion, we found that crosstalk between wnt
and the IL-12 signaling inhibits T-bet and mTOR pathways and impairs memory
programming which can be recovered in part by rapamycin. In addition, direct
inhibition of wnt signaling during CTL activation does not affect CTL memory
programming. Therefore, wnt signaling may serve as a new tool for CTL
manipulation in autoimmune diseases and immune therapy for certain cancers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3783547
PMID: 23911398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Genesis. 2013 Oct;51(10):725-33. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22417. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Generation and characterization of a tamoxifen-inducible Eomes(CreER) mouse line.

Pimeisl IM(1), Tanriver Y, Daza RA, Vauti F, Hevner RF, Arnold HH, Arnold SJ.

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Centre, Renal Department, Centre for Clinical Research,
Freiburg, Germany.

Transgenic mouse lines expressing inducible forms of Cre-recombinase in a
tissue-specific manner are powerful genetic tools for studying aspects of
development and various processes in the adult. The T-box transcription factor
eomesodermin (Eomes) plays critical roles for maintenance and differentiation of 
different pools of stem and progenitor cells from early embryonic stages to
adulthood. These include trophoblast stem cells, epiblast cells during the
generation of the primary germ layers, neurogenic intermediate progenitor cells
in embryonic and adult cortical neurogenesis, and maturing natural killer and T
cells. Here, we report on the generation and analysis of an Eomes(CreER)
-targeted allele by placing the tamoxifen-activatable Cre-recombinase (CreER)
under the control of the Eomes genomic locus. We demonstrate that CreER
expression recapitulates endogenous Eomes transcription within different
progenitor cell populations. Tamoxifen administration specifically labels
Eomes-expressing cells and their progeny as demonstrated by crossing Eomes(CreER)
animals to different Cre-inducible reporter strains. In summary, this novel
Eomes(CreER) allele can be used as elegant genetic tool that allows to follow the
fate of Eomes-positive cells and to genetically manipulate them in a temporal
specific manner.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4112203
PMID: 23897762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Nov;43(11):3017-27. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343627. Epub 2013 Aug
27.

CD28 controls the development of innate-like CD8+ T cells by promoting the
functional maturation of NKT cells.

Yousefi M(1), Duplay P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut Armand-Frappier,
Université du Québec, Laval, Canada.

NK T cells(NKT cells) share functional characteristics and homing properties that
are distinct from conventional T cells. In this study, we investigated the
contribution of CD28 in the functional development of <U+03B3>d NKT and aß NKT cells in 
mice. We show that CD28 promotes the thymic maturation of promyelocytic leukemia 
zinc finger(+) IL-4(+) NKT cells and upregulation of LFA-1 expression on NKT
cells. We demonstrate that the developmental defect of <U+03B3>d NKT cells in
CD28-deficient mice is cell autonomous. Moreover, we show in both wild-type
C57BL/6 mice and in downstream of tyrosine kinase-1 transgenic mice, a mouse
model with increased numbers of <U+03B3>d NKT cells, that CD28-mediated regulation of
thymic IL-4(+) NKT cells promotes the differentiation of eomesodermin(+)
CD44(high) innate-like CD8(+) T cells. These findings reveal a previously
unappreciated mechanism by which CD28 controls NKT-cell homeostasis and the size 
of the innate-like CD8(+) T-cell pool.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23896981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Sep;35(3):890-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.06.030.
Epub 2013 Jul 12.

Transgene and immune gene expression following intramuscular injection of
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.) with DNA-releasing PLGA nano- and
microparticles.

Hølvold LB(1), Fredriksen BN, Bøgwald J, Dalmo RA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tromsø, Faculty of Biosciences, Fisheries & Economics, Norwegian
College of Fishery Science, 9037 Tromsø, Norway. linn.b.holvold@uit.no

The use of poly-(D,L-lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) particles as carriers for
DNA delivery has received considerable attention in mammalian studies. DNA
vaccination of fish has been shown to elicit durable transgene expression, but no
reports exist on intramuscular administration of PLGA-encapsulated plasmid DNA
(pDNA). We injected Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.) intramuscularly with a
plasmid vector containing a luciferase (Photinus pyralis) reporter gene as a)
naked pDNA, b) encapsulated into PLGA nano- (~320 nm) (NP) or microparticles (~4 
µm) (MP), c) in an oil-based formulation, or with empty particles of both sizes. 
The ability of the different pDNA-treatments to induce transgene expression was
analyzed through a 70-day experimental period. Anatomical distribution patterns
and depot effects were determined by tracking isotope labeled pDNA. Muscle, head 
kidney and spleen from all treatment groups were analyzed for proinflammatory
cytokines (TNF-a, IL-1ß), antiviral genes (IFN-a, Mx) and cytotoxic T-cell
markers (CD8, Eomes) at mRNA transcription levels at days 1, 2, 4 and 7.
Histopathological examinations were performed on injection site samples from days
2, 7 and 30. Injection of either naked pDNA or the oil-formulation was superior
to particle treatments for inducing transgene expression at early time-points.
Empty particles of both sizes were able to induce proinflammatory immune
responses as well as degenerative and inflammatory pathology at the injection
site. Microparticles demonstrated injection site depots and an inflammatory
pathology comparable to the oil-based formulation. In comparison, the
distribution of NP-encapsulated pDNA resembled that of naked pDNA, although
encapsulation into NPs significantly elevated the expression of antiviral genes
in all tissues. Together the results indicate that while naked pDNA is most
efficient for inducing transgene expression, the encapsulation of pDNA into NPs
up-regulates antiviral responses that could be of benefit to DNA vaccination.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23850547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Neurosci Res. 2013 Sep-Oct;77(1-2):42-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2013.06.004. Epub 
2013 Jul 4.

Prenatal exposure to suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid perturbs corticogenesis.

Yuniarti N(1), Juliandi B, MuhChyi C, Noguchi H, Sanosaka T, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation Research, Graduate School of Biological
Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Nara, Japan; Laboratory of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacy,
Faculty of Pharmacy, Universitas Gadjah Mada (UGM), Yogyakarta, Indonesia.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) is one of the epidrugs developed for
cancer treatment that works epigenetically by inhibiting histone deacetylases
(HDACs). SAHA has been reported to diffuse across the placenta and found in fetal
plasma in preclinical study, implying that it can influence fetus if taken by
pregnant cancer patients. However, report regarding this aspect and the study of 
in utero HDAC inhibition by SAHA especially on fate specification of neural
stem/progenitor cells within the developing mammalian cortex, is yet unavailable.
Here we show that transient exposure of SAHA to mouse embryos during prominent
neurogenic period resulted in an enhancement of cortical neurogenesis, which is
accompanied by an increased expression of proneuronal transcription factor
Neurog1. Neurogenesis was enhanced due to the increase number of proliferating
Tbr2+ intermediate progenitor cells following SAHA exposure. In this relation, we
observed that SAHA perturbed neonatal cortical lamination because of the
increased production of Cux1+ and Satb2+ upper-layer neurons, and decreased that 
of Ctip2+ deep-layer neurons. Furthermore, an upper-layer neuronal lineage
determinant Satb2 was also up-regulated, whereas those of deep-layer ones Fezf2
and Ctip2 were down-regulated by SAHA treatment. Taken together, our study
suggests that proper regulation of HDACs is important for precise embryonic
corticogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23831515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Aug;132(2):400-11.e9. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2013.05.029. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) mutations underlying
autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome impair human CD8(+) T-cell memory formation
and function.

Ives ML(1), Ma CS, Palendira U, Chan A, Bustamante J, Boisson-Dupuis S, Arkwright
PD, Engelhard D, Averbuch D, Magdorf K, Roesler J, Peake J, Wong M, Adelstein S, 
Choo S, Smart JM, French MA, Fulcher DA, Cook MC, Picard C, Durandy A, Tsumura M,
Kobayashi M, Uzel G, Casanova JL, Tangye SG, Deenick EK.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
Darlinghurst, Australia.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Aug;132(2):412-3.

BACKGROUND: The capacity of CD8(+) T cells to control infections and mediate
antitumor immunity requires the development and survival of effector and memory
cells. IL-21 has emerged as a potent inducer of CD8(+) T-cell effector function
and memory development in mouse models of infectious disease. However, the role
of IL-21 and associated signaling pathways in protective CD8(+) T-cell immunity
in human subjects is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine which signaling pathways mediate the effects of
IL-21 on human CD8(+) T cells and whether defects in these pathways contribute to
disease pathogenesis in patients with primary immunodeficiencies caused by
mutations in components of the IL-21 signaling cascade.
METHODS: Human primary immunodeficiencies resulting from monogenic mutations
provide a unique opportunity to assess the requirement for particular molecules
in regulating human lymphocyte function. Lymphocytes from patients with
loss-of-function mutations in signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 
(STAT1), STAT3, or IL-21 receptor (IL21R) were used to assess the respective
roles of these genes in human CD8(+) T-cell differentiation in vivo and in vitro.
RESULTS: Mutations in STAT3 and IL21R, but not STAT1, led to a decrease in
multiple memory CD8(+) T-cell subsets in vivo, indicating that STAT3 signaling,
possibly downstream of IL-21R, regulates the memory cell pool. Furthermore, STAT3
was important for inducing the lytic machinery in IL-21-stimulated naive CD8(+) T
cells. However, this defect was overcome by T-cell receptor engagement.
CONCLUSION: The IL-21R/STAT3 pathway is required for many aspects of human CD8(+)
T-cell behavior but in some cases can be compensated by other signals. This helps
explain the relatively mild susceptibility to viral disease observed in STAT3-
and IL-21R-deficient subjects.

Published by Mosby, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3785237
PMID: 23830147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 27;8(6):e67401. Print 2013.

T-Bet and Eomes Regulate the Balance between the Effector/Central Memory T Cells 
versus Memory Stem Like T Cells.

Li G(1), Yang Q, Zhu Y, Wang HR, Chen X, Zhang X, Lu B.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Laboratory of Jiangsu Province, Jiangsu Institute of
Clinical Immunology, Institute of Medical Biotechnology, Soochow University,
Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.

Memory T cells are composed of effector, central, and memory stem cells. Previous
studies have implicated that both T-bet and Eomes are involved in the generation 
of effector and central memory CD8 T cells. The exact role of these transcription
factors in shaping the memory T cell pool is not well understood, particularly
with memory stem T cells. Here, we demonstrate that both T-bet or Eomes are
required for elimination of established tumors by adoptively transferred CD8 T
cells. We also examined the role of T-bet and Eomes in the generation of
tumor-specific memory T cell subsets upon adoptive transfer. We showed that
combined T-bet and Eomes deficiency resulted in a severe reduction in the number 
of effector/central memory T cells but an increase in the percentage of
CD62L(high)CD44(low) Sca-1(+) T cells which were similar to the phenotype of
memory stem T cells. Despite preserving large numbers of phenotypic memory stem T
cells, the lack of both of T-bet and Eomes resulted in a profound defect in
antitumor memory responses, suggesting T-bet and Eomes are crucial for the
antitumor function of these memory T cells. Our study establishes that T-bet and 
Eomes cooperate to promote the phenotype of effector/central memory CD8 T cell
versus that of memory stem like T cells.

PMCID: PMC3694876
PMID: 23826287  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


169. J Vet Sci. 2014;15(1):73-80. Epub 2013 Jun 30.

A simplified one-step nuclear transfer procedure alters the gene expression
patterns and developmental potential of cloned porcine embryos.

Park SK(1), Roh S, Park JI.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Reprogramming and Embryo Biotechnology Laboratory, Dental Research
Institute, Seoul National University School of Dentistry, Seoul 110-749, Korea.

Various somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) techniques for mammalian species
have been developed to adjust species-specific procedures to oocyte-associated
differences among species. Species-specific SCNT protocols may result in
different expression levels of developmentally important genes that may affect
embryonic development and pregnancy. In the present study, porcine oocytes were
treated with demecolcine that facilitated enucleation with protruding genetic
material. Enucleation and donor cell injection were performed either
simultaneously with a single pipette (simplified one-step SCNT; SONT) or
separately with different pipettes (conventional two-step SCNT; CTNT) as the
control procedure. After blastocysts from both groups were cultured in vitro, the
expression levels of developmentally important genes (OCT4, NANOG, EOMES, CDX2,
GLUT-1, PolyA, and HSP70) were analyzed by real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction. Both the developmental rate according to blastocyst stage as well
as the expression levels CDX2, EOMES, and HSP70 were elevated with SONT compared 
to CTNT. The genes with elevated expression are known to influence trophectoderm 
formation and heat stress-induced arrest. These results showed that our SONT
technique improved the development of SCNT porcine embryos, and increased the
expression of genes that are important for placental formation and stress-induced
arrest.

PMCID: PMC3973768
PMID: 23820223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Exp Med. 2013 Jul 1;210(7):1463-79. doi: 10.1084/jem.20112495. Epub 2013 Jun
17.

N-ras couples antigen receptor signaling to Eomesodermin and to functional CD8+ T
cell memory but not to effector differentiation.

Iborra S(1), Ramos M, Arana DM, Lázaro S, Aguilar F, Santos E, López D,
Fernández-Malavé E, Del Val M.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC/Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, E-28049 Madrid, Spain.

Signals from the TCR that specifically contribute to effector versus memory CD8<U+207A> 
T cell differentiation are poorly understood. Using mice and adoptively
transferred T lymphocytes lacking the small GTPase N-ras, we found that
N-ras-deficient CD8<U+207A> T cells differentiate efficiently into antiviral primary
effectors but have a severe defect in generating protective memory cells. This
defect was rescued, although only partly, by rapamycin-mediated inhibition of
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) in vivo. The memory defect correlated with a
marked impairment in vitro and in vivo of the antigen-mediated early induction of
T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes), whereas T-bet was unaffected.
Besides N-ras, early Eomes induction in vitro required phosphoinositide 3-kinase 
(PI3K)-AKT but not extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activation, and it
was largely insensitive to rapamycin. Consistent with N-ras coupling Eomes to T
cell memory, retrovirally enforced expression of Eomes in N-ras-deficient CD8<U+207A> T 
cells effectively rescued their memory differentiation. Thus, our study
identifies a critical role for N-ras as a TCR-proximal regulator of Eomes for
early determination of the CD8<U+207A> T cell memory fate.

PMCID: PMC3698526
PMID: 23776078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013 Oct;132(4):811-20.e1-5. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2013.04.033. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

IL-2-inducible T-cell kinase modulates TH2-mediated allergic airway inflammation 
by suppressing IFN-<U+03B3> in naive CD4+ T cells.

Kannan AK(1), Sahu N, Mohanan S, Mohinta S, August A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a predominantly TH2 cell-dominated inflammatory disease
characterized by airway inflammation and a major public health concern affecting 
millions of persons. The Tec family tyrosine kinase IL-2-inducible T-cell kinase 
(Itk) is primarily expressed in T cells and critical for the function and
differentiation of TH cells. Itk(-/-) mice have a defective TH2 response and are 
not susceptible to allergic asthma.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to better understand the role of Itk signaling in TH
differentiation programs and in the development and molecular pathology of
allergic asthma.
METHODS: Using a murine model of allergic airway inflammation, we dissected the
role of Itk in regulating TH cell differentiation through genetic ablation of
critical genes, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, and house dust mite-driven 
allergic airway inflammation.
RESULTS: Peripheral naive Itk(-/-) CD4(+) T cells have substantially increased
transcripts and expression of the prototypic TH1 genes Eomesodermin, IFN-<U+03B3>, T-box
transcription factor (T-bet), and IL-12Rß1. Removal of IFN-<U+03B3> on the Itk(-/-)
background rescues expression of TH2-related genes in TH cells and allergic
airway inflammation in Itk(-/-) mice. Furthermore, small hairpin RNA-mediated
knockdown of Itk in human peripheral blood T cells results in increased
expression of mRNA for IFN-<U+03B3> and T-bet and reduction in expression of IL-4.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that Itk signals suppress the expression of
IFN-<U+03B3> in naive CD4(+) T cells, which in a positive feed-forward loop regulates
the expression of TH1 factors, such as T-bet and Eomesodermin, and suppress
development of TH2 cells and allergic airway inflammation.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4033298
PMID: 23768572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Immunity. 2013 Jun 27;38(6):1250-60. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.05.009. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Effector-like CD8<U+207A> T cells in the memory population mediate potent protective
immunity.

Olson JA(1), McDonald-Hyman C, Jameson SC, Hamilton SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Center for Immunology,
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN 55414, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2013 Jun 27;38(6):1090-1.

The CD8<U+207A> memory T cell population is heterogeneous, and it is unclear which
subset(s) optimally mediate the central goal of the immune system-protection
against infection. Here we investigate the protective capacities of CD8<U+207A> T cell
subsets present at the memory stage of the immune response. We show that a
population of CD8<U+207A> T cells bearing markers associated with effector cells
(KLRG1(hi), CD27(lo), T-bet(hi), Eomes(lo)) persisted to the memory phase and
provided optimal control of Listeria monocytogenes and vaccinia virus, despite
weak recall proliferative responses. After antigen-specific boosting, this
population formed the predominant secondary memory subset and maintained superior
pathogen control. The effector-like memory subset displayed a distinct pattern of
tissue distribution and localization within the spleen, and their enhanced
capacity to eliminate Listeria involved specialized utilization of cytolysis.
Together, these data suggest that long-lived effector CD8<U+207A> T cells are optimal
for protective immunity against certain pathogens.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3703254
PMID: 23746652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cereb Cortex. 2014 Nov;24(11):2822-34. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bht126. Epub 2013 May 
29.

Characterization of enhancers active in the mouse embryonic cerebral cortex
suggests Sox/Pou cis-regulatory logics and heterogeneity of cortical progenitors.

Bery A(1), Martynoga B(2), Guillemot F(2), Joly JS(3), Rétaux S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Development and Evolution of the Forebrain. (2)MRC-NIMR, London, UK.
(3)Equipe Morphogenesis of the Chordate Nervous System, UPR3294 N&D, Institut de 
Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France and.

We aimed to identify cis-regulatory elements that control gene expression in
progenitors of the cerebral cortex. A list of 975 putative enhancers were
retrieved from a ChIP-Seq experiment performed in NS5 mouse stem cells with
antibodies to Sox2, Brn2/Pou3f2, or Brn1/Pou3f3. Through a selection pipeline
including gene ontology and expression pattern, we reduced the number of
candidate enhancer sequences to 20. Ex vivo electroporation of green fluorescent 
pProtein (GFP) reporter constructs in the telencephalon of mouse embryos showed
that 35% of the 20 selected candidate sequences displayed enhancer activity in
the developing cortex at E13.5. In silico transcription factor binding site
(TFBS) searches and mutagenesis experiments showed that enhancer activity is
related to the presence of Sox/Pou TFBS pairs in the sequence. Comparative
genomic analyses showed that enhancer activity is not related to the evolutionary
conservation of the sequence. Finally, the combination of in utero
electroporation of GFP reporter constructs with immunostaining for Tbr2 (basal
progenitor marker) and phospho-histoneH3 (mitotic activity marker) demonstrated
that each enhancer is specifically active in precise subpopulations of
progenitors in the cortical germinal zone, highlighting the heterogeneity of
these progenitors in terms of cis-regulation.

© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 23720416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Exp Med. 2013 Jun 3;210(6):1189-200. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130392. Epub 2013 May
27.

Differentiation of CD8 memory T cells depends on Foxo1.

Hess Michelini R(1), Doedens AL, Goldrath AW, Hedrick SM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Section, Division of Biological Sciences, Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA.

The forkhead O transcription factors (FOXO) integrate a range of extracellular
signals, including growth factor signaling, inflammation, oxidative stress, and
nutrient availability, to substantially alter the program of gene expression and 
modulate cell survival, cell cycle progression, and many yet to be unraveled cell
type-specific responses. Naive antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells undergo a rapid
expansion and arming of effector function within days of pathogen exposure. In
addition, by the peak of expansion, they form precursors to memory T cells
capable of self-renewal and indefinite survival. Using lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus Armstrong to probe the response to infection, we found
that Foxo1(-/-) CD8(+) T cells expand normally with no defects in effector
differentiation, but continue to exhibit characteristics of effector T cells long
after antigen clearance. The KLRG1(lo) CD8(+) T cells that are normally enriched 
for memory-precursor cells retain Granzyme B and CD69 expression, and fail to
up-regulate TCF7, EOMES, and other memory signature genes. As a correlate,
Foxo1(-/-) CD8(+) T cells were virtually unable to expand upon secondary
infection. Collectively, these results demonstrate an intrinsic role for FOXO1 in
establishing the post-effector memory program that is essential to forming
long-lived memory cells capable of immune reactivation.

PMCID: PMC3674697
PMID: 23712431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Neurosci. 2013 May 22;33(21):9122-39. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0791-13.2013.

Dynamic interactions between intermediate neurogenic progenitors and radial glia 
in embryonic mouse neocortex: potential role in Dll1-Notch signaling.

Nelson BR(1), Hodge RD, Bedogni F, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, Washington 98101,USA. bneuro@uw.edu or rhevner@uw.edu

The mammalian neocortical progenitor cell niche is composed of a diverse
repertoire of neuroepithelial cells, radial glia (RG), and intermediate
neurogenic progenitors (INPs). Previously, live-cell imaging experiments have
proved crucial in identifying these distinct progenitor populations, especially
INPs, which amplify neural output by undergoing additional rounds of
proliferation before differentiating into new neurons. INPs also provide feedback
to the RG pool by serving as a source of Delta-like 1 (Dll1), a key ligand for
activating Notch signaling in neighboring cells, a well-known mechanism for
maintaining RG identity. While much is known about Dll1-Notch signaling at the
molecular level, little is known about how this cell-cell contact dependent
feedback is transmitted at the cellular level. To investigate how RG and INPs
might interact to convey Notch signals, we used high-resolution live-cell
multiphoton microscopy (MPM) to directly observe cellular interactions and
dynamics, in conjunction with Notch-pathway specific reporters in the neocortical
neural stem cell niche in organotypic brain slices from embryonic mice. We found 
that INPs and RG interact via dynamic and transient elongate processes, some
apparently long-range (extending from the subventricular zone to the ventricular 
zone), and some short-range (filopodia-like). Gene expression profiling of RG and
INPs revealed further progenitor cell diversification, including different
subpopulations of Hes1+ and/or Hes5+ RG, and Dll1+ and/or Dll3+ INPs. Thus, the
embryonic progenitor niche includes a network of dynamic cell-cell interactions, 
using different combinations of Notch signaling molecules to maintain and likely 
diversify progenitor pools.

PMCID: PMC3716275
PMID: 23699523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Genes Dev. 2013 May 1;27(9):997-1002. doi: 10.1101/gad.215152.113.

The T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin is essential for AVE induction in the
mouse embryo.

Nowotschin S(1), Costello I, Piliszek A, Kwon GS, Mao CA, Klein WH, Robertson EJ,
Hadjantonakis AK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10065, USA.

Reciprocal inductive interactions between the embryonic and extraembryonic
tissues establish the anterior-posterior (AP) axis of the early mouse embryo. The
anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) signaling center emerges at the distal tip of
the embryo at embryonic day 5.5 and translocates to the prospective anterior side
of the embryo. The process of AVE induction and migration are poorly understood. 
Here we demonstrate that the T-box gene Eomesodermin (Eomes) plays an essential
role in AVE recruitment, in part by directly activating the homeobox
transcription factor Lhx1. Thus, Eomes function in the visceral endoderm (VE)
initiates an instructive transcriptional program controlling AP identity.

PMCID: PMC3656330
PMID: 23651855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Cell Rep. 2013 May 30;3(5):1398-406. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.03.037. Epub 2013
Apr 25.

MicroRNA cluster miR-17-92 regulates neural stem cell expansion and transition to
intermediate progenitors in the developing mouse neocortex.

Bian S(1), Hong J, Li Q, Schebelle L, Pollock A, Knauss JL, Garg V, Sun T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, Box 60, New York, NY 10065, USA.

During development of the embryonic neocortex, tightly regulated expansion of
neural stem cells (NSCs) and their transition to intermediate progenitors (IPs)
are critical for normal cortical formation and function. Molecular mechanisms
that regulate NSC expansion and transition remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate
that the microRNA (miRNA) miR-17-92 cluster is required for maintaining proper
populations of cortical radial glial cells (RGCs) and IPs through repression of
Pten and Tbr2 protein. Knockout of miR-17-92 and its paralogs specifically in the
developing neocortex restricts NSC proliferation, suppresses RGC expansion, and
promotes transition of RGCs to IPs. Moreover, Pten and Tbr2 protectors
specifically block silencing activities of endogenous miR-17-92 and control
proper numbers of RGCs and IPs in vivo. Our results demonstrate a critical role
for miRNAs in promoting NSC proliferation and modulating the cell-fate decision
of generating distinct neural progenitors in the developing neocortex.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3762321
PMID: 23623502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 31;288(22):15537-46. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.430207. Epub
2013 Apr 22.

60-kDa Tat-interactive protein (TIP60) positively regulates Th-inducing POK
(ThPOK)-mediated repression of eomesodermin in human CD4+ T cells.

Li Y(1), Tsun A, Gao Z, Han Z, Gao Y, Li Z, Lin F, Wang Y, Wei G, Yao Z, Li B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Unit of Molecular
Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 411 Hefei Road, Shanghai 200025, China.

The abundant expression of IFN<U+03B3> in Th-inducing POK (ThPOK)-deficient CD4(+) T
cells requires the activation of Eomesodermin (Eomes); however, the underlying
mechanism of this phenomenon remains unclear. Here we report that ThPOK binds
directly to the promoter region of the Eomes gene to repress its expression in
CD4(+) T cells. We identified the histone acetyltransferase TIP60 as a
co-repressor of ThPOK-target genes, where ectopically expressed TIP60 increased
ThPOK protein stability by promoting its acetylation at its Lys(360) residue to
then augment the transcriptional repression of Eomes. Moreover, knockdown of
endogenous TIP60 abolished the stabilization of ThPOK in CD4(+) T cells, which
led to the transcriptional activation of Eomes and increased production of IFN<U+03B3>. 
Our results reveal a novel pathway by which TIP60 and ThPOK synergistically
suppresses Eomes function and IFN<U+03B3> production, which could contribute to the
regulation of inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3668715
PMID: 23609452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Reprod Dev. 2013 May;80(5):371-83. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22171. Epub 2013 Apr 19.

Down-regulation of interferon tau gene transcription with a transcription factor,
EOMES.

Sakurai T(1), Bai H, Bai R, Sato D, Arai M, Okuda K, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Godkin
JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding and Reproduction, Graduate School of
Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
asaku@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Interferon tau (IFNT), produced for a short interval during early pregnancy by
the ruminant embryonic trophectoderm, is essential for the maintenance of early
pregnancy, but the mechanism by which it is transcriptionally regulated has not
been fully determined. To identify a transcription factor(s) involved in the
down-regulation of IFNT genes, mRNAs for various known transcription factors were
investigated by reverse-transcriptase and real-time PCR in conceptus tissues
collected on Days 15, 17, and 21, or Days 17, 20, and 22 of ovine or bovine
pregnancy, respectively. In particular, the T-box protein eomesodermin (EOMES)
exhibited high mRNA expression in Day 17 or 22 ovine or bovine conceptuses.
Interaction between EOMES and the identified transcription factors was studied
using transient transfection, revealing that ovine/bovine IFNT-reporter
transactivation was down-regulated by EOMES. Transcription factor interactions
with EOMES were further studied through immunoprecipitation, demonstrating an
association between EOMES and cAMP-response element binding protein
(CREB)-binding protein (CREBBP). Uterine flushing media collected from cyclic or 
early pregnancy animals were added to bovine trophoblast CT-1 cells cultured on
type-I collagen (monoculture) or bovine uterine epithelial cells (coculture) in
an attempt to regulate EOMES expression. In the coculture, but not the
monoculture, addition of uterine flushing from Day 17 pregnant animals resulted
in increased EOMES expression in CT-1 cells. These results suggest that as
conceptuses attach to the uterine epithelium, IFNT gene transcription is
down-regulated by an increase in EOMES expression and EOMES-CREBBP binding in the
attached trophoblast cells.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23606646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Neurosci. 2013 Apr 17;33(16):6766-75. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0128-13.2013.

Bone morphogenic protein signaling is a major determinant of dentate development.

Choe Y(1), Kozlova A, Graf D, Pleasure SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Programs in Neuroscience and Developmental Stem Cell 
Biology, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell
Research, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158, USA.

To understand life-long neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus (DG), characterizing
dentate neural stem cells and the signals controlling their development are
crucial. In the present study, we show that bone morphogenic protein (Bmp)
signaling is a critical regulator of embryonic dentate development, required for 
initiating neurogenesis in embryonic DG progenitors and required for the
establishment of dentate neural stem cells postnatally. We tested the hypothesis 
that Bmp signaling regulates dentate development in part by controlling the
expression of Lef1, a Wnt responsive transcription factor expressed in dentate
stem cells and absolutely required for dentate granule cell production. Bmp
activation through the Acvr1 receptor induced Lef1 expression and neurogenesis in
the embryonic DG. Ectopic expression of Bmp7 in the embryonic midline increased
DG neurogenesis and inhibition of local Bmp signaling decreased embryonic DG
neurogenesis. Mice with selective loss of Bmp expression due to defective
meningeal development or with selective conditional deletion of meningeal Bmp7
also have dentate developmental defects. Conditional deletion of Activin receptor
type I (Acvr1) or Smad4 (a downstream target nuclear effector of Bmp signaling)
in DG neural stem cells resulted in defects in the postnatal subgranular zone and
reduced neurogenesis. These results suggest that Acvr1-mediated meningeal Bmp
signaling regulates Lef1 expression in the dentate, regulating embryonic DG
neurogenesis, DG neural stem cell niche formation, and maintenance.

PMCID: PMC3684166
PMID: 23595735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. EMBO J. 2013 May 15;32(10):1393-408. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.78. Epub 2013 Apr
12.

The histone demethylase Jmjd3 sequentially associates with the transcription
factors Tbx3 and Eomes to drive endoderm differentiation.

Kartikasari AE(1), Zhou JX, Kanji MS, Chan DN, Sinha A, Grapin-Botton A, Magnuson
MA, Lowry WE, Bhushan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 
90095-7073, USA.

Stem cell differentiation depends on transcriptional activation driven by
lineage-specific regulators as well as changes in chromatin organization.
However, the coordination of these events is poorly understood. Here, we show
that T-box proteins team up with chromatin modifying enzymes to drive the
expression of the key lineage regulator, Eomes during endodermal differentiation 
of embryonic stem (ES) cells. The Eomes locus is maintained in a
transcriptionally poised configuration in ES cells. During early differentiation 
steps, the ES cell factor Tbx3 associates with the histone demethylase Jmjd3 at
the enhancer element of the Eomes locus to allow enhancer-promoter interactions. 
This spatial reorganization of the chromatin primes the cells to respond to
Activin signalling, which promotes the binding of Jmjd3 and Eomes to its own
bivalent promoter region to further stimulate Eomes expression in a positive
feedback loop. In addition, Eomes activates a transcriptional network of core
regulators of endodermal differentiation. Our results demonstrate that Jmjd3
sequentially associates with two T-box factors, Tbx3 and Eomes to drive stem cell
differentiation towards the definitive endoderm lineage.

PMCID: PMC3655467
PMID: 23584530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Transcription. 2013 May-Jun;4(3):92-6. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Transient Mesp1 expression: a driver of cardiac cell fate determination.

Liu Y(1), Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry; University of Houston; Houston, TX
USA.

Mesp1 sits on the tip of the cardiac regulatory hierarchy, recent evidences
support that it is regulated by stem cell factor Oct4, early gastrulation signal 
canonical Wnts and a couple of T-box factors, T and Eomes. With other
transcription factors, Mesp1 programs/reprograms human cells toward
cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC4042590
PMID: 23584093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 23;110(17):7056-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1219385110. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

MicroRNA-92b regulates the development of intermediate cortical progenitors in
embryonic mouse brain.

Nowakowski TJ(1), Fotaki V, Pollock A, Sun T, Pratt T, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD,
United Kingdom. tomasz.j.nowakowski@gmail.com

Cerebral cortical neurons arise from radial glia (direct neurogenesis) or from
intermediate progenitors (indirect neurogenesis); intriguingly, the sizes of
intermediate progenitor populations and the cortices they generate correlate
across species. The generation of intermediate progenitors is regulated by the
transcription factor Tbr2, whose expression marks these cells. We investigated
how this mechanism might be controlled. We found that acute blockade of mature
microRNA biosynthesis in murine cortical progenitors caused a rapid cell
autonomous increase in numbers of Tbr2-expressing cells. Acute microRNA-92b
(miR-92b) gain of function caused rapid reductions in numbers of Tbr2-expressing 
cells and proliferating intermediate progenitors. Acute miR-92b loss of function 
had opposite effects. These findings indicate that miR-92b limits the production 
of intermediate cortical progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3637761
PMID: 23569256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1658. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2646.

Ets2-dependent trophoblast signalling is required for gastrulation progression
after primitive streak initiation.

Polydorou C(1), Georgiades P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, University Campus, PO
Box 20537, Nicosia 1678, Cyprus.

Although extraembryonic ectoderm trophoblast signals the embryo for primitive
streak initiation, a prerequisite for gastrulation, it is unknown whether it also
signals for the progression of gastrulation after primitive streak initiation.
Here, using Ets2-/- mice, we show that trophoblast signalling is also required in
vivo for primitive streak elongation, completion of intraembryonic mesoderm
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and the development of anterior primitive
streak derivatives such as the node. We show that Ets2-dependent trophoblast
signalling is required for the maintenance of high levels of Nodal and Wnt3
expression in the epiblast and for the induction of Snail expression in the
primitive streak, between embryonic day 6.3 and 6.7. Within extraembryonic
ectoderm trophoblast, Ets2 maintains the expression of the transcription factors 
Elf5, Cdx2 and Eomes, and that of the signalling molecule Bmp4. We propose a
model that provides a genetic explanation as to how Ets2 in trophoblast mediates 
the progression of gastrulation within the epiblast.

PMID: 23552073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Exp Med. 2013 Apr 8;210(4):743-55. doi: 10.1084/jem.20121190. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Systemic 4-1BB activation induces a novel T cell phenotype driven by high
expression of Eomesodermin.

Curran MA(1), Geiger TL, Montalvo W, Kim M, Reiner SL, Al-Shamkhani A, Sun JC,
Allison JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

4-1BB agonist antibody treatment induces a population of KLRG1(+) T cells that
infiltrate melanoma tumors. We investigated the origin and function of these
cells, as well as their place within established T cell paradigms. We find that
these T cells, particularly the CD4 lineage, represent a novel phenotype
characterized by enhanced, multipotent cytotoxicity. Distinct from described
polarities, this T cell phenotype is driven by the T-box transcription factor
Eomesodermin. Formation of this phenotype requires 4-1BB signaling on both T and 
antigen-presenting cells and the resulting production of the cytokines IL-27,
IL-15, and IL-10. Furthermore, we find CD4(+) T cells bearing the signature
features of this phenotype in the livers of mice infected with both bacterial and
viral intracellular pathogens, suggesting a role for these cells in infectious
immunity. These T cells constitute a novel phenotype that resolves multiple
questions associated with 4-1BB activation, including how 4-1BB enhances
tumor-specific cytotoxicity and how 4-1BB can promote tumor immunity while
repressing autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3620352
PMID: 23547098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Brain Struct Funct. 2014 Mar;219(2):719-49. doi: 10.1007/s00429-013-0531-9. Epub 
2013 Mar 16.

Differential distribution of phospholipase C beta isoforms and diaglycerol
kinase-beta in rodents cerebella corroborates the division of unipolar brush
cells into two major subtypes.

Sekerková G(1), Watanabe M, Martina M, Mugnaini E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, 5-465 Searle bldg. 320 E. Superior str, Chicago, IL,
60611, USA, g-sekerkova@northwestern.edu.

Sublineage diversification of specific neural cell classes occurs in complex as
well as simply organized regions of the central and peripheral nervous systems;
the significance of the phenomenon, however, remains insufficiently understood.
The unipolar brush cells (UBCs) are glutamatergic cerebellar interneurons that
occur at high density in vestibulocerebellum. As they are classified into subsets
that differ in chemical phenotypes, intrinsic properties, and lobular
distribution, they represent a valuable neuronal model to study subclass
diversification. In this study, we show that cerebellar UBCs of adult rats and
mice form two subclasses-type I and type II UBCs-defined by somatodendritic
expression of calretinin (CR), mGluR1a, phospholipases PLCß1 and PLCß4, and
diacylglycerol kinase-beta (DGKß). We demonstrate that PLCß1 is associated only
with the CR(+) type I UBCs, while PLCß4 and DGKß are exclusively present in
mGluR1a(+) type II UBCs. Notably, all PLCß4(+) UBCs, representing about 2/3 of
entire UBC population, also express mGluR1a. Furthermore, our data show that the 
sum of CR(+) type I UBCs and mGluR1a(+) type II UBCs accounts for the entire UBC 
class identified with Tbr2 immunolabeling. The two UBC subtypes also show a very 
different albeit somehow overlapping topographical distribution as illustrated by
detailed cerebellar maps in this study. Our data not only complement and extend
the previous knowledge on the diversity and subclass specificity of the chemical 
phenotypes within the UBC population, but also provide a new angle to the
understanding of the signaling networks in type I and type II UBCs.

PMCID: PMC3714372
PMID: 23503970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Immunol. 2013 Apr 1;190(7):3207-15. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201556. Epub 2013
Mar 1.

Differential localization of T-bet and Eomes in CD8 T cell memory populations.

McLane LM(1), Banerjee PP, Cosma GL, Makedonas G, Wherry EJ, Orange JS, Betts MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

In mice, two T-box transcription factors, T-box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and 
eomesodermin (Eomes), drive the differentiation of CD8 T cell lineages; however, 
little is known regarding their role in human CD8 T cell differentiation. In this
study, we characterized T-bet and Eomes expression and localization within human 
CD8 memory T cell populations. We find that T-bet and Eomes are broadly expressed
in human memory CD8 T cells, with increasing levels of T-bet and Eomes strongly
correlating with differentiation from central memory to effector memory and
effector subpopulations. In resting T cells, T-bet levels directly correlate to
subcellular localization, with a higher propensity for nuclear expression of
T-bet within T-bet(hi) cells and predominantly cytoplasmic expression in
T-bet(lo) cells. In addition, Eomes is also localized to either the nucleus or
the cytoplasm. Upon TCR stimulation, the percentage of T cells that express T-bet
dramatically increases, whereas the percentage of cells expressing Eomes remains 
largely unchanged across all memory populations. Of interest, T-bet, but not
Eomes, relocalizes to the nucleus in the majority of cells across all populations
within 24 h post stimulation. These data indicate that T-bet and Eomes are likely
regulated at the level of subcellular localization, potentially via different
mechanisms. Together, these findings suggest a novel model for CD8 T cell
differentiation in humans that is based on the localization of T-bet and Eomes.

PMCID: PMC3608800
PMID: 23455505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Neurosci. 2013 Feb 27;33(9):4165-80. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4185-12.2013.

Tbr2 expression in Cajal-Retzius cells and intermediate neuronal progenitors is
required for morphogenesis of the dentate gyrus.

Hodge RD(1), Garcia AJ 3rd, Elsen GE, Nelson BR, Mussar KE, Reiner SL, Ramirez
JM, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98101, USA. rdhodge@uw.edu or rhevner@uw.edu

The dentate gyrus (DG) is a unique cortical region whose protracted development
spans the embryonic and early postnatal periods. DG development involves
large-scale reorganization of progenitor cell populations, ultimately leading to 
the establishment of the subgranular zone neurogenic niche. In the developing DG,
the T-box transcription factor Tbr2 is expressed in both Cajal-Retzius cells
derived from the cortical hem that guide migration of progenitors and neurons to 
the DG, and intermediate neuronal progenitors born in the dentate neuroepithelium
that give rise to granule neurons. Here we show that in mice Tbr2 is required for
proper migration of Cajal-Retzius cells to the DG; and, in the absence of Tbr2,
formation of the hippocampal fissure is abnormal, leading to aberrant development
of the transhilar radial glial scaffold and impaired migration of progenitors and
neuroblasts to the developing DG. Furthermore, loss of Tbr2 results in decreased 
expression of Cxcr4 in migrating cells, leading to a premature burst of granule
neurogenesis during early embryonic development accompanied by increased cell
death in mutant animals. Formation of the transient subpial neurogenic zone was
abnormal in Tbr2 conditional knock-outs, and the stem cell population in the DG
was depleted before proper establishment of the subgranular zone. These studies
indicate that Tbr2 is explicitly required for morphogenesis of the DG and
participates in multiple aspects of the intricate developmental process of this
structure.

PMCID: PMC3623668
PMID: 23447624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Jun;93(6):825-36. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0912438. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Increased T-bet is associated with senescence of influenza virus-specific CD8 T
cells in aged humans.

Dolfi DV(1), Mansfield KD, Polley AM, Doyle SA, Freeman GJ, Pircher H, Schmader
KE, Wherry EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, Department of Microbiology, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Comment in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Jun;93(6):819-21.

Aged individuals have increased morbidity and mortality following influenza and
other viral infections, despite previous exposure or vaccination. Mouse and human
studies suggest increased senescence and/or exhaustion of influenza
virus-specific CD8 T cells with advanced age. However, neither the relationship
between senescence and exhaustion nor the underlying transcriptional pathways
leading to decreased function of influenza virus-specific cellular immunity in
elderly humans are well-defined. Here, we demonstrate that increased percentages 
of CD8 T cells from aged individuals express CD57 and KLRG1, along with PD-1 and 
other inhibitory receptors, markers of senescence, or exhaustion, respectively.
Expression of T-box transcription factors, T-bet and Eomes, were also increased
in CD8 T cells from aged subjects and correlated closely with expression of CD57 
and KLRG1. Influenza virus-specific CD8 T cells from aged individuals exhibited
decreased functionality with corresponding increases in CD57, KLRG1, and T-bet, a
molecular regulator of terminal differentiation. However, in contrast to total
CD8 T cells, influenza virus-specific CD8 T cells had altered expression of
inhibitory receptors, including lower PD-1, in aged compared with young subjects.
Thus, our data suggest a prominent role for senescence and/or terminal
differentiation for influenza virus-specific CD8 T cells in elderly subjects.

PMCID: PMC4051188
PMID: 23440501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 5;110(10):4081-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1209076110. Epub 2013 Feb 19.

The protomap is propagated to cortical plate neurons through an Eomes-dependent
intermediate map.

Elsen GE(1), Hodge RD, Bedogni F, Daza RA, Nelson BR, Shiba N, Reiner SL, Hevner 
RF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

The cortical area map is initially patterned by transcription factor (TF)
gradients in the neocortical primordium, which define a "protomap" in the
embryonic ventricular zone (VZ). However, mechanisms that propagate regional
identity from VZ progenitors to cortical plate (CP) neurons are unknown. Here we 
show that the VZ, subventricular zone (SVZ), and CP contain distinct molecular
maps of regional identity, reflecting different gene expression gradients in
radial glia progenitors, intermediate progenitors, and projection neurons,
respectively. The "intermediate map" in the SVZ is modulated by Eomes (also known
as Tbr2), a T-box TF. Eomes inactivation caused rostrocaudal shifts in SVZ and CP
gene expression, with loss of corticospinal axons and gain of corticotectal
projections. These findings suggest that cortical areas and connections are
shaped by sequential maps of regional identity, propagated by the Pax6 <U+2192> Eomes <U+2192> 
Tbr1 TF cascade. In humans, PAX6, EOMES, and TBR1 have been linked to
intellectual disability and autism.

PMCID: PMC3593833
PMID: 23431145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Vaccine. 2013 Apr 8;31(15):1956-63. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.02.008. Epub 2013
Feb 17.

The kinetics of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell gene expression correlate with protection in
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L) vaccinated against infectious pancreatic
necrosis.

Munang'andu HM(1), Fredriksen BN, Mutoloki S, Dalmo RA, Evensen O.

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian School of Veterinary Science, Department of Basic Sciences and
Aquatic Medicine, PO Box 8146 Dep., N-0033 Oslo, Norway.

Infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV) is a highly contagious disease
causing high mortalities in juvenile salmonids. Lack of correlation between
neutralizing antibodies and infecting virus suggests a likelihood of involvement 
of the cellular mediated immune response in vaccine protection. To elucidate the 
kinetics of CD4 and CD8 T-cells responses in vaccine protection, Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar L) were vaccinated with a high antigen (HiAg) or low antigen (LoAg) 
dose vaccine and challenged by cohabitation using a highly virulent Norwegian Sp 
strain. Analysis of T-cell gene expression in lymphoid organs (headkidney and
spleen) showed that GATA-3 was positively correlated with increase in antibody
levels when T-bet was low. Conversely, T-bet and FoxP3 were positively correlated
with viral infection and negatively correlated with increase in antibody levels. 
Among the CD8+ T cell genes, expression of eomes and CD8a were positively
correlated with increase in viral copy numbers and negatively correlated with
increase in antibody levels. Up-regulation of granzyme A was highly correlated
with increase in viral copy numbers in the LoAg and control groups indicating
that this gene could save as a diagnostic marker of acute infection for IPNV
during acute infection. In contrast, its down regulation in the HiAg which had
low viral copy numbers corresponded with high antibody levels. Overall, these
data show that the kinetics of CD4 and CD8 T-cell genes expression follow the
same pattern as that observed in higher vertebrates. These findings suggest that 
functional signatures of the cellular mediated immune response could be
evolutionary conserved across the vertebrate taxa and that they can effectively
be used to monitor vaccine protection and infection progression of IPNV in
Atlantic salmon.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23422142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55893. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055893. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Eomesodermin of atlantic salmon: an important regulator of cytolytic gene and
interferon gamma expression in spleen lymphocytes.

Kumari J(1), Bøgwald J, Dalmo RA.

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian College of Fishery Science, Faculty of Biosciences, Fisheries and
Economics University of Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway. jaya.kumari@uit.no

Eomesodermin (Eomes), a T-bet homologue expressed in activated CD8+T cells was
recently proposed to act as a master regulator of cytotoxic CD8+ T cell effector 
function and offers an exciting avenue for future exploration. Here, we have
identified and characterized the full-length Atlantic salmon Eomes cDNA (2477
bp). Promoter analysis of the salmon Eomes showed the presence of important
putative transcription binding sites like SP1, FOXO, Oct-1, SMAD, STAT, IRF, and 
Ets-1. The basal core region responsible for the promoter activity was located
between base -199 and +59. Quantitative PCR analysis revealed that the Atlantic
salmon Eomes was ubiquitously expressed in all the tissues studied but strongly
expressed in the ovary, spleen, brain, and the head kidney. Moreover, the
involvement of Eomes in Atlantic salmon immune response and its relation with the
cytolytic activity was demonstrated by investigating the early time dependent
expression profile of Eomes and CD8a followed by high interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>)
and granzyme A expression during challenge with live Aeromonas salmonicida and
Infectious Pancreatic Necrosis (IPN) virus. Therefore, we further analyzed the
regulated expression and function of this transcription factor in spleen
lymphocytes. Overexpression of Eomes induced IFN-<U+03B3>, and granzyme A expression but
not perforin expression, whereas small interfering RNA (siRNA) mediated
suppression of Eomes expression led to significantly reduced IFN-<U+03B3> production.
Thus, Eomes may be critical in cytolytic gene expression and function in fish
similar to mammals. Furthermore, IFN-a, and mitogens induced Eomes expression.
Taken together, this is the first study on the promoter activity and regulatory
role of Eomes in fish.

PMCID: PMC3567031
PMID: 23409078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Nat Genet. 2013 Mar;45(3):325-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2553. Epub 2013 Feb 10.

Endogenous retroviruses function as species-specific enhancer elements in the
placenta.

Chuong EB(1), Rumi MA, Soares MJ, Baker JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA. echuong@stanford.edu

The mammalian placenta is remarkably distinct between species, suggesting a
history of rapid evolutionary diversification. To gain insight into the molecular
drivers of placental evolution, we compared biochemically predicted enhancers in 
mouse and rat trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) and found that species-specific
enhancers are highly enriched for endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) on a genome-wide
level. One of these ERV families, RLTR13D5, contributes hundreds of
mouse-specific histone H3 lysine 4 monomethylation (H3K4me1)- and histone H3
lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac)-defined enhancers that functionally bind Cdx2,
Eomes and Elf5-core factors that define the TSC regulatory network. Furthermore, 
we show that RLTR13D5 is capable of driving gene expression in rat placental
cells. Analysis in other tissues shows that species-specific ERV enhancer
activity is generally restricted to hypomethylated tissues, suggesting that
tissues permissive for ERV activity gain access to an otherwise silenced source
of regulatory variation. Overall, our results implicate ERV enhancer co-option as
a mechanism underlying the extensive evolutionary diversification of placental
development.

PMCID: PMC3789077
PMID: 23396136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2013 May;54:58-70. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2013.01.002. Epub 2013
Jan 22.

Pax6 regulates Tbr1 and Tbr2 expressions in olfactory bulb mitral cells.

Imamura F(1), Greer CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520, USA.

Tracking olfactory bulb mitral cell development with BrdU labeling, we find that 
mitral cells are generated from Pax6+ radial glial cells in the ventricular zone 
of the embryonic olfactory bulb. Unlike cortical projection neurons, postmitotic 
mitral cell precursors express both Tbr1 and Tbr2. Our tracking experiments
revealed that down-regulation of Pax6 preceded up-regulation of Tbrs, and that
Tbr1 emerged earlier than Tbr2. Using in utero electroporation, we also show that
Pax6 negatively regulates the expression of Tbr1 and Tbr2 in postmitotic mitral
cell precursors. Exogenous expression of Pax6 in embryonic olfactory bulb
postmitotic precursors decreased the number of cells that progressed to a mitral 
cell fate. In contrast, exogenous expression of Pax6 resulted in an increase of
GABAergic and/or dopaminergic interneurons. These results indicate that Pax6 is a
regulator of fate determination of precursor cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3622182
PMID: 23353076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Genes Cells. 2013 Feb;18(2):79-89. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12024. Epub 2013 Jan 21.

IMP2 regulates differentiation potentials of mouse neocortical neural precursor
cells.

Fujii Y(1), Kishi Y, Gotoh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo,
1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Neural precursor cells (NPCs) in the mammalian neocortex generate various
neuronal and glial cell types in a developmental stage-dependent manner. Most
neocortical NPCs lose their neurogenic potential after birth. We have previously 
shown that high-mobility group A (HMGA) proteins confer the neurogenic potential 
on early-stage NPCs during the midgestation period, although the underlying
mechanisms are not fully understood. In this study, we found that HMGA2 promotes 
the expression of insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding protein 2 (IMP2,
Igf2bp2) in neocortical NPCs. The level of IMP2 was indeed high in early-stage
NPCs compared with that in late-stage NPCs. Importantly, over-expression of IMP2 
increased the neurogenic potential and suppressed astrocytic differentiation of
late-stage NPCs, whereas knockdown of IMP2 promoted astrocytic differentiation
and reduced the neurogenic potential of early-stage neocortical NPCs without
overtly affecting cell proliferation. Our results thus identified IMP2 as a
developmental stage-dependent regulator of the differentiation potentials of NPCs
in the mouse neocortex.

© 2013 The Authors Genes to Cells © 2013 by the Molecular Biology Society of
Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23331702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Blood. 2013 Mar 21;121(12):2234-43. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-440099. Epub 2013 
Jan 17.

Lineage relationships of human interleukin-22-producing CD56+ ROR<U+03B3>t+ innate
lymphoid cells and conventional natural killer cells.

Ahn YO(1), Blazar BR, Miller JS, Verneris MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Human interleukin (IL)-22-producing ROR<U+03B3>t(+) innate lymphoid cells (ILC22) and
conventional natural killer (cNK) cells are present in secondary lymphoid
tissues. Both have an immunophenotype corresponding to stage III NK progenitors
(CD56(+/-)CD117(high)CD94(-)). Using an in vitro differentiation and primary
human tissues, we investigated their developmental relationships. cNK cells
showed a CD56(+)CD117(+)CD7(+/-)LFA-1(high) phenotype and expressed surface
receptors, cytokines, and transcription factors found on mature cNK cells. In
contrast, ILC22 cells were contained within the
CD56(+)CD117(high)CD94(-)CD7(-)LFA-1(-) fraction and produced IL-22, IL-8, and
granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor. Although ILC22 cells expressed 
NKp44 and CD161, they lacked most other NK receptors and NK-associated
transcription factors (T-bet and Eomes) and were incapable of interferon-<U+03B3>
production or cytotoxic responses. Most purified CD56(+)CD117(+)CD7(+/-)LFA-1(-) 
remained as ILC22 cells and never became cNK cells. In the absence of IL-15,
CD34(+) cells showed a complete block in cNK differentiation and instead gave
rise to a CD56(+) population of ILC22 cells. Conversely, in the absence of IL-7
and stem cell factor, cNK cells were generated but ILC22 cells showed minimal
differentiation. Although human ILC22 cells and cNK progenitors have a phenotype 
that overlaps with stage III NK progenitors, they have unique cytokine
requirements and can be distinguished by LFA-1 expression.

PMCID: PMC3606063
PMID: 23327921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 8;431(2):197-202. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.135. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

Roles of CDX2 and EOMES in human induced trophoblast progenitor cells.

Chen Y(1), Wang K, Gong YG, Khoo SK, Leach R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, College of
Human Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI 49503, USA.
ying.chen@hc.msu.edu

Abnormal trophoblast lineage proliferation and differentiation in early pregnancy
have been associated with the pathogenesis of placenta diseases of pregnancy.
However, there is still a gap in understanding the molecular mechanisms of early 
placental development due to the limited primary trophoblast cultures and
fidelity of immortalized trophoblast lines. Trophoblasts stem (TS) cells, an in
vitro model of trophectoderm that can differentiate into syncytiotrophoblasts and
extravillous trophoblasts, can be an attractive tool for early pregnancy
research. TS cells are well established in mouse but not in humans due to
insufficient knowledge of which trophoblast lineage-specific transcription
factors are involved in human trophectoderm (TE) proliferation and
differentiation. Here, we applied induced pluripotent stem cell technique to
investigate the human trophoblast lineage-specific transcription factors. We
established human induced trophoblast progenitor (iTP) cells by direct
reprogramming the fibroblasts with a pool of mouse trophoblast lineage-specific
transcription factors consisting of CDX2, EOMES, and ELF5. The human iTP cells
exhibit epithelial morphology and can be maintained in vitro for more than 2
months. Gene expression profile of these cells was tightly clustered with human
trophectoderm but not with human neuron progenitor cells, mesenchymal stem cells,
or endoderm cells. These cells are capable of differentiating into cells with an 
invasive capacity, suggesting extravillous trophoblasts. They also form
multi-nucleated cells which secrete human chorionic gonadotropin and estradiol,
consistent with a syncytiotrophoblast phenotype. Our results provide the evidence
that transcription factors CDX2 and EOMES may play critical roles in human iTP
cell generation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3570630
PMID: 23313847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Immunol. 2013 Jan 15;190(2):712-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201837. Epub 2012
Dec 14.

NK cell maturation and function in C57BL/6 mice are altered by caloric
restriction.

Clinthorne JF(1), Beli E, Duriancik DM, Gardner EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

NK cells are a heterogenous population of innate lymphocytes with diverse
functional attributes critical for early protection from viral infections. We
have previously reported a decrease in influenza-induced NK cell cytotoxicity in 
6-mo-old C57BL/6 calorically restricted (CR) mice. In the current study, we
extend our findings on the influence of CR on NK cell phenotype and function in
the absence of infection. We demonstrate that reduced mature NK cell subsets
result in increased frequencies of CD127(+) NK cells in CR mice, skewing the
function of the total NK cell pool. NK cells from CR mice produced TNF-a and
GM-CSF at a higher level, whereas IFN-<U+03B3> production was impaired following IL-2
plus IL-12 or anti-NK1.1 stimulation. NK cells from CR mice were highly
responsive to stimulation with YAC-1 cells such that CD27(-)CD11b(+) NK cells
from CR mice produced granzyme B and degranulated at a higher frequency than
CD27(-)CD11b(+) NK cells from ad libitum fed mice. CR has been shown to be a
potent dietary intervention, yet the mechanisms by which the CR increases life
span have yet to be fully understood. To our knowledge, these findings are the
first in-depth analysis of the effects of caloric intake on NK cell phenotype and
function and provide important implications regarding potential ways in which CR 
alters NK cell function prior to infection or cancer.

PMCID: PMC4080414
PMID: 23241894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Transplantation. 2013 Jan 15;95(1):54-62. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e318276d358.

A color-coded reporter model to study the effect of immunosuppressants on CD8+
T-cell memory in antitumor and alloimmune responses.

Rovira J(1), Sabet-Baktach M, Eggenhofer E, Lantow M, Koehl GE, Schlitt HJ,
Campistol JM, Geissler EK, Kroemer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors possess anticancer
properties potentially useful in reducing posttransplantation malignancy. Besides
controlling tumor-sensitive proliferative and angiogenic effects, mTOR influences
transcription factors T-bet and Eomesodermin (Eomes) in CD8 cytotoxic T cells
(Tc), which are key in rejecting tumors, and allografts.
METHODS: To study the role of mTOR in tumor and transplant immunity in an
antigen-specific way, we used T-cell receptor transgenic B6.OTI recipients,
B6.OVA.TG donors, and OVA-B16F10 melanoma cells. For tracking color-coded OTI-Tc 
cells associated with antitumor and alloimmunity in vivo, CD8-OTI transgenic
reporter mice were created by crossbreeding DsRed-expressing B6.Nagy mice with
B6.OTI mice.
RESULTS: The role of mTOR in regulating the differentiation and function of
alloreactive Tc cells in vitro was explored by stimulating OTI-Tc cells with
ovalbumin-transgenic antigen-presenting cells in the presence of rapamycin or
tacrolimus. Rapamycin, but not tacrolimus, induced a pro-antitumor phenotypic
shift from CD62LCD44 effector memory Tc cells to CD62LCD44 central memory Tc
cells, which featured up-regulated levels of T-bet and Eomes and preserved levels
of interferon-<U+03B3> and perforin. For future investigations, an in vivo model was
established whereby DsRedOTI-Tc cells adoptively transferred into B6 mice bearing
either a ovalbumin-transgenic mouse skin transplant or OVA-B16F10 tumor could be 
traced by fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis as effector or memory Tc
cells in transplant and tumor tissues.
CONCLUSION: mTOR, but not calcineurin, inhibition spares antitumoral memory Tc
cells by distinctively regulating T-bet and Eomes. This finding is now testable
in a new tumor transplant model, which incorporates DsRedOTI-Tc cell tracing,
opening the way to study the differential effects of immunosuppressants in
posttransplantation malignancy.

PMID: 23222894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biol Open. 2012 Apr 15;1(4):341-52. doi: 10.1242/bio.2012513. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

NuRD-dependent DNA methylation prevents ES cells from accessing a trophectoderm
fate.

Latos PA(1), Helliwell C, Mosaku O, Dudzinska DA, Stubbs B, Berdasco M, Esteller 
M, Hendrich B.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Stem Cell Research, MRC Centre for Stem Cell Biology
and Regenerative Medicine, University of Cambridge , Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1QR , UK ; Babraham Institute, Babraham Research Campus ,
Cambridge, CB22 3AT , UK.

Embryonic Stem (ES) cells are able to give rise to the three germ layers of the
embryo but are prevented from contributing to the trophoblast. The molecular
nature of this barrier between embryonic and trophectodermal cell fates is not
clear, but is known to involve DNA methylation. Here we demonstrate that the
Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylation (NuRD) co-repressor complex maintains the
developmental barrier between embryonic and trophectodermal cell fates by
maintaining transcriptional silencing of trophectoderm determinant genes in ES
cells. We further show that NuRD activity facilitates DNA methylation of several 
of its target promoters, where it acts non-redundantly with DNA methylation to
enforce transcriptional silencing. NuRD-deficient ES cells fail to completely
silence expression of the trophectoderm determinant genes Elf5 and Eomes, but
this alone is not sufficient to induce transdifferentiation towards the
trophectoderm fate. Rather this leaves ES cells capable of activating expression 
of trophectoderm-specific genes in response to appropriate extracellular signals,
enabling them to commit to a trophectodermal cell fate. Our findings clarify the 
molecular nature of the developmental barrier between the embryonic and
trophoblast cell fates, and establish a role for NuRD activity in specifying
sites for de novo DNA methylation.

PMCID: PMC3509455
PMID: 23213424  [PubMed]


201. Science. 2012 Nov 30;338(6111):1220-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1229620.

Progenitor and terminal subsets of CD8+ T cells cooperate to contain chronic
viral infection.

Paley MA(1), Kroy DC, Odorizzi PM, Johnnidis JB, Dolfi DV, Barnett BE, Bikoff EK,
Robertson EJ, Lauer GM, Reiner SL, Wherry EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Institute for Immunology, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Jan;13(1):3.

Chronic infections strain the regenerative capacity of antiviral T lymphocyte
populations, leading to failure in long-term immunity. The cellular and molecular
events controlling this regenerative capacity, however, are unknown. We found
that two distinct states of virus-specific CD8(+) T cells exist in chronically
infected mice and humans. Differential expression of the T-box transcription
factors T-bet and Eomesodermin (Eomes) facilitated the cooperative maintenance of
the pool of antiviral CD8(+) T cells during chronic viral infection. T-bet(hi)
cells displayed low intrinsic turnover but proliferated in response to persisting
antigen, giving rise to Eomes(hi) terminal progeny. Genetic elimination of either
subset resulted in failure to control chronic infection, which suggests that an
imbalance in differentiation and renewal could underlie the collapse of immunity 
in humans with chronic infections.

PMCID: PMC3653769
PMID: 23197535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Feb;93(2):307-15. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0812400. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Technical Advance: Fluorescent reporter reveals insights into eomesodermin
biology in cytotoxic lymphocytes.

Paley MA(1), Gordon SM, Bikoff EK, Robertson EJ, Wherry EJ, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The T-box transcription factor Eomes is expressed in cytotoxic immune cells and
plays an important role in development, maintenance, and function of these cell
types. Identification and separation of cells with differential Eomes expression 
would allow for better understanding of the transcriptional program governing
these cytotoxic lymphocytes. Here, we report the use of an Eomes(gfp)-targeted
mouse allele that displays robust fidelity to Eomes protein expression in NK and 
T cells. Use of this reporter mouse revealed that Eomes expression in antiviral
effector cells did not correlate with enhanced cytotoxicity but rather was
associated with more efficient central memory differentiation. Weakening of
reporter activity in Eomes-deficient CD8(+) T cells revealed a critical role for 
Eomes protein in maintaining central memory cells that have activated the Eomes
locus. Characterization of reporter activity in NK lineage cells also permitted
identification of a novel intermediate of NK cell maturation. Thus, the murine
Eomes(gfp)-targeted allele provides a novel opportunity to explore Eomes biology 
in cytotoxic lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC3545675
PMID: 23192430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49087. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049087. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

3-dimensional examination of the adult mouse subventricular zone reveals
lineage-specific microdomains.

Azim K(1), Fiorelli R, Zweifel S, Hurtado-Chong A, Yoshikawa K, Slomianka L,
Raineteau O.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Research Institute, University of Zürich/ETHZ, Zürich, Switzerland.

Recent studies suggest that the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the lateral
ventricle is populated by heterogeneous populations of stem and progenitor cells 
that, depending on their exact location, are biased to acquire specific neuronal 
fates. This newly described heterogeneity of SVZ stem and progenitor cells
underlines the necessity to develop methods for the accurate quantification of
SVZ stem and progenitor subpopulations. In this study, we provide 3-dimensional
topographical maps of slow cycling "stem" cells and progenitors based on their
unique cell cycle properties. These maps revealed that both cell populations are 
present throughout the lateral ventricle wall as well as in discrete regions of
the dorsal wall. Immunodetection of transcription factors expressed in defined
progenitor populations further reveals that divergent lineages have clear
regional enrichments in the rostro-caudal as well as in the dorso-ventral span of
the lateral ventricle. Thus, progenitors expressing Tbr2 and Dlx2 were confined
to dorsal and dorso-lateral regions of the lateral ventricle, respectively, while
Mash1+ progenitors were more homogeneously distributed. All cell populations were
enriched in the rostral-most region of the lateral ventricle. This diversity and 
uneven distribution greatly impede the accurate quantification of SVZ progenitor 
populations. This is illustrated by measuring the coefficient of error of
estimates obtained by using increasing section sampling interval. Based on our
empirical data, we provide such estimates for all progenitor populations
investigated in this study. These can be used in future studies as guidelines to 
judge if the precision obtained with a sampling scheme is sufficient to detect
statistically significant differences between experimental groups if a biological
effect is present. Altogether, our study underlines the need to consider the SVZ 
of the lateral ventricle as a complex 3D structure and define methods to
accurately assess neural stem cells or progenitor diversity and population sizes 
in physiological or experimental paradigms.

PMCID: PMC3499551
PMID: 23166605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Immunity. 2012 Dec 14;37(6):1130-44. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.08.021. Epub 2012
Nov 15.

Network analysis reveals centrally connected genes and pathways involved in CD8+ 
T cell exhaustion versus memory.

Doering TA(1), Crawford A, Angelosanto JM, Paley MA, Ziegler CG, Wherry EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Institute for Immunology, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Exhausted CD8(+) T cells function poorly and are negatively regulated by
inhibitory receptors. Transcriptional profiling has identified gene expression
changes associated with exhaustion. However, the transcriptional pathways
critical to the differences between exhausted and functional memory CD8(+)
T cells are unclear. We thus defined transcriptional coexpression networks to
define pathways centrally involved in exhaustion versus memory. These studies
revealed differences between exhausted and memory CD8(+) T cells including the
following: lack of coordinated transcriptional modules of quiescence during
exhaustion, centrally connected hub genes, pathways such as transcription
factors, genes involved in regulation of immune responses, and DNA repair genes, 
as well as differential connectivity for genes including T-bet, Eomes, and other 
transcription factors. These data identify pathways involved in CD8(+) T cell
exhaustion, and highlight the context-dependent nature of transcription factors
in exhaustion versus memory.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3749234
PMID: 23159438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 15;373(2):359-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.10.026. Epub 2012 
Nov 1.

Depletion of Suds3 reveals an essential role in early lineage specification.

Zhang K(1), Dai X, Wallingford MC, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, 455, 661 N. Pleasant Street, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Preimplantation development culminates with the emergence of three distinct
populations: the inner cell mass, primitive endoderm and trophectoderm. Here, we 
define the mechanisms underlying the requirement of Suds3 in
pre/peri-implantation development. Suds3 knockdown blastocysts exhibit a failure 
of both trophectoderm proliferation as well as a conspicuous lack of primitive
endoderm. Expression of essential lineage factors Nanog, Sox2, Cdx2, Eomes, Elf5 
and Sox17 are severely reduced in the absence of Suds3. Importantly, we document 
deficient FGF4/ERK signaling and show that exogenous FGF4 rescues primitive
endoderm formation and trophectoderm proliferation in Suds3 knockdown
blastocysts. We also show that Hdac1 knockdown reduces Sox2/FGF4/ERK signaling in
blastocysts. Collectively, these data define a role for Suds3 in activation of
FGF4/ERK signaling and determine an essential molecular role of Suds3/Sin3/HDAC
complexes in lineage specification in vivo.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46297. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046297. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Diagnosis of bladder cancer recurrence based on urinary levels of EOMES, HOXA9,
POU4F2, TWIST1, VIM, and ZNF154 hypermethylation.

Reinert T(1), Borre M, Christiansen A, Hermann GG, Ørntoft TF, Dyrskjøt L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Non muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) has the highest recurrence
rate of any malignancy and as many as 70% of patients experience relapse.
Aberrant DNA methylation is present in all bladder tumors and can be detected in 
urine specimens. Previous studies have identified DNA methylation markers that
showed significant diagnostic value. We evaluated the significance of the
biomarkers for early detection of tumor recurrence in urine.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The methylation levels of EOMES, HOXA9, POU4F2,
TWIST1, VIM, and ZNF154 in urine specimens were measured by real-time PCR
(MethyLight). We analyzed 390 urine sediments from 184 patients diagnosed with
NMIBC. Urine from 35 age-matched control individuals was used to determine the
methylation baseline levels. Recurrence was diagnosed by cystoscopy and verified 
by histology. Initially, we compared urine from bladder cancer patients and
healthy individuals and detected significant hypermethylation of all six markers 
(P<0.0001) achieving sensitivity in the range 82%-89% and specificity in the
range 94%-100%. Following, we validated the urinary hypermethylation for use in
recurrence surveillance and found sensitivities of 88-94% and specificities of
43-67%. EOMES, POU4F2, VIM and ZNF154 were more frequently methylated in urine
from patients with higher grade tumors (P = 0.08). Univariate Cox regression
analysis showed that five markers were significantly associated with disease
recurrence; HOXA9 (HR=7.8, P=0.006), POU4F2 (HR=8.5, P=0.001), TWIST1 (HR=12.0,
P=0.015), VIM (HR=8.0, P=0.001), and ZNF154 (HR=13.9, P<0.001). Interestingly,
for one group of patients (n=15) we found that hypermethylation was consistently 
present in the urine samples despite the lack of tumor recurrences, indicating
the presence of a field defect.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Methylation levels of EOMES, HOXA9, POU4F2, TWIST1, VIM,
and ZNF154 in urine specimens are promising diagnostic biomarkers for bladder
cancer recurrence surveillance.

PMCID: PMC3463582
PMID: 23056278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Blood. 2013 Jan 3;121(1):107-17. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-05-433508. Epub 2012 Oct
4.

Differential effects of <U+03B3>c cytokines on postselection differentiation of CD8
thymocytes.

Rafei M(1), Rouette A, Brochu S, Vanegas JR, Perreault C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal,
Montreal, QC, Canada.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Jan 3;121(1):4-6.

The primary consequence of positive selection is to render thymocytes responsive 
to cytokines and chemokines expressed in the thymic medulla. In the present
study, our main objective was to discover which cytokines could support the
differentiation of positively selected thymocytes. To this end, we have developed
an in vitro model suitable for high-throughput analyses of positive selection and
CD8 T-cell differentiation. The model involves coculture of
TCR(hi)CD5(int)CD69(-) double-positive (DP) thymocytes with peptide-pulsed OP9
cells and <U+03B3>c-cytokines. We report that IL-4, IL-7, and IL-21 have nonredundant
effects on positively selected DP thymocytes. IL-7 signaling phosphorylates STAT5
and ERK; induces Foxo1, Klf2, and S1pr1; and supports the differentiation of
classic CD8 T cells. IL-4 activates STAT6 and ERK and supports the
differentiation of CD8(int)PD-L1(hi)CD44(hi)EOMES(+) innate CD8 T cells. IL-21 is
produced by thymic epithelial cells and the IL-21 receptor-a is strongly induced 
on DP thymocytes undergoing positive selection. IL-21 signaling phosphorylates
STAT3 and STAT5, but not ERK, and does not support CD8 T-cell differentiation.
However, IL-21 has a unique ability to up-regulate BCL-6, expand DP thymocytes
undergoing positive selection, and increase the production of mature T cells. Our
data suggest that injection of recombinant IL-21 might enhance thymic output in
subjects with age- or disease-related thymic atrophy.

PMID: 23043071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 9;109(41):E2794-802. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1205742109. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

TCR signaling via Tec kinase ITK and interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4)
regulates CD8+ T-cell differentiation.

Nayar R(1), Enos M, Prince A, Shin H, Hemmers S, Jiang JK, Klein U, Thomas CJ,
Berg LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

CD8(+) T-cell development in the thymus generates a predominant population of
conventional naive cells, along with minor populations of "innate" T cells that
resemble memory cells. Recent studies analyzing a variety of KO or knock-in mice 
have indicated that impairments in the T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling pathway
produce increased numbers of innate CD8(+) T cells, characterized by their high
expression of CD44, CD122, CXCR3, and the transcription factor, Eomesodermin
(Eomes). One component of this altered development is a non-CD8(+) T
cell-intrinsic role for IL-4. To determine whether reduced TCR signaling within
the CD8(+) T cells might also contribute to this pathway, we investigated the
role of the transcription factor, IFN regulatory factor 4 (IRF4). IRF4 is
up-regulated following TCR stimulation in WT T cells; further, this up-regulation
is impaired in T cells treated with a small-molecule inhibitor of the Tec family 
tyrosine kinase, IL-2 inducible T-cell kinase (ITK). In contrast to WT cells,
activation of IRF4-deficient CD8(+) T cells leads to rapid and robust expression 
of Eomes, which is further enhanced by IL-4 stimulation. In addition, inhibition 
of ITK together with IL-4 increases Eomeso up-regulation. These data indicate
that ITK signaling promotes IRF4 up-regulation following CD8(+) T-cell activation
and that this signaling pathway normally suppresses Eomes expression, thereby
regulating the differentiation pathway of CD8(+) T cells.

PMCID: PMC3478592
PMID: 23011795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Immunol Res. 2013 Mar;55(1-3):135-45. doi: 10.1007/s12026-012-8356-9.

Phenotype and function of protective, CD4-independent CD8 T cell memory.

Edwards LE(1), Haluszczak C, Kedl RM.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206, USA.

While the need for CD4 T cells in the generation of CD8 T cell memory has been
well documented, the mechanism underlying their requirement remains unknown.
Here, we detail an immunization method capable of generating CD8 memory T cells
that are indifferent to CD4 T cell help. Using a subunit vaccination that
combines polyIC and an agonistic CD40 antibody, we program protective
CD4-independent CD8 T cell memory. When cells generated by combined polyIC/CD40
immunization are compared to cells produced following a CD4-dependent
vaccination, Listeria monocytogenes, they display dramatic differences, both
phenotypically and functionally. The memory cells generated in a CD4-deficient
host by polyIC/CD40 immunization provide protection against secondary infectious 
challenge, whereas cells generated by LM immunization in the same environment do 
not. Interestingly, combined polyIC/CD40 immunization generates long-term memory 
cells with low Blimp-1 and elevated Eomes expression despite high expression of
Blimp-1 during the primary response. The potency of combined polyIC/CD40 to
elicit CD8+ T cell memory in the absence of CD4 T cells suggests that it could be
considered as a vaccine adjuvant in clinical situations where CD4
responses/numbers are compromised.

PMCID: PMC3922058
PMID: 22948808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Blood. 2012 Oct 18;120(16):3237-45. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-420182. Epub 2012 
Aug 31.

Endogenous antigen presentation impacts on T-box transcription factor expression 
and functional maturation of CD8+ T cells.

Smith C(1), Elhassen D, Gras S, Wynn KK, Dasari V, Tellam J, Tey SK, Rehan S, Liu
YC, Rossjohn J, Burrows SR, Khanna R.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Centre for Vaccine Development and Tumour Immunology Laboratory,
Department of Immunology, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane,
Australia.

T-box transcription factors T-bet (Tbx21) and Eomesodermin (Eomes) are critical
players in CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocyte effector function and differentiation,
but how the expression of these transcription factors is regulated remains poorly
defined. Here we show that dominant T cells directed toward human CMV, expressing
significantly higher levels of T-bet with graded loss of Eomes expression
(T-bet(hi)Eomes(hi/lo)), are more efficient in recognizing endogenously processed
peptide-major histocompatibility complexes (pMHC) compared with subdominant
virus-specific T cells expressing lower levels of T-bet and high levels of Eomes 
(T-bet(int)Eomes(hi)). Paradoxically, the T-bet(hi)Eomes(hi/lo) dominant
populations that efficiently recognized endogenous antigen demonstrated lower
intrinsic avidity for pMHC, whereas T-bet(int)Eomes(hi) subdominant populations
were characterized by higher pMHC avidity and less efficient recognition of
virus-infected cells. Importantly, differential endogenous viral antigen
recognition by CMV-specific CD8(+) T cells also correlated with the
differentiation status and expression of perforin, granzyme B and K. Furthermore,
we demonstrate that the expression of T-bet correlates with clonal expansion,
differentiation status, and expression of perforin, granzyme B and K in
antigen-specific T cells. These findings illustrate how endogenous viral antigen 
presentation during persistent viral infection may influence the transcriptional 
program of virus-specific T cells and their functional profile in the peripheral 
blood of humans.

PMID: 22942184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Dev Dyn. 2012 Nov;241(11):1651-64. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23851. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

Ectopic expression of Fgf3 leads to aberrant lineage segregation in the mouse
parthenote preimplantation embryos.

Chen YH(1), Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Aerospace and Undersea Medicine, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Parthenogenetic mammalian embryos were reported to die in utero no
later than the 25-somite stage due to abnormal development of both embryonic and 
extraembryonic lineages. Interestingly, it has been shown that parthenogenetic
ICM cells tend to differentiate more into primitive endoderm cells and less into 
epiblast and ES cells. Hence we are interested in studying the molecular
mechanisms underlying lineage defects of parthenotes.
RESULTS: We found that parthenote inner cell masses (ICMs) contained decreased
numbers of Sox2(+) /Nanog(+) epiblast cells but increased numbers of Gata4(+)
primitive endoderm cells, indicating an unusual lineage segregation. We
demonstrate for the first time that the increased Gata4 level in parthenotes may 
be explained by the strong up-regulation of Fgf3 and Fgfr2 phosphorylation.
Inhibition of Fgfr2 activation by SU5402 in parthenotes restored normal Nanog and
Gata4 levels without affecting Fgf3, indicating that Fgf3 is upstream of Fgfr2
activation. In parthenote trophectoderm, we detected normal Cdx2 but ectopic
Gata4 expression and reduced Elf5 and Tbr2(Eomes) levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our work provides for the first time the insight
into the molecular mechanisms of the developmental defects of parthenogenetic
embryos in both the trophectoderm and ICM.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22930543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Immunol. 2012 Oct 1;189(7):3462-71. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

The molecular signature of tissue resident memory CD8 T cells isolated from the
brain.

Wakim LM(1), Woodward-Davis A, Liu R, Hu Y, Villadangos J, Smyth G, Bevan MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Tissue resident memory (Trm) CD8 T cells represent a newly described memory T
cell population. We have previously characterized a population of Trm cells that 
persists within the brain after acute virus infection. Although capable of
providing marked protection against a subsequent local challenge, brain Trm cells
do not undergo recall expansion after dissociation from the tissue. Furthermore, 
these Trm cells do not depend on the same survival factors as the circulating
memory T cell pool as assessed either in vivo or in vitro. To gain greater
insight into this population of cells, we compared the gene expression profiles
of Trm cells isolated from the brain with those of circulating memory T cells
isolated from the spleen after an acute virus infection. Trm cells displayed
altered expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, expressed a distinct set of
transcription factors, and overexpressed several inhibitory receptors.
Cumulatively, these data indicate that Trm cells are a distinct memory T cell
population disconnected from the circulating memory T cell pool and display a
unique molecular signature that likely results in optimal survival and function
within their local environment.

PMCID: PMC3884813
PMID: 22922816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. BMC Neurosci. 2012 Aug 1;13:90. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-13-90.

Hierarchical clustering of gene expression patterns in the Eomes + lineage of
excitatory neurons during early neocortical development.

Cameron DA(1), Middleton FA, Chenn A, Olson EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, SUNY Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cortical neurons display dynamic patterns of gene expression during
the coincident processes of differentiation and migration through the developing 
cerebrum. To identify genes selectively expressed by the Eomes<U+2009>+<U+2009>(Tbr2) lineage
of excitatory cortical neurons, GFP-expressing cells from Tg(Eomes::eGFP) Gsat
embryos were isolated to > 99% purity and profiled.
RESULTS: We report the identification, validation and spatial grouping of genes
selectively expressed within the Eomes + cortical excitatory neuron lineage
during early cortical development. In these neurons 475 genes were expressed =
3-fold, and 534 genes = 3-fold, compared to the reference population of neuronal 
precursors. Of the up-regulated genes, 328 were represented at the Genepaint in
situ hybridization database and 317 (97%) were validated as having spatial
expression patterns consistent with the lineage of differentiating excitatory
neurons. A novel approach for quantifying in situ hybridization patterns (QISP)
across the cerebral wall was developed that allowed the hierarchical clustering
of genes into putative co-regulated groups. Forty four candidate genes were
identified that show spatial expression with Intermediate Precursor Cells, 49
candidate genes show spatial expression with Multipolar Neurons, while the
remaining 224 genes achieved peak expression in the developing cortical plate.
CONCLUSIONS: This analysis of differentiating excitatory neurons revealed the
expression patterns of 37 transcription factors, many chemotropic signaling
molecules (including the Semaphorin, Netrin and Slit signaling pathways), and
unexpected evidence for non-canonical neurotransmitter signaling and changes in
mechanisms of glucose metabolism. Over half of the 317 identified genes are
associated with neuronal disease making these findings a valuable resource for
studies of neurological development and disease.

PMCID: PMC3583225
PMID: 22852769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Nature. 2012 Aug 2;488(7409):100-5. doi: 10.1038/nature11284.

Dissecting the genomic complexity underlying medulloblastoma.

Jones DT(1), Jäger N, Kool M, Zichner T, Hutter B, Sultan M, Cho YJ, Pugh TJ,
Hovestadt V, Stütz AM, Rausch T, Warnatz HJ, Ryzhova M, Bender S, Sturm D, Pleier
S, Cin H, Pfaff E, Sieber L, Wittmann A, Remke M, Witt H, Hutter S, Tzaridis T,
Weischenfeldt J, Raeder B, Avci M, Amstislavskiy V, Zapatka M, Weber UD, Wang Q, 
Lasitschka B, Bartholomae CC, Schmidt M, von Kalle C, Ast V, Lawerenz C, Eils J, 
Kabbe R, Benes V, van Sluis P, Koster J, Volckmann R, Shih D, Betts MJ, Russell
RB, Coco S, Tonini GP, Schüller U, Hans V, Graf N, Kim YJ, Monoranu C, Roggendorf
W, Unterberg A, Herold-Mende C, Milde T, Kulozik AE, von Deimling A, Witt O,
Maass E, Rössler J, Ebinger M, Schuhmann MU, Frühwald MC, Hasselblatt M, Jabado
N, Rutkowski S, von Bueren AO, Williamson D, Clifford SC, McCabe MG, Collins VP, 
Wolf S, Wiemann S, Lehrach H, Brors B, Scheurlen W, Felsberg J, Reifenberger G,
Northcott PA, Taylor MD, Meyerson M, Pomeroy SL, Yaspo ML, Korbel JO, Korshunov
A, Eils R, Pfister SM, Lichter P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.

Medulloblastoma is an aggressively growing tumour, arising in the cerebellum or
medulla/brain stem. It is the most common malignant brain tumour in children, and
shows tremendous biological and clinical heterogeneity. Despite recent treatment 
advances, approximately 40% of children experience tumour recurrence, and 30%
will die from their disease. Those who survive often have a significantly reduced
quality of life. Four tumour subgroups with distinct clinical, biological and
genetic profiles are currently identified. WNT tumours, showing activated
wingless pathway signalling, carry a favourable prognosis under current treatment
regimens. SHH tumours show hedgehog pathway activation, and have an intermediate 
prognosis. Group 3 and 4 tumours are molecularly less well characterized, and
also present the greatest clinical challenges. The full repertoire of genetic
events driving this distinction, however, remains unclear. Here we describe an
integrative deep-sequencing analysis of 125 tumour-normal pairs, conducted as
part of the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) PedBrain Tumor Project.
Tetraploidy was identified as a frequent early event in Group 3 and 4 tumours,
and a positive correlation between patient age and mutation rate was observed.
Several recurrent mutations were identified, both in known
medulloblastoma-related genes (CTNNB1, PTCH1, MLL2, SMARCA4) and in genes not
previously linked to this tumour (DDX3X, CTDNEP1, KDM6A, TBR1), often in
subgroup-specific patterns. RNA sequencing confirmed these alterations, and
revealed the expression of what are, to our knowledge, the first medulloblastoma 
fusion genes identified. Chromatin modifiers were frequently altered across all
subgroups. These findings enhance our understanding of the genomic complexity and
heterogeneity underlying medulloblastoma, and provide several potential targets
for new therapeutics, especially for Group 3 and 4 patients.

PMCID: PMC3662966
PMID: 22832583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40865. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040865. Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Signal 3 cytokines as modulators of primary immune responses during infections:
the interplay of type I IFN and IL-12 in CD8 T cell responses.

Keppler SJ(1), Rosenits K, Koegl T, Vucikuja S, Aichele P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene,
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Signal 3 cytokines, such as IL-12 or type I IFN, support expansion and
differentiation of CD8 T cells in vivo. If and how these two signal 3 cytokines
compensate each other in T cell activation during different infections is so far 
unknown. Using CD8 T cells lacking receptors for IL-12, type I IFN or both, we
show that the expansion of CD8 T cells depends on type I IFN (LCMV infection),
type I IFN and IL-12 (Listeria and vesicular stomatitis virus infection) or is
largely independent of the two cytokines (vaccinia virus infection). Furthermore,
we show that CD8 T cells lacking IL-12 and type I IFN signals are impaired in
cytokine production and cytolytic activity in the context of VSV and Listeria
infection. These effector CD8 T cells fail to express KLRG1, thereby exhibiting a
memory-like phenotype which correlated with lower expression of the transcription
factor T-bet and higher expression of Eomes. This indicates that the variable
interplay of both signal 3 cytokines is mandatory for cell fate decision of CD8 T
cells in the context of different infections. Furthermore our results demonstrate
that the pathogen-induced overall inflammatory milieu and not the antigen load
and/or the quality of antigen presentation critically determine the signal 3
dependence of CD8 T cells.

PMCID: PMC3398954
PMID: 22815848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Transl Med. 2012 Jul 12;10:146. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-146.

Biomarkers on melanoma patient T cells associated with ipilimumab treatment.

Wang W(1), Yu D, Sarnaik AA, Yu B, Hall M, Morelli D, Zhang Y, Zhao X, Weber JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cutaneous Oncology and the Donald A. Adam Comprehensive Melanoma
Research Center, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
Wenshi.wang@moffitt.org

BACKGROUND: Ipilimumab induces long-lasting clinical responses in a minority of
patients with metastatic melanoma. To better understand the mechanism(s) of
action and to identify novel biomarkers associated with the clinical benefit and 
toxicity of ipilimumab, baseline characteristics and changes in CD4(+) and CD8(+)
T cells from melanoma patients receiving ipilimumab were characterized by gene
profiling and flow cytometry.
METHODS: Microarray analysis of flow-cytometry purified CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells
was employed to assess gene profiling changes induced by ipilimumab. Selected
molecules were further investigated by flow cytometry on pre, 3-month and 6-month
post-treatment specimens.
RESULTS: Ipilimumab up-regulated Ki67 and ICOS on CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells at both
3- and 6-month post ipilimumab (p = 0.001), decreased CCR7 and CD25 on CD8(+) at 
3-month post ipilimumab (p = 0.02), and increased Gata3 in CD4(+) and CD8(+)
cells at 6-month post ipilimumab (p = 0.001). Increased EOMES(+)CD8(+),
GranzymeB(+)EOMES(+)CD8(+) and decreased Ki67(+)EOMES(+)CD4(+) T cells at 6
months were significantly associated with relapse (all p = 0.03). Decreased
Ki67(+)CD8(+) T cells were significantly associated with the development of irAE 
(p = 0.02). At baseline, low Ki67(+)EOMES(+)CD8(+) T cells were associated with
relapse (p = 0.001), and low Ki67(+)EOMES(+)CD4(+) T cells were associated with
irAE (p = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: Up-regulation of proliferation and activation signals in CD4(+) and 
CD8(+) T cells were pharmacodynamic markers for ipilimumab. Ki67(+)EOMES(+)CD8(+)
and Ki67(+)EOMES(+)CD4(+)T cells at baseline merit further testing as biomarkers 
associated with outcome and irAEs, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3527361
PMID: 22788688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Neurosci. 2012 Jun 27;32(26):8831-44. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5746-11.2012.

Tbr2 deficiency in mitral and tufted cells disrupts excitatory-inhibitory balance
of neural circuitry in the mouse olfactory bulb.

Mizuguchi R(1), Naritsuka H, Mori K, Mao CA, Klein WH, Yoshihara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Neurobiology of Synapse, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama
351-0198, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2012 Sep 26;32(39):13639. Mao, Chai-An [added]; Klein, William H
[added].

The olfactory bulb (OB) is the first relay station in the brain where odor
information from the olfactory epithelium is integrated, processed through its
intrinsic neural circuitry, and conveyed to higher olfactory centers. Compared
with profound mechanistic insights into olfactory axon wiring from the nose to
the OB, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying the formation
of functional neural circuitry among various types of neurons inside the OB.
T-box transcription factor Tbr2 is expressed in various types of glutamatergic
excitatory neurons in the brain including the OB projection neurons, mitral and
tufted cells. Here we generated conditional knockout mice in which the Tbr2 gene 
is inactivated specifically in mitral and tufted cells from late embryonic
stages. Tbr2 deficiency caused cell-autonomous changes in molecular expression
including a compensatory increase of another T-box member, Tbr1, and a
concomitant shift of vesicular glutamate transporter (VGluT) subtypes from VGluT1
to VGluT2. Tbr2-deficient mitral and tufted cells also exhibited anatomical
abnormalities in their dendritic morphology and projection patterns.
Additionally, several non-cell-autonomous phenotypes were observed in
parvalbumin-, calbindin-, and 5T4-positive GABAergic interneurons. Furthermore,
the number of dendrodendritic reciprocal synapses between mitral/tufted cells and
GABAergic interneurons was significantly reduced. Upon stimulation with odorants,
larger numbers of mitral and tufted cells were activated in Tbr2 conditional
knockout mice. These results suggest that Tbr2 is required for not only the
proper differentiation of mitral and tufted cells, but also for the establishment
of functional neuronal circuitry in the OB and maintenance of
excitatory-inhibitory balance crucial for odor information processing.

PMCID: PMC3700647
PMID: 22745484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Immunother. 2012 Jul;35(6):488-501. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e31826183a7.

Simultaneous coexpression of memory-related and effector-related genes by
individual human CD8 T cells depends on antigen specificity and differentiation.

Gupta B(1), Iancu EM, Gannon PO, Wieckowski S, Baitsch L, Speiser DE, Rufer N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Phenotypic and functional cell properties are usually analyzed at the level of
defined cell populations but not single cells. Yet, large differences between
individual cells may have important functional consequences. It is likely that
T-cell-mediated immunity depends on the polyfunctionality of individual T cells, 
rather than the sum of functions of responding T-cell subpopulations. We
performed highly sensitive single-cell gene expression profiling, allowing the
direct ex vivo characterization of individual virus-specific and tumor-specific T
cells from healthy donors and melanoma patients. We have previously shown that
vaccination with the natural tumor peptide Melan-A-induced T cells with superior 
effector functions as compared with vaccination with the analog peptide optimized
for enhanced HLA-A*0201 binding. Here we found that natural peptide vaccination
induced tumor-reactive CD8 T cells with frequent coexpression of both
memory/homing-associated genes (CD27, IL7R, EOMES, CXCR3, and CCR5) and
effector-related genes (IFNG, KLRD1, PRF1, and GZMB), comparable with protective 
Epstein-Barr virus-specific and cytomegalovirus-specific T cells. In contrast,
memory/homing-associated and effector-associated genes were less frequently
coexpressed after vaccination with the analog peptide. Remarkably, these findings
reveal a previously unknown level of gene expression diversity among
vaccine-specific and virus-specific T cells with the simultaneous coexpression of
multiple memory/homing-related and effector-related genes by the same cell. Such 
broad functional gene expression signatures within antigen-specific T cells may
be critical for mounting efficient responses to pathogens or tumors. In summary, 
direct ex vivo high-resolution molecular characterization of individual T cells
provides key insights into the processes shaping the functional properties of
tumor-specific and virus-specific T cells.

PMID: 22735807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Blood. 2012 Jun 21;119(25):6175-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-416800.

Dasatinib enhances the expansion of CD56+CD3- NK cells from cord blood.

Tanaka J, Sugita J, Shiratori S, Shigematsu A, Imamura M.

PMID: 22730528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Genome Biol. 2012 Jun 15;13(6):R43. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-6-r43.

Functional annotation of the human brain methylome identifies tissue-specific
epigenetic variation across brain and blood.

Davies MN(1), Volta M, Pidsley R, Lunnon K, Dixit A, Lovestone S, Coarfa C,
Harris RA, Milosavljevic A, Troakes C, Al-Sarraj S, Dobson R, Schalkwyk LC, Mill 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, De Crespigny Park, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Dynamic changes to the epigenome play a critical role in establishing
and maintaining cellular phenotype during differentiation, but little is known
about the normal methylomic differences that occur between functionally distinct 
areas of the brain. We characterized intra- and inter-individual methylomic
variation across whole blood and multiple regions of the brain from multiple
donors.
RESULTS: Distinct tissue-specific patterns of DNA methylation were identified,
with a highly significant over-representation of tissue-specific differentially
methylated regions (TS-DMRs) observed at intragenic CpG islands and low CG
density promoters. A large proportion of TS-DMRs were located near genes that are
differentially expressed across brain regions. TS-DMRs were significantly
enriched near genes involved in functional pathways related to neurodevelopment
and neuronal differentiation, including BDNF, BMP4, CACNA1A, CACA1AF, EOMES,
NGFR, NUMBL, PCDH9, SLIT1, SLITRK1 and SHANK3. Although between-tissue variation 
in DNA methylation was found to greatly exceed between-individual differences
within any one tissue, we found that some inter-individual variation was
reflected across brain and blood, indicating that peripheral tissues may have
some utility in epidemiological studies of complex neurobiological phenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reinforces the importance of DNA methylation in
regulating cellular phenotype across tissues, and highlights genomic patterns of 
epigenetic variation across functionally distinct regions of the brain, providing
a resource for the epigenetics and neuroscience research communities.

PMCID: PMC3446315
PMID: 22703893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Neurosci. 2012 May 30;32(22):7672-84. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0894-12.2012.

Filamin a regulates neural progenitor proliferation and cortical size through
Wee1-dependent Cdk1 phosphorylation.

Lian G(1), Lu J, Hu J, Zhang J, Cross SH, Ferland RJ, Sheen VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Cytoskeleton-associated proteins play key roles not only in regulating cell
morphology and migration but also in proliferation. Mutations in the
cytoskeleton-associated gene filamin A (FlnA) cause the human disorder
periventricular heterotopia (PH). PH is a disorder of neural stem cell
development that is characterized by disruption of progenitors along the
ventricular epithelium and subsequent formation of ectopic neuronal nodules.
FlnA-dependent regulation of cytoskeletal dynamics is thought to direct neural
progenitor migration and proliferation. Here we show that embryonic FlnA-null
mice exhibited a reduction in brain size and decline in neural progenitor numbers
over time. The drop in the progenitor population was not attributable to cell
death or changes in premature differentiation, but to prolonged cell cycle
duration. Suppression of FlnA led to prolongation of the entire cell cycle
length, principally in M phase. FlnA loss impaired degradation of cyclin
B1-related proteins, thereby delaying the onset and progression through mitosis. 
We found that the cdk1 kinase Wee1 bound FlnA, demonstrated increased expression 
levels after loss of FlnA function, and was associated with increased
phosphorylation of cdk1. Phosphorylation of cdk1 inhibited activation of the
anaphase promoting complex degradation system, which was responsible for cyclin
B1 degradation and progression through mitosis. Collectively, our results
demonstrate a molecular mechanism whereby FlnA loss impaired G2 to M phase entry,
leading to cell cycle prolongation, compromised neural progenitor proliferation, 
and reduced brain size.

PMCID: PMC3368379
PMID: 22649246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biol Reprod. 2012 Aug 23;87(2):37. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.098079. Print 2012
Aug.

Connexin 31 (GJB3) deficiency in mouse trophoblast stem cells alters giant cell
differentiation and leads to loss of oxygen sensing.

Koch Y(1), van Fürden B, Kaiser S, Klein D, Kibschull M, Schorle H, Carpinteiro
A, Gellhaus A, Winterhager E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen Medical School,
Essen, Germany.

The nonphysiological placental oxidative environment has been implicated in many 
complications during human pregnancy. Oxygen tension can influence a broad
spectrum of molecular changes leading to alterations in trophoblast cell lineage 
development. In this study, we report that mouse wild-type trophoblast stem cells
(TSCs) react to low oxygen (3%) with an enhanced differentiation into the giant
cell pathway, indicated by a downregulation of the early stem cell markers Eomes 
and Cdx2 as well as by a significant upregulation of Tfap2c and the
differentiation markers Tpbpa and Prl3d1. Here we demonstrated that connexin
31/GJB3-deficient TSCs failed to stabilize HIF-1A under low oxygen, resulting in 
nonresponsiveness of different marker genes, such as Cdx2 and Eomes and Tfap2c
and Tpbpa. Moreover, connexin 31-deficient TSCs revealed a shift in giant cell
differentiation from Prl3d1 expressing parietal giant cells to Ctsq, Prl3b1, and 
Prl2c2-positive giant cells, probably sinusoidal and canal lining trophoblast
giant cells. Thus, loss of connexin 31 led to different giant cell subtypes which
bypass the progenitor regulators Tfap2c and Tpbpa under low oxygen conditions.

PMID: 22623621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Neurosci. 2012 May 2;32(18):6275-87. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0532-12.2012.

Tbr2 is essential for hippocampal lineage progression from neural stem cells to
intermediate progenitors and neurons.

Hodge RD(1), Nelson BR, Kahoud RJ, Yang R, Mussar KE, Reiner SL, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98101, USA.

Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus has been implicated in cognitive functions,
including learning and memory, and may be abnormal in major neuropsychiatric
disorders, such as depression. Dentate neurogenesis is regulated by interactions 
between extrinsic factors and intrinsic transcriptional cascades that are
currently not well understood. Here we show that Tbr2 (also known as Eomes), a
T-box transcription factor expressed by intermediate neuronal progenitors (INPs),
is critically required for neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of developing and
adult mice. In the absence of Tbr2, INPs are depleted despite augmented neural
stem cell (NSC) proliferation, and neurogenesis is halted as the result of failed
neuronal differentiation. Interestingly, we find that Tbr2 likely promotes
lineage progression from NSC to neuronal-specified INP in part by repression of
Sox2, a key determinant of NSC identity. These findings suggest that Tbr2
expression in INPs is critical for neuronal differentiation in the dentate gyrus 
and that INPs are an essential stage in the lineage from NSCs to new granule
neurons in the dentate gyrus.

PMCID: PMC3366485
PMID: 22553033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Blood. 2012 Jun 14;119(24):5758-68. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-415364. Epub 2012 
Apr 27.

Rapid development of exhaustion and down-regulation of eomesodermin limit the
antitumor activity of adoptively transferred murine natural killer cells.

Gill S(1), Vasey AE, De Souza A, Baker J, Smith AT, Kohrt HE, Florek M, Gibbs KD 
Jr, Tate K, Ritchie DS, Negrin RS.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA 94305, USA.

Natural killer (NK) cells are potent anti-viral and antitumor "first responders" 
endowed with natural cytotoxicity and cytokine production capabilities. To date, 
attempts to translate these promising biologic functions through the adoptive
transfer of NK cells for the treatment of cancer have been of limited benefit.
Here we trace the fate of adoptively transferred murine NK cells and make the
surprising observation that NK cells traffic to tumor sites yet fail to control
tumor growth or improve survival. This dysfunction is related to a rapid
down-regulation of activating receptor expression and loss of important effector 
functions. Loss of interferon (IFN)<U+03B3> production occurs early after transfer,
whereas loss of cytotoxicity progresses with homeostatic proliferation and tumor 
exposure. The dysfunctional phenotype is accompanied by down-regulation of the
transcription factors Eomesodermin and T-bet, and can be partially reversed by
the forced overexpression of Eomesodermin. These results provide the first
demonstration of NK-cell exhaustion and suggest that the NK-cell first-response
capability is intrinsically limited. Further, novel approaches may be required to
circumvent the described dysfunctional phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3382935
PMID: 22544698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Cell Mol Immunol. 2012 May;9(3):193-4. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2012.8. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Single line or parallel lines: NK cell differentiation driven by T-bet and Eomes.

Jiang X(1), Chen Y, Peng H, Tian Z.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, China.

PMCID: PMC4012847
PMID: 22504953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Immunol. 2012 May 15;188(10):4846-57. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103799. Epub 2012 
Apr 13.

Identification of a new pathway for Th1 cell development induced by cooperative
stimulation with IL-4 and TGF-ß.

Tofukuji S(1), Kuwahara M, Suzuki J, Ohara O, Nakayama T, Yamashita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba
260-8670, Japan.

IL-4 plays an important role in the induction of Th2 and Th9 cells, as well as in
the inhibition of Th1 cell generation. We show that a combination of IL-4 and
TGF-ß augments the development of Th1 cells that express CD103 (CD103(+) Th1
cells) if IFN-<U+03B3> is present. The T-box-containing transcription factor
eomesodermin (Eomes) is preferentially expressed in CD103(+) Th1 cells and is
involved in IFN-<U+03B3> production. The induction of T-bet during early T cell
activation is essential for the formation of the active chromatin at both the
Eomes and IFN-<U+03B3> gene loci. TGF-ß is required for the induction of Eomes and
CD103, as well as the inhibition of Th2 cytokine expression. In addition, IL-4
induces Eomes transcription through activation of the Stat6-signaling pathway.
IFN-<U+03B3>-producing CD103(+) Th1 cells are detected in the intraepithelial
lymphocytes of normal mice, and their numbers significantly decrease in Tbet- and
Stat6-deficient mice. To our knowledge, these results represent the first
molecular mechanism of IL-4/TGF-ß-dependent augmentation of Th1 cell generation
and raise the possibility that IL-4 and TGF-ß simultaneously enhance the Th1
cell-mediated immune responses under certain cytokine conditions.

PMID: 22504655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 15;188(8):3859-68. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103729.

T cell factor-1 and ß-catenin control the development of memory-like CD8
thymocytes.

Sharma A(1), Chen Q, Nguyen T, Yu Q, Sen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology, National Institute on Aging,
National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Innate memory-like CD8 thymocytes develop and acquire effector function during
maturation in the absence of encounter with Ags. In this study, we demonstrate
that enhanced function of transcription factors T cell factor (TCF)-1 and
ß-catenin regulate the frequency of promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger
(PLZF)-expressing, IL-4-producing thymocytes that promote the generation of
eomesodermin-expressing memory-like CD8 thymocytes in trans. In contrast,
TCF1-deficient mice do not have PLZF-expressing thymocytes and
eomesodermin-expressing memory-like CD8 thymocytes. Generation of TCF1 and
ß-catenin-dependent memory-like CD8 thymocytes is non-cell-intrinsic and requires
the expression of IL-4 and IL-4R. CD8 memory-like thymocytes migrate to the
peripheral lymphoid organs, and the memory-like CD8 T cells rapidly produce
IFN-<U+03B3>. Thus, TCF1 and ß-catenin regulate the generation of PLZF-expressing
thymocytes and thereby facilitate the generation of memory-like CD8 T cells in
the thymus.

PMCID: PMC3471543
PMID: 22492686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Blood. 2012 May 24;119(21):4928-38. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-395186. Epub 2012 
Apr 6.

Chronic HIV infection affects the expression of the 2 transcription factors
required for CD8 T-cell differentiation into cytolytic effectors.

Ribeiro-dos-Santos P(1), Turnbull EL, Monteiro M, Legrand A, Conrod K, Baalwa J, 
Pellegrino P, Shaw GM, Williams I, Borrow P, Rocha B.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, Unit 1020, Medical Faculty Déscartes, Paris, France.

CD8 T cells lose the capacity to control HIV infection, but the extent of the
impairment of CD8 T-cell functions and the mechanisms that underlie it remain
controversial. Here we report an extensive ex vivo analysis of HIV-specific CD8 T
cells, covering the expression of 16 different molecules involved in CD8 function
or differentiation. This approach gave remarkably homogeneous readouts in
different donors and showed that CD8 dysfunction in chronic HIV infection was
much more severe than described previously: some Ifng transcription was observed,
but most cells lost the expression of all cytolytic molecules and Eomesodermin
and T-bet by chronic infection. These results reveal a cellular mechanism
explaining the dysfunction of CD8 T cells during chronic HIV infection, as CD8 T 
cells are known to maintain some functionality when either of these transcription
factors is present, but to lose all cytotoxic activity when both are not
expressed. Surprisingly, they also show that chronic HIV and lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus infections have a very different impact on fundamental
T-cell functions, "exhausted" lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus-specific cells
losing the capacity to secrete IFN-<U+03B3> but maintaining some cytotoxic activity as
granzyme B and FasL are overexpressed and, while down-regulating T-bet,
up-regulating Eomesodermin expression.

PMID: 22490682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34645. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034645. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Zfp296 is a novel, pluripotent-specific reprogramming factor.

Fischedick G(1), Klein DC, Wu G, Esch D, Höing S, Han DW, Reinhardt P, Hergarten 
K, Tapia N, Schöler HR, Sterneckert JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany.

Expression of the four transcription factors Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc (OSKM)
is sufficient to reprogram somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem (iPSCs).
However, this process is slow and inefficient compared with the fusion of somatic
cells with embryonic stem cells (ESCs), indicating that ESCs express additional
factors that can enhance the efficiency of reprogramming. We had previously
developed a method to detect and isolate early neural induction intermediates
during the differentiation of mouse ESCs. Using the gene expression profiles of
these intermediates, we identified 23 ESC-specific transcripts and tested each
for the ability to enhance iPSC formation. Of the tested factors, zinc finger
protein 296 (Zfp296) led to the largest increase in mouse iPSC formation. We
confirmed that Zfp296 was specifically expressed in pluripotent stem cells and
germ cells. Zfp296 in combination with OSKM induced iPSC formation earlier and
more efficiently than OSKM alone. Through mouse chimera and teratoma formation,
we demonstrated that the resultant iPSCs were pluripotent. We showed that Zfp296 
activates transcription of the Oct4 gene via the germ cell-specific conserved
region 4 (CR4), and when overexpressed in mouse ESCs leads to upregulation of
Nanog expression and downregulation of the expression of differentiation markers,
including Sox17, Eomes, and T, which is consistent with the observation that
Zfp296 enhances the efficiency of reprogramming. In contrast, knockdown of Zfp296
in ESCs leads to the expression of differentiation markers. Finally, we
demonstrated that expression of Zfp296 in ESCs inhibits, but does not block,
differentiation into neural cells.

PMCID: PMC3317644
PMID: 22485183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Immunol Lett. 2012 May 30;144(1-2):7-15. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2012.02.013. Epub
2012 Mar 10.

Ectopic expression of a T-box transcription factor, eomesodermin, renders CD4(+) 
Th cells cytotoxic by activating both perforin- and FasL-pathways.

Eshima K(1), Chiba S, Suzuki H, Kokubo K, Kobayashi H, Iizuka M, Iwabuchi K,
Shinohara N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kitasato,
Minamiku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan. eshima@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

During viral infection, CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) play a central role 
to eliminate viruses by destructing virus-infected cells utilizing two cytolytic 
pathways, i.e., perforin/granzyme pathway and FasL-Fas pathway. It has been shown
that effector functions of CTL are critically controlled by two T-box
transcription factors, T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes), although their precise
activities in constructing CTL functions are not fully understood. To investigate
the functional potency and activities of Eomes, the effects of ectopic expression
of Eomes in two terminally differentiated murine CD4(+) Th lines, on their
effector functions were analyzed. The results showed that in Eomes-transfected Th
hybridoma, cell surface FasL expression upon Con A stimulation was markedly
enhanced, although perforin expression was not induced. In normal,
non-transformed Th2 cells, introduction of Eomes elicited perforin expression,
and also augmented FasL up-regulation. Interestingly, cyotlytic activity of
Eomes-transfectant was more efficient than that of perforin-transfected Th2 cells
which expressed high levels of perforin and granzyme B mRNA, indicating that
Eomes may play additional roles other than preparation of these cytolytic
effector molecules. In contrast, stimulation-induced CD154 up-regulation, one of 
the typical helper T cell characteristics, was repressed in Eomes-transfectant.
Collectively, these results suggest that Eomes may not only be involved in
perforin/granzyme expression but also play various functions, including FasL
up-regulation, to develop the characteristics of CD8(+) CTL. These studies have
also suggested that introduction of Eomes alone was sufficient to convert the
functions of fully differentiated Th cells toward those of CTL.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22425747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. EMBO Rep. 2012 Apr;13(4):355-62. doi: 10.1038/embor.2012.23.

Eomesodermin induces Mesp1 expression and cardiac differentiation from embryonic 
stem cells in the absence of Activin.

van den Ameele J(1), Tiberi L, Bondue A, Paulissen C, Herpoel A, Iacovino M, Kyba
M, Blanpain C, Vanderhaeghen P.

Author information: 
(1)IRIBHM (Institute for Interdisciplinary Research), Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Campus Erasme, Brussels B-1070, Belgium.

The transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes) is involved in early embryonic
patterning, but the range of cell fates that it controls as well as its
mechanisms of action remain unclear. Here we show that transient expression of
Eomes promotes cardiovascular fate during embryonic stem cell differentiation.
Eomes also rapidly induces the expression of Mesp1, a key regulator of
cardiovascular differentiation, and directly binds to regulatory sequences of
Mesp1. Eomes effects are strikingly modulated by Activin signalling: high levels 
of Activin inhibit the promotion of cardiac mesoderm by Eomes, while they enhance
Eomes-dependent endodermal specification. These results place Eomes upstream of
the Mesp1-dependent programme of cardiogenesis, and at the intersection of
mesodermal and endodermal specification, depending on the levels of Activin/Nodal
signalling.

PMCID: PMC3321156
PMID: 22402664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Hum Reprod. 2012 Apr;27(4):1005-15. doi: 10.1093/humrep/der477. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Glycodelin-A interferes with IL-2/IL-2R signalling to induce cell growth arrest, 
loss of effector functions and apoptosis in T-lymphocytes.

Soni C(1), Karande AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012,
India.

BACKGROUND: The progesterone-regulated glycoprotein glycodelin-A (GdA), secreted 
by the decidualized endometrium at high concentrations in primates, inhibits the 
maternal immune response against fetal antigens and thereby contributes to the
tolerance of the semi-allogenic fetus during a normal pregnancy. Our earlier
studies demonstrated the ability of GdA to induce an intrinsic apoptotic cascade 
in CD4(+) T-lymphocytes and suppress the cytolytic effector function of CD8(+)
T-lymphocytes. In this report, we investigated further into the mechanism of
action of GdA controlling perforin and granzyme B expression in CD8(+)
T-lymphocytes and the mechanism of action of GdA leading to lymphocyte death.
METHODS: Flow cytometry analysis was performed to check for the surface
expression of interleukin-2 receptor a (IL-2Ra) and intracellular eomesodermin
(Eomes) in activated T-lymphocytes, whereas quantitative RT-PCR analysis was used
to find out their mRNA profile upon GdA treatment. Western analysis was carried
out to confirm the protein level of Bax and Bcl-2.
RESULTS: GdA reduces the surface expression of the high-affinity IL-2R complex by
down-regulating the synthesis of IL-2Ra (CD25). This disturbs the optimal IL-2
signalling and decreases the Eomes expression, which along with IL-2 directly
regulates perforin and granzymes expression. Consequently, the CD8(+)
T-lymphocytes undergo growth arrest and are unable to mature into competent
cytotoxic T-lymphocytes. In the CD4(+) T-lymphocytes, growth factor IL-2
deprivation leads to proliferation inhibition, decreased Bcl-2/enhanced Bax
expression, culminating in mitochondrial stress and cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: GdA spurs cell cycle arrest, loss of effector functions and
apoptosis in different T-cell subsets by making T-lymphocytes unable to respond
to IL-2.

PMID: 22313865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Immunity. 2012 Jan 27;36(1):55-67. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.11.016. Epub 2012
Jan 18.

The transcription factors T-bet and Eomes control key checkpoints of natural
killer cell maturation.

Gordon SM(1), Chaix J, Rupp LJ, Wu J, Madera S, Sun JC, Lindsten T, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Mar;12(3):150.
    Immunity. 2012 Jan 27;36(1):1-3.

Natural killer (NK) cells play critical roles defending against tumors and
pathogens. We show that mice lacking both transcription factors Eomesodermin
(Eomes) and T-bet failed to develop NK cells. Developmental stability of immature
NK cells constitutively expressing the death ligand TRAIL depended on T-bet.
Conversely, maturation characterized by loss of constitutive TRAIL expression and
induction of Ly49 receptor diversity and integrin CD49b (DX5(+)) required Eomes. 
Mature NK cells from which Eomes was deleted reverted to phenotypic immaturity if
T-bet was present or downregulated NK lineage antigens if T-bet was absent,
despite retaining expression of Ly49 receptors. Fetal and adult hepatic
hematopoiesis restricted Eomes expression and limited NK development to the
T-bet-dependent, immature stage, whereas medullary hematopoiesis permitted
Eomes-dependent NK maturation in adult mice. These findings reveal two
sequential, genetically separable checkpoints of NK cell maturation, the
progression of which is metered largely by the anatomic localization of
hematopoiesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3381976
PMID: 22261438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Ann Neurol. 2011 Dec;70(6):897-912. doi: 10.1002/ana.22609.

Genome-wide meta-analysis identifies novel multiple sclerosis susceptibility
loci.

Patsopoulos NA(1); Bayer Pharma MS Genetics Working Group; Steering Committees of
Studies Evaluating IFNß-1b and a CCR1-Antagonist; ANZgene Consortium; GeneMSA;
International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium, Esposito F, Reischl J, Lehr
S, Bauer D, Heubach J, Sandbrink R, Pohl C, Edan G, Kappos L, Miller D, Montalbán
J, Polman CH, Freedman MS, Hartung HP, Arnason BG, Comi G, Cook S, Filippi M,
Goodin DS, Jeffery D, O'Connor P, Ebers GC, Langdon D, Reder AT, Traboulsee A,
Zipp F, Schimrigk S, Hillert J, Bahlo M, Booth DR, Broadley S, Brown MA, Browning
BL, Browning SR, Butzkueven H, Carroll WM, Chapman C, Foote SJ, Griffiths L,
Kermode AG, Kilpatrick TJ, Lechner-Scott J, Marriott M, Mason D, Moscato P, Heard
RN, Pender MP, Perreau VM, Perera D, Rubio JP, Scott RJ, Slee M, Stankovich J,
Stewart GJ, Taylor BV, Tubridy N, Willoughby E, Wiley J, Matthews P, Boneschi FM,
Compston A, Haines J, Hauser SL, McCauley J, Ivinson A, Oksenberg JR,
Pericak-Vance M, Sawcer SJ, De Jager PL, Hafler DA, de Bakker PI.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Translational NeuroPsychiatric Genomics, Institute for the
Neurosciences, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 
02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Ann Neurol. 2013 Apr;73(4):561.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2011 Dec;70(6):A5-7.

OBJECTIVE: To perform a 1-stage meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies 
(GWAS) of multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility and to explore functional
consequences of new susceptibility loci.
METHODS: We synthesized 7 MS GWAS. Each data set was imputed using HapMap phase
II, and a per single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) meta-analysis was performed
across the 7 data sets. We explored RNA expression data using a quantitative
trait analysis in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 228 subjects with
demyelinating disease.
RESULTS: We meta-analyzed 2,529,394 unique SNPs in 5,545 cases and 12,153
controls. We identified 3 novel susceptibility alleles: rs170934(T) at 3p24.1
(odds ratio [OR], 1.17; p = 1.6 × 10(-8)) near EOMES, rs2150702(G) in the second 
intron of MLANA on chromosome 9p24.1 (OR, 1.16; p = 3.3 × 10(-8)), and
rs6718520(A) in an intergenic region on chromosome 2p21, with THADA as the
nearest flanking gene (OR, 1.17; p = 3.4 × 10(-8)). The 3 new loci do not have a 
strong cis effect on RNA expression in PBMCs. Ten other susceptibility loci had a
suggestive p < 1 × 10(-6) , some of these loci have evidence of association in
other inflammatory diseases (ie, IL12B, TAGAP, PLEK, and ZMIZ1).
INTERPRETATION: We have performed a meta-analysis of GWAS in MS that more than
doubles the size of previous gene discovery efforts and highlights 3 novel MS
susceptibility loci. These and additional loci with suggestive evidence of
association are excellent candidates for further investigations to refine and
validate their role in the genetic architecture of MS.

Copyright © 2011 American Neurological Association.

PMCID: PMC3247076
PMID: 22190364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Dev Biol. 2012 Feb 1;362(1):11-23. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.036. Epub 2011
Nov 18.

Differential regulation of epiboly initiation and progression by zebrafish
Eomesodermin A.

Du S(1), Draper BW, Mione M, Moens CB, Bruce A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

The T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes) has been implicated in
patterning and morphogenesis in frog, fish and mouse. In zebrafish, one of the
two Eomes homologs, Eomesa, has been implicated in dorsal-ventral patterning,
epiboly and endoderm specification in experiments employing over-expression,
dominant-negative constructs and antisense morpholino oligonucleotides. Here we
report for the first time the identification and characterization of an Eomesa
mutant generated by TILLING. We find that Eomesa has a strictly maternal role in 
the initiation of epiboly, which involves doming of the yolk cell up into the
overlying blastoderm. By contrast, epiboly progression is normal, demonstrating
for the first time that epiboly initiation is genetically separable from
progression. The yolk cell microtubules, which are required for epiboly, are
defective in maternal-zygotic eomesa mutant embryos. In addition, the deep cells 
of the blastoderm are more tightly packed and exhibit more bleb-like protrusions 
than cells in control embryos. We postulate that the doming delay may be the
consequence both of overly stabilized yolk cell microtubules and defects in the
adhesive properties or motility of deep cells. We also show that Eomesa is
required for normal expression of the endoderm markers sox32, bon and og9x;
however it is not essential for endoderm formation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3259739
PMID: 22142964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 13;287(3):2257-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.287128. Epub 2011 
Nov 28.

SATB homeobox proteins regulate trophoblast stem cell renewal and
differentiation.

Asanoma K(1), Kubota K, Chakraborty D, Renaud SJ, Wake N, Fukushima K, Soares MJ,
Rumi MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Reproductive Health and Regenerative Medicine, Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, Kansas 66160, USA.

The morphogenesis of the hemochorial placenta is dependent upon the precise
expansion and differentiation of trophoblast stem (TS) cells. SATB homeobox 1
(SATB1) and SATB2 are related proteins that have been implicated as regulators of
some stem cell populations. SATB1 is highly expressed in TS cells, which prompted
an investigation of SATB1 and the related SATB2 as regulators of TS cells. SATB1 
and SATB2 were highly expressed in rat TS cells maintained in the stem state and 
rapidly declined following induction of differentiation. SATB proteins were also 
present within the rat placenta during early stages of its morphogenesis and
disappeared as gestation advanced. Silencing Satb1 or Satb2 expression decreased 
TS cell self-renewal and increased differentiation, whereas ectopic expression of
SATB proteins promoted TS cell expansion and blunted differentiation. Eomes, a
key transcriptional regulator of TS cells, was identified as a target for SATB
proteins. SATB knockdown decreased Eomes transcript levels and promoter activity,
whereas SATB ectopic expression increased Eomes transcript levels and promoter
activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay as well as chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses demonstrated that SATB proteins physically associate
with a regulatory site within the Eomes promoter. We conclude that SATB proteins 
promote TS cell renewal and inhibit differentiation. These actions are mediated
in part by regulating the expression of the TS cell stem-associated transcription
factor, EOMES.

PMCID: PMC3265903
PMID: 22123820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Immunity. 2011 Nov 23;35(5):792-805. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.09.017.

An interleukin-21-interleukin-10-STAT3 pathway is critical for functional
maturation of memory CD8+ T cells.

Cui W(1), Liu Y, Weinstein JS, Craft J, Kaech SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Nov 23;35(5):663-5.

Memory CD8(+) T cells are critical for long-term immunity, but the genetic
pathways governing their formation remain poorly defined. This study shows that
the IL-10-IL-21-STAT3 pathway is critical for memory CD8(+) T cell development
after acute LCMV infection. In the absence of either interleukin-10 (IL-10) and
IL-21 or STAT3, virus-specific CD8(+) T cells retain terminal effector (TE)
differentiation states and fail to mature into protective memory T cells that
contain self-renewing central memory T cells. Expression of Eomes, BCL-6,
Blimp-1, and SOCS3 was considerably reduced in STAT3-deficient memory CD8(+) T
cells, and BCL-6- or SOCS3-deficient CD8(+) T cells also had perturbed memory
cell development. Reduced SOCS3 expression rendered STAT3-deficient CD8(+) T
cells hyperresponsive to IL-12, suggesting that the STAT3-SOCS3 pathway helps to 
insulate memory precursor cells from inflammatory cytokines that drive TE
differentiation. Thus, memory CD8(+) T cell precursor maturation is an active
process dependent on IL-10-IL-21-STAT3 signaling.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3431922
PMID: 22118527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Immunity. 2011 Nov 23;35(5):733-45. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.08.017.

Eomesodermin controls interleukin-5 production in memory T helper 2 cells through
inhibition of activity of the transcription factor GATA3.

Endo Y(1), Iwamura C, Kuwahara M, Suzuki A, Sugaya K, Tumes DJ, Tokoyoda K,
Hosokawa H, Yamashita M, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

The regulation of memory CD4(+) helper T (Th) cell function, such as polarized
cytokine production, remains unclear. Here we show that memory T helper 2 (Th2)
cells are divided into four subpopulations by CD62L and CXCR3 expression. All
four subpopulations produced interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-13, whereas only the
CD62L(lo)CXCR3(lo) population produced IL-5 accompanied by increased H3-K4
methylation at the Il5 gene locus. The transcription factor Eomesodermin (encoded
by Eomes) was highly expressed in memory Th2 cells, whereas its expression was
selectively downregulated in the IL-5-producing cells. Il5 expression was
enhanced in Eomes-deficient cells, and Eomesodermin was shown to interact with
the transcription factor GATA3, preventing GATA3 binding to the Il5 promoter.
Memory Th2 cell-dependent airway inflammation was attenuated in the absence of
the CD62L(lo)CXCR3(lo) population but was enhanced by Eomes-deficient memory Th2 
cells. Thus, IL-5 production in memory Th2 cells is regulated by Eomesodermin via
the inhibition of GATA3 activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22118525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Development. 2012 Jan;139(1):95-105. doi: 10.1242/dev.069294. Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Basolateral rather than apical primary cilia on neuroepithelial cells committed
to delamination.

Wilsch-Bräuninger M(1), Peters J, Paridaen JT, Huttner WB.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Pfotenhauer
Strasse 108, D-01307 Dresden, Germany.

Delamination of neural progenitors from the apical adherens junction belt of the 
neuroepithelium is a hallmark of cerebral cortex development and evolution.
Specific cell biological processes preceding this delamination are largely
unknown. Here, we identify a novel, pre-delamination state of neuroepithelial
cells in mouse embryonic neocortex. Specifically, in a subpopulation of
neuroepithelial cells that, like all others, exhibit apical-basal polarity and
apical adherens junctions, the re-establishing of the primary cilium after
mitosis occurs at the basolateral rather than the apical plasma membrane.
Neuroepithelial cells carrying basolateral primary cilia appear at the onset of
cortical neurogenesis, increase in abundance with its progression, selectively
express the basal (intermediate) progenitor marker Tbr2, and eventually
delaminate from the apical adherens junction belt to become basal progenitors,
translocating their nucleus from the ventricular to the subventricular zone.
Overexpression of insulinoma-associated 1, a transcription factor known to
promote the generation of basal progenitors, increases the proportion of
basolateral cilia. Basolateral cilia in cells delaminating from the apical
adherens junction belt are preferentially found near spot-like adherens
junctions, suggesting that the latter provide positional cues to basolateral
ciliogenesis. We conclude that re-establishing a basolateral primary cilium
constitutes the first known cell biological feature preceding neural progenitor
delamination.

PMID: 22096071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Neurosci. 2011 Nov 16;31(46):16651-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3015-11.2011.

Serum response factor is required for cortical axon growth but is dispensable for
neurogenesis and neocortical lamination.

Lu PP(1), Ramanan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Previous studies have shown that neuron-specific deletion of serum response
factor (SRF) results in deficits in tangential cell migration, guidance-dependent
circuit assembly, activity-dependent gene expression, and synaptic plasticity in 
the hippocampus. Furthermore, SRF deletion in mouse embryonic stem cells causes
cell death in vitro. However, the requirement of SRF for early neuronal
development including neural stem cell homeostasis, neurogenesis, and axonal
innervations remains unknown. Here, we report that SRF is critical for
development of major axonal tracts in the forebrain. Conditional mutant mice
lacking SRF in neural progenitor cells (Srf-Nestin-cKO) exhibit striking deficits
in cortical axonal projections including corticostriatal, corticospinal, and
corticothalamic tracts, and they show a variable loss of the corpus callosum.
Neurogenesis and interneuron specification occur normally in the absence of SRF
and the deficits in axonal projections were not due to a decrease or loss in cell
numbers. Radial migration of neurons and neocortical lamination were also not
affected. No aberrant cell death was observed during development, whereas there
was an increase in the number of proliferative cells in the ventricular zone from
embryonic day 14 to day 18. Similar axonal tract deficits were also observed in
mutant mice lacking SRF in the developing excitatory neurons of neocortex and
hippocampus (Srf-NEX-cKO). Together, these findings suggest distinct roles for
SRF during neuronal development; SRF is specifically required in a
cell-autonomous manner for axonal tract development but is dispensable for cell
survival, neurogenesis, neocortical lamination, and neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 22090492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Immunol. 2011 Dec 15;187(12):6235-42. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101540. Epub 2011 
Nov 11.

Resident peritoneal NK cells.

Gonzaga R(1), Matzinger P, Perez-Diez A.

Author information: 
(1)Ghost Laboratory, T Cell Memory and Tolerance Section, Laboratory of Cellular 
and Molecular Immunology, National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

In this study, we describe a new population of NK cells that reside in the
normal, uninflamed peritoneal cavity. Phenotypically, they share some
similarities with the small population of CD49b(-), CD27(+) immature splenic NK
cells, as well as liver NK cells, but they differ in their expression of CD62L,
TRAIL, and EOMES. Functionally, the peritoneal NK cells resemble the immature
splenic NK cells in their production of IFN-<U+03B3>, GM-CSF, and TNF-a and in the
killing of YAC-1 target cells. We also found that the peritoneum induces
different behavior in mature and immature splenic NK cells. When transferred i.v.
into RAG<U+03B3>c knockout mice, both populations undergo homeostatic proliferation in
the spleen, but only the immature splenic NK cells are able to reach the
peritoneum. When transferred directly into the peritoneum, the mature NK cells
survive but do not divide, whereas the immature NK cells proliferate profusely.
These data suggest that the peritoneum is not only home to a new subset of
tissue-resident NK cells, but that it differentially regulates the migration and 
homeostatic proliferation of immature versus mature NK cells.

PMCID: PMC3237802
PMID: 22079985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Cytokine. 2012 Jan;57(1):191-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.10.006. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

IL-4 acts as a potent stimulator of IFN-<U+03B3> expression in CD8+ T cells through
STAT6-dependent and independent induction of Eomesodermin and T-bet.

Oliver JA(1), Stolberg VR, Chensue SW, King PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5620, USA.

CD8+ T cell synthesis of IFN-<U+03B3> is an important component of the CD8+ T cell
immune response. In short-term cultures of murine pan-T cells, we found that IL-4
was the principal cytokine responsible for driving IFN-<U+03B3> synthesis by
CD3/CD28-activated CD8+ T cells. IL-4 was able to induce low levels of IFN-<U+03B3> mRNA
in CD8+ T cells even in the absence of CD3/CD28 engagement, although concomitant 
CD3/CD28 stimulation was necessary for IFN-<U+03B3> secretion. IL-4 induction of IFN-<U+03B3>
was explained by its ability to induce Eomesodermin and T-bet transcription
factors whose expression was further increased by CD3/CD28. Expression of
Eomesodermin, T-bet and IFN-<U+03B3> induced by IL-4 was partially dependent upon
activation of MAPK and PI3K but independent of the canonical IL-4-activated
transcription factor, STAT6. In contrast, expression of IFN-<U+03B3> induced by
IL-4/CD3/CD28 stimulation showed additional dependency upon STAT6 which functions
to increase expression of Eomesodermin specifically. These novel findings point
to a function for IL-4 as a direct regulator of IFN-<U+03B3> expression in CD8+ T cells 
and reveal the molecular mechanisms involved.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3246089
PMID: 22078635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Neurosci. 2011 Oct 26;31(43):15604-17. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4439-11.2011.

FGF signaling expands embryonic cortical surface area by regulating
Notch-dependent neurogenesis.

Rash BG(1), Lim HD, Breunig JJ, Vaccarino FM.

Author information: 
(1)Yale Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

The processes regulating cortical surface area expansion during development and
evolution are unknown. We show that loss of function of all fibroblast growth
factor receptors (FgfRs) expressed at the earliest stages of cortical development
causes severe deficits in surface area growth by embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) in
the mouse. In FgfR mutants, accelerated production of neurons led to severe loss 
of radial progenitors and premature termination of neurogenesis. Nevertheless,
these mutants showed remarkably little change in cortical layer structure.
Birth-dating experiments indicated that a greater proportion of layer fates was
generated during early neurogenic stages, revealing that FgfR activity normally
slows the temporal progression of cortical layer fates. Electroporation of a
dominant-negative FgfR at E11.5 increased cortical neurogenesis in normal
mice--an effect that was blocked by simultaneous activation of the Notch pathway.
Together with changes in the expression of Notch pathway genes in FgfR mutant
embryos, these findings indicate that Notch lies downstream of FgfR signaling in 
the same pathway regulating cortical neurogenesis and begin to establish a
mechanism for regulating cortical surface expansion.

PMCID: PMC3235689
PMID: 22031906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Dec;155A(12):3035-41. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34078. Epub 2011
Oct 14.

New recessive syndrome of microcephaly, cerebellar hypoplasia, and congenital
heart conduction defect.

Zaki MS(1), Salam GM, Saleem SN, Dobyns WB, Issa MY, Sattar S, Gleeson JG.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research Division,
National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. mszaki60@internetegypt.com

We identified a two-branch consanguineous family in which four affected members
(three females and one male) presented with constitutive growth delay, severe
psychomotor retardation, microcephaly, cerebellar hypoplasia, and second-degree
heart block. They also shared distinct facial features and similar appearance of 
their hands and feet. Childhood-onset insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
developed in one affected child around the age of 9 years. Molecular analysis
excluded mutations in potentially related genes such as PTF1A, EIF2AK3, EOMES,
and WDR62. This condition appears to be unique of other known conditions,
suggesting a unique clinical entity of autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3415795
PMID: 22002884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Neurosci. 2011 Sep 21;31(38):13400-11. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2944-11.2011.

Cocaine alters BDNF expression and neuronal migration in the embryonic mouse
forebrain.

McCarthy DM(1), Zhang X, Darnell SB, Sangrey GR, Yanagawa Y, Sadri-Vakili G,
Bhide PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and NeuroEpigenetcis Laboratory, MassGeneral Institute
for Neurodegenerative Disease, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General
Hospital, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Prenatal cocaine exposure impairs brain development and produces lasting
alterations in cognitive function. In a prenatal cocaine exposure mouse model, we
found that tangential migration of GABA neurons from the basal to the dorsal
forebrain and radial neuron migration within the dorsal forebrain were
significantly decreased during the embryonic period. The decrease in the
tangential migration occurred early in gestation and normalized by late
gestation, despite ongoing cocaine exposure. The decrease in radial migration was
associated with altered laminar positioning of neurons in the medial prefrontal
cortex. The cocaine exposure led to transient decreases in the expression of Tbr2
and Tbr1, transcription factors associated with intermediate progenitor cells and
newborn neurons of the dorsal forebrain, respectively, although neurogenesis was 
not significantly altered. Since cocaine can modulate brain derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) expression in the mature brain, we examined whether cocaine can
alter BDNF expression in the embryonic brain. We found a transient decrease in
BDNF protein expression in the cocaine-exposed embryonic forebrain early in
gestation. By late gestation, the BDNF expression recovered to control levels,
despite ongoing cocaine exposure. In basal forebrain explants from
cocaine-exposed embryos, cell migration was significantly decreased,
corroborating the in vivo data on tangential GABA neuron migration. Since BDNF
can influence tangential neuronal migration, we added BDNF to the culture medium 
and observed increased cell migration. Our data suggest that cocaine can alter
tangential and radial neuronal migration as well as BDNF expression in the
embryonic brain and that decreased BDNF may mediate cocaine's effects on neuronal
migration.

PMCID: PMC3182852
PMID: 21940433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Immunol. 2011 Oct 1;187(7):3555-64. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101244. Epub 2011
Aug 31.

CD134 plus CD137 dual costimulation induces Eomesodermin in CD4 T cells to
program cytotoxic Th1 differentiation.

Qui HZ(1), Hagymasi AT, Bandyopadhyay S, St Rose MC, Ramanarasimhaiah R, Ménoret 
A, Mittler RS, Gordon SM, Reiner SL, Vella AT, Adler AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
CT 06030, USA.

Cytotoxic CD4 Th1 cells are emerging as a therapeutically useful T cell lineage
that can effectively target tumors, but until now the pathways that govern their 
differentiation have been poorly understood. We demonstrate that CD134 (OX40)
costimulation programs naive self- and virus-reactive CD4 T cells to undergo in
vivo differentiation into cytotoxic Th1 effectors. CD137 (4-1BB) costimulation
maximized clonal expansion, and IL-2 was necessary for cytotoxic Th1
differentiation. Importantly, the T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin was
critical for inducing the cytotoxic marker granzyme B. CD134 plus CD137 dual
costimulation also imprinted a cytotoxic phenotype on bystanding CD4 T cells.
Thus, to our knowledge, the current study identifies for the first time a
specific costimulatory pathway and an intracellular mechanism relying on
Eomesodermin that induces both Ag-specific and bystander cytotoxic CD4 Th1 cells.
This mechanism might be therapeutically useful because CD134 plus CD137 dual
costimulation induced CD4 T cell-dependent tumoricidal function in a mouse
melanoma model.

PMCID: PMC3178659
PMID: 21880986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 May 20;21(8):1250-63. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0578. Epub 2011 
Oct 19.

A model of early human embryonic stem cell differentiation reveals inter- and
intracellular changes on transition to squamous epithelium.

Galat V(1), Malchenko S, Galat Y, Ishkin A, Nikolsky Y, Kosak ST, Soares BM,
Iannaccone P, Crispino JD, Hendrix MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, iPS and Human Stem Cell Core Facility,
Children's Memorial Research Center, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60614-3394, USA. v-galat@northwestern.edu

The molecular events leading to human embryonic stem cell (hESC) differentiation 
are the subject of considerable scrutiny. Here, we characterize an in vitro model
that permits analysis of the earliest steps in the transition of hESC colonies to
squamous epithelium on basic fibroblast growth factor withdrawal. A set of
markers (GSC, CK18, Gata4, Eomes, and Sox17) point to a mesendodermal nature of
the epithelial cells with subsequent commitment to definitive endoderm (Sox17,
Cdx2, nestin, and Islet1). We assayed alterations in the transcriptome in
parallel with the distribution of immunohistochemical markers. Our results
indicate that the alterations of tight junctions in pluripotent culture precede
the beginning of differentiation. We defined this cell population as "specified,"
as it is committed toward differentiation. The transitional zone between
"specified" pluripotent and differentiated cells displays significant
up-regulation of keratin-18 (CK18) along with a decrease in the functional
activity of gap junctions and the down-regulation of 2 gap junction proteins,
connexin 43 (Cx43) and connexin 45 (Cx45), which is coincidental with substantial
elevation of intracellular Ca2+ levels. These findings reveal a set of cellular
changes that may represent the earliest markers of in vitro hESC transition to an
epithelial phenotype, before the induction of gene expression networks that guide
hESC differentiation. Moreover, we hypothesize that these events may be common
during the primary steps of hESC commitment to functionally varied epithelial
tissue derivatives of different embryological origins.

PMCID: PMC3353739
PMID: 21861759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Immunol. 2011 Sep 15;187(6):3133-44. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101097. Epub 2011
Aug 15.

Development and function of innate polyclonal TCRalphabeta+ CD8+ thymocytes.

Rafei M(1), Hardy MP, Williams P, Vanegas JR, Forner KA, Dulude G, Labrecque N,
Galipeau J, Perreault C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada.

Innate CD8 T cells are found in mutant mouse models, but whether they are
produced in a normal thymus remains controversial. Using the RAG2p-GFP mouse
model, we found that ~10% of TCRaß(+) CD4(-)CD8(+) thymocytes were innate
polyclonal T cells (GFP(+)CD44(hi)). Relative to conventional T cells, innate CD8
thymocytes displayed increased cell surface amounts of B7-H1, CD2, CD5, CD38,
IL-2Rß, and IL-4Ra and downmodulation of TCRß. Moreover, they overexpressed
several transcripts, including T-bet, Id3, Klf2, and, most of all, Eomes. Innate 
CD8 thymocytes were positively selected, mainly by nonhematopoietic MHCIa(+)
cells. They rapidly produced high levels of IFN-<U+03B3> upon stimulation and readily
proliferated in response to IL-2 and IL-4. Furthermore, low numbers of innate CD8
thymocytes were sufficient to help conventional CD8 T cells expand and secrete
cytokine following Ag recognition. This helper effect depended on CD44-mediated
interactions between innate and conventional CD8 T cells. We concluded that
innate TCRaß(+) CD8 T cells represent a sizeable proportion of normal thymocytes 
whose development and function differ in many ways from those of conventional CD8
T cells.

PMID: 21844388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Aug 7;13(9):1084-91. doi: 10.1038/ncb2304.

The T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin acts upstream of Mesp1 to specify
cardiac mesoderm during mouse gastrulation.

Costello I(1), Pimeisl IM, Dräger S, Bikoff EK, Robertson EJ, Arnold SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, UK.

Instructive programmes guiding cell-fate decisions in the developing mouse embryo
are controlled by a few so-termed master regulators. Genetic studies demonstrate 
that the T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes) is essential for
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, mesoderm migration and specification of
definitive endoderm during gastrulation. Here we report that Eomes expression
within the primitive streak marks the earliest cardiac mesoderm and promotes
formation of cardiovascular progenitors by directly activating the bHLH
(basic-helix-loop-helix) transcription factor gene Mesp1 upstream of the core
cardiac transcriptional machinery. In marked contrast to Eomes/Nodal signalling
interactions that cooperatively regulate anterior-posterior axis patterning and
allocation of the definitive endoderm cell lineage, formation of cardiac
progenitors requires only low levels of Nodal activity accomplished through a
Foxh1/Smad4-independent mechanism. Collectively, our experiments demonstrate that
Eomes governs discrete context-dependent transcriptional programmes that
sequentially specify cardiac and definitive endoderm progenitors during
gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC4531310
PMID: 21822279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Immunity. 2011 Aug 26;35(2):169-81. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.07.009. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

MicroRNA-29 regulates T-box transcription factors and interferon-<U+03B3> production in 
helper T cells.

Steiner DF(1), Thomas MF, Hu JK, Yang Z, Babiarz JE, Allen CD, Matloubian M,
Blelloch R, Ansel KM.

Author information: 
(1)Sandler Asthma Basic Research Center and Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Sep;11(9):573.
    Immunotherapy. 2011 Nov;3(11):1291-2.

MicroRNA (miRNA)-deficient helper T cells exhibit abnormal IFN-<U+03B3> production and
decreased proliferation. However, the contributions of individual miRNAs to this 
phenotype remain poorly understood. We conducted a screen for miRNA function in
primary T cells and identified individual miRNAs that rescue the defects
associated with miRNA deficiency. Multiple members of the miR-17 and miR-92
families enhanced miRNA-deficient T cell proliferation whereas miR-29 largely
corrected their aberrant interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) expression. Repression of IFN-<U+03B3>
production by miR-29 involved direct targeting of both T-bet and Eomes, two
transcription factors known to induce IFN-<U+03B3> production. Although not usually
expressed at functionally relevant amounts in helper T cells, Eomes was abundant 
in miRNA-deficient cells and was upregulated after miR-29 inhibition in wild-type
cells. These results demonstrate that miR-29 regulates helper T cell
differentiation by repressing multiple target genes, including at least two that 
are independently capable of inducing the T helper 1 (Th1) cell gene expression
program.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3361370
PMID: 21820330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 1;17(17):5582-92. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2659.
Epub 2011 Jul 25.

Comprehensive genome methylation analysis in bladder cancer: identification and
validation of novel methylated genes and application of these as urinary tumor
markers.

Reinert T(1), Modin C, Castano FM, Lamy P, Wojdacz TK, Hansen LL, Wiuf C, Borre
M, Dyrskjøt L, Orntoft TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Urology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus N, Denmark.

PURPOSE: Epigenetic alterations are common and can now be addressed in a parallel
fashion. We investigated the methylation in bladder cancer with respect to
location in genome, consistency, variation in metachronous tumors, impact on
transcripts, chromosomal location, and usefulness as urinary markers.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A microarray assay was utilized to analyze methylation in 56
samples. Independent validation was conducted in 63 samples by a PCR-based method
and bisulfite sequencing. The methylation levels in 174 urine specimens were
quantified. Transcript levels were analyzed using expression microarrays and
pathways were analyzed using dedicated software.
RESULTS: Global methylation patterns were established within and outside CpG
islands. We validated methylation of the eight tumor markers genes ZNF154 (P <
0.0001), HOXA9 (P < 0.0001), POU4F2 (P < 0.0001), EOMES (P = 0.0005), ACOT11 (P =
0.0001), PCDHGA12 (P = 0.0001), CA3 (P = 0.0002), and PTGDR (P = 0.0110), the
candidate marker of disease progression TBX4 (P < 0.04), and other genes with
stage-specific methylation. The methylation of metachronous tumors was stable and
targeted to certain pathways. The correlation to expression was not stringent.
Chromosome 21 showed most differential methylation (P < 0.0001) and specifically 
hypomethylation of keratins, which together with keratin-like proteins were
epigenetically regulated. In DNA from voided urine, we detected differential
methylation of ZNF154 (P < 0.0001), POU4F2 (P < 0.0001), HOXA9 (P < 0.0001), and 
EOMES (P < 0.0001), achieving 84% sensitivity and 96% specificity.
CONCLUSIONS: We initiated a detailed mapping of the methylome in metachronous
bladder cancer. Novel genes with tumor, chromosome, as well as pathway-specific
differential methylation in bladder cancer were identified. The methylated genes 
were promising cancer markers for early detection of bladder cancer.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21788354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Gene Expr Patterns. 2012 Jan-Feb;12(1-2):85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2011.06.003.
Epub 2011 Jul 8.

Identification of a conserved cis-acting region driving expression of mouse
Eomesodermin to the primitive streak, node, and definitive endoderm.

Wolf XA(1), Klein T, Garcia R, Hyttel P, Serup P.

Author information: 
(1)Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels Steensensvej 6, DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark. 
xea@hagedorn.dk

The cis-acting elements that regulate Eomes transcription during embryonic
development are largely unknown. Here we identify a conserved cis-acting region
(EoIV) located ~20kb upstream of the Eomes coding region that faithfully drives
reporter expression to sites of Eomes expression during gastrulation. Transgenic 
EoIV-hsp68-GFP expression was evident in the epiblast of early-streak stage mouse
embryos at the site where the primitive streak is initiated. At the mid- and
late-streak stages, EoIV-hsp68-GFP expression was found in the streak, node
region and definitive endoderm with a particular intensive GFP expression in the 
node region. At the early head fold stage, GFP was expressed in the node region
and the surrounding endoderm. In contrast to earlier reports of Eomes mRNA
expression, we confirmed Eomes protein expression in the node of early head fold 
embryos by immunohistochemistry. In vitro, EoIV-hsp68-GFP expression was
activated ES cells differentiating into primitive streak-like progeny in response
to Bmp and activin treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21763783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Neurosci. 2011 Jul 6;31(27):10088-100. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1324-11.2011.

Requirement for DNA ligase IV during embryonic neuronal development.

Gatz SA(1), Ju L, Gruber R, Hoffmann E, Carr AM, Wang ZQ, Liu C, Jeggo PA.

Author information: 
(1)Development and Stem Cell Institute, Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education, 
Department of Paediatrics, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2011 Sep 21;31(38):13695.

The embryonic ventricular and subventricular zones (VZ/SVZ) contain the neuronal 
stem and progenitor cells and undergo rapid proliferation. The intermediate zone 
(IZ) contains nonreplicating, differentiated cells. The VZ/SVZ is hypersensitive 
to radiation-induced apoptosis. Ablation of DNA non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ)
proteins, XRCC4 or DNA ligase IV (LigIV), confers ataxia telangiectasia mutated
(ATM)-dependent apoptosis predominantly in the IZ. We examine the mechanistic
basis underlying these distinct sensitivities using a viable LigIV (Lig4(Y288C)) 
mouse, which permits an examination of the DNA damage responses in the embryonic 
and adult brain. Via combined analysis of DNA breakage, apoptosis, and cell-cycle
checkpoint control in tissues, we show that apoptosis in the VZ/SVZ and IZ is
activated by low numbers of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Unexpectedly, high
sensitivity in the VZ/SVZ arises from sensitive activation of ATM-dependent
apoptosis plus an ATM-independent process. In contrast, the IZ appears to be
hypersensitive to persistent DSBs. NHEJ functions efficiently in both
compartments. The VZ/SVZ and IZ regions incur high endogenous DNA breakage, which
correlates with VZ proliferation. We demonstrate a functional G(2)/M checkpoint
in VZ/SVZ cells and show that it is not activated by low numbers of DSBs,
allowing damaged VZ/SVZ cells to transit into the IZ. We propose a novel model in
which microcephaly in LIG4 syndrome arises from sensitive apoptotic induction
from persisting DSBs in the IZ, which arise from high endogenous breakage in the 
VZ/SVZ and transit of damaged cells to the IZ. The VZ/SVZ, in contrast, is highly
sensitive to acute radiation-induced DSB formation.

PMCID: PMC3154654
PMID: 21734301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Immunol Res. 2011 Aug;50(2-3):269-75. doi: 10.1007/s12026-011-8227-9.

T-cell-mediated tumor immune surveillance and expression of B7 co-inhibitory
molecules in cancers of the upper gastrointestinal tract.

Lu B(1), Chen L, Liu L, Zhu Y, Wu C, Jiang J, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, E1047
BST, 200 Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. Binfeng@pitt.edu

Tumorigenesis can induce adaptive T-cell-mediated immune responses against
malignant cells. Such cellular immune responses are actively suppressed by cancer
cells via mechanisms of immune tolerance. We studied T-cell responses against
tumor growth by examining tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in upper
gastrointestinal (GI) cancers. The number of T-bet(+) TILs correlates with better
survival of esophageal cancer patients. Using well-defined mouse models, we have 
further shown that T-bet and Eomes are both required for the adaptive anti-tumor 
immunity by regulating T-cell trafficking into the tumor tissue and their
effector functions inside the tumor microenvironment. In order to gain further
insight into the tumor immune microenvironment in the upper GI cancer, we have
also studied expression levels of co-inhibitory molecules such as B7-H1/PD-L1 and
B7-H4 in tissue specimens of esophageal and gastric cancers. These inhibitory B7 
molecules were expressed at high but variable levels by cancer cells. The
overexpression of these molecules correlates with poor clinicopathological
parameters and shorter patient survival time. The number of CD3(+) and CD8(+)
TILs correlates inversely with expression levels of B7-H4 in samples from
esophageal cancer, supporting a role of active immune suppression by inhibitory
B7 molecules in the tumor microenvironment. In addition, TILs show functional
exhaustion and express high levels of PD-1 and Tim-3. We propose that metabolic
competition mediated by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases (PI3Ks) characterizes the 
immune suppression within cancer tissues. Future tumor vaccine design should
combine blockade of B7 inhibitory molecules and enhancement of T-bet and Eomes
levels within the tumor microenvironment.

PMID: 21717068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Reprod Dev. 2011 Jul;78(7):519-28. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21342. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Eomesodermin, HAND1, and CSH1 proteins are induced by cellular stress in a
stress-activated protein kinase-dependent manner.

Awonuga AO(1), Zhong W, Abdallah ME, Slater JA, Zhou SC, Xie YF, Puscheck EE,
Rappolee DA.

Author information: 
(1)C.S. Mott Center for Human Growth and Development, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Wayne
State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Eomesodermin (Eomes) is a transcription factor essential for trophoblast
development. Stress stimuli activate stress-activated protein kinase (MAPK8/9)
and modulate transcription factors in trophoblast stem cells (TSC). In this
study, we test the hypothesis that stress-induced Eomes upregulation and
downstream trophoblast development are MAPK8/9-dependent. Immunocytochemical and 
immunoblot assays suggest that Eomes is induced by hyperosmolar stress in a dose-
and time-dependent manner. Two MAPK8/9 inhibitors that work by different
mechanisms, LJNKl1 and SP600125, block induction of Eomes protein by stress.
During normal TSC differentiation, the transcription factor heart and neural
crest derivatives expressed 1 (HAND1) is dependent on Eomes, and chorionic
somatomammotropin hormone 1 (CSH1) expression is dependent on HAND1. Similar to
Eomes, HAND1 and CSH1 induction by stress are MAPK8/9-dependent, and CSH1 is
induced in nearly all stressed TSC. CSH1 induction normally requires
downregulation of the transcription factor inhibitor of differentiation 2 (ID2)
as well as HAND1 upregulation. It was shown previously that hyperosmolar stress
induces AMP-activated protein kinase (PRKAA1/2)-dependent ID2 loss in a
MAPK8/9-independent manner. Inhibition of PRKAA1/2 with compound C and LJNKl1,
more than MAPK8/9 inhibitors alone, inhibits the induction of CSH1 by stress.
Taken together these data suggest that stress-induced MAPK8/9 and PRKAA1/2
regulate transcription factors Eomes/HAND1 and ID2, respectively. Together this
network mediates induction of CSH1 by stress. Therefore, stress triggers a
proportional increase in a normal early TSC differentiation event that could be
adaptive in inducing CSH1. But the flexibility of TSC to undergo stress-induced
differentiation could lead to pathophysiological consequences if stress endured
and TSC differentiation became unbalanced.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3140599
PMID: 21710638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Stem Cells. 2011 Aug;29(8):1269-82. doi: 10.1002/stem.678.

Geminin regulates cortical progenitor proliferation and differentiation.

Spella M(1), Kyrousi C, Kritikou E, Stathopoulou A, Guillemot F, Kioussis D,
Pachnis V, Lygerou Z, Taraviras S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical School, University of Patras, Patras,
Greece.

During cortical development, coordination of proliferation and differentiation
ensures the timely generation of different neural progenitor lineages that will
give rise to mature neurons and glia. Geminin is an inhibitor of DNA replication 
and it has been proposed to regulate cell proliferation and fate determination
during neurogenesis via interactions with transcription factors and chromatin
remodeling complexes. To investigate the in vivo role of Geminin in the
maintenance and differentiation of cortical neural progenitors, we have generated
mice that lack Geminin expression in the developing cortex. Our results show that
loss of Geminin leads to the expansion of neural progenitor cells located at the 
ventricular and subventricular zones of the developing cortex. Early cortical
progenitors lacking Geminin exhibit a longer S-phase and a reduced ability to
generate early born neurons, consistent with a preference on self-renewing
divisions. Overexpression of Geminin in progenitor cells of the cortex reduces
the number of neural progenitor cells, promotes cell cycle exit and subsequent
neuronal differentiation. Our study suggests that Geminin has an important role
during cortical development in regulating progenitor number and ultimately neuron
generation.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21681860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. PLoS Genet. 2011 May;7(5):e1002072. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002072. Epub 2011 
May 26.

Nodal-dependent mesendoderm specification requires the combinatorial activities
of FoxH1 and Eomesodermin.

Slagle CE(1), Aoki T, Burdine RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, 
United States of America.

Vertebrate mesendoderm specification requires the Nodal signaling pathway and its
transcriptional effector FoxH1. However, loss of FoxH1 in several species does
not reliably cause the full range of loss-of-Nodal phenotypes, indicating that
Nodal signals through additional transcription factors during early development. 
We investigated the FoxH1-dependent and -independent roles of Nodal signaling
during mesendoderm patterning using a novel recessive zebrafish FoxH1 mutation
called midway, which produces a C-terminally truncated FoxH1 protein lacking the 
Smad-interaction domain but retaining DNA-binding capability. Using a combination
of gel shift assays, Nodal overexpression experiments, and genetic epistasis
analyses, we demonstrate that midway more accurately represents a complete loss
of FoxH1-dependent Nodal signaling than the existing zebrafish FoxH1 mutant
schmalspur. Maternal-zygotic midway mutants lack notochords, in agreement with
FoxH1 loss in other organisms, but retain near wild-type expression of markers of
endoderm and various nonaxial mesoderm fates, including paraxial and intermediate
mesoderm and blood precursors. We found that the activity of the T-box
transcription factor Eomesodermin accounts for specification of these tissues in 
midway embryos. Inhibition of Eomesodermin in midway mutants severely reduces the
specification of these tissues and effectively phenocopies the defects seen upon 
complete loss of Nodal signaling. Our results indicate that the specific
combinations of transcription factors available for signal transduction play
critical and separable roles in determining Nodal pathway output during
mesendoderm patterning. Our findings also offer novel insights into the
co-evolution of the Nodal signaling pathway, the notochord specification program,
and the chordate branch of the deuterostome family of animals.

PMCID: PMC3102743
PMID: 21637786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Oct 1;92(1):115-22. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr158. Epub 2011 Jun
1.

Induction of MesP1 by Brachyury(T) generates the common multipotent
cardiovascular stem cell.

David R(1), Jarsch VB, Schwarz F, Nathan P, Gegg M, Lickert H, Franz WM.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik I, Klinikum Großhadern der LMU,
Marchioninistr. 15, D-81377 München, Germany. robert.david@med.uni-muenchen.de

AIMS: Our recent work demonstrated that common cardiovascular progenitor cells
are characterized and induced by the expression of the transcription factor
mesoderm posterior1 (MesP1) in vertebrate embryos and murine embryonic stem
cells. As the proliferative potential of stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes is
limited, it is crucial to understand how MesP1 expression is mediated in order to
achieve reasonable and reliable yields for novel stem cell-based therapeutic
options. As potential upstream regulators of MesP1, we therefore analysed Eomes
and Brachyury(T), which had been controversially discussed as being crucial for
cardiovasculogenic lineage formation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Wild-type and transgenic murine embryonic stem cell lines,
mRNA analyses, embryoid body formation, and cell sorting revealed that the MesP1 
positive population emerges from the Brachyury(T) positive fraction. In situ
hybridizations using wild-type mouse embryos confirmed that Brachyury(T)
colocalises with MesP1 in vivo. Likewise, shRNA-based loss of Brachyury(T) causes
a dramatic decrease in MesP1 expression accompanied by reduced cardiac markers in
differentiating embryonic stem cells, which is reflected in vivo via in situ
hybridizations using Brachyury(T) knock-out embryos where MesP1 mRNA is greatly
abolished. We finally defined a 3.4 kb proximal MesP1-promoter fragment which is 
directly bound and activated by Brachyury(T) via a T responsive element as shown 
via bandshift, chromatin immuneprecipitation, and reporter assays.
CONCLUSION: Our work contributes to the understanding of the earliest
cardiovasculogenic events and may become an important prerequisite for cell
therapy, tissue engineering, and pharmacological testing in the culture dish
using pluripotent stem cell-derived as well as directly reprogrammed
cardiovascular cell types.

PMID: 21632880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Cereb Cortex. 2012 Jan;22(1):144-57. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr097. Epub 2011 May
30.

Early postnatal migration and development of layer II pyramidal neurons in the
rodent cingulate/retrosplenial cortex.

Zgraggen E(1), Boitard M, Roman I, Kanemitsu M, Potter G, Salmon P, Vutskits L,
Dayer AG, Kiss JZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of Geneva Medical School, CH-1211
Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The cingulate and retrosplenial regions are major components of the dorsomedial
(dm) limbic cortex and have been implicated in a range of cognitive functions
such as emotion, attention, and spatial memory. While the structure and
connectivity of these cortices are well characterized, little is known about
their development. Notably, the timing and mode of migration that govern the
appropriate positioning of late-born neurons remain unknown. Here, we analyzed
migratory events during the early postnatal period from
ventricular/subventricular zone (VZ/SVZ) to the cerebral cortex by transducing
neuronal precursors in the VZ/SVZ of newborn rats/mice with Tomato/green
fluorescent protein-encoding lentivectors. We have identified a pool of
postmitotic pyramidal precursors in the dm part of the neonatal VZ/SVZ that
migrate into the medial limbic cortex during the first postnatal week. Time-lapse
imaging demonstrates that these cells migrate on radial glial fibers by
locomotion and display morphological and behavioral changes as they travel
through the white matter and enter into the cortical gray matter. In the granular
retrosplenial cortex, these cells give rise to a Satb2+ pyramidal subtype and
develop dendritic bundles in layer I. Our observations provide the first insight 
into the patterns and dynamics of cell migration into the medial limbic cortex.

PMID: 21625013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Immunity. 2011 May 27;34(5):741-54. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.02.021. Epub 2011 
May 19.

Transcription factor Smad-independent T helper 17 cell induction by
transforming-growth factor-ß is mediated by suppression of eomesodermin.

Ichiyama K(1), Sekiya T, Inoue N, Tamiya T, Kashiwagi I, Kimura A, Morita R, Muto
G, Shichita T, Takahashi R, Yoshimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) has been shown to be required for Th17 cell 
differentiation via Smad-independent mechanisms. The molecular mechanism
underlying this pathway remains to be clarified, however. We searched for genes
regulated by TGF-ß through the Smad-independent pathway by using Smad2 and Smad3 
double-deficient T cells and identified the transcription factor Eomesodermin
(Eomes), whose expression was suppressed by TGF-ß via the c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK)-c-Jun signaling pathway. Inhibition of JNK strongly suppressed disease in
an in vivo EAE model as well as in vitro Th17 cell induction. Overexpression of
Eomes substantially suppressed Th17 cell differentiation, whereas ablation of
Eomes expression could substitute for TGF-ß in Th17 cell induction in primary
T cells. Eomes suppressed Rorc and Il17a promoters by directly binding to the
proximal region of these promoters. In conclusion, the suppression of Eomes by
TGF-ß via the JNK pathway is an important mechanism for Smad-independent Th17
cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21600798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Immunol. 2011 May 15;186(10):5749-57. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002825. Epub 2011 
Apr 8.

MHC class II-restricted interaction between thymocytes plays an essential role in
the production of innate CD8+ T cells.

Min HS(1), Lee YJ, Jeon YK, Kim EJ, Kang BH, Jung KC, Chang CH, Park SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
110-799 Seoul, Korea.

We have recently shown that MHC class II-dependent thymocyte-thymocyte (T-T)
interaction successfully generates CD4(+) T cells (T-T CD4(+) T cells), and that 
T-T CD4(+) T cells expressing promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger protein (PLZF)
show an innate property both in mice and humans. In this article, we report that 
the thymic T-T interaction is essential for the conversion of CD8(+) T cells into
innate phenotype in the physiological condition. CD8(+) T cells developed in the 
presence of PLZF(+) CD4(+) T cells showed marked upregulation of eomesodermin
(Eomes), activation/memory phenotype, and rapid production of IFN-<U+03B3> on ex vivo
stimulation. Their development was highly dependent on the PLZF expression in T-T
CD4(+) T cells and the IL-4 secreted by PLZF(+) T-T CD4(+) T cells. The same
events may take place in humans, as a substantial number of Eomes expressing
innate CD8(+) T cells were found in human fetal thymi and spleens. It suggests
that PLZF(+) T-T CD4(+) T cells in combination with Eomes(+) CD8(+) T cells might
actively participate in the innate immune response against various pathogens,
particularly in human perinatal period.

PMCID: PMC3192403
PMID: 21478404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Neural Dev. 2011 Apr 5;6:12. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-12.

Sequential generation of olfactory bulb glutamatergic neurons by
Neurog2-expressing precursor cells.

Winpenny E(1), Lebel-Potter M, Fernandez ME, Brill MS, Götz M, Guillemot F,
Raineteau O.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Robinson Way, CB2 0PY Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: While the diversity and spatio-temporal origin of olfactory bulb (OB)
GABAergic interneurons has been studied in detail, much less is known about the
subtypes of glutamatergic OB interneurons.
RESULTS: We studied the temporal generation and diversity of Neurog2-positive
precursor progeny using an inducible genetic fate mapping approach. We show that 
all subtypes of glutamatergic neurons derive from Neurog2 positive progenitors
during development of the OB. Projection neurons, that is, mitral and tufted
cells, are produced at early embryonic stages, while a heterogeneous population
of glutamatergic juxtaglomerular neurons are generated at later embryonic as well
as at perinatal stages. While most juxtaglomerular neurons express the T-Box
protein Tbr2, those generated later also express Tbr1. Based on morphological
features, these juxtaglomerular cells can be identified as tufted interneurons
and short axon cells, respectively. Finally, targeted electroporation experiments
provide evidence that while the majority of OB glutamatergic neurons are
generated from intrabulbar progenitors, a small portion of them originate from
extrabulbar regions at perinatal ages.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first comprehensive analysis of the temporal and
spatial generation of OB glutamatergic neurons and identify distinct populations 
of juxtaglomerular interneurons that differ in their antigenic properties and
time of origin.

PMCID: PMC3087671
PMID: 21466690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. BMC Immunol. 2011 Mar 23;12:22. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-12-22.

Human CD8 T cells generated in vitro from hematopoietic stem cells are
functionally mature.

Awong G(1), Herer E, La Motte-Mohs RN, Zúñiga-Pflücker JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, and Sunnybrook Research
Institute, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M4N 3M5, Canada.

BACKGROUND: T cell development occurs within the highly specialized thymus.
Cytotoxic CD8 T cells are critical in adaptive immunity by targeting virally
infected or tumor cells. In this study, we addressed whether functional CD8 T
cells can be generated fully in vitro using human umbilical cord blood (UCB)
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in coculture with OP9-DL1 cells.
RESULTS: HSC/OP9-DL1 cocultures supported the differentiation of CD8 T cells,
which were TCR/CD3(hi) CD27(hi) CD1a(neg) and thus phenotypically resembled
mature functional CD8 single positive thymocytes. These in vitro-generated T
cells also appeared to be conventional CD8 cells, as they expressed high levels
of Eomes and low levels of Plzf, albeit not identical to ex vivo UCB CD8 T cells.
Consistent with the phenotypic and molecular characterization, upon
TCR-stimulation, in vitro-generated CD8 T cells proliferated, expressed
activation markers (MHC-II, CD25, CD38), secreted IFN-<U+03B3> and expressed Granzyme B,
a cytotoxic T-cell effector molecule.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, the ability to direct human hematopoietic stem cell
or T-progenitor cells towards a mature functional phenotype raises the
possibility of establishing cell-based treatments for T-immunodeficiencies by
rapidly restoring CD8 effector function, thereby mitigating the risks associated 
with opportunistic infections.

PMCID: PMC3072939
PMID: 21429219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 5;108(14):5724-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1013084108. Epub 2011 Mar 21.

Single-cell gene-expression profiling reveals qualitatively distinct CD8 T cells 
elicited by different gene-based vaccines.

Flatz L(1), Roychoudhuri R, Honda M, Filali-Mouhim A, Goulet JP, Kettaf N, Lin M,
Roederer M, Haddad EK, Sékaly RP, Nabel GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Research Center, National Institute for Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-3005, USA.

CD8 T cells play a key role in mediating protective immunity against selected
pathogens after vaccination. Understanding the mechanism of this protection is
dependent upon definition of the heterogeneity and complexity of cellular immune 
responses generated by different vaccines. Here, we identify previously
unrecognized subsets of CD8 T cells based upon analysis of gene-expression
patterns within single cells and show that they are differentially induced by
different vaccines. Three prime-boost vector combinations encoding HIV Env
stimulated antigen-specific CD8 T-cell populations of similar magnitude,
phenotype, and functionality. Remarkably, however, analysis of single-cell
gene-expression profiles enabled discrimination of a majority of central memory
(CM) and effector memory (EM) CD8 T cells elicited by the three vaccines. Subsets
of T cells could be defined based on their expression of Eomes, Cxcr3, and Ccr7, 
or Klrk1, Klrg1, and Ccr5 in CM and EM cells, respectively. Of CM cells elicited 
by DNA prime-recombinant adenoviral (rAd) boost vectors, 67% were Eomes(-)
Ccr7(+) Cxcr3(-), in contrast to only 7% and 2% stimulated by rAd5-rAd5 or
rAd-LCMV, respectively. Of EM cells elicited by DNA-rAd, 74% were Klrk1(-)
Klrg1(-)Ccr5(-) compared with only 26% and 20% for rAd5-rAd5 or rAd5-LCMV.
Definition by single-cell gene profiling of specific CM and EM CD8 T-cell subsets
that are differentially induced by different gene-based vaccines will facilitate 
the design and evaluation of vaccines, as well as enable our understanding of
mechanisms of protective immunity.

PMCID: PMC3078363
PMID: 21422297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Immunol. 2011 Apr 15;186(8):4573-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100037. Epub 2011
Mar 7.

Requirements for eomesodermin and promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger in the
development of innate-like CD8+ T cells.

Gordon SM(1), Carty SA, Kim JS, Zou T, Smith-Garvin J, Alonzo ES, Haimm E,
Sant'Angelo DB, Koretzky GA, Reiner SL, Jordan MS.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Conventional and nonconventional T cell development occur in the thymus.
Nonconventional thymocytes that bear characteristics typically associated with
innate immune cells are termed innate-like lymphocytes (ILLs). Mice harboring a
tyrosine to phenylalanine mutation in the adaptor protein Src homology 2
domain-containing leukocyte protein of 76 kDa at residue 145 (Y145F mice) develop
an expanded population of CD8(+)CD122(+)CD44(+) ILLs, typified by expression of
the T-box transcription factor eomesodermin. Y145F mice also have an expanded
population of <U+03B3>d T cells that produce copious amounts of IL-4 via a mechanism
that is dependent on the BTB-ZF transcription factor promyelocytic leukemia zinc 
finger. Using mice with T cell-specific deletion of Eomes, we demonstrate that
this transcription factor is required for CD8(+) ILL development in Y145F as well
as wild-type mice. Moreover, we show that promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger and 
IL-4 are also required for the generation of this ILL population. Taken together,
these data shed light on the cell-intrinsic and cell-extrinsic factors that drive
CD8(+) ILL differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3085897
PMID: 21383242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Immunol Lett. 2011 Jun 30;137(1-2):70-7. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.02.020. Epub
2011 Feb 24.

Oxygen tension regulates NK cells differentiation from hematopoietic stem cells
in vitro.

Yun S(1), Lee SH, Yoon SR, Myung PK, Choi I.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Therapy Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Natural killer (NK) cells are differentiated from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
which are located at the lowest end of an oxygen gradient within the bone marrow 
(BM). In this report, we investigated whether oxygen tension could affect NK cell
differentiation from hematopoietic cells in vitro. We found that hypoxia led to
an inhibition of differentiation in NK cells, and increased oxygen supply
alleviated this inhibition and restored NK cell differentiation under hypoxic
condition. Hypoxia-treated cells demonstrated reduced mRNA expression of
transcription factors (TFs) that have important roles in NK cell differentiation,
such as EOMES, T-bet, GATA-3 and ETS-1. Moreover, hypoxia-pretreated cells
recovered mRNA expression of TFs when the oxygen tension was changed to normoxia.
Our findings suggest that oxygen tension modulates in vitro differentiation of NK
cells through the regulation of TF expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21354208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Hum Pathol. 2011 Sep;42(9):1319-28. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.11.022. Epub 2011
Feb 16.

Transcription factors engaged in development of NK cells are commonly expressed
in nasal NK/T-cell lymphomas.

Zhang S(1), Li T, Zhang B, Nong L, Aozasa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 100034,
China.

Extranodal natural killer/T (NK/T)-cell lymphoma, nasal type, is a prevailing
tumor in Asia with distinct clinical, pathologic, and immunophenotypic features. 
Previous study revealed amplification and overexpression of T-bet in extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type. As a transcription factor, T-bet functionally
cooperates with its family member eomesodermin (EOMES) or ETS family members
(ETS-1 and MEF) and positively regulates the development and cytotoxic function
of natural killer (NK) cells. To evaluate their role in extranodal NK/T-cell
lymphoma, nasal type, the expression status and clinical relevance of these genes
were analyzed in 40 cases of this tumor by in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry. Tumor cells in all 40 cases expressed cytotoxic granule
proteins, of which 39 contained the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genome. Two (8.7%)
of 23 cases showed T-cell receptor (TCR) <U+03B3> gene clonal rearrangement, confirming 
cytotoxic T lineage of cell derivation. The expression level of T-bet as revealed
by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry was high in extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, (82.5% and 100%) and peripheral T-cell lymphomas 
(94.4% and 72.2%) but not in mature B-cell lymphomas in our control group (0% and
0%). By in situ hybridization, high expression of EOMES (80.0%), ETS-1 (82.5%),
and MEF (62.5%) was observed in cases of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal
type, but none of the control groups and cases expressed these molecules.
Coexpression of T-bet and EOMES, ETS-1, or MEF was found in 30 (75%), 25 (62.5%),
and 21 cases (52.5%), respectively. The frequency of coexpression of T-bet and
EOMES was significantly higher than that of other genes. Transcription factors
engaged in NK-cell development are highly expressed in extranodal NK/T-cell
lymphoma, nasal type, suggesting a role in the biologic behavior of this tumor.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21329961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Genes Dev. 2011 Feb 1;25(3):238-50. doi: 10.1101/gad.607311. Epub 2011 Jan 18.

Pluripotency factors regulate definitive endoderm specification through
eomesodermin.

Teo AK(1), Arnold SJ, Trotter MW, Brown S, Ang LT, Chng Z, Robertson EJ, Dunn NR,
Vallier L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Understanding the molecular mechanisms controlling early cell fate decisions in
mammals is a major objective toward the development of robust methods for the
differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into clinically relevant cell
types. Here, we used human embryonic stem cells and mouse epiblast stem cells to 
study specification of definitive endoderm in vitro. Using a combination of
whole-genome expression and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) deep sequencing 
(ChIP-seq) analyses, we established an hierarchy of transcription factors
regulating endoderm specification. Importantly, the pluripotency factors NANOG,
OCT4, and SOX2 have an essential function in this network by actively directing
differentiation. Indeed, these transcription factors control the expression of
EOMESODERMIN (EOMES), which marks the onset of endoderm specification. In turn,
EOMES interacts with SMAD2/3 to initiate the transcriptional network governing
endoderm formation. Together, these results provide for the first time a
comprehensive molecular model connecting the transition from pluripotency to
endoderm specification during mammalian development.

PMCID: PMC3034899
PMID: 21245162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Reproduction. 2011 Mar;141(3):321-32. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0536. Epub 2011 Jan 5.

Trophoblast stem cell marker gene expression in inner cell mass-derived cells
from parthenogenetic equine embryos.

Desmarais JA(1), Demers SP, Suzuki J Jr, Laflamme S, Vincent P, Laverty S, Smith 
LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biomedicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Centre
de Recherche en Reproduction Animale, University of Montreal, 3200 Sicotte,
St-Hyacinthe, Quebec J2S 7C6, Canada.

Although putative horse embryonic stem (ES)-like cell lines have been obtained
recently from in vivo-derived embryos, it is currently not known whether it is
possible to obtain ES cell (ESC) lines from somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) 
and parthenogenetic (PA) embryos. Our aim is to establish culture conditions for 
the derivation of autologous ESC lines for cell therapy studies in an equine
model. Our results indicate that both the use of early-stage blastocysts with a
clearly visible inner cell mass (ICM) and the use of pronase to dissect the ICM
allow the derivation of a higher proportion of primary ICM outgrowths from PA and
SCNT embryos. Primary ICM outgrowths express the molecular markers of
pluripotency POU class 5 homeobox 1 (POU5F1) and (sex determining region-Y)-box2 
(SOX2), and in some cases, NANOG. Cells obtained after the passages of PA primary
ICM outgrowths display alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and POU5F1, SOX2,
caudal-related homeobox-2 (CDX2) and eomesodermin (EOMES) expression, but may
lose NANOG. Cystic embryoid body-like structures expressing POU5F1, CDX2 and
EOMES were produced from these cells. Immunohistochemical analysis of equine
embryos reveals the presence of POU5F1 in trophectoderm, primitive endoderm and
ICM. These results suggest that cells obtained after passages of primary ICM
outgrowths are positive for trophoblast stem cell markers while expressing POU5F1
and displaying AP activity. Therefore, these cells most likely represent
trophoblast cells rather than true ESCs. This study represents an important first
step towards the production of autologous equine ESCs for pre-clinical cell
therapy studies on large animal models.

PMID: 21209071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 12;5(11):e13952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013952.

Sox2 is essential for formation of trophectoderm in the preimplantation embryo.

Keramari M(1), Razavi J, Ingman KA, Patsch C, Edenhofer F, Ward CM, Kimber SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: In preimplantation mammalian development the transcription factor
Sox2 (SRY-related HMG-box gene 2) forms a complex with Oct4 and functions in
maintenance of self-renewal of the pluripotent inner cell mass (ICM). Previously 
it was shown that Sox2-/- embryos die soon after implantation. However, maternal 
Sox2 transcripts may mask an earlier phenotype. We investigated whether Sox2 is
involved in controlling cell fate decisions at an earlier stage.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We addressed the question of an earlier role for Sox2 using
RNAi, which removes both maternal and embryonic Sox2 mRNA present during the
preimplantation period. By depleting both maternal and embryonic Sox2 mRNA at the
2-cell stage and monitoring embryo development in vitro we show that, in the
absence of Sox2, embryos arrest at the morula stage and fail to form
trophectoderm (TE) or cavitate. Following knock-down of Sox2 via three different 
short interfering RNA (siRNA) constructs in 2-cell stage mouse embryos, we have
shown that the majority of embryos (76%) arrest at the morula stage or slightly
earlier and only 18.7-21% form blastocysts compared to 76.2-83% in control
groups. In Sox2 siRNA-treated embryos expression of pluripotency associated
markers Oct4 and Nanog remained unaffected, whereas TE associated markers Tead4, 
Yap, Cdx2, Eomes, Fgfr2, as well as Fgf4, were downregulated in the absence of
Sox2. Apoptosis was also increased in Sox2 knock-down embryos. Rescue experiments
using cell-permeant Sox2 protein resulted in increased blastocyst formation from 
18.7% to 62.6% and restoration of Sox2, Oct4, Cdx2 and Yap protein levels in the 
rescued Sox2-siRNA blastocysts.
CONCLUSION AND SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that the first essential function of
Sox2 in the preimplantation mouse embryo is to facilitate establishment of the
trophectoderm lineage. Our findings provide a novel insight into the first
differentiation event within the preimplantation embryo, namely the segregation
of the ICM and TE lineages.

PMCID: PMC2980489
PMID: 21103067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cell Biol Int. 2011 Jun;35(6):587-91. doi: 10.1042/CBI20100452.

Gelatin induces trophectoderm differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Peng S(1), Hua J, Cao X, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest AF University, Yangling, Shaanxi
712100, Peoples Republic of China. pengsha123@yahoo.com.cn

In this study, we selected gelatin as ECM (extracellular matrix) to support
differentiation of mES (mouse embryonic stem) cells into TE (trophectoderm), as
gelatin was less expensive and widely used. We found that 0.2% and 1.5% gelatin
were the suitable concentrations to induce TE differentiation by means of
detecting Cdx2 expression using real-time PCR. Moreover, about 15% cells were
positive for Cdx2 staining after 6 days differentiation. We discovered that the
expressions of specific markers for TE, such as Cdx2, Eomes, Hand1 and Esx1 were 
prominently increased after gelatin induction. Meanwhile, the expression of Oct4 
was significantly decreased. We also found that inhibition of the BMP (bone
morphogenetic protein) signalling by Noggin could promote mES cells
differentiation into TE, whereas inhibition of the Wnt signalling by Dkk1 had the
contrary effect. This could be used as a tool to study the differentiation and
function of early trophoblasts as well as further elucidating the molecular
mechanism during abnormal placental development.

PMID: 21091439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Immunol. 2010 Dec 15;185(12):7151-5. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003193. Epub 2010
Nov 12.

Cutting edge: Lymphoproliferation caused by Fas deficiency is dependent on the
transcription factor eomesodermin.

Kinjyo I(1), Gordon SM, Intlekofer AM, Dowdell K, Mooney EC, Caricchio R, Grupp
SA, Teachey DT, Rao VK, Lindsten T, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Division of Infectious Diseases,
Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

A hallmark of autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), caused by mutation 
of the Fas death receptor, is massive lymphadenopathy from aberrant expansion of 
CD4(-)CD8(-) (double-negative [DN]) T cells. Eomesodermin (Eomes) is a member of 
the T-box family of transcription factors and plays critical roles in effector
cell function and memory cell fitness of CD8(+) T lymphocytes. We provide
evidence in this study that DN T cells exhibit dysregulated expression of Eomes
in humans and mice with ALPS. We also find that T cell-specific deletion of Eomes
prevents lymphoid hypertrophy and accumulation of DN T cells in Fas-mutant mice. 
Although Eomes has critical physiological roles in the function and homeostasis
of CD8(+) T cells, overexpression of Eomes appears to enable pathological
induction or expansion of unusual CD8-related T cell subsets. Thus, antagonism of
Eomes emerges as a therapeutic target for DN T cell ablation in ALPS.

PMCID: PMC2997140
PMID: 21076068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 29;5(10):e13740. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013740.

Epitope density influences CD8+ memory T cell differentiation.

Leignadier J(1), Labrecque N.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The generation of long-lived memory T cells is critical for
successful vaccination but the factors controlling their differentiation are
still poorly defined. We tested the hypothesis that the strength of T cell
receptor (TCR) signaling contributed to memory CD8(+) T cell generation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We manipulated the density of antigenic epitope
presented by dendritic cells to mouse naïve CD8(+) T cells, without varying TCR
affinity. Our results show that a two-fold decrease in antigen dose selectively
affects memory CD8(+) T cell generation without influencing T cell expansion and 
acquisition of effector functions. Moreover, we show that low antigen dose alters
the duration of the interaction between T cells and dendritic cells and finely
tunes the expression level of the transcription factors Eomes and Bcl6.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that priming with higher epitope density results in a
2-fold decrease in the expression of Neuron-derived orphan nuclear receptor 1
(Nor-1) and this correlates with a lower level of conversion of Bcl-2 into a
pro-apoptotic molecule and an increased number of memory T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that the amount of antigen encountered by naïve
CD8(+) T cells following immunization with dendritic cells does not influence the
generation of functional effector CD8(+) T cells but rather the number of CD8(+) 
memory T cells that persist in the host. Our data support a model where antigenic
epitope density sensed by CD8(+) T cells at priming influences memory generation 
by modulating Bcl6, Eomes and Nor-1 expression.

PMCID: PMC2966420
PMID: 21060788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Jun;39(6):366-71.

[Expression of natural killer cell development-associated transcription factors
in nasal NK/T-cell lymphomas occurring in Chinese population].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang S(1), Nong L, Zhang Y, Wang Y, Li T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the expression and prognostic significance of T-bet and
its cofactors EOMES, ETS-1 and MEF [which are transcription factors and
responsible for development of natural killer (NK) cells] in the extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type (EN-NK/T-NT).
METHODS: The expression status of T-bet, EOMES, ETS-1 and MEF in 40 cases of
EN-NK/T-NT occurring in Chinese population was studied by immunohistochemistry
and in-situ hybridization (ISH). The clinical relevance was also evaluated. The
control cases included 18 cases of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, 10 cases of B-cell
lymphoma, 5 cases of normal spleen, 5 cases of normal thymus and 10 cases of
nasal mucosal tissues affected by chronic inflammation.
RESULTS: The expression levels of T-bet mRNA and protein were high in EN-NK/T-NT 
(82.5% and 100%, respectively) and in peripheral T cell lymphoma (17/18 and
72.2%, respectively). There was no expression in B-cell lymphoma. The expression 
of EOMES (80.0% by ISH), ETS-1 (82.5% by ISH) and MEF (62.5% by ISH) was high in 
EN-NK/T-NT, but not in the control group. The frequency of co-expression of T-bet
and EOMES (75%, 30/40) was significantly higher than that of the other genes.
Follow-up study showed that the mean and median survival of the 19 cases of
EN-NK/ T-NT was 33 months and 10 months, respectively. The five-year survival
rate was 10.5%. Statistical analysis showed that only treatment modalities
significantly affected the patients' overall survival; and none of the four
transcription factors had significant impact on survival. The expression rates of
T-bet, EOMES, ETS-1 or MEF had no significant difference between the 9 alive and 
the 10 dead cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of T-bet correlates with the lymphoma types. It is
mainly expressed in peripheral NK and T-cell lymphomas. The important functional 
gene engaged in NK cells development is highly expressed in EN-NK/T-NT. They may 
play a crucial role in pathogenesis and aggressive biologic behavior.

PMID: 21055151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 26;5(10):e13615. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013615.

Functional genomics of 5- to 8-cell stage human embryos by blastomere single-cell
cDNA analysis.

Galán A(1), Montaner D, Póo ME, Valbuena D, Ruiz V, Aguilar C, Dopazo J, Simón C.

Author information: 
(1)Valencia Node of The National Stem Cell Bank, Centro de Investigación Príncipe
Felipe, Valencia, Spain.

Blastomere fate and embryonic genome activation (EGA) during human embryonic
development are unsolved areas of high scientific and clinical interest.
Forty-nine blastomeres from 5- to 8-cell human embryos have been investigated
following an efficient single-cell cDNA amplification protocol to provide a
template for high-density microarray analysis. The previously described markers, 
characteristic of Inner Cell Mass (ICM) (n = 120), stemness (n = 190) and
Trophectoderm (TE) (n = 45), were analyzed, and a housekeeping pattern of 46
genes was established. All the human blastomeres from the 5- to 8-cell stage
embryo displayed a common gene expression pattern corresponding to ICM markers
(e.g., DDX3, FOXD3, LEFTY1, MYC, NANOG, POU5F1), stemness (e.g., POU5F1, DNMT3B, 
GABRB3, SOX2, ZFP42, TERT), and TE markers (e.g., GATA6, EOMES, CDX2, LHCGR). The
EGA profile was also investigated between the 5-6- and 8-cell stage embryos, and 
compared to the blastocyst stage. Known genes (n = 92) such as depleted maternal 
transcripts (e.g., CCNA1, CCNB1, DPPA2) and embryo-specific activation (e.g.,
POU5F1, CDH1, DPPA4), as well as novel genes, were confirmed. In summary, the
global single-cell cDNA amplification microarray analysis of the 5- to 8-cell
stage human embryos reveals that blastomere fate is not committed to ICM or TE.
Finally, new EGA features in human embryogenesis are presented.

PMCID: PMC2964308
PMID: 21049019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Development. 2010 Dec;137(23):3953-63. doi: 10.1242/dev.054775. Epub 2010 Oct 27.

Klf5 regulates lineage formation in the pre-implantation mouse embryo.

Lin SC(1), Wani MA, Whitsett JA, Wells JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Kruppel-like transcription factors (Klfs) are essential for the induction and
maintenance of pluripotency of embryonic stem cells (ESCs), yet little is known
about their roles in establishing the three lineages of the pre-implantation
embryo. Here, we show that Klf5 is required for the formation of the
trophectoderm (TE) and the inner cell mass (ICM), and for repressing primitive
endoderm (PE) development. Although cell polarity appeared normal, Klf5 mutant
embryos arrested at the blastocyst stage and failed to hatch due to defective TE 
development. Klf5 acted cell-autonomously in the TE, downstream of Fgf4 and
upstream of Cdx2, Eomes and Krt8. In the ICM, loss of Klf5 resulted in reduced
expression of pluripotency markers Oct4 and Nanog, but led to increased Sox17
expression in the PE, suggesting that Klf5 suppresses the PE lineage. Consistent 
with this, overexpression of Klf5 in transgenic embryos was sufficient to
suppress the Sox17(+) PE lineage in the ICM. Klf5 overexpression led to a
dose-dependent decrease in Sox17 promoter activity in reporter assays in cultured
cells. Moreover, in chimeric embryos, Klf5(-/-) cells preferentially contributed 
to the Sox17(+) PE lineage and Cdx2 expression was not rescued in Klf5(-/-) outer
cells. Finally, outgrowths from Klf5(-/-) embryos failed to form an
ICM/pluripotent colony, had very few Oct4(+) or Cdx2(+) cells, but showed an
increase in the percentage of Sox17(+) PE cells. These findings demonstrate that 
Klf5 is a dynamic regulator of all three lineages in the pre-implantation embryo 
by promoting the TE and epiblast lineages while suppressing the PE lineage.

PMCID: PMC2976279
PMID: 20980403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 1;185(9):4988-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002042. Epub 2010
Oct 8.

Cutting edge: The transcription factor eomesodermin enables CD8+ T cells to
compete for the memory cell niche.

Banerjee A(1), Gordon SM, Intlekofer AM, Paley MA, Mooney EC, Lindsten T, Wherry 
EJ, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

CD8(+) T cells responding to intracellular infection give rise to cellular
progeny that become terminally differentiated effector cells and self-renewing
memory cells. T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes) are key transcription factors of
cytotoxic lymphocyte lineages. We show in this study that CD8(+) T cells lacking 
Eomes compete poorly in contributing to the pool of Ag-specific central memory
cells. Eomes-deficient CD8(+) T cells undergo primary clonal expansion but are
defective in long-term survival, populating the bone marrow niche and
re-expanding postrechallenge. The phenotype of Eomes-deficient CD8(+) T cells
supports the hypothesis that T-bet and Eomes can act redundantly to induce
effector functions, but can also act to reciprocally promote terminal
differentiation versus self-renewal of Ag-specific memory cells.

PMCID: PMC2975552
PMID: 20935204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Clin Invest. 2010 Nov;120(11):4077-90. doi: 10.1172/JCI42758.

Molecular profiling of cytomegalovirus-induced human CD8+ T cell differentiation.

Hertoghs KM(1), Moerland PD, van Stijn A, Remmerswaal EB, Yong SL, van de Berg
PJ, van Ham SM, Baas F, ten Berge IJ, van Lier RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.

CD8+ T cells play a critical role in the immune response to viral pathogens.
Persistent human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection results in a strong increase in
the number of virus-specific, quiescent effector-type CD8+ T cells with
constitutive cytolytic activity, but the molecular pathways involved in the
induction and maintenance of these cells are unknown. We show here that HCMV
infection induced acute and lasting changes in the transcriptomes of
virus-reactive T cells collected from HCMV-seropositive patients at distinct
stages of infection. Enhanced cell cycle and metabolic activity was restricted to
the acute phase of the response, but at all stages, HCMV-specific CD8+ T cells
expressed the Th1-associated transcription factors T-bet (TBX21) and eomesodermin
(EOMES), in parallel with continuous expression of IFNG mRNA and IFN-<U+03B3>-regulated 
genes. The cytolytic proteins granzyme B and perforin as well as the
fractalkine-binding chemokine receptor CX3CR1 were found in virus-reactive cells 
throughout the response. During HCMV latency, virus-specific CD8+ T cells lacked 
the typical features of exhausted cells found in other chronic infections.
Persistent effector cell traits together with the permanent changes in chemokine 
receptor usage of virus-specific, nonexhausted, long-lived CD8+ T cells may be
crucial to maintain lifelong protection from HCMV reactivation.

PMCID: PMC2964975
PMID: 20921622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Fertil Steril. 2011 Mar 15;95(4):1367-72. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.08.009. 
Epub 2010 Sep 22.

Blastocyst gene expression correlates with implantation potential.

Parks JC(1), McCallie BR, Janesch AM, Schoolcraft WB, Katz-Jaffe MG.

Author information: 
(1)Colorado Foundation for Fertility Research, Lone Tree, Colorado, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of the blastocyst in implantation failure.
This study examined trophectoderm (TE) gene expression relative to pregnancy
outcome.
DESIGN: Retrospective experimental study.
SETTING: Nonprofit research foundation.
ANIMAL(S): Six-week-old BDF1 female mice.
INTERVENTION(S): Hatching blastocysts underwent trophectoderm biopsy before
single blastocyst transfer (one per uterine horn).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Blinded gene expression analysis was performed on biopsied
TE cells by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (Q RT-PCR). Healthy 
placenta and absorption sites were biopsied on day 16 of fetal development for
comprehensive transcriptome analysis with validation by Q RT-PCR.
RESULT(S): Compared with blastocysts that resulted in healthy fetal development, 
blastocysts that failed to implant (negative) showed decreased B3gnt5 and Eomes
gene expression, while blastocysts that resulted in spontaneous pregnancy loss
(absorption) displayed decreased Wnt3a and Eomes gene expression. Comprehensive
transcriptome analysis of biopsied absorption sites and healthy placenta revealed
distinct gene expression signatures, with 5,918 significantly altered transcripts
(greater than twofold). The predominantly altered pathways associated with
spontaneous pregnancy loss were the complement and coagulation cascades.
CONCLUSION(S): This study revealed for the first time that individual blastocyst 
gene expression profiles correlate with outcome, including successful
implantation and pregnancy loss.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20864103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 25;5(8):e12376. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012376.

Beta-catenin signaling negatively regulates intermediate progenitor population
numbers in the developing cortex.

Mutch CA(1), Schulte JD, Olson E, Chenn A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Intermediate progenitor cells constitute a second proliferative cell type in the 
developing mammalian cerebral cortex. Little is known about the factors that
govern the production of intermediate progenitors. Although persistent expression
of stabilized beta-catenin was found to delay the maturation of radial glial
progenitors into intermediate progenitors, the relationship between beta-catenin 
signaling and intermediate progenitors remains poorly understood. Using a
transgenic reporter mouse for Axin2, a direct target of Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling, we observed that beta-catenin signaling is decreased in intermediate
progenitor cells relative to radial glial progenitors. Conditional deletion of
beta-catenin from mouse cortical neural progenitors increased intermediate
progenitor numbers, while conditional expression of stabilized beta-catenin
reduced the intermediate progenitor population. Together, these findings provide 
evidence that beta-catenin signaling in radial progenitors negatively regulates
intermediate progenitor cell number during cortical development.

PMCID: PMC2928265
PMID: 20811503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Immunity. 2010 Aug 27;33(2):145-7. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.08.008.

TCF-1 flips the switch on Eomes.

Paley MA(1), Wherry EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Institute for Immunology, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2010 Aug 27;33(2):229-40.

The interaction between different transcriptional pathways in CD8(+) T cell
memory remains incompletely understood. In this issue, Zhou et al. (2010)
demonstrate an important role for T cell factor 1 in regulating CD8(+) T cell
memory via control of a second transcription factor, Eomesodermin.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20732636  [PubMed]


282. Immunity. 2010 Aug 27;33(2):229-40. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.08.002.

Differentiation and persistence of memory CD8(+) T cells depend on T cell factor 
1.

Zhou X(1), Yu S, Zhao DM, Harty JT, Badovinac VP, Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 Aug 27;33(2):145-7.

T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) is a transcription factor known to act downstream of the 
canonical Wnt pathway and is essential for normal T cell development. However,
its physiological roles in mature CD8(+) T cell responses are unknown. Here we
showed that TCF-1 deficiency limited proliferation of CD8(+) effector T cells and
impaired their differentiation toward a central memory phenotype. Moreover,
TCF-1-deficient memory CD8(+) T cells were progressively lost over time,
exhibiting reduced expression of the antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-2 and
interleukin-2 receptor beta chain and diminished IL-15-driven proliferation.
TCF-1 was directly associated with the Eomes allele and the Wnt-TCF-1 pathway was
necessary and sufficient for optimal Eomes expression in naive and memory CD8(+) 
T cells. Importantly, forced expression of Eomes partly protected TCF-1-deficient
memory CD8(+) T cells from time-dependent attrition. Our studies thus identify
TCF-1 as a critical player in a transcriptional program that regulates memory CD8
differentiation and longevity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2928475
PMID: 20727791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Immunol. 2010 Sep 15;185(6):3174-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000749. Epub 2010
Aug 16.

T-bet and eomesodermin are required for T cell-mediated antitumor immune
responses.

Zhu Y(1), Ju S, Chen E, Dai S, Li C, Morel P, Liu L, Zhang X, Lu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Cell-mediated adaptive immunity is very important in tumor immune surveillance
and tumor vaccination. However, the genetic program underlying an effective
adaptive antitumor immunity is elusive. T-bet and Eomesodermin (Eomes) have been 
suggested to be master regulators of Th1 cells and CD8(+) T cells. However,
whether they are important for T cell-mediated antitumor immunity is
controversial. In this paper, we show that the combined germline deletion of
T-bet and T cell-specific deletion of Eomes resulted in profound defects in
adaptive antitumor immune responses. T-bet and Eomes drive Tc1 differentiation by
preventing alternative CD8(+) T cell differentiation to Tc17 or Tc2 cells.
Surprisingly, T-bet and Eomes are not critical for the generation of systemic CTL
activities against cancer cells. Instead, T-bet and Eomes are crucial for tumor
infiltration by CD8(+) T cells. This study defines T-bet and Eomes as critical
regulators of T cell-mediated immune responses against tumor.

PMID: 20713880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Genes Dev. 2010 Aug 15;24(16):1816-26. doi: 10.1101/gad.575410.

Tbr2-positive intermediate (basal) neuronal progenitors safeguard cerebral cortex
expansion by controlling amplification of pallial glutamatergic neurons and
attraction of subpallial GABAergic interneurons.

Sessa A(1), Mao CA, Colasante G, Nini A, Klein WH, Broccoli V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan 20132,
Italy.

Little is known about how, during its formidable expansion in development and
evolution, the cerebral cortex is able to maintain the correct balance between
excitatory and inhibitory neurons. In fact, while the former are born within the 
cortical primordium, the latter originate outward in the ventral pallium.
Therefore, it remains to be addressed how these two neuronal populations might
coordinate their relative amounts in order to build a functional cortical
network. Here, we show that Tbr2-positive cortical intermediate (basal) neuronal 
progenitors (INPs) dictate the migratory route and control the amount of
subpallial GABAergic interneurons in the subventricular zone (SVZ) through a
non-cell-autonomous mechanism. In fact, Tbr2 interneuron attractive activity is
moderated by Cxcl12 chemokine signaling, whose forced expression in the Tbr2
mutants can rescue, to some extent, SVZ cell migration. We thus propose that INPs
are able to control simultaneously the increase of glutamatergic and GABAergic
neuronal pools, thereby creating a simple way to intrinsically balance their
relative accumulation.

PMCID: PMC2922508
PMID: 20713522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Immunol. 2010 Jul 1;185(1):126-33. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903767. Epub 2010 Jun
4.

Naturally activated V gamma 4 gamma delta T cells play a protective role in tumor
immunity through expression of eomesodermin.

He W(1), Hao J, Dong S, Gao Y, Tao J, Chi H, Flavell R, O'Brien RL, Born WK,
Craft J, Han J, Wang P, Zhao L, Wu J, Yin Z.

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory for Diseases Proteomics, Southwest Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

We previously demonstrated that gammadelta T cells played an important role in
tumor immune surveillance by providing an early source of IFN-gamma. The precise 
role of different subsets of gammadelta T cells in the antitumor immune response,
however, is unknown. Vgamma1 and Vgamma4 gammadelta T cells are the principal
subsets of peripheral lymphoid gammadelta T cells and they might play distinct
roles in tumor immunity. In support of this, we observed that reconstitution of
TCRdelta(-/-) mice with Vgamma4, but not Vgamma1, gammadelta T cells restored the
antitumor response. We also found that these effects were exerted by the
activated (CD44(high)) portion of Vgamma4 gammadelta T cells. We further
determined that IFN-gamma and perforin are critical elements in the
Vgamma4-mediated antitumor immune response. Indeed, CD44(high) Vgamma4 gammadelta
T cells produced significantly more IFN-gamma and perforin on activation, and
showed greater cytolytic activity than did CD44(high) Vgamma1 gammadelta T cells,
apparently due to the high level of eomesodermin (Eomes) in these activated
Vgamma4 gammadelta T cells. Consistently, transfection of dominant-negative Eomes
in Vgamma4 gammadelta T cells diminished the level of IFN-gamma secretion,
indicating a critical role of Eomes in the effector function of these gammadelta 
T cells. Our results thus reveal distinct functions of Vgamma4 and Vgamma1
gammadelta T cells in antitumor immune response, and identify a protective role
of activated Vgamma4 gammadelta T cells, with possible implications for tumor
immune therapy.

PMCID: PMC3813958
PMID: 20525896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. PLoS One. 2010 May 21;5(5):e10709. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010709.

A data integration approach to mapping OCT4 gene regulatory networks operative in
embryonic stem cells and embryonal carcinoma cells.

Jung M(1), Peterson H, Chavez L, Kahlem P, Lehrach H, Vilo J, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Aging Group, Department of Vertebrate Genomics,
Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. jung@molgen.mpg.de

It is essential to understand the network of transcription factors controlling
self-renewal of human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and human embryonal carcinoma
cells (ECs) if we are to exploit these cells in regenerative medicine regimes.
Correlating gene expression levels after RNAi-based ablation of OCT4 function
with its downstream targets enables a better prediction of motif-specific driven 
expression modules pertinent for self-renewal and differentiation of embryonic
stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells.We initially identified putative
direct downstream targets of OCT4 by employing CHIP-on-chip analysis. A
comparison of three peak analysis programs revealed a refined list of OCT4
targets in the human EC cell line NCCIT, this list was then compared to
previously published OCT4 CHIP-on-chip datasets derived from both ES and EC
cells. We have verified an enriched POU-motif, discovered by a de novo approach, 
thus enabling us to define six distinct modules of OCT4 binding and regulation of
its target genes.A selection of these targets has been validated, like NANOG,
which harbours the evolutionarily conserved OCT4-SOX2 binding motif within its
proximal promoter. Other validated targets, which do not harbour the classical
HMG motif are USP44 and GADD45G, a key regulator of the cell cycle.
Over-expression of GADD45G in NCCIT cells resulted in an enrichment and
up-regulation of genes associated with the cell cycle (CDKN1B, CDKN1C, CDK6 and
MAPK4) and developmental processes (BMP4, HAND1, EOMES, ID2, GATA4, GATA5, ISL1
and MSX1). A comparison of positively regulated OCT4 targets common to EC and ES 
cells identified genes such as NANOG, PHC1, USP44, SOX2, PHF17 and OCT4, thus
further confirming their universal role in maintaining self-renewal in both cell 
types. Finally we have created a user-friendly database
(http://biit.cs.ut.ee/escd/), integrating all OCT4 and stem cell related datasets
in both human and mouse ES and EC cells.In the current era of systems biology
driven research, we envisage that our integrated embryonic stem cell database
will prove beneficial to the booming field of ES, iPS and cancer research.

PMCID: PMC2873957
PMID: 20505756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. PLoS One. 2010 May 13;5(5):e10636. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010636.

Human Th1 cells that express CD300a are polyfunctional and after stimulation
up-regulate the T-box transcription factor eomesodermin.

Narayanan S(1), Silva R, Peruzzi G, Alvarez Y, Simhadri VR, Debell K, Coligan JE,
Borrego F.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.

Human naïve CD4 T cells express low levels of the immunomodulatory receptor
CD300a, whereas effector/memory CD4 cells can be either CD300a(+) or CD300a(-).
This suggested that CD300a expression could define a specific subset within the
effector/memory CD4 T cell subpopulations. In fact, ex vivo analysis of the
IFN-gamma producing CD4 T cells showed that they are enriched in the CD300a(+)
subset. Moreover, stimulated CD4 T cells producing TNF-alpha and IL-2 besides
IFN-gamma (polyfunctional) are predominantly CD300a(+). In addition to producing 
markedly higher levels of Th1-associated cytokines, the stimulated CD300a(+) CD4 
T cells are distinguished by a striking up-regulation of the T-box transcription 
factor eomesodermin (Eomes), whereas T-bet is up-regulated in both CD300a(+) and 
CD300a(-) activated CD4 T cells to similar levels. The pleiotropic cytokine
TGF-beta1 has a determinant role in dictating the development of this Th1 subset,
as its presence inhibits the expression of CD300a and down-regulates the
expression of Eomes and IFN-gamma. We conclude that CD300a(+) human Th1 cells
tend to be polyfunctional and after stimulation up-regulate Eomes.

PMCID: PMC2869357
PMID: 20498708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Neurosci. 2010 May 19;30(20):7028-36. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6131-09.2010.

Heterogeneity in ventricular zone neural precursors contributes to neuronal fate 
diversity in the postnatal neocortex.

Stancik EK(1), Navarro-Quiroga I, Sellke R, Haydar TF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA.

The recent discovery of short neural precursors (SNPs) in the murine neocortical 
ventricular zone (VZ) challenges the widely held view that radial glial cells
(RGCs) are the sole occupants of this germinal compartment and suggests that
precursor variety is an important factor of brain development. Here, we use in
utero electroporation and genetic fate mapping to show that SNPs and RGCs cohabit
the VZ but display different cell cycle kinetics and generate phenotypically
different progeny. In addition, we find that RGC progeny undergo additional
rounds of cell division as intermediate progenitor cells (IPCs), whereas SNP
progeny generally produce postmitotic neurons directly from the VZ. By clearly
defining SNPs as bona fide VZ residents, separate from both RGCs and IPCs, and
uncovering their unique proliferative and lineage properties, these results
demonstrate how individual neural precursor groups in the embryonic rodent VZ
create diversity in the overlying neocortex.

PMCID: PMC2909740
PMID: 20484645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 1;344(1):66-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.017. Epub 2010
Apr 27.

Maternally and zygotically provided Cdx2 have novel and critical roles for early 
development of the mouse embryo.

Jedrusik A(1), Bruce AW, Tan MH, Leong DE, Skamagki M, Yao M, Zernicka-Goetz M.

Author information: 
(1)The Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QN, UK.

Divisions of polarised blastomeres that allocate polar cells to outer and apolar 
cells to inner positions initiate the first cell fate decision in the mouse
embryo. Subsequently, outer cells differentiate into trophectoderm while inner
cells retain pluripotency to become inner cell mass (ICM) of the blastocyst.
Elimination of zygotic expression of trophectoderm-specific transcription factor 
Cdx2 leads to defects in the maintenance of the blastocyst cavity, suggesting
that it participates only in the late stage of trophectoderm formation. However, 
we now find that mouse embryos also have a maternally provided pool of Cdx2 mRNA.
Moreover, depletion of both maternal and zygotic Cdx2 from immediately after
fertilization by three independent approaches, dsRNAi, siRNAi and morpholino
oligonucleotides, leads to developmental arrest at much earlier stages than
expected from elimination of only zygotic Cdx2. This developmental arrest is
associated with defects in cell polarisation, reflected by expression and
localisation of cell polarity molecules such as Par3 and aPKC and cell compaction
at the 8- and 16-cell stages. Cells deprived of Cdx2 show delayed development
with increased cell cycle length, irregular cell division and increased incidence
of apoptosis. Although some Cdx2-depleted embryos initiate cavitation, the cavity
cannot be maintained. Furthermore, expression of trophectoderm-specific genes,
Gata3 and Eomes, and also the trophectoderm-specific cytokeratin intermediate
filament, recognised by Troma1, are greatly reduced or undetectable. Taken
together, our results indicate that Cdx2 participates in two steps leading to
trophectoderm specification: appropriate polarisation of blastomeres at the 8-
and 16-cell stage and then the maintenance of trophectoderm lineage-specific
differentiation.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2954319
PMID: 20430022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Zygote. 2010 Aug;18(3):269-79. doi: 10.1017/S0967199409990323. Epub 2010 Apr 30.

Changes in the expression of pluripotency-associated genes during preimplantation
and peri-implantation stages in bovine cloned and in vitro produced embryos.

Rodríguez-Alvarez L(1), Cox J, Tovar H, Einspanier R, Castro FO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Universidad de
Concepción, Chillán, Chile.

In cattle, embryos elongate before implantation and after hatching. Changes in
gene expression during this transition are not well studied. Especially important
are variations in the expression of pluripotency-associated genes as a result of 
assisted reproductive biotechnologies, such as cloning and in vitro fertilization
(IVF). We hypothesize that there will be a decline in the expression of key
pluripotency-associated genes and an increase in the expression of IFN-tau in
elongated embryos when compared with day-7 blastocysts. To test this we generated
cloned and IVF bovine day-7 blastocyst and day-17 elongated embryos (day 0 = day 
of nucleus transfer or IVF). Gene expression in all embryos was assessed via
RT-qPCR. OCT4 was overexpressed (p < 0.05) in the cloned blastocysts when
compared with IVF. No differences in gene expression at this stage between cloned
and IVF embryos were found for EOMES, NANOG and FGF4. At elongation EOMES, NANOG 
and FGF4 were upregulated in IVF embryos (p < 0.05). IFN-tau and OCT4 were
expressed at similar levels. There were changes in the expression levels for all 
transcripts between blastogenesis and elongation. NANOG, IFN-tau and EOMES were
overexpressed in all the elongated embryos (p < 0.05), FGF4 was underexpressed in
both treatments. OCT4 dropped drastically in the cloned elongated embryos, but
not in the IVF. Interestingly only adult donor cells (but not fetal) from which
the cloned embryos originated also expressed high levels of OCT4. Our findings
might help to understand the shift of gene expression during elongation and to
identify key markers of embryonic development useful for embryo screening
purposes.

PMID: 20429963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Immunity. 2010 Apr 23;32(4):507-17. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.04.004. Epub 2010 
Apr 15.

The transcription factor GATA3 actively represses RUNX3 protein-regulated
production of interferon-gamma.

Yagi R(1), Junttila IS, Wei G, Urban JF Jr, Zhao K, Paul WE, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 Apr 23;32(4):500-1.

The transcription factor GATA3 is crucial for the differentiation of naive CD4(+)
T cells into T helper 2 (Th2) cells. Here, we show that deletion of Gata3 allowed
the appearance of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)-producing cells in the absence of 
interleukin-12 (IL-12) and IFN-gamma. Such IFN-gamma production was transcription
factor T-bet independent. Another T-box-containing transcription factor Eomes,
but not T-bet, was induced both in GATA3-deficient CD4(+) T cells differentiated 
under Th2 cell conditions and in Th2 cells with enforced Runx3 expression,
contributing to IFN-gamma production. GATA3 overexpression blocked Runx3-mediated
Eomes induction and IFN-gamma production, and GATA3 protein physically interacted
with Runx3 protein. Furthermore, we found that Runx3 directly bound to multiple
regulatory elements of the Ifng gene and that blocking Runx3 function in either
Th1 or GATA3-deficient "Th2" cells results in diminished IFN-gamma production by 
these cells. Thus, the Runx3-mediated pathway, actively suppressed by GATA3,
induces IFN-gamma production in a STAT4- and T-bet-independent manner.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2867662
PMID: 20399120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Exp Med. 2010 Apr 12;207(4):807-21. doi: 10.1084/jem.20090348. Epub 2010 Apr 5.

Human cytomegalovirus elicits fetal gammadelta T cell responses in utero.

Vermijlen D(1), Brouwer M, Donner C, Liesnard C, Tackoen M, Van Rysselberge M,
Twité N, Goldman M, Marchant A, Willems F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Immunology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 6041
Gosselies, Belgium. dvermijl@ulb.ac.be

The fetus and infant are highly susceptible to viral infections. Several viruses,
including human cytomegalovirus (CMV), cause more severe disease in early life
compared with later life. It is generally accepted that this is a result of the
immaturity of the immune system. gammadelta T cells are unconventional T cells
that can react rapidly upon activation and show major histocompatibility
complex-unrestricted activity. We show that upon CMV infection in utero, fetal
gammadelta T cells expand and become differentiated. The expansion was restricted
to Vgamma9-negative gammadelta T cells, irrespective of their Vdelta chain
expression. Differentiated gammadelta T cells expressed high levels of IFN-gamma,
transcription factors T-bet and eomes, natural killer receptors, and cytotoxic
mediators. CMV infection induced a striking enrichment of a public
Vgamma8Vdelta1-TCR, containing the germline-encoded
complementary-determining-region-3 (CDR3)
delta1-CALGELGDDKLIF/CDR3gamma8-CATWDTTGWFKIF. Public
Vgamma8Vdelta1-TCR-expressing cell clones produced IFN-gamma upon coincubation
with CMV-infected target cells in a TCR/CD3-dependent manner and showed antiviral
activity. Differentiated gammadelta T cells and public Vgamma8Vdelta1-TCR were
detected as early as after 21 wk of gestation. Our results indicate that
functional fetal gammadelta T cell responses can be generated during development 
in utero and suggest that this T cell subset could participate in antiviral
defense in early life.

PMCID: PMC2856038
PMID: 20368575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Nat Neurosci. 2010 May;13(5):551-8. doi: 10.1038/nn.2527. Epub 2010 Apr 4.

The exon junction complex component Magoh controls brain size by regulating
neural stem cell division.

Silver DL(1), Watkins-Chow DE, Schreck KC, Pierfelice TJ, Larson DM, Burnetti AJ,
Liaw HJ, Myung K, Walsh CA, Gaiano N, Pavan WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute
(NHGRI), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2010 May;13(5):531.

Brain structure and size require precise division of neural stem cells (NSCs),
which self-renew and generate intermediate neural progenitors (INPs) and neurons.
The factors that regulate NSCs remain poorly understood, and mechanistic
explanations of how aberrant NSC division causes the reduced brain size seen in
microcephaly are lacking. Here we show that Magoh, a component of the exon
junction complex (EJC) that binds RNA, controls mouse cerebral cortical size by
regulating NSC division. Magoh haploinsufficiency causes microcephaly because of 
INP depletion and neuronal apoptosis. Defective mitosis underlies these
phenotypes, as depletion of EJC components disrupts mitotic spindle orientation
and integrity, chromosome number and genomic stability. In utero rescue
experiments showed that a key function of Magoh is to control levels of the
microcephaly-associated protein Lis1 during neurogenesis. Our results uncover
requirements for the EJC in brain development, NSC maintenance and mitosis,
thereby implicating this complex in the pathogenesis of microcephaly.

PMCID: PMC2860667
PMID: 20364144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jun 15;19(12):2456-67. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq128. Epub 2010 Mar
30.

ELF5-enforced transcriptional networks define an epigenetically regulated
trophoblast stem cell compartment in the human placenta.

Hemberger M(1), Udayashankar R, Tesar P, Moore H, Burton GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Genetics & Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK. myriam.hemberger@bbsrc.ac.uk

The first definitive cell fate decision in development occurs at the blastocyst
stage with establishment of the trophoblast and embryonic cell lineages. In the
mouse, lineage commitment is achieved by epigenetic regulation of a critical
gatekeeper gene, the transcription factor Elf5, that reinforces placental cell
fate and is necessary for trophoblast stem (TS) cell self-renewal. In humans,
however, the epigenetic lineage boundary seems to be less stringent since human
embryonic stem (ES) cells, unlike their murine counterparts, harbour some
potential to differentiate into trophoblast derivatives. Here, we show that ELF5 
is expressed in the human placenta in villous cytotrophoblast cells but not in
post-mitotic syncytiotrophoblast and invasive extravillous cytotrophoblast cells.
ELF5 establishes a circuit of mutually interacting transcription factors with
CDX2 and EOMES, and the highly proliferative ELF5(+)/CDX2(+) double-positive
subset of cytotrophoblast cells demarcates a putative TS cell compartment in the 
early human placenta. In contrast to placental trophoblast, however, ELF5 is
hypermethylated and largely repressed in human ES cells and derived trophoblast
cell lines, as well as in induced pluripotent stem cells and murine epiblast stem
cells. Thus, these cells exhibit an embryonic lineage-specific epigenetic
signature and do not undergo an epigenetic reprogramming to reflect the
trophoblast lineage at key loci such as ELF5. Our identification of the
trophoblast-specific transcriptional circuit established by ELF5 will be
instrumental to derive human TS cell lines that truly reflect early placental
trophoblast and that will be most beneficial to gain insights into the aetiology 
of common pregnancy complications, including intra-uterine growth restriction and
pre-eclampsia.

PMID: 20354077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Neural Dev. 2010 Mar 19;5:8. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-5-8.

Cortico-cerebral histogenesis in the opossum Monodelphis domestica: generation of
a hexalaminar neocortex in the absence of a basal proliferative compartment.

Puzzolo E(1), Mallamaci A.

Author information: 
(1)International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA/ISAS), Trieste, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The metatherian Monodelphis domestica, commonly known as the
South-American short-tailed opossum, is an appealing animal model for
developmental studies on cortico-cerebral development. Given its phylogenetic
position, it can help in tracing evolutionary origins of key traits peculiar to
the eutherian central nervous system. The capability of its pup to regenerate
damaged cortico-spinal connections makes it an ideal substrate for regenerative
studies. Recent sequencing of its genome and the ex utero accessibility of its
developing cerebral cortex further enhance its experimental interest. However, at
the moment, a comprehensive cellular and molecular characterization of its
cortical development is missing.
RESULTS: A systematic analysis of opossum cortico-cerebral development was
performed, including: origin of cortical neurons; migration of these neurons from
their birthplaces to their final layer destinations; and molecular
differentiation of distinct neocortical laminae. We observed that opossum
projection neurons and interneurons are generated by pallial and subpallial
precursors, respectively, similar to rodents. A six-layered cortex with a
eutherian-like molecular profile is laid down, according to the inside-out rule. 
However, neocortical projection neurons are generated by apical neural precursors
and almost no basal progenitors may be found in the neuronogenic neopallial
primordium. In the opossum neocortex, Tbr2, the hallmark of eutherian basal
progenitors, is transiently expressed by postmitotic progenies of apical
precursors prior to the activation of more mature neuronal markers.
CONCLUSIONS: The neocortical developmental program predates Eutheria-Methatheria 
branching. However, in metatherians, unlike eutherians, a basal proliferative
compartment is not needed for the formation of a six-layered neuronal blueprint.

PMCID: PMC2859365
PMID: 20302607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Jan;125(1):55-63. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-0825-z.
Epub 2010 Mar 12.

Identification of genes associated with chemosensitivity to SAHA/taxane
combination treatment in taxane-resistant breast cancer cells.

Chang H(1), Jeung HC, Jung JJ, Kim TS, Rha SY, Chung HC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei Cancer
Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Here we evaluated the cytotoxic effects of a combination of the histone
deacetylase inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and taxanes in human
breast cancer cell lines. Combination treatment with taxane and SAHA had a
synergistic cytotoxic effect against taxane-resistant breast cancer cells.
Oligonucleotide microarray analysis identified 28 genes (MAPK13, ATP2C1, ANKRD57,
MT1G, RGL4, C12orf49, EXOC6, RAB4A, TM9SF3, IFNGR1, DMD, HCG9, KIFC3, SYNGR3,
NDRG4, NT5E, EOMES, SMC4, LANCL1, SCHIP1, and 8 ESTs) whose expression correlated
with the combined effect of paclitaxel and SAHA. Twelve of these genes were
down-regulated in cell lines that were paclitaxel-resistant but combination
synergistic. SAHA induced NT5E mRNA expression in paclitaxel-resistant YCC-B1
cell. Our results indicate that a combination of taxane and SAHA could be
efficacious for the treatment of breast cancer and that genes involved in the
synergistic response to paclitaxel and SAHA could serve as biomarkers to predict 
therapeutic response in breast cancer patients.

PMID: 20224928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Theriogenology. 2010 Jul 1;74(1):45-59. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2009.12.018. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Differential gene expression in bovine elongated (Day 17) embryos produced by
somatic cell nucleus transfer and in vitro fertilization.

Rodríguez-Alvarez L(1), Sharbati J, Sharbati S, Cox JF, Einspanier R, Castro FO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, Universidad de
Concepción, Campus Chillán, Avenida Vicente Méndez 595, Chillán, Chile.

Somatic cloning in cattle is associated with impaired embryo development, caused 
by inappropriate epigenetic reprogramming during embryogenesis; however, there is
a paucity of data regarding gene expression at the critical elongation and
peri-implantation stages. The objective of the present study was to identify
genes differentially expressed in bovine cloned embryos at Day 17 of development 
(Day 0=day of nucleus transfer or IVF). Day 7 blastocysts (Hand Made Cloned or
IVP) were transferred to recipient cattle and collected at Day 17. The efficiency
of recovery of elongated embryos was similar, however cloned embryos elongated
less than IVP embryos (91.8+/-45.8 vs. 174+/-50mm) and fewer had embryonic discs 
(63 vs. 83%). Qualitative and quantitative PCR detected expression of OCT4,
NANOG, IFNtau, EOMES, FGF4, SOX2, and CDX2 in all IVP embryos. In most cloned
embryos, NANOG and FGF4 were absent (verified by qPCR); NANOG, EOMES, and FGF4
were underexpressed, whereas IFNtau was overexpressed in cloned embryos. Based on
qPCRs, other genes, i.e., SPARC, SNRB1, and CBPP22, were down-regulated in cloned
embryos, whereas HSP70 and TDKP1 were overexpressed. In bovine microarrays, 47
genes (3.6%) were deregulated in cloned embryos, including several involved in
trophoblast growth and differentiation. In conclusion, we inferred that these
data were indicative of incomplete epigenetic reprogramming after cloning; this
could lead to aberrant gene expression and subsequently early pregnancy loss.
There was an apparent association between incomplete morphological elongation and
aberrant reprogramming of a subset of genes critical for early embryonic
development.

PMID: 20197198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Genome Res. 2010 Apr;20(4):458-72. doi: 10.1101/gr.101469.109. Epub 2010 Feb 22.

Examination of transcriptional networks reveals an important role for TCFAP2C,
SMARCA4, and EOMES in trophoblast stem cell maintenance.

Kidder BL(1), Palmer S.

Author information: 
(1)EMD Serono Research Institute, Inc., Rockland, MA 02370, USA.
benjamin.kidder@emdserono.com

Trophoblast stem cells (TS cells), derived from the trophectoderm (TE) of
blastocysts, require transcription factors (TFs) and external signals (FGF4,
INHBA/NODAL/TGFB1) for self-renewal. While many reports have focused on TF
networks that regulate embryonic stem cell (ES cell) self-renewal and
pluripotency, little is know about TF networks that regulate self-renewal in TS
cells. To further understand transcriptional networks in TS cells, we used
chromatin immunoprecipitation with DNA microarray hybridization (ChIP-chip)
analysis to investigate targets of the TFs-TCFAP2C, EOMES, ETS2, and GATA3-and a 
chromatin remodeling factor, SMARCA4. We then evaluated the transcriptional
states of target genes using transcriptome analysis and genome-wide analysis of
histone H3 acetylation (AcH3). Our results describe previously unknown
transcriptional networks in TS cells, including TF occupancy of genes involved in
ES cell self-renewal and pluripotency, co-occupancy of TCFAP2C, SMARCA4, and
EOMES at a significant number of genes, and transcriptional regulatory circuitry 
within the five factors. Moreover, RNAi depletion of Tcfap2c, Smarca4, and Eomes 
transcripts resulted in a loss of normal colony morphology and down-regulation of
TS cell-specific genes, suggesting an important role for TCFAP2C, SMARCA4, and
EOMES in TS cell self-renewal. Through genome-wide mapping and global expression 
analysis of five TF target genes, our data provide a comprehensive analysis of
transcriptional networks that regulate TS cell self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC2847749
PMID: 20176728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Immunity. 2010 Jan 29;32(1):79-90. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.11.012. Epub 2010
Jan 21.

Interleukin-2 and inflammation induce distinct transcriptional programs that
promote the differentiation of effector cytolytic T cells.

Pipkin ME(1), Sacks JA, Cruz-Guilloty F, Lichtenheld MG, Bevan MJ, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Immune Disease Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Interleukin(IL)-2 and inflammation regulate effector and memory cytolytic
T-lymphocyte (CTL) generation during infection. We demonstrate a complex
interplay between IL-2 and inflammatory signals during CTL differentiation. IL-2 
stimulation induced the transcription factor eomesodermin (Eomes), upregulated
perforin (Prf1) transcription, and repressed re-expression of memory CTL markers 
Bcl6 and IL-7Ralpha. Binding of Eomes and STAT5 to Prf1 cis-regulatory regions
correlated with transcriptional initiation (increased recruitment of RNA
polymerase II to the Prf1 promoter). Inflammation (CpG, IL-12) enhanced
expression of IL-2Ralpha and the transcription factor T-bet, but countered late
Eomes and perforin induction while preventing IL-7Ralpha repression by IL-2.
After infection of mice with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus,
IL-2Ralpha-deficient effector CD8(+) T cells expressed more Bcl6 but less
perforin and granzyme B, formed fewer KLRG-1(+) and T-bet-expressing CTL, and
killed poorly. Thus, inflammation influences both effector and memory CTL
differentiation, whereas persistent IL-2 stimulation promotes effector at the
expense of memory CTL development.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2906224
PMID: 20096607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Immunity. 2010 Jan 29;32(1):67-78. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.10.010. Epub 2010
Jan 7.

The mTOR kinase determines effector versus memory CD8+ T cell fate by regulating 
the expression of transcription factors T-bet and Eomesodermin.

Rao RR(1), Li Q, Odunsi K, Shrikant PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263,
USA.

The mechanisms underpinning integration of instructions that program naive CD8+ T
cells for effector and/or memory differentiation are not well understood. Herein,
we demonstrate that interleukin-12 (IL-12) enhanced and sustained antigen and
costimulatory molecule (B7.1)-induced mTOR kinase activity in naive CD8+ (OT-I) T
cells via phosphoinositide 3-kinase and STAT4 transcription factor pathways.
Blocking mTOR activity by rapamycin reversed IL-12-induced effector functions
because of loss of persistent expression of the transcription factor T-bet.
Rapamycin treatment of IL-12-conditioned OT-I cells promoted persistent
Eomesodermin expression and produced memory cell precursors that demonstrated
enhanced sustenance and antigen-recall responses upon adoptive transfer. The
memory cell precursors showed greater tumor efficacy than IL-12-conditioned
effector OT-I cells. These results identify mTOR as the central regulator of
transcriptional programs that determine effector and/or memory cell fates in CD8+
T cells. Targeting mTOR activity offers new opportunities to regulate CD8+ T
cell-mediated immunity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20060330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Jan;26(1):31-4.

[Role of transcription factor T-bet and Eomes in IFN-gamma secretion of different
human T cell subsets].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang HT(1), Ge XS, Xue ZP, Li BQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu 233030, China.
bb_wanghongtao@126.com

AIM: To investigate the effect of siRNAs specific for T-bet and Eomesodermin
(Eomes) in interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) production of different human T cell
subsets.
METHODS: Double-stranded small interfering RNA (siRNA) sequences specific for
genes of T-bet and Eomes were chemically synthesized and transfected into
anti-CD3 mAb activated alphabeta T cells and Mtb-Ag activated gammadelta T cells.
CD4(+), CD8(+) T and gammadelta T cells were sorted by flow cytometry and the
expressions of T-bet and Eomes gene mRNA were detected by RT-PCR technique. The
changes of IFN-gamma production were determined by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: After two series of transfection, the siRNA-FAM(+) cells were about 50% 
in the transfected cells. The IFN-gamma(+) cells in CD4(+) T cells (50.20%)
decreased in the cells transfected with T-bet siRNA (18.46%) but no obvious
decrease was observed in the cells transfected with Eomes siRNA, whereas the
IFN-gamma(+) cells in CD8(+) T cells (76.51%) decreased in the cells transfected 
with Eomes siRNA (25.37%) and no obvious decrease was observed in the cells
transfected with T-bet siRNA. However, the IFN-gamma producing cells in
gammadelta T cells (76.52%) decreased in the cells transfected with T-bet siRNA
(56.57%) or with Eomes siRNA (42.53%).
CONCLUSION: At the level of transcription factors, T-bet and Eomes are important 
transcription factors for the regulation of IFN-gamma production in CD4(+) and
CD8(+) T cells, respectively. Both T-bet and Eomes may simultaneously be involved
in the regulation of the IFN-gamma production of gammadeltaT cells.

PMID: 20056084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Dev Dyn. 2010 Feb;239(2):620-9. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22176.

Comparison of extraembryonic expression of Eomes and Cdx2 in pregastrulation
chick and mouse embryo unveils regulatory changes along evolution.

Pernaute B(1), Cañon S, Crespo M, Fernandez-Tresguerres B, Rayon T, Manzanares M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Developmental Biology, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares, Madrid, Spain.

In the mouse blastocyst, Eomes and Cdx2 are critical for establishing the
trophoectoderm, the precursor of the placenta. To better understand how the
trophoectoderm lineage arose in mammals during evolution, we examined the
expression of their orthologues in the pregastrulation chick embryo and found
that, while both genes are expressed in extraembryonic tissues, their temporal
pattern of expression differs from what occurs in mouse. Moreover, we failed to
detect expression of other genes specific from the mouse trophoectoderm in
extraembryonic regions of the chick. Also unlike the mouse, chick Eomes is
expressed in primordial germ cells. Finally, conserved noncoding elements in the 
Eomes genomic region are unable to drive trophoectoderm restricted expression in 
the mouse blastocyst, but do so in conserved sites of expression such as the
forebrain. These results suggest that critical changes in the gene regulatory
networks controlling extraembryonic development accompanied the appearance of the
trophoectoderm in mammals.

PMID: 20014105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(1):81-92. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082837mf.

Zygotic VegT is required for Xenopus paraxial mesoderm formation and is regulated
by Nodal signaling and Eomesodermin.

Fukuda M(1), Takahashi S, Haramoto Y, Onuma Y, Kim YJ, Yeo CY, Ishiura S,
Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Japan.

The T-box gene VegT plays a crucial role during mesendoderm specification of the 
amphibian embryo. While the function of maternal VegT (mVegT) has been
extensively investigated, little is known about the function and transcriptional 
regulation of zygotic VegT (zVegT). In the present study, we used comparative
genomics and a knockdown experiment to demonstrate that zVegT is the orthologous 
gene of zebrafish Spadetail/Tbx16 and chick Tbx6L/Tbx6, and has an essential role
in paraxial mesodermal formation. zVegT knockdown embryos show several defects in
the patterning of trunk mesoderm, such as abnormal segmentation of somites, a
reduction in muscle, and the formation of an abnormal mass of cells at the tail
tip. We also identified the cis-regulatory elements of zVegT that are necessary
and sufficient for mesoderm-specific expression. These cis-regulatory elements
are located in two separate upstream regions of zVegT, corresponding to the first
intron of mVegT. The results of in vitro binding and functional assays indicate
that Forkhead box H1 (FoxH1) and Eomesodermin (Eomes) are the trans-acting
factors required for zVegT expression. Our results highlight the essential role
of zVegT in organization of paraxial mesoderm, and reveal that zVegT is regulated
by a coherent feedforward loop of Nodal signaling via Eomes.

PMID: 20013651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Neurochem. 2010 Feb;112(4):924-39. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2009.06503.x. Epub 
2009 Nov 24.

The fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate 3 adapter is a developmentally
regulated microtubule-associated protein expressed in migrating and
differentiated neurons.

Hryciw T(1), MacDonald JI, Phillips R, Seah C, Pasternak S, Meakin SO.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Brain Research Group, Robarts Research Institute, London, Ontario,
Canada.

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) mediated signaling is essential to many aspects of
neural development. Activated FGF receptors signal primarily through the FGF
receptor substrate (Frs) adapters, which include Frs2/Frs2alpha and
Frs3/Frs2beta. While some studies suggest that Frs3 can compensate for the loss
of Frs2 in transfected cells, the lack of an effective Frs3 specific antibody has
prevented efforts to determine the role(s) of the endogenous protein. To this
end, we have generated a Frs3 specific antibody and have characterized the
pattern of Frs3 expression in the developing nervous system, its subcellular
localization as well as its biochemical properties. We demonstrate that Frs3 is
expressed at low levels in the ventricular zone of developing cortex, between E12
and E15, and it co-localizes with nestin and acetylated alpha-tubulin in radial
processes in the ventricular/subventricular zones as well as with betaIII tubulin
in differentiated cortical neurons. Subcellular fractionation studies demonstrate
that endogenous Frs3 is both soluble and plasma membrane associated while Frs3
expressed in 293T cells associates exclusively with lipid rafts. Lastly, we
demonstrate that neuronal Frs3 binds microtubules comparable to the
microtubule-associated protein, MAP2, while Frs2 does not. Collectively, these
data suggest that neuronal Frs3 functions as a novel microtubule binding protein 
and they provide the first biochemical evidence that neuronal Frs3 is
functionally distinct from Frs2/Frs2alpha.

PMID: 19943849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Dec;12(12):1524-33. doi: 10.1038/nn.2416. Epub 2009 Nov 1.

Adult generation of glutamatergic olfactory bulb interneurons.

Brill MS(1), Ninkovic J, Winpenny E, Hodge RD, Ozen I, Yang R, Lepier A, Gascón
S, Erdelyi F, Szabo G, Parras C, Guillemot F, Frotscher M, Berninger B, Hevner
RF, Raineteau O, Götz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Genomics, Institute of Physiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany.

Erratum in
    Nat Neurosci. 2010 May;13(5):649.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Jun 15;9(12):2259-60.

The adult mouse subependymal zone (SEZ) harbors neural stem cells that are
thought to exclusively generate GABAergic interneurons of the olfactory bulb. We 
examined the adult generation of glutamatergic juxtaglomerular neurons, which had
dendritic arborizations that projected into adjacent glomeruli, identifying them 
as short-axon cells. Fate mapping revealed that these originate from Neurog2- and
Tbr2-expressing progenitors located in the dorsal region of the SEZ. Examination 
of the progenitors of these glutamatergic interneurons allowed us to determine
the sequential expression of transcription factors in these cells that are
thought to be hallmarks of glutamatergic neurogenesis in the developing cerebral 
cortex and adult hippocampus. Indeed, the molecular specification of these SEZ
progenitors allowed for their recruitment into the cerebral cortex after a lesion
was induced. Taken together, our data indicate that SEZ progenitors not only
produce a population of adult-born glutamatergic juxtaglomerular neurons, but may
also provide a previously unknown source of progenitors for endogenous repair.

PMCID: PMC2787799
PMID: 19881504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Genesis. 2009 Nov;47(11):775-81. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20562.

Generation and analysis of a mouse line harboring GFP in the Eomes/Tbr2 locus.

Arnold SJ(1), Sugnaseelan J, Groszer M, Srinivas S, Robertson EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
Sebastian.Arnold@uniklinikfreiburg.de

During mouse embryonic development, the T-box transcription factor Eomes/Tbr2 is 
expressed in highly dynamic patterns in various progenitor cell types. Those
include the undifferentiated cells of the trophectoderm, ingressing nascent
mesoderm at the primitive streak, and intermediate progenitor cells of the
developing cerebral cortex. We generated an Eomes(GFP)- targeted allele to follow
the highly dynamic patterns of Eomes expression and to allow for the
identification of novel expression domains. We show that our novel allele
recapitulates endogenous gene expression at known sites of expression and confirm
our results by anti-Eomes immunofluorescent staining. Using this novel allele we 
were able to identify previously undocumented domains of Eomes expression within 
the visceral endoderm and at various locations in the developing and adult mouse 
brain.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19830823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Immunology. 2009 Dec;128(4):589-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2009.03169.x. Epub
2009 Aug 4.

T-bet-dependent regulation of CD8+ T-cell expansion during experimental
Trypanosoma cruzi infection.

Cobb D(1), Guo S, Lara AM, Manque P, Buck G, Smeltz RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

The transcription factor T-bet (T-box, expressed in T cells), promotes type I
immunity to pathogens through effects involving T cells and dendritic cells. In
CD8(+) T cells, many of the functions of T-bet are redundant with those of
eomesodermin (Eomes), a paralogue of T-bet. We therefore investigated the role of
T-bet in immunity to Trypanosoma cruzi, an intracellular pathogen that causes
Chagas disease, and which requires CD8(+) T cells for resistance. T-bet-deficient
mice (tbx21(-/-)) were highly susceptible to T. cruzi infection, marked by severe
liver pathology. CD8(+) T cells from infected tbx21(-/-) mice expressed typical
markers of activation, including CD44 and CD25. In striking contrast, there was a
10-fold reduction in the number of antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells in tbx21(-/-) 
mice. This reduction was not a consequence of increased apoptosis or altered
tissue-specific migration. Further, antigen-presenting cell (APC) functions in
tbx21(-/-) mice were normal as we observed comparable levels of B7-1, B7-2 and
CD40 expression as well as normal antigen-driven proliferation of wild-type
CD8(+) T cells in infected tbx21(-/-) mice. However, adoptive transfer of naïve T
cells from tbx21(-/-) donors into infected Rag-2-deficient mice (tbx21(+/+))
demonstrated a similar quantitative defect in CD8(+) T-cell expansion. These data
demonstrate that T-bet facilitates immunity to T. cruzi by promoting the
expansion of T. cruzi-specific CD8(+) T cells in a T cell-intrinsic manner. They 
also serve to further illustrate the multifaceted functions of T-box proteins in 
regulating quantitative aspects of T-cell immunity, in addition to qualitative
components such as cytokine production.

PMCID: PMC2792143
PMID: 19824916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Immunol. 2009 Oct 15;183(8):4859-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900714.

Functionally mature CD4 and CD8 TCRalphabeta cells are generated in OP9-DL1
cultures from human CD34+ hematopoietic cells.

Van Coppernolle S(1), Verstichel G, Timmermans F, Velghe I, Vermijlen D, De Smedt
M, Leclercq G, Plum J, Taghon T, Vandekerckhove B, Kerre T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium.

Human CD34(+) hematopoietic precursor cells cultured on delta-like ligand 1
expressing OP9 (OP9-DL1) stromal cells differentiate to T lineage cells. The
nature of the T cells generated in these cultures has not been studied in detail.
Since these cultures do not contain thymic epithelial cells which are the main
cell type mediating positive selection in vivo, generation of conventional helper
CD4(+) and cytotoxic CD8(+) TCRalphabeta cells is not expected. Phenotypically
mature CD27(+)CD1(-) TCRgammadelta as well as TCRalphabeta cells were generated
in OP9-DL1 cultures. CD8 and few mature CD4 single-positive TCRalphabeta cells
were observed. Mature CD8 single-positive cells consisted of two subpopulations: 
one expressing mainly CD8alphabeta and one expressing CD8alphaalpha dimers.
TCRalphabeta CD8alphaalpha and TCRgammadelta cells both expressed the IL2Rbeta
receptor constitutively and proliferated on IL-15, a characteristic of
unconventional T cells. CD8alphabeta(+) and CD4(+) TCRalphabeta cells were
unresponsive to IL-15, but could be expanded upon TCR stimulation as mature
CD8alphabeta(+) and CD4(+) T cells. These T cells had the characteristics of
conventional T cells: CD4(+) cells expressed ThPOK, CD40L, and high levels of
IL-2 and IL-4; CD8(+) cells expressed Eomes, Runx3, and high levels of granzyme, 
perforin, and IFN-gamma. Induction of murine or human MHC class I expression on
OP9-DL1 cells had no influence on the differentiation of mature CD8(+) cells.
Similarly, the presence of dendritic cells was not required for the generation of
mature CD4(+) or CD8(+) T cells. These data suggest that positive selection of
these cells is induced by interaction between T precursor cells.

PMID: 19801512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Eur Cell Mater. 2009 Sep 21;18:1-13; discussion 13-4.

Substrate stiffness affects early differentiation events in embryonic stem cells.

Evans ND(1), Minelli C, Gentleman E, LaPointe V, Patankar SN, Kallivretaki M,
Chen X, Roberts CJ, Stevens MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Embryonic stem cells (ESC) are both a potential source of cells for tissue
replacement therapies and an accessible tool to model early embryonic
development. Chemical factors such as soluble growth factors and insoluble
components of the extracellular matrix are known to affect the differentiation of
murine ESCs. However, there is also evidence to suggest that undifferentiated
cells can both sense the mechanical properties of their environment and
differentiate accordingly. By growing ESCs on flexible polydimethylsiloxane
substrates with varying stiffness, we tested the hypothesis that substrate
stiffness can influence ESC differentiation. While cell attachment was unaffected
by the stiffness of the growth substrate, cell spreading and cell growth were all
increased as a function of substrate stiffness. Similarly, several genes
expressed in the primitive streak during gastrulation and implicated in early
mesendoderm differentiation, such as Brachyury, Mixl1 and Eomes, were upregulated
in cell cultures on stiffer compared to softer substrates. Finally, we
demonstrated that osteogenic differentiation of ESCs was enhanced on stiff
substrates compared to soft substrates, illustrating that the mechanical
environment can play a role in both early and terminal ESC differentiation. Our
results suggest a fundamental role for mechanosensing in mammalian development
and illustrate that the mechanical environment should be taken into consideration
when engineering implantable scaffolds or when producing therapeutically relevant
cell populations in vitro.

PMID: 19768669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Oct;12(10):1229-37. doi: 10.1038/nn.2399. Epub 2009 Sep 13.

AP2gamma regulates basal progenitor fate in a region- and layer-specific manner
in the developing cortex.

Pinto L(1), Drechsel D, Schmid MT, Ninkovic J, Irmler M, Brill MS, Restani L,
Gianfranceschi L, Cerri C, Weber SN, Tarabykin V, Baer K, Guillemot F, Beckers J,
Zecevic N, Dehay C, Caleo M, Schorle H, Götz M.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Institute for Stem Cell Research, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany.
luisapinto@ecsaude.uminho.pt [corrected]

Erratum in
    Nat Neurosci. 2010 May;13(5):649.
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Oct;12(10):1237.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Oct;12(10):1211-2.

An important feature of the cerebral cortex is its layered organization, which is
modulated in an area-specific manner. We found that the transcription factor
AP2gamma regulates laminar fate in a region-specific manner. Deletion of AP2gamma
(also known as Tcfap2c) during development resulted in a specific reduction of
upper layer neurons in the occipital cortex, leading to impaired function and
enhanced plasticity of the adult visual cortex. AP2gamma functions in apical
progenitors, and its absence resulted in mis-specification of basal progenitors
in the occipital cortex at the time at which upper layer neurons were generated. 
AP2gamma directly regulated the basal progenitor fate determinants Math3 (also
known as Neurod4) and Tbr2, and its overexpression promoted the generation of
layer II/III neurons in a time- and region-specific manner. Thus, AP2gamma acts
as a regulator of basal progenitor fate, linking regional and laminar
specification in the mouse developing cerebral cortex.

PMID: 19749747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2009;21(7):882-91. doi: 10.1071/RD09063.

Porcine nuclear transfer using somatic donor cells altered to express male germ
cell function.

Roh S(1), Choi HY, Park SK, Won C, Kim BW, Kim JH, Kang H, Lee ER, Cho SG.

Author information: 
(1)Embryo Biotechnology Laboratory, Dental Research Institute and CLS21, Seoul
National University School of Dentistry, Seoul, Korea. sangho@snu.ac.kr;
ssangoo@konkuk.ac.kr

Recent studies reported that the direct transformation of one differentiated
somatic cell type into another is possible. In the present study, we were able to
modulate the cell fate of somatic cells to take on male germ cell function by
introducing cell extracts derived from porcine testis tissue. Fibroblasts were
treated with streptolysin O, which reversibly permeabilises the plasma membrane, 
and incubated with testis extracts. Our results showed that the testis extracts
(TE) could activate expression of male germ cell-specific genes, implying that TE
can provide regulatory components required for altering the cell fate of
fibroblasts. Male germ cell function was sustained for more than 10 days after
the introduction of TE. In addition, a single TE-treated cell was injected
directly into the cytoplasm of in vitro-matured porcine oocytes. The rate of
blastocyst formation was significantly higher in the TE-treated nuclear donor
cell group than in the control cell group. The expression level of Nanog, Sox9
and Eomes was drastically increased when altered cells were used as donor nuclei.
Our results suggest that TE can be used to alter the cell fate of fibroblasts to 
express male germ cell function and improve the developmental efficiency of the
nuclear transfer porcine embryos.

PMID: 19698292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Nov;39(11):3010-8. doi: 10.1002/eji.200839154.

Gadd45b and Gadd45g are important for anti-tumor immune responses.

Ju S(1), Zhu Y, Liu L, Dai S, Li C, Chen E, He Y, Zhang X, Lu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

An effective Th1 type cell-mediated immune response against cancer cells is
critical in limiting cancer progression. Gadd45b, a signaling molecule highly
up-regulated during Th1 type responses, is studied for its role in limiting tumor
growth. Mouse B16 melanoma cells implanted into Gadd45b(-/-) mice grew faster
than those in WT or Gadd45b(+/-) littermate controls. The defect of Gadd45b(-/-) 
mice in tumor immunosurveillance was attributed to the reduced expression of
IFN-gamma, granzyme B, and CCR5 in Gadd45b(-/-) CD8(+) T cells at the tumor site.
Activation of p38 MAP kinase, but not ERK or JNK, by either TCR-stimuli or IL-12 
and IL-18 is diminished in Gadd45b(-/-) CD8(+) T cells, resulting in reduced
production of IFN-gamma. In addition, mRNA of T-bet and Eomes were reduced in
Gadd45b(-/-) CD8(+) T cells, supporting a critical role of Gadd45b in shaping the
Th1 fate. More importantly, the tumor vaccination, which is effective in WT mice,
failed in Gadd45b/Gadd45g doubly deficient mice. Collectively, these data
demonstrate that members of the Gadd45 gene family are important for anti-tumor
immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3025293
PMID: 19688743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Neurosci. 2009 Jul 29;29(30):9614-24. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2284-09.2009.

Cyclin D2 is critical for intermediate progenitor cell proliferation in the
embryonic cortex.

Glickstein SB(1), Monaghan JA, Koeller HB, Jones TK, Ross ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Expression of cyclins D1 (cD1) and D2 (cD2) in ventricular zone and
subventricular zone (SVZ), respectively, suggests that a switch to cD2 could be a
requisite step in the generation of cortical intermediate progenitor cells
(IPCs). However, direct evidence is lacking. Here, cD1 or cD2 was seen to colabel
subsets of Pax6-expressing radial glial cells (RGCs), whereas only cD2 colabeled 
with Tbr2. Loss of IPCs in cD2(-/-) embryonic cortex and analysis of expression
patterns in mutant embryos lacking cD2 or Tbr2 indicate that cD2 is used as
progenitors transition from RGCs to IPCs and is important for the expansion of
the IPC pool. This was further supported by the laminar thinning, microcephaly,
and selective reduction in the cortical SVZ population in the cD2(-/-)cortex.
Cell cycle dynamics between embryonic day 14-16 in knock-out lines showed
preserved parameters in cD1 mutants that induced cD2 expression, but absence of
cD2 was not compensated by cD1. Loss of cD2 was associated with reduced
proliferation and enhanced cell cycle exit in embryonic cortical progenitors,
indicating a crucial role of cD2 for the support of cortical IPC divisions. In
addition, knock-out of cD2, but not cD1, affected both G(1)-phase and also
S-phase duration, implicating the importance of these phases for division cycles 
that expand the progenitor pool. That cD2 was the predominant D-cyclin expressed 
in the human SVZ at 19-20 weeks gestation indicated the evolutionary importance
of cD2 in larger mammals for whom expansive intermediate progenitor divisions are
thought to enable generation of larger, convoluted, cerebral cortices.

PMCID: PMC2811167
PMID: 19641124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Immunol. 2009 Aug 1;183(3):1695-704. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900592. Epub 2009
Jul 10.

Gene regulation and chromatin remodeling by IL-12 and type I IFN in programming
for CD8 T cell effector function and memory.

Agarwal P(1), Raghavan A, Nandiwada SL, Curtsinger JM, Bohjanen PR, Mueller DL,
Mescher MF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Department of Laboratory, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

A third signal that can be provided by IL-12 or type I IFN is required for
differentiation of naive CD8 T cells responding to Ag and costimulation. The
cytokines program development of function and memory within 3 days of initial
stimulation, and we show here that programming involves regulation of a common
set of approximately 355 genes including T-bet and eomesodermin. Much of the gene
regulation program is initiated in response to Ag and costimulation within 24 h
but is then extinguished unless a cytokine signal is available. Histone
deacetylase inhibitors mimic the effects of IL-12 or type I IFN signaling,
indicating that the cytokines relieve repression and allow continued gene
expression by promoting increased histone acetylation. In support of this,
increased association of acetylated histones with the promoter loci of granzyme B
and eomesodermin is shown to occur in response to IL-12, IFN-alpha, or histone
deacetylase inhibitors. Thus, IL-12 and IFN-alpha/beta enforce in common a
complex gene regulation program that involves, at least in part, chromatin
remodeling to allow sustained expression of a large number of genes critical for 
CD8 T cell function and memory.

PMCID: PMC2893405
PMID: 19592655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Immunol. 2009 Jul 1;183(1):381-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900939.

IL-23 promotes the production of IL-17 by antigen-specific CD8 T cells in the
absence of IL-12 and type-I interferons.

Curtis MM(1), Way SS, Wilson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, 98195, USA.

In contrast to CD4 T cells, CD8 T cells inherently differentiate into
IFN-gamma-producing effectors. Accordingly, while generation of
IFN-gamma-producing Th1 CD4 T cells was profoundly impaired in mice deficient for
both type-I IFN and IL-12 signaling in response to infection with Listeria
monocytogenes, generation of Ag-specific, IFN-gamma-producing CD8 T cells was
unimpaired. However, a fraction of these CD8 T cells also produced IL-17 in an
IL-23-dependent manner. Furthermore, the addition of IL-23 in vitro was
sufficient for some naive CD8 T cells to differentiate into IFN-gamma/IL-17
dual-producing cells and was associated with increased expression of ROR-gammat
and ROR-alpha. Addition of IL-6 and TGF-beta to IL-23 further augmented
ROR-gammat and ROR-alpha expression and suppressed Eomes expression, thereby
enhancing IL-17 production by CD8 T cells. A loss of cytotoxic function
accompanied the production of IL-17, as the addition of IL-6 and TGF-beta
resulted in a marked reduction of granzyme B and perforin expression. Thus, CD8 T
cells retain sufficient plasticity to respond to environmental cues and can
acquire additional effector functions in response to their environmental context.

PMCID: PMC2729917
PMID: 19542449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Hum Genet. 2009 Jul;126(1):173-93. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0702-1. Epub 2009 Jun 
18.

Genetic basis in epilepsies caused by malformations of cortical development and
in those with structurally normal brain.

Andrade DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Toronto Western Hospital, Krembil Neuroscience Centre, 
University of Toronto, 5W-445, 399 Bathurst St., Toronto M5T 2S8, Canada.
Danielle.Andrade@uhn.on.ca

Epilepsy is the most common neurological disorder affecting young people. The
etiologies are multiple and most cases are sporadic. However, some rare families 
with Mendelian inheritance have provided evidence of genes' important role in
epilepsy. Two important but apparently different groups of disorders have been
extensively studied: epilepsies associated with malformations of cortical
development (MCDs) and epilepsies associated with a structurally normal brain (or
with minimal abnormalities only). This review is focused on clinical and
molecular aspects of focal cortical dysplasia, polymicrogyria, periventricular
nodular heterotopia, subcortical band heterotopia, lissencephaly and
schizencephaly as examples of MCDs. Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, childhood
absence epilepsy, some familial forms of focal epilepsy and epilepsies associated
with febrile seizures are discussed as examples of epileptic conditions in
(apparently) structurally normal brains.

PMID: 19536565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. PLoS Genet. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000511. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000511. Epub 2009 
Jun 12.

The level of the transcription factor Pax6 is essential for controlling the
balance between neural stem cell self-renewal and neurogenesis.

Sansom SN(1), Griffiths DS, Faedo A, Kleinjan DJ, Ruan Y, Smith J, van Heyningen 
V, Rubenstein JL, Livesey FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gurdon Institute and Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

Neural stem cell self-renewal, neurogenesis, and cell fate determination are
processes that control the generation of specific classes of neurons at the
correct place and time. The transcription factor Pax6 is essential for neural
stem cell proliferation, multipotency, and neurogenesis in many regions of the
central nervous system, including the cerebral cortex. We used Pax6 as an entry
point to define the cellular networks controlling neural stem cell self-renewal
and neurogenesis in stem cells of the developing mouse cerebral cortex. We
identified the genomic binding locations of Pax6 in neocortical stem cells during
normal development and ascertained the functional significance of genes that we
found to be regulated by Pax6, finding that Pax6 positively and directly
regulates cohorts of genes that promote neural stem cell self-renewal, basal
progenitor cell genesis, and neurogenesis. Notably, we defined a core network
regulating neocortical stem cell decision-making in which Pax6 interacts with
three other regulators of neurogenesis, Neurog2, Ascl1, and Hes1. Analyses of the
biological function of Pax6 in neural stem cells through phenotypic analyses of
Pax6 gain- and loss-of-function mutant cortices demonstrated that the
Pax6-regulated networks operating in neural stem cells are highly dosage
sensitive. Increasing Pax6 levels drives the system towards neurogenesis and
basal progenitor cell genesis by increasing expression of a cohort of basal
progenitor cell determinants, including the key transcription factor Eomes/Tbr2, 
and thus towards neurogenesis at the expense of self-renewal. Removing Pax6
reduces cortical stem cell self-renewal by decreasing expression of key cell
cycle regulators, resulting in excess early neurogenesis. We find that the
relative levels of Pax6, Hes1, and Neurog2 are key determinants of a dynamic
network that controls whether neural stem cells self-renew, generate cortical
neurons, or generate basal progenitor cells, a mechanism that has marked
parallels with the transcriptional control of embryonic stem cell self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC2686252
PMID: 19521500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Zygote. 2009 Nov;17(4):353-65. doi: 10.1017/S0967199409005486. Epub 2009 Jun 8.

Elongation and gene expression in bovine cloned embryos transferred to temporary 
recipients.

Rodríguez-Alvarez L(1), Cox J, Navarrete F, Valdés C, Zamorano T, Einspanier R,
Castro FO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Universidad de
Concepción, Avenida Vicente Méndez 595, Chillán, Chile.

SummaryElongated embryos provide a unique source of information about
trophoblastic differentiation, gene expression and maternal-embryonic
interactions; however they are difficult and costly to obtain, especially
elongated cloned embryos. One alternative is their production in heterologous
temporary recipients such as sheep and goats. We aimed to produce elongated
bovine cloned embryos using heterologous transfer to temporary recipients. Day-7 
cloned cattle blastocysts were transferred to the uteri of ewes and goats and
recovered as elongated structures at day 17. We evaluated elongation, length,
presence of embryonic disc and expression of several important genes for
embryonic development. We also produced homologous (cloned cattle embryos
transferred into cattle uteri). Cloned bovine blastocysts were able to proceed
with preimplantation development through elongation with high efficiency despite 
the species to which they were transferred. In qualitative and quantitative
RT-PCR experiments we found differences in the pattern of gene expression among
embryos recovered from different species. Sox2, Nanog and FGF-4 were markedly
deregulated. No previous reports about the expression pattern of the studied
genes had been published for elongated bovine cloned embryos produced in
intermediate recipients, furthermore, the pattern of expression of Nanog, Oct4,
Eomes, Cdx2, IFN-tau, Dicer, FGF-4 and Sox2 shown here are novel for elongated
cloned bovine embryos created by hand-made cloning. Our data confirmed that sheep
and goats can be used as temporary recipients. This model could serve as a basis 
for further research on gene expression and cellular changes during bovine
peri-implantation development.

PMID: 19500444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 Nov;18(9):1309-18. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0115.

Developmental potential of rat extraembryonic stem cells.

Galat V(1), Binas B, Iannaccone S, Postovit LM, Debeb BG, Iannaccone P.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA. v-galat@northwestern.edu

We have previously found that certain stem cells that are derived from rat
blastocysts and named extraembryonic endoderm precursor (XEN-P) cells show a
unique molecular signature sharing some of the characteristics of embryonic stem 
cells (ES), trophoblast stem cells (TS), and extraembryonic endoderm stem cells
(XEN). These XEN-P cells are positive for AP, SSEA1, Oct4, and Rex1 markers
similar to ES cells and also express signature markers of TS-eomesodermin (Eomes)
and XEN-Gata6. Here we show that these cells integrate into the visceral and
parietal extraembryonic endoderm lineages as well as into the inner cell mass
(ICM), the primitive endoderm, and the polar and mural trophectoderm (TE) of
cultured embryos. In addition, we find that the XEN-P cells colonize yolk sac and
contribute to trophoblast lineages of postimplantation embryos following transfer
to surrogate mothers. We also find that the XEN-P cell culture propagates by
shedding cell clusters into the media in addition to typical expansion of
colonies. Interestingly, the cell cultures exist as mixed populations of two
interconvertible phenotypes of flat and round cells with preferential expression 
of stem cell markers Oct4 and SSEA1 in round cells. We believe these cells
represent a metastable stage during ICM cellular segregation. These results are
important for developing hypotheses of cell fate plasticity in the ICM and
provide a model for the study of development and differentiation along the
extraembryonic lineages.

PMID: 19480599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Blood. 2009 Jul 16;114(3):596-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-02-203935. Epub 2009 May
26.

Type 17 CD8+ T cells display enhanced antitumor immunity.

Hinrichs CS(1), Kaiser A, Paulos CM, Cassard L, Sanchez-Perez L, Heemskerk B,
Wrzesinski C, Borman ZA, Muranski P, Restifo NP.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Interleukin-17 (IL-17)-secreting CD8(+) T cells have been described, but they
have not been thoroughly studied and they do not have a known role in cancer
immunotherapy. We skewed CD8(+) T cells to secrete IL-17 through priming in
Th17-polarizing conditions. IL-17-producing CD8(+) T cells demonstrated reduced
expression of Eomes and diminished cytolytic differentiation in vitro. However,
after adoptive transfer, these cells converted to interferon-gamma-producing
effector cells and mediated regression of large, established tumors. This
improved antitumor immunity was associated with increased expression of
IL-7R-alpha, decreased expression of killer cell lectin-like receptor G1, and
enhanced persistence of the transferred cells. This report is the first
description of a cancer therapy with IL-17-secreting CD8(+) T cells. These
findings have implications for the improvement of CD8(+) T cell-based adoptive
immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2713473
PMID: 19471017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;29(14):3894-904. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01598-08. Epub 2009 May
11.

Histone acetyltransferase CBP is vital to demarcate conventional and innate CD8+ 
T-cell development.

Fukuyama T(1), Kasper LH, Boussouar F, Jeevan T, van Deursen J, Brindle PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny
Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Defining the chromatin modifications and transcriptional mechanisms that direct
the development of different T-cell lineages is a major challenge in immunology. 
The transcriptional coactivators CREB binding protein (CBP) and the closely
related p300, which comprise the KAT3 family of histone/protein lysine
acetyltransferases, interact with over 50 T-lymphocyte-essential transcriptional 
regulators. We show here that CBP, but not p300, modulates the thymic development
of conventional adaptive T cells versus those having unconventional innate
functions. Conditional inactivation of CBP in the thymus yielded CD8
single-positive (SP) thymocytes with an effector-, memory-, or innate-like T-cell
phenotype. In this regard, CD8 SP thymocytes in CBP mutant mice were
phenotypically similar to those reported for Itk and Rlk protein tyrosine kinase 
mutants, including the increased expression of the T-cell master regulatory
transcription factor eomesodermin (Eomes) and the interleukin-2 and -15 receptor 
beta chain (CD122) and an enhanced ability to rapidly produce gamma interferon.
CBP was required for the expression of the Itk-dependent genes Egr2, Egr3, and
Il2, suggesting that CBP helps mediate Itk-responsive transcription. CBP
therefore defines a nuclear component of the signaling pathways that demarcate
the development of innate and adaptive naïve CD8(+) T cells in the thymus.

PMCID: PMC2704754
PMID: 19433445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Dev Biol. 2009 Aug 1;332(1):90-102. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.543. Epub 2009
May 9.

Germ layer patterning in bichir and lamprey; an insight into its evolution in
vertebrates.

Takeuchi M(1), Takahashi M, Okabe M, Aizawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Vertebrate Body Plan, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN
Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Amphibian holoblastic cleavage in which all blastomeres contribute to any one of 
the three primary germ layers has been widely thought to be a developmental
pattern in the stem lineage of vertebrates, and meroblastic cleavage to have
evolved independently in each vertebrate lineage. In extant primitive
vertebrates, agnathan lamprey and basal bony fishes also undergo holoblastic
cleavage, and their vegetal blastomeres have been generally thought to contribute
to embryonic endoderm. However, the present marker analyses in basal ray-finned
fish bichir and agnathan lamprey embryos indicated that their mesoderm and
endoderm develop in the equatorial marginal zone, and their vegetal cell mass is 
extraembryonic nutritive yolk cells, having non-cell autonomous meso-endoderm
inducing activity. Eomesodermin (eomes), but not VegT, orthologs are expressed
maternally in these animals, suggesting that VegT is a maternal factor for
endoderm differentiation only in amphibian. The study raises the viewpoint that
the lamprey/bichir type holoblastic development would have been ancestral to
extant vertebrates and retained in their stem lineage; amphibian-type holoblastic
development would have been acquired secondarily, accompanied by the exploitation
of new molecular machinery such as maternal VegT.

PMID: 19433081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Clin Invest. 2009 May;119(5):1350-8.

Girls homozygous for an IL-2-inducible T cell kinase mutation that leads to
protein deficiency develop fatal EBV-associated lymphoproliferation.

Huck K(1), Feyen O, Niehues T, Rüschendorf F, Hübner N, Laws HJ, Telieps T, Knapp
S, Wacker HH, Meindl A, Jumaa H, Borkhardt A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Centre
for Child and Adolescent Health, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

The fatal immune dysregulation that sometimes follows EBV infection in boys has
been linked to mutations in two X chromosome-encoded genes, SLAM-associated
protein (SAP) and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP). In this study we
describe 2 girls from a consanguineous Turkish family who died after developing
severe immune dysregulation and therapy-resistant EBV-positive B cell
proliferation following EBV infection. SNP array-based genome-wide linkage
analysis revealed IL-2-inducible T cell kinase (ITK) as a candidate gene for this
immunodeficiency syndrome. Both girls harbored a homozygous missense mutation
that led to substitution of a highly conserved residue (R335W) in the SH2 domain 
of ITK. Characteristics of ITK deficiency in mouse models, such as absence of NKT
cells and high levels of eomesodermin in CD8+ cells, were seen in either one or
both of the girls. Two lines of evidence suggested that R335W caused instability 
of the ITK protein. First, in silico modeling of the mutant protein predicted
destabilization of the SH2 domain. Additionally, Western blot analysis revealed
that, unlike wild-type ITK, the R335W mutant was nearly undetectable when
expressed in 293 T cells. Our results suggest that ITK deficiency causes what we 
believe to be a novel immunodeficiency syndrome that leads to a fatal inadequate 
immune response to EBV. Because ITK deficiency resembles EBV-associated
lymphoproliferative disorders in boys, we suggest that this molecular cause
should be considered during diagnosis and treatment.

PMCID: PMC2673872
PMID: 19425169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Am J Pathol. 2009 Jun;174(6):2300-9. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.081153. Epub 2009
Apr 23.

Protection of hippocampal neurogenesis from toll-like receptor 4-dependent innate
immune activation by ablation of prostaglandin E2 receptor subtype EP1 or EP2.

Keene CD(1), Chang R, Stephen C, Nivison M, Nutt SE, Look A, Breyer RM, Horner
PJ, Hevner R, Montine TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Box 359791, Seattle, WA
98104, USA.

Prostaglandin E2 is one of several eicosanoid products of the cyclooxygenase
isozymes and is a key regulator of innate immune responses; it also possesses
paracrine effects on mature neurons. The prostaglandin E2 receptor family
consists of four subtypes of which EP1 and EP2 are known to be expressed by
microglia. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced innate immune activation leads to the
degeneration of intermediate progenitor cells (IPCs) that are destined for
neuronal maturation in the hippocampal subgranular zone (SGZ); these cells can be
identified by the expression of the transcription factor T-box brain gene 2
(Tbr2). Importantly, depletion of LPS-induced IPCs from the SGZ is suppressed by 
cyclooxygenase inhibitors. We therefore tested the hypothesis that either EP1 or 
EP2 is critical to LPS-induced depletion of Tbr2+ IPCs from the SGZ. Expression
of either EP1 or EP2 was necessary for Toll-like receptor 4-dependent innate
immune-mediated depletion of these Tbr2+ IPCs in mice. Moreover, EP1 activation
was directly toxic to murine adult hippocampal progenitor cells; EP2 was not
expressed by these cells. Finally, EP1 modulated the response of murine primary
microglia cultures to LPS but in a manner distinct from EP2. These results
indicate that prostaglandin E2 signaling via either EP1 or EP2 is largely to
completely necessary for Toll-like receptor 4-dependent depletion of IPCs from
the SGZ and suggest further pharmacological strategies to protect this important 
neurogenic niche.

PMCID: PMC2684194
PMID: 19389932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Mar;39(3):687-90. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939261.

CTLA-4 co-receptor impacts on the function of Treg and CD8+ T-cell subsets.

Rudd CE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cell Signalling Section, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

CTLA-4 has potent regulatory effects on the threshold of T-cell signalling and,
in the process, guards against the development of hyper-proliferation and
autoimmunity. Despite this, the role of CTLA-4 on specific T-cell subsets has
been unclear. Such studies could shed light on both the function of CTLA-4, and
on the contribution of the subsets to the disease phenotype of the Ctla4(-/-)
mouse. Recently, a role for this co-receptor in the function of Treg has been
outlined and, in this issue of the European Journal of Immunology, the selective 
targeting of the T-box transcription factor Eomes by CTLA-4 in the regulation of 
CD8(+) cytolytic T-cell (CTL) effector function is shown. Together, these papers 
shed light on the role of CTLA-4 in different T-cell subsets.

PMCID: PMC3512132
PMID: 19283722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Semin Immunol. 2009 Apr;21(2):92-8. doi: 10.1016/j.smim.2009.02.002. Epub 2009
Mar 6.

Surviving the crash: transitioning from effector to memory CD8+ T cell.

D'Cruz LM(1), Rubinstein MP, Goldrath AW.

Author information: 
(1)University of California San Diego, Division of Biological Sciences, 9500
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0377, United States.

One outcome of infection is the formation of long-lived immunological memory,
which provides durable protection from symptomatic re-infection. In response to
infection or vaccination, T cells undergo dramatic proliferation and
differentiate into effector T cells that mediate removal of the pathogen.
Following pathogen clearance, the majority of effector cells die, restoring
lymphocyte homeostasis. However, a small number of antigen-specific cells survive
and seed the memory T cell population. Here, we focus on recent advances in
identifying the key proteins and transcription factors that allow a portion of
effector CD8(+) T cells to persist after contraction of the immune response,
forming a memory cell population programmed for long-term self-renewal and
survival. We also examine new findings addressing the role of environmental cues 
such as cytokines and co-stimulatory molecules in CD8(+) memory T cell formation 
and how the cell-extrinsic cues influence the molecular players of intracellular 
pathways important for memory formation.

PMCID: PMC2671236
PMID: 19269192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Immunol. 2009 Mar 15;182(6):3380-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802598.

Notch regulates cytolytic effector function in CD8+ T cells.

Cho OH(1), Shin HM, Miele L, Golde TE, Fauq A, Minter LM, Osborne BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

The maturation of naive CD8(+) T cells into effector CTLs is a critical feature
of a functional adaptive immune system. Development of CTLs depends, in part,
upon the expression of the transcriptional regulator eomesodermin (EOMES), which 
is thought to regulate expression of two key effector molecules, perforin and
granzyme B. Although EOMES is important for effector CTL development, the precise
mechanisms regulating CD8(+) effector cell maturation remains poorly understood. 
In this study, we show that Notch1 regulates the expression of EOMES, perforin,
and granzyme B through direct binding to the promoters of these crucial effector 
molecules. By abrogating Notch signaling, both biochemically as well as
genetically, we conclude that Notch activity mediates CTL activity through direct
regulation of EOMES, perforin, and granzyme B.

PMCID: PMC4374745
PMID: 19265115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Mar;39(3):883-93. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838770.

CD152 (CTLA-4) regulates effector functions of CD8+ T lymphocytes by repressing
Eomesodermin.

Hegel JK(1), Knieke K, Kolar P, Reiner SL, Brunner-Weinzierl MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Otto-von-Guericke-University Magdeburg, Magdeburg,
Germany.

CD8(+) T lymphocytes are required for effective host defense against pathogens
and also for mediating effector responses against uncontrolled proliferating
self-tissues. In this study, we determine that individual CD8(+) T cells are
tightly controlled in their effector functions by CD152 (CTLA-4). We demonstrate 
that signals induced by CD152 reduce the frequency of IFN-gamma and granzyme B
expressing CD8(+) T cells independently of the transcription factors T-bet or
cKrox by selectively inhibiting accumulation of Eomesodermin mRNA and protein.
Ectopic expression of Eomesodermin reversed the CD152-mediated inhibition of
effector molecule production. Additionally, enhanced cytotoxicity of individual
CD8(+) T cells differentiated in the absence of CD152 signaling was determined in
vivo. These novel insights extend our understanding of how immune responses of
CD8(+) T cells are selectively modulated.

PMID: 19224637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Eur J Neurosci. 2009 Jan;29(2):232-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06595.x.

Involvement of Ngn2, Tbr and NeuroD proteins during postnatal olfactory bulb
neurogenesis.

Roybon L(1), Deierborg T, Brundin P, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Neuronal Survival Unit, Department of Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg
Neuroscience Center, BMC A10, 22184 Lund, Sweden. laurent.roybon@med.lu.se

Comment in
    Eur J Neurosci. 2009 Jan;29(2):231.

Postnatal neurogenesis takes place in two brain regions, the hippocampus and the 
subventricular zone (SVZ). The transcriptional cascade controlling hippocampal
neurogenesis has been described in detail; however, the transcriptional control
of olfactory bulb neurogenesis is still not well mapped. In this study, we
provide insights into the molecular events controlling postnatal olfactory bulb
neurogenesis. We first show the existence of diverse neural stem cell/progenitor 
populations along the SVZ-rostral migratory stream (RMS) axis, focusing on those 
expressing the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Mash1. We
provide evidence that Mash1-derived progenies generate oligodendrocytic and
neuronal precursors through the transient expression of the bHLH transcription
factors Olig2 and neurogenin2 (Ngn2), respectively. Furthermore, we reveal that
Ngn2-positive progenies express the T-box transcription factors Tbr2 and Tbr1,
which are usually present during cortical and hippocampal glutamatergic neuronal 
differentiation. We also highlight a cell population expressing another bHLH
transcription factor, neuroD1 (ND1). The ND1-positive cells are located in the
SVZ-RMS axis and also co-express Tbr2, Tbr1 and neuroD2. The observations that
these cells incorporate bromodeoxyuridine and express both doublecortin and
polysialylated form of neural cell adhesion molecule suggest that they are
newborn neurons. Finally, using an in vitro assay, we demonstrate that Ngn2 and
ND1 equally and exclusively direct differentiation of Mash1-expressing precursors
into calbindin-expressing and calretinin-expressing neurons, which are both
neuronal subtypes normally found in the olfactory bulb. Taken together, our data 
illustrate that Ngn2, neuroD and Tbr transcription factors are involved in
postnatal neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb.

PMID: 19200230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Cereb Cortex. 2009 Oct;19(10):2439-50. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhn260. Epub 2009 Jan 
23.

Intermediate neuronal progenitors (basal progenitors) produce
pyramidal-projection neurons for all layers of cerebral cortex.

Kowalczyk T(1), Pontious A, Englund C, Daza RA, Bedogni F, Hodge R, Attardo A,
Bell C, Huttner WB, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurological Surgery and Pathology, University of Washington
and Center for Neuroscience, Seattle Children's Hospital Research Institute,
Seattle, WA 98101, USA.

The developing cerebral cortex contains apical and basal types of neurogenic
progenitor cells. Here, we investigated the cellular properties and neurogenic
output of basal progenitors, also called intermediate neuronal progenitors
(INPs). We found that basal mitoses expressing transcription factor Tbr2 (an INP 
marker) were present throughout corticogenesis, from embryonic day 10.5 through
birth. Postnatally, Tbr2(+) progenitors were present in the dentate gyrus,
subventricular zone (SVZ), and posterior periventricle (pPV). Two morphological
subtypes of INPs were distinguished in the embryonic cortex, "short radial" in
the ventricular zone (VZ) and multipolar in the SVZ, probably corresponding to
molecularly defined INP subtypes. Unexpectedly, many short radial INPs appeared
to contact the apical (ventricular) surface and some divided there. Time-lapse
video microscopy suggested that apical INP divisions produced daughter INPs.
Analysis of neurogenic divisions (Tis21-green fluorescent protein [GFP](+))
indicated that INPs may produce the majority of projection neurons for preplate, 
deep, and superficial layers. Conversely, proliferative INP divisions
(Tis21-GFP(-)) increased from early to middle corticogenesis, concomitant with
SVZ growth. Our findings support the hypothesis that regulated amplification of
INPs may be an important factor controlling the balance of neurogenesis among
different cortical layers.

PMCID: PMC2742596
PMID: 19168665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Exp Med. 2009 Jan 16;206(1):51-9. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081242. Epub 2009 Jan 12.

Runx3 and T-box proteins cooperate to establish the transcriptional program of
effector CTLs.

Cruz-Guilloty F(1), Pipkin ME, Djuretic IM, Levanon D, Lotem J, Lichtenheld MG,
Groner Y, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School and the Immune Disease Institute, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

Activation of naive CD8(+) T cells with antigen induces their differentiation
into effector cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs). CTLs lyse infected or aberrant
target cells by exocytosis of lytic granules containing the pore-forming protein 
perforin and a family of proteases termed granzymes. We show that effector CTL
differentiation occurs in two sequential phases in vitro, characterized by early 
induction of T-bet and late induction of Eomesodermin (Eomes), T-box
transcription factors that regulate the early and late phases of interferon (IFN)
gamma expression, respectively. In addition, we demonstrate a critical role for
the transcription factor Runx3 in CTL differentiation. Runx3 regulates Eomes
expression as well as expression of three cardinal markers of the effector CTL
program: IFN-gamma, perforin, and granzyme B. Our data point to the existence of 
an elaborate transcriptional network in which Runx3 initially induces and then
cooperates with T-box transcription factors to regulate gene transcription in
differentiating CTLs.

PMCID: PMC2626671
PMID: 19139168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2009 Feb;40(2):225-33. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.10.007. Epub
2008 Nov 7.

Periventricular notch activation and asymmetric Ngn2 and Tbr2 expression in
pair-generated neocortical daughter cells.

Ochiai W(1), Nakatani S, Takahara T, Kainuma M, Masaoka M, Minobe S, Namihira M, 
Nakashima K, Sakakibara A, Ogawa M, Miyata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, 65 Tsurumai, Showa, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8550, Japan.

To understand the cellular and molecular mechanisms regulating cytogenesis within
the neocortical ventricular zone, we examined at high resolution the
spatiotemporal expression patterns of Ngn2 and Tbr2. Individually DiI-labeled
daughter cells were tracked from their birth in slice cultures and immunostained 
for Ngn2 and Tbr2. Both proteins were initially absent from daughter cells during
the first 2 h. Ngn2 expression was then initiated asymmetrically in one of the
daughter cells, with a bias towards the apical cell, followed by a similar
pattern of expression for Tbr2, which we found to be a direct target of Ngn2. How
this asymmetric Ngn2 expression is achieved is unclear, but gamma-secretase
inhibition at the birth of daughter cells resulted in premature Ngn2 expression, 
suggesting that Notch signaling in nascent daughter cells suppresses a Ngn2-Tbr2 
cascade. Many of the nascent cells exhibited pin-like morphology with a short
ventricular process, suggesting periventricular presentation of Notch ligands to 
these cells.

PMID: 19059340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Genes Dev. 2008 Dec 1;22(23):3349-62. doi: 10.1101/gad.486708.

Genetic ablation of FLRT3 reveals a novel morphogenetic function for the anterior
visceral endoderm in suppressing mesoderm differentiation.

Egea J(1), Erlacher C, Montanez E, Burtscher I, Yamagishi S, Hess M, Hampel F,
Sanchez R, Rodriguez-Manzaneque MT, Bösl MR, Fässler R, Lickert H, Klein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Max-Planck Institute of Neurobiology,
82152 Martinsried, Germany. jegea@neuro.mpg.de

During early mouse development, the anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) secretes
inhibitor and activator signals that are essential for establishing the
anterior-posterior (AP) axis of the embryo and for restricting mesoderm formation
to the posterior epiblast in the primitive streak (PS) region. Here we show that 
AVE cells have an additional morphogenetic function. These cells express the
transmembrane protein FLRT3. Genetic ablation of FLRT3 did not affect the
signaling functions of the AVE according to the normal expression pattern of
Nodal and Wnt and the establishment of a proper AP patterning in the epiblast.
However, FLRT3(-/-) embryos showed a highly disorganized basement membrane (BM)
in the AVE region. Subsequently, adjacent anterior epiblast cells displayed an
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like process characterized by the loss
of cell polarity, cell ingression, and the up-regulation of the EMT and the
mesodermal marker genes Eomes, Brachyury/T, and FGF8. These results suggest that 
the AVE acts as a morphogenetic boundary to prevent EMT and mesoderm induction in
the anterior epiblast by maintaining the integrity of the BM. We propose that
this novel function cooperates with the signaling activities of the AVE to
restrict EMT and mesoderm induction to the posterior epiblast.

PMCID: PMC2600762
PMID: 19056886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Neurobiol Dis. 2009 Feb;33(2):250-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.10.010. Epub 2008
Nov 6.

Aberrant differentiation of glutamatergic cells in neocortex of mouse model for
fragile X syndrome.

Tervonen TA(1), Louhivuori V, Sun X, Hokkanen ME, Kratochwil CF, Zebryk P,
Castrén E, Castrén ML.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 56, 00014 Helsinki,
Finland.

The lack of fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) causes fragile X
syndrome, a common form of inherited mental retardation. Our previous studies
revealed alterations in the differentiation of FMRP-deficient neural progenitors.
Here, we show abnormalities in neurogenesis in the mouse and human embryonic
FMRP-deficient brain as well as after in utero transfection of I304N mutated
FMRP, which acts in a dominant negative manner in the wild-type mouse brain.
Progenitors accumulated abnormally in the subventricular zone of the embryonic
Fmr1-knockout (Fmr1-KO) mouse neocortex. An increased density of cells expressing
sequentially an intermediate progenitor marker, T-box transcription factor
(Tbr2), and a postmitotic neuron marker, T-brain 1 (Tbr1), indicated that the
differentiation to glutamatergic cell lineages was particularly disturbed. These 
abnormalities were associated with an increased density of pyramidal cells of the
layer V in the early postnatal neocortex suggesting a role for FMRP in the
regulation of the differentiation of neocortical glutamatergic neurons.

PMID: 19056494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Immunol. 2008 Dec 15;181(12):8700-10.

T-bet and eomesodermin play critical roles in directing T cell differentiation to
Th1 versus Th17.

Yang Y(1), Xu J, Niu Y, Bromberg JS, Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene and Cell Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA.

Th1 and Th17 cells are crucial in immune regulation and autoimmune disease
development. By adding Stat6 deficiency to T-bet deficiency, and thus negating
effects from elevated levels of IL-4/Stat6/GATA3 Th2 signals in T-bet-deficient
cells, we investigated the signals important for Th1 and Th17 cell
differentiation and their role in colitis development. The data reveal that
Eomesodermin compensates T-bet deficiency for IFN-gamma and Th1 development.
However, without T-bet, IFN-gamma production and Th1 differentiation are
susceptible to inhibition by IL-6 and TGFbeta. As a result, Th17 development is
strongly favored, the threshold for TGFbeta requirement is lowered, and IL-6
drives Th17 differentiation, elucidating a critical role for T-bet in directing T
cell differentiation to Th1 vs Th17. In contrast to IL-6 plus TGFbeta-driven
Th17, IL-6-driven Th17 cells do not express IL-10 and they induce a more intense 
colitis. Naive CD4 T cells deficient in Stat6 and T-bet also induce a
Th17-dominant colitis development in vivo. Our data provide new insights into the
choice between Th1 and Th17 development and their roles in autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC2834216
PMID: 19050290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 23;284(4):2397-408. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808704200. Epub 2008 
Nov 26.

Eomesodermin requires transforming growth factor-beta/activin signaling and binds
Smad2 to activate mesodermal genes.

Picozzi P(1), Wang F, Cronk K, Ryan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Cardiology, Joseph Stokes Jr. Research
Institute, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-4318, USA.

The T-box gene Eomesodermin (Eomes) is required for early embryonic mesoderm
differentiation in mouse, frog (Xenopus laevis), and zebrafish, is important in
late cardiac development in Xenopus, and for CD8+ T effector cell function in
mouse. Eomes can ectopically activate many mesodermal genes. However, the
mechanism by which Eomes activates transcription of these genes is poorly
understood. We report that Eomes protein interacts with Smad2 and is capable of
working in a non-cell autonomous manner via transfer of Eomes protein between
adjacent embryonic cells. Blocking of Eomes protein transfer using a farnesylated
red fluorescent protein (CherryF) also prevents Eomes nuclear accumulation.
Transfer of Eomes protein between cells is mediated by the Eomes carboxyl
terminus (456-692). A carbohydrate binding domain within the Eomes
carboxyl-terminal region is sufficient for transfer and important for gene
activation. We propose a novel mechanism by which Eomes helps effect a cellular
response to a morphogen gradient.

PMCID: PMC2629102
PMID: 19036723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Biol Reprod. 2009 Feb;80(2):227-34. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.070920. Epub 2008
Oct 29.

Glial cells missing homologue 1 is induced in differentiating equine chorionic
girdle trophoblast cells.

de Mestre AM(1), Miller D, Roberson MS, Liford J, Chizmar LC, McLaughlin KE,
Antczak DF.

Author information: 
(1)Baker Institute for Animal Health and Department of Biomedical Sciences,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA. 
ademestre@rvc.ac.uk

The objective of this study was to identify transcription factors associated with
differentiation of the chorionic girdle, the invasive form of equine trophoblast.
The expression patterns of five transcription factors were determined on a panel 
of conceptus tissues from early horse pregnancy. Tissues from Days 15 through 46 
were tested. Eomesodermin (EOMES), glial cells missing homologue 1 (GCM1), heart 
and neural crest derivatives expressed transcript 1 (HAND1), caudal type homeobox
2 (CDX2), and distal-less homeobox 3 (DLX3) were detected in horse trophoblast,
but the expression patterns for these genes varied. EOMES had the most restricted
distribution, while DLX3 CDX2, and HAND1 were widely expressed. GCM1 seemed to
increase in the developing chorionic girdle, and this was confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR assays. GCM1 expression preceded a striking increase in
expression of equine chorionic gonadotropin beta (CGB) in the chorionic girdle,
and binding sites for GCM1 were discovered in the promoter region of the CGB
gene. GCM1, CGB, and CGA mRNA were expressed preferentially in binucleate cells
as opposed to uninucleate cells of the chorionic girdle. Based on these findings,
it is likely that GCM1 has a role in differentiation and function of the invasive
trophoblast of the equine chorionic girdle and endometrial cups. The equine
binucleate chorionic girdle (CG) secreting trophoblast shares molecular,
morphological, and functional characteristics with human syncytiotrophoblast and 
represents a model for studies of human placental function.

PMCID: PMC2804814
PMID: 18971425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Neuron. 2008 Oct 9;60(1):56-69. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.09.028.

Tbr2 directs conversion of radial glia into basal precursors and guides neuronal 
amplification by indirect neurogenesis in the developing neocortex.

Sessa A(1), Mao CA, Hadjantonakis AK, Klein WH, Broccoli V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropathology Laboratory, SCRI, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 
Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milan, Italy.

T-brain gene-2 (Tbr2) is specifically expressed in the intermediate (basal)
progenitor cells (IPCs) of the developing cerebral cortex; however, its function 
in this biological context has so far been overlooked due to the early lethality 
of Tbr2 mutant embryos. Conditional ablation of Tbr2 in the developing forebrain 
resulted in the loss of IPCs and their differentiated progeny in mutant cortex.
Intriguingly, early loss of IPCs led to a decrease in cortical surface expansion 
and thickness with a neuronal reduction observed in all cortical layers. These
findings suggest that IPC progeny contribute to the correct morphogenesis of each
cortical layer. Our observations were confirmed by tracing Tbr2+ IPC cell fate
using Tbr2::GFP transgenic mice. Finally, we demonstrated that misexpression of
Tbr2 is sufficient to induce IPC identity in ventricular radial glial cells
(RGCs). Together, these findings identify Tbr2 as a critical factor for the
specification of IPCs during corticogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2887762
PMID: 18940588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;10(11):1280-90. doi: 10.1038/ncb1786. Epub 2008 Oct 5.

Epigenetic restriction of embryonic cell lineage fate by methylation of Elf5.

Ng RK(1), Dean W, Dawson C, Lucifero D, Madeja Z, Reik W, Hemberger M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK.

Mouse ES cells can differentiate into all three germ layers of the embryo but are
generally excluded from the trophoblast lineage. Here we show that ES cells
deficient in DNA methylation can differentiate efficiently into trophoblast
derivatives. In a genome-wide screen we identified the transcription factor Elf5 
as methylated and repressed in ES cells, and hypomethylated and expressed in TS
and methylation-deficient ES cells. Elf5 creates a positive-feedback loop with
the TS cell determinants Cdx2 and Eomes that is restricted to the trophoblast
lineage by epigenetic regulation of Elf5. Importantly, the late-acting function
of Elf5 allows initial plasticity and regulation in the early blastocyst. Thus,
Elf5 functions as a gatekeeper, downstream of initial lineage determination, to
reinforce commitment to the trophoblast lineage or to abort this pathway in
epiblast cells. This epigenetic restriction of cell lineage fate provides a
molecular mechanism for Waddington's concept of canalization of developmental
pathways.

PMCID: PMC2635539
PMID: 18836439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Genes Dev. 2008 Sep 15;22(18):2479-84. doi: 10.1101/gad.475408.

The T-box transcription factor Eomes/Tbr2 regulates neurogenesis in the cortical 
subventricular zone.

Arnold SJ(1), Huang GJ, Cheung AF, Era T, Nishikawa S, Bikoff EK, Molnár Z,
Robertson EJ, Groszer M.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3RE,
United Kingdom.

The embryonic subventricular zone (SVZ) is a critical site for generating
cortical projection neurons; however, molecular mechanisms regulating
neurogenesis specifically in the SVZ are largely unknown. The transcription
factor Eomes/Tbr2 is transiently expressed in cortical SVZ progenitor cells. Here
we demonstrate that conditional inactivation of Tbr2 during early brain
development causes microcephaly and severe behavioral deficits. In Tbr2 mutants
the number of SVZ progenitor cells is reduced and the differentiation of upper
cortical layer neurons is disturbed. Neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus but 
not the subependymal zone is abolished. These studies establish Tbr2 as a key
regulator of neurogenesis in the SVZ.

PMCID: PMC2546697
PMID: 18794345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Science. 2008 Jul 18;321(5887):408-11. doi: 10.1126/science.1159806.

Anomalous type 17 response to viral infection by CD8+ T cells lacking T-bet and
eomesodermin.

Intlekofer AM(1), Banerjee A, Takemoto N, Gordon SM, Dejong CS, Shin H, Hunter
CA, Wherry EJ, Lindsten T, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

When intracellular pathogens invade mammalian hosts, naïve CD8+ T cells
differentiate into cytotoxic killers, which lyse infected target cells and
secrete cytokines that activate intracellular microbicides. We show that CD8+ T
cells deficient in the transcription factors T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes) fail 
to differentiate into functional killers required for defense against lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus. Instead, virus-specific CD8+ T cells lacking both T-bet
and Eomes differentiate into an interleukin-17-secreting lineage, reminiscent of 
the helper T cell fate that has been implicated in autoimmunity and extracellular
microbial defense. Upon viral infection, mice with T cells lacking both T-bet and
Eomes develop a CD8+ T cell-dependent, progressive inflammatory and wasting
syndrome characterized by multi-organ infiltration of neutrophils. T-bet and
Eomes, thus, ensure that CD8+ T cells adopt an appropriate course of
intracellular rather than extracellular destruction.

PMCID: PMC2807624
PMID: 18635804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Immunol. 2008 Jun 15;180(12):8102-8.

Histone acetylation facilitates rapid and robust memory CD8 T cell response
through differential expression of effector molecules (eomesodermin and its
targets: perforin and granzyme B).

Araki Y(1), Fann M, Wersto R, Weng NP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology and Flow Cytometry Unit, National Institute on Aging,
National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

To understand the mechanism regulating the effector function of memory CD8 T
cells, we examined expression and chromatin state of a key transcription factor
(eomesodermin, EOMES) and two of its targets: perforin (PRF1) and granzyme B
(GZMB). Accessible chromatin associated histone 3 lysine 9 acetylation (H3K9Ac)
was found significantly higher at the proximal promoter and the first exon region
of all three genes in memory CD8 T cells than in naive CD8 T cells.
Correspondingly, EOMES and PRF1 were constitutively higher expressed in memory
CD8 T cells than in naive CD8 T cells at resting and activated states. In
contrast, higher expression of GZMB was induced in memory CD8 T cells than in
naive CD8 T cells only after activation. Regardless of their constitutive or
inducible expression, decreased H3K9Ac levels after treatment with a histone
acetyltransferase inhibitor (Curcumin) led to decreased expression of all three
genes in activated memory CD8 T cells. These findings suggest that H3K9Ac
associated accessible chromatin state serves as a corner stone for the
differentially high expression of these effector genes in memory CD8 T cells.
Thus, epigenetic changes mediated via histone acetylation may provide a chromatin
"memory" for the rapid and robust transcriptional response of memory CD8 T cells.

PMCID: PMC2493419
PMID: 18523274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Reproduction. 2008 May;135(5):635-47. doi: 10.1530/REP-07-0359.

Expression of genes involved in early cell fate decisions in human embryos and
their regulation by growth factors.

Kimber SJ(1), Sneddon SF, Bloor DJ, El-Bareg AM, Hawkhead JA, Metcalfe AD,
Houghton FD, Leese HJ, Rutherford A, Lieberman BA, Brison DR.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of 
Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. susan.kimber@manchester.ac.uk

Little is understood about the regulation of gene expression in human
preimplantation embryos. We set out to examine the expression in human
preimplantation embryos of a number of genes known to be critical for early
development of the murine embryo. The expression profile of these genes was
analysed throughout preimplantation development and in response to growth factor 
(GF) stimulation. Developmental expression of a number of genes was similar to
that seen in murine embryos (OCT3B/4, CDX2, NANOG). However, GATA6 is expressed
throughout preimplantation development in the human. Embryos were cultured in
IGF-I, leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) or heparin-binding EGF-like growth
factor (HBEGF), all of which are known to stimulate the development of human
embryos. Our data show that culture in HBEGF and LIF appears to facilitate human 
embryo expression of a number of genes: ERBB4 (LIF) and LIFR and DSC2 (HBEGF)
while in the presence of HBEGF no blastocysts expressed EOMES and when cultured
with LIF only two out of nine blastocysts expressed TBN. These data improve our
knowledge of the similarities between human and murine embryos and the influence 
of GFs on human embryo gene expression. Results from this study will improve the 
understanding of cell fate decisions in early human embryos, which has important 
implications for both IVF treatment and the derivation of human embryonic stem
cells.

PMID: 18411410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Neurosci. 2008 Apr 2;28(14):3707-17. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4280-07.2008.

Intermediate progenitors in adult hippocampal neurogenesis: Tbr2 expression and
coordinate regulation of neuronal output.

Hodge RD(1), Kowalczyk TD, Wolf SA, Encinas JM, Rippey C, Enikolopov G,
Kempermann G, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98101-1304, USA.

Neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus is a highly regulated process that
originates from multipotent progenitors in the subgranular zone (SGZ). Currently,
little is known about molecular mechanisms that regulate proliferation and
differentiation in the SGZ. To study the role of transcription factors (TFs), we 
focused on Tbr2 (T-box brain gene 2), which has been implicated previously in
developmental glutamatergic neurogenesis. In adult mouse hippocampus, Tbr2
protein and Tbr2-GFP (green fluorescent protein) transgene expression were
specifically localized to intermediate-stage progenitor cells (IPCs), a type of
transit amplifying cells. The Tbr2+ IPCs were highly responsive to neurogenic
stimuli, more than doubling after voluntary wheel running. Notably, the Tbr2+
IPCs formed cellular clusters, the average size of which (Tbr2+ cells per
cluster) likewise more than doubled in runners. Conversely, Tbr2+ IPCs were
selectively depleted by antimitotic drugs, known to suppress neurogenesis. After 
cessation of antimitotic treatment, recovery of neurogenesis was paralleled by
recovery of Tbr2+ IPCs, including a transient rebound above baseline numbers.
Finally, Tbr2 was examined in the context of additional TFs that, together,
define a TF cascade in embryonic neocortical neurogenesis (Pax6 --> Ngn2 --> Tbr2
--> NeuroD --> Tbr1). Remarkably, the same TF cascade was found to be linked to
stages of neuronal lineage progression in adult SGZ. These results suggest that
Tbr2+ IPCs play a major role in the regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis,
and that a similar transcriptional program controls neurogenesis in adult SGZ as 
in embryonic cerebral cortex.

PMID: 18385329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Immunol Cell Biol. 2008 May-Jun;86(4):325-32. doi: 10.1038/icb.2008.16. Epub 2008
Mar 25.

Distinct regulation of effector and memory T-cell differentiation.

Kallies A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. kallies@wehi.edu.au

Three major subsets of antigen-experienced T cells have been identified based on 
surface markers and distinct functional properties: short-lived effector T cells,
central memory T cells and effector memory T cells. The precise relationship
among these subsets and their mode of differentiation are still controversial.
Recent studies, however, have provided compelling evidence for an early
delineation of the effector versus memory T-cell fates regulated through specific
transcription factors. Cytokines have long been recognized as being important for
the shaping of a T-cell response and for the maintenance of memory T cells. The
observation that short-lived effector and memory T cells, as well as their
precursors, express distinct levels of IL7R has provided an important tool to
examine the role that cytokines play in the programming of T-cell differentiation
pathways and of the transcriptional regulators that guide these processes. IL2
and IL12 in particular have been shown to provide the signals that induce or
repress transcription factors, such as T-bet, Eomes and Blimp-1, all of which are
crucial in the differentiation and homoeostasis of effector and memory T cells.
The coordinated differentiation of a heterogeneous population of antigen-specific
T cells early during an immune response is essential for the effective
eradication of pathogens and the long-term protection against reinfection. Thus, 
understanding the signals and transcriptional programmes in T-cell
differentiation is a key to successful manipulation of T-cell responses during
vaccination.

PMID: 18362944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Brain Res Bull. 2008 Mar 18;75(2-4):241-5. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.10.027. Epub 2007 Nov 20.

Anuran olfactory bulb organization: embryology, neurochemistry and hodology.

Moreno N(1), Morona R, López JM, Dominguez L, Muñoz M, González A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University Autonoma of Madrid,
Spain.

In Xenopus laevis, we analyzed the origin of the projection neurons and
interneurons in the developing olfactory bulbs by studying the expression
patterns of the genes x-Eomes, x-Lhx5, x-Dll3 and x-Pax6. Olfactory bulb
interneurons were characterized by using four conserved molecular markers for
distinct subpopulations: gamma-aminobutyric acid, calretinin, calbindin, and
tyrosine hydroxylase. Immunohistochemistry was combined with tract-tracing
experiments to demonstrate the projection neurons and the interneurons of the
olfactory bulbs simultaneously. Taken together, the results showed: (1) the
pallial nature of the olfactory bulb and its projection neurons in Xenopus, like 
in mammals with comparable central projection areas, (2) the subpallial origin of
the interneurons that, most likely, follow migratory pathways comparable to those
described for mammals, (3) the different interneuron types possess neurochemical 
characteristics similar to mammals. Therefore, the present results show that the 
origin, chemoarchitecture and central connections of the olfactory bulbs are
highly conserved in evolution.

PMID: 18331878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Blood. 2008 Jun 1;111(11):5326-33. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-113050. Epub 2008
Feb 14.

IL-2 and IL-21 confer opposing differentiation programs to CD8+ T cells for
adoptive immunotherapy.

Hinrichs CS(1), Spolski R, Paulos CM, Gattinoni L, Kerstann KW, Palmer DC,
Klebanoff CA, Rosenberg SA, Leonard WJ, Restifo NP.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Surgery Branch, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-1502, USA. christian_hinrichs@nih.gov

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 Jun 1;111(11):5268-9.

IL-2 and IL-21 are closely related cytokines that might have arisen by gene
duplication. Both cytokines promote the function of effector CD8(+) T cells, but 
their distinct effects on antigen-driven differentiation of naive CD8(+) T cells 
into effector CD8(+) T cells are not clearly understood. We found that
antigen-induced expression of Eomesodermin (Eomes) and maturation of naive CD8(+)
T cells into granzyme B- and CD44-expressing effector CD8(+) T cells was enhanced
by IL-2, but, unexpectedly, suppressed by IL-21. Furthermore, IL-21 repressed
expression of IL-2Ra and inhibited IL-2-mediated acquisition of a cytolytic
CD8(+) T-cell phenotype. Despite its inhibitory effects, IL-21 did not induce
anergy, but instead potently enhanced the capacity of cells to mediate tumor
regression upon adoptive transfer. In contrast, IL-2 impaired the subsequent
antitumor function of transferred cells. Gene expression studies revealed a
distinct IL-21 program that was characterized phenotypically by increased
expression of L-selectin and functionally by enhanced antitumor immunity that was
not reversed by secondary in vitro stimulation with antigen and IL-2. Thus, the
efficacy of CD8(+) T cells for adoptive immunotherapy can be influenced by
opposing differentiation programs conferred by IL-2 and IL-21, a finding with
important implications for the development of cellular cancer therapies.

PMCID: PMC2396726
PMID: 18276844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Cloning Stem Cells. 2008 Mar;10(1):133-42. doi: 10.1089/clo.2007.0066.

The effects of trichostatin A on mRNA expression of chromatin structure-, DNA
methylation-, and development-related genes in cloned mouse blastocysts.

Li X(1), Kato Y, Tsuji Y, Tsunoda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Reproduction, College of Agriculture, Kinki University,
Nara, Japan.

Trichostatin A (TSA) is the most potent histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor
known. We previously reported that treatment of mouse somatic cell
nuclear-transferred (SCNT) oocytes with TSA significantly increased the
blastocyst rate, blastocyst cell number, and full-term development. How TSA
enhances the epigenetic remodeling ability of somatic nuclei and the expression
of development-related genes, however, is not known. In the present study, we
compared the expression patterns of nine genes involved in chromatin structure
and DNA methylation, and seven development-related genes in blastocysts developed
from SCNT oocytes treated with and without TSA, and in blastocysts developed in
vivo and in vitro using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction. In vivo-recovered blastocysts and blastocysts developed from
TSA-treated SCNT oocytes exhibited similar expression patterns for Hdac1, 2, and 
3, CBP, PCAF, and Dnmt3b genes compared with in vitro-developed blastocysts and
blastocysts developed from SCNT oocytes without TSA treatment. There were
significantly lower expression levels of Hdac1 and Hdac2 transcripts in
TSA-treated and in vivo-recovered blastocysts than in TSA-untreated and in
vitro-developed blastocysts. The finding that TSA treatment of SCNT oocytes
significantly upregulated Sox2 and cMyc transcripts in blastocysts indicated that
both transcripts are TSA-responsive genes. Thus, TSA treatment of mouse SCNT
oocytes decreased the expression of chromatin structure- and DNA
methylation-related genes, and increased the expression of Sox2 and cMyc genes in
blastocysts. Such modifications might be a reason for the high developmental
potential of mouse SCNT oocytes treated with TSA.

PMID: 18241125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Mar 10;507(2):1245-57. doi: 10.1002/cne.21604.

Early teleostean basal ganglia development visualized by zebrafish Dlx2a, Lhx6,
Lhx7, Tbr2 (eomesa), and GAD67 gene expression.

Mueller T(1), Wullimann MF, Guo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences and Programs in Human Genetics,
University of California, San Francisco, California 94143-2811, USA.

We examined the brain expression patterns of zebrafish genes Lhx6, Lhx7, Dlx2a,
GAD67, and Tbr2/eomesa; except for GAD67, expression domains are restricted to
the forebrain. In particular, a distribution of transcripts in the early
zebrafish telencephalon comparable to that of tetrapods is revealed. Expression
domains of Lhx6 and Lhx7 are restricted to a ventral subdivision (Sdv) of the
precommissural dorsal subpallium, interpreted here as the homologue of the
mammalian medial ganglionic eminence (the adult pallidum in mammals). In
contrast, there is no such expression in the dorsal subdivision (Sdd) of the
dorsal subpallium, interpreted here as the homologue of the mammalian lateral
ganglionic eminence (the adult caudatoputamen in mammals). The Lhx6 and Lhx7
genes are furthermore expressed in the zebrafish ventral subpallium (Sv, septum),
and in the supra-/postcommissurally lying posterior subdivision of the dorsal
subpallium (Sdp; possible homologue of the subpallial amygdala). Also in support 
of this comparative interpretation, Dlx2a is generally expressed in all of the
subpallium, including the ventricular zones of (all three subvidisions of) the
dorsal as well as of the ventral subpallium. In contrast, Tbr2 is expressed in
all of the zebrafish pallium and in a restricted zone of the ventral subpallium, 
comparable to the known restricted septal expression in mammals. The
telencephalic expression of GAD67 largely coincides with that of Dlx2a. However, 
GAD67-positive cells migrate (radially) into postmitotic zones of the peripheral 
subpallium (as does Dlx2a and Lhx6) as well as (tangentially) into pallial zones 
(as does Dlx2a, but not Lhx6).

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18181142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Development. 2008 Feb;135(3):501-11. doi: 10.1242/dev.014357. Epub 2008 Jan 2.

Pivotal roles for eomesodermin during axis formation, epithelium-to-mesenchyme
transition and endoderm specification in the mouse.

Arnold SJ(1), Hofmann UK, Bikoff EK, Robertson EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, UK.

The T-box transcription factor eomesodermin (Eomes) has been implicated as an
important component in germ layer induction and patterning in vertebrate embryos.
In the mouse, Eomes is essential for development of the trophectoderm lineage and
Eomes loss-of-function mutants arrest at implantation. Here, we have used a novel
Eomes conditional allele to test Eomes functions in the embryo proper.
Eomes-deficient embryos express both Fgf8 and its downstream target Snail at
normal levels but surprisingly fail to downregulate E-cadherin. Eomes functional 
loss thus efficiently and profoundly blocks EMT and concomitant mesoderm
delamination. Marker analysis as well as fate-mapping and chimera studies
demonstrate for the first time that Eomes is required for specification of the
definitive endoderm lineage. We also describe developmental abnormalities in
Eomes/Nodal double heterozygotes, and demonstrate that these phenotypes reflect
Eomes and Nodal interactions in different tissue sites. Collectively, our
experiments establish that Eomes is a key regulator of anteroposterior axis
formation, EMT and definitive endoderm specification in the mouse.

PMID: 18171685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Dev Dyn. 2008 Feb;237(2):316-27. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21418.

Impaired placental trophoblast lineage differentiation in Alkbh1(-/-) mice.

Pan Z(1), Sikandar S, Witherspoon M, Dizon D, Nguyen T, Benirschke K, Wiley C,
Vrana P, Lipkin SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California
92697, USA.

E. coli AlkB has been intensively studied since 1983, but the in vivo roles of
its mammalian homologue Alkbh1 are unknown. We, therefore, created null mice for 
Alkbh1. Alkbh1 mRNA is expressed at highest levels in the trophoblast lineages of
the developing placenta. Alkbh1(-/-) placentas have decreased expression of
differentiated trophoblast markers including Tpbp, Gcm1, and Pl-1, and increased 
expression of the trophoblast stem cell marker Eomes. Alkbh1 localizes to nuclear
euchromatin, and interacts strongly with Mrj, an essential placental gene that
mediates gene repression by recruitment of class II histone deacetylases (HDACs).
Competition experiments show Alkbh1 and HDAC4 binding to Mrj are mutually
exclusive, which causes decreased HDAC activity and increased target gene
expression. Our study demonstrates Alkbh1 performs important functions in
placental trophoblast lineage differentiation and participates in mechanisms of
transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 18163532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Cells Tissues Organs. 2008;188(1-2):9-22. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

The origins of human embryonic stem cells: a biological conundrum.

Brink TC(1), Sudheer S, Janke D, Jagodzinska J, Jung M, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics (Molecular Embryology and Aging), Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Human inner cell mass (ICM) cells isolated from in vitro fertilized blastocysts
are the progenitor cells used to establish in vitro stable human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) which are pluripotent and self-renew indefinitely. This long-term
perpetuation of hESCs in the undifferentiated state is thought to be an in vitro 
adaptation of the ICM cells. To investigate at the molecular level how hESCs
acquired their unique properties, transcriptional profiles of isolated ICM cells 
and undifferentiated hESCs were compared. We identified 33 genes enriched in the 
ICM compared to the trophectoderm and hESCs. These genes are involved in
signaling cascades (SEMA7A and MAP3K10), cell proliferation (CUZD1 and MS4A7) and
chromatin remodeling (H1FOO and HRMT1L4). Furthermore, primordial germ
cell-specific genes (SGCA and TEX11) were detected as expressed in the ICM cells 
and not hESCs. We propose that the transcriptional differences observed between
ICM cells and hESCs might be accounted for by adaptive reprogramming events
induced by the in vitro culture conditions which are distinct from that of in
vitro fertilized blastocysts. hESCs are a distinct cell type lacking in the human
embryo but, nonetheless, resemble the ICM in their ability to differentiate into 
cells representative of the endodermal, ectodermal and mesodermal cell lineages.

(c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18160822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mech Dev. 2008 Mar-Apr;125(3-4):270-83. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Tead4 is required for specification of trophectoderm in pre-implantation mouse
embryos.

Nishioka N(1), Yamamoto S, Kiyonari H, Sato H, Sawada A, Ota M, Nakao K, Sasaki
H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

During pre-implantation mouse development, embryos form blastocysts with
establishment of the first two cell lineages: the trophectoderm (TE) which gives 
rise to the placenta, and the inner cell mass (ICM) which will form the embryo
proper. Differentiation of TE is regulated by the transcription factor
Caudal-related homeobox 2 (Cdx2), but the mechanisms which act upstream of Cdx2
expression remain unknown. Here we show that the TEA domain family transcription 
factor, Tead4, is required for TE development. Tead1, Tead2 and Tead4 were
expressed in pre-implantation embryos, and at least Tead1 and Tead4 were
expressed widely in both TE and ICM lineages. Tead4-/- embryos died at
pre-implantation stages without forming the blastocoel. The mutant embryos
continued cell proliferation, and adherens junction and cell polarity were not
significantly affected. In Tead4-/- embryos, Cdx2 was weakly expressed at the
morula stage but was not expressed in later stages. None of the TE specific
genes, including Eomes and a Cdx2 independent gene, Fgfr2, was detected in
Tead4-/- embryos. Instead, the ICM specific transcription factors, Oct3/4 and
Nanog, were expressed in all the blastomeres. Tead4-/- embryos also failed to
differentiate trophoblast giant cells when they were cultured in vitro. ES cells 
with normal in vitro differentiation abilities were established from Tead4-/-
embryos. These results suggest that Tead4 has a distinct role from Tead1 and
Tead2 in trophectoderm specification of pre-implantation embryos, and that Tead4 
is an early transcription factor required for specification and development of
the trophectoderm lineage, which includes expression of Cdx2.

PMID: 18083014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Development. 2008 Jan;135(2):271-80. Epub 2007 Dec 12.

Eomesodermin, a target gene of Pou4f2, is required for retinal ganglion cell and 
optic nerve development in the mouse.

Mao CA(1), Kiyama T, Pan P, Furuta Y, Hadjantonakis AK, Klein WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The mechanisms regulating retinal ganglion cell (RGC) development are crucial for
retinogenesis and for the establishment of normal vision. However, these
mechanisms are only vaguely understood. RGCs are the first neuronal lineage to
segregate from pluripotent progenitors in the developing retina. As output
neurons, RGCs display developmental features very distinct from those of the
other retinal cell types. To better understand RGC development, we have
previously constructed a gene regulatory network featuring a hierarchical cascade
of transcription factors that ultimately controls the expression of downstream
effector genes. This has revealed the existence of a Pou domain transcription
factor, Pou4f2, that occupies a key node in the RGC gene regulatory network and
that is essential for RGC differentiation. However, little is known about the
genes that connect upstream regulatory genes, such as Pou4f2 with downstream
effector genes responsible for RGC differentiation. The purpose of this study was
to characterize the retinal function of eomesodermin (Eomes), a T-box
transcription factor with previously unsuspected roles in retinogenesis. We show 
that Eomes is expressed in developing RGCs and is a mediator of Pou4f2 function. 
Pou4f2 directly regulates Eomes expression through a cis-regulatory element
within a conserved retinal enhancer. Deleting Eomes in the developing retina
causes defects reminiscent of those in Pou4f2(-/-) retinas. Moreover, myelin
ensheathment in the optic nerves of Eomes(-/-) embryos is severely impaired,
suggesting that Eomes regulates this process. We conclude that Eomes is a crucial
regulator positioned immediately downstream of Pou4f2 and is required for RGC
differentiation and optic nerve development.

PMCID: PMC2893890
PMID: 18077589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Dev Neurosci. 2008;30(1-3):65-81.

How neuronal migration contributes to the morphogenesis of the CNS: insights from
the zebrafish.

Mione M(1), Baldessari D, Deflorian G, Nappo G, Santoriello C.

Author information: 
(1)IFOM, FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology, Milan, Italy.
marina.mione@ifom-ieo-campus.it

We used transgenic zebrafish expressing GFP or YFP in subpopulations of neurons
to study the migration, homing process and axon extension of groups of CNS
neurons in different regions of the zebrafish brain. We found that extensive
migration takes place at all levels of the CNS and gives rise to nuclei or cell
populations with specific identities. Here, we describe 4 previously unknown or
only partially characterized migratory events taking place in the zebrafish
telencephalon and rhombic lip, using 3 different transgenic lines, and identify
the phenotypes of the cells undertaking these migrations. The migration of a
subgroup of mitral cell precursors from the dorsocaudal telencephalon to the
olfactory bulb, visualized in the tg(tbr1:YFP) transgenic line, is coupled with
morphogenetic transformation of the dorsal telencephalon. The tg(1.4dlx5a-6a:GFP)
transgenic line provides a means to analyze the migration of GABAergic
interneurons from the ventral to the dorsal telencephalon, thus extending the
occurrence of this migration to another vertebrate. The tg(Xeom:GFP) transgenic
line provides the first demonstration of the dorsoventral migration of
glutamatergic septal neurons, present in mammals and now described in fish, thus 
reconciling the contrasting evidence of dorsal patterning genes (tbr1, eomes)
expressed in a ventral cell population. Furthermore, migration studies in the
tg(1.4dlx5a-6a:GFP) and tg(Xeom:GFP) lines help determine the origin of 2
important cell populations in the fish cerebellum: projection neurons and
Purkinje cells. These examples reinforce the concept that migratory events
contribute to the distribution of cell types with diverse identities through the 
CNS and that zebrafish transgenic lines represent excellent tools to study these 
events.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18075256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Clin Immunol. 2008 Mar;28(2):97-106. Epub 2007 Dec 11.

Blimp-1 connects the intrinsic and extrinsic regulation of T cell homeostasis.

Nutt SL(1), Kallies A, Belz GT.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
Parkville, Victoria, 3050, Australia. nutt@wehi.edu.au

The body tends to maintain a relatively constant number of peripheral T cells, a 
phenomenon termed T cell homeostasis. Homeostasis is controlled by the
coordinated activity of extrinsic regulation, most notably through cytokines of
the common gamma chain (cgammaC) family and intrinsic regulation by transcription
factors. Whereas the former mechanism has been extensively studied and is
relatively well characterized, the transcription factors that govern the
homeostasis of late-stage effector and memory T cells have been less well defined
but include regulators such as T-bet, Eomes, Bcl6, and Id2. The transcriptional
repressor, Blimp-1 is well known as a master regulator of the terminal
differentiation of B cells into antibody secreting plasma cells. Recent
experiments have now revealed that Blimp-1 is also a key regulator of T cell
differentiation. Blimp-1 is expressed in differentiated effector T cells and
controls their homeostasis. Interestingly, Blimp-1 expression is controlled by
the same cgammaC cytokines that regulate T cell homeostasis suggesting a direct
link between the extrinsic and intrinsic arms of the process.

PMID: 18071884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 15;313(2):614-29. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Cdx2 acts downstream of cell polarization to cell-autonomously promote
trophectoderm fate in the early mouse embryo.

Ralston A(1), Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, MARS Building, Toronto Medical Discovery Tower, 101 College
St., Toronto, ON, Canada.

The first lineage decision during mouse development is the establishment of
trophectoderm and inner cell mass lineages, morphologically distinguishable at
the blastocyst stage. The Caudal-like transcription factor Cdx2 is required for
repression of inner cell mass genes Oct4 and Nanog in the trophectoderm.
Expression of Cdx2 in the trophectoderm is thus one of the earliest known events 
in lineage determination. However, it is not clear whether the Cdx2 expression
pattern is the cause or the consequence of this first lineage decision. Here, we 
show that Cdx2 is initially ubiquitously expressed, and becomes progressively
upregulated in outside, future trophectoderm cells prior to blastocyst formation.
Ubiquitous Cdx2 expression begins around the time of cell polarization, but we
show that cell polarization is independent of zygotic Cdx2. Finally, we show
functionally that Cdx2 is downstream of lineage allocation since Cdx2 mutant
cells, which show cell-autonomous defects in expression of Oct4, Nanog, and the
trophectoderm marker Eomesodermin, do not preferentially contribute to inner cell
mass in chimeric blastocysts. Cdx2 therefore appears to act downstream of the
first lineage decision, suggesting that processes influencing lineage allocation 
or morphogenesis may regulate Cdx2 expression along the inside/outside axis of
the embryo.

PMID: 18067887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Immunol. 2007 Nov 15;179(10):6734-40.

Dual roles of IL-15 in maintaining IL-7RalphalowCCR7- memory CD8+ T cells in
humans via recovering the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT pathway.

Kim HR(1), Hwang KA, Kang I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Rheumatology, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Recently, we identified two subsets of CCR7(-) memory CD8(+) T cells expressing
high and low levels of the IL-7R alpha-chain (IL-7Ralpha) that is essential for
memory T cell survival in human peripheral blood. IL-7Ralpha(low)CCR7(-) memory
CD8(+) T cells that produce effector cytokines and perforin have impaired
proliferation and survival in response to TCR triggering and IL-7, respectively. 
These findings raise a question of how such cells are sustained at significant
numbers, >20% of peripheral CD8(+) T cells, despite impaired IL-7- and
TCR-mediated cell maintenance. In this study, we demonstrate that
IL-7Ralpha(low)CCR7(-) memory CD8(+) T cells have increased expression of
IL-2/15R beta-chain (IL-2/15Rbeta), which is critical for IL-15 signaling, with
enhanced gene expression of T box expressed in T cells (T-bet) and eomesodermin
(eomes), transcriptional factors involved in IL-2/15Rbeta expression compared
with IL-7Ralpha(high)CCR7(-) memory CD8(+) T cells. Such a cytokine chain is
functional as IL-7Ralpha(low)CCR7(-) memory CD8(+) T cells proliferate
considerably in response to IL-15. Furthermore, adding IL-15 to TCR triggering
recovers impaired TCR-mediated proliferation of IL-7Ralpha(low) memory CD8(+) T
cells via restoring the activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway. These findings
indicate that IL-15 has dual roles in maintaining IL-7Ralpha(low)CCR7(-) memory
CD8(+) T cells via TCR-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Moreover, IL-15 can
be useful in reviving impaired proliferative function of such memory CD8(+) T
cells with effector functions against infections and tumors via rescuing the
PI3K/AKT pathway.

PMID: 17982063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2008 Jan;47(1):43-55.

In vivo differentiation and genomic evolution in adult male germ cell tumors.

Korkola JE(1), Heck S, Olshen AB, Reuter VE, Bosl GJ, Houldsworth J, Chaganti RS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY, USA.

Germ cell tumors (GCTs) are the most common solid malignancy in young adult men, 
but the genes and genomic regions involved in their etiology are not fully
defined. We report here an investigation of DNA copy number changes in GCTs using
1 Mb BAC arrays. As expected, 12p gain was the defining genomic alteration,
occurring in 72/74 GCTs. Parallel expression profiling of these tumors identified
potential oncogenes from gained regions (LYN and RAB25) and potential tumor
suppressor genes in regions of loss (SYNPO2, TTC12, IGSF4, and EPB41L3). Notably,
we observed specific genomic alterations associated with histology, including
gain of 17p11.2-q21.32 and loss of 2p25.3 in embryonal carcinoma, gain of
8p23.3-12 and loss of 5p15.33-35.3, 11q23.1-25, and 13q12.11-34 in seminoma, and 
gain of 1q31.3-42.3, 3p, 14q11.2-32.33, and 20q and loss of 8q11.1-23.1 in yolk
sac tumors (YST). Many significant genes that mapped to these regions had
previously been associated with specific histologies, such as EOMES (chr3) and
BMP2 (chr20) in YST and SPRY2 (chr13) and SOX17 (chr8) in seminomas.
Additionally, our results suggest a model in which histologic differentiation of 
GCTs may drive genomic evolution.

PMID: 17943972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Gut. 2007 Nov;56(11):1572-8. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

The T-box transcription factor eomesodermin controls CD8 T cell activity and
lymph node metastasis in human colorectal cancer.

Atreya I(1), Schimanski CC, Becker C, Wirtz S, Dornhoff H, Schnürer E, Berger MR,
Galle PR, Herr W, Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)I. Department of Medicine, University of Mainz, Langenbeckstrasse 1, 55101
Mainz, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: An efficient cytolytic T cell function is essential for immune
mediated rejection of colorectal cancer. However, the molecular mechanisms
driving T cell mediated cancer rejection are still poorly understood. Here, we
assessed the relevance of the T-box transcription factor eomesodermin in
colorectal cancer. METHODS/ RESULTS: By analysing tissue probes from 88 different
colorectal tumours, a significant (p<0.02) inverse correlation between
eomesodermin expression in colorectal cancers and the presence of lymph node
metastases could be shown, whereas no such correlation was noted for the master
transcription factor of regulatory T cells, FoxP3 and CD8 alpha expression. To
evaluate whether this effect might be due to effects of eomesodermin on tumour
infiltrating CD8 T cells, we subsequently analysed the regulated expression and
function of this transcription factor in human T cells. Whereas overexpression of
this factor induced perforin but not granzyme expression, siRNA mediated
suppression of eomesodermin expression led to significantly reduced IFN-gamma
production, perforin levels and cytolytic activity of CD8 T cells. Furthermore,
TGF-beta and IL4 could be identified as important inducer of eomesodermin
expression.
CONCLUSION: These data define for the first time a regulatory role of
eomesodermin for CD8 T cell activity in humans. Our findings are consistent with 
a model in which eomesodermin expression in tumour infiltrating T cells regulates
cytolytic functions of CD8 T cells via perforin expression. These data provide
novel insights into control mechanisms governing the functional activity of human
CD8 T lymphocytes via T-box transcription factors in cancer.

PMCID: PMC2095672
PMID: 17566017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Stem Cells. 2007 Jul;25(7):1664-74. Epub 2007 Apr 19.

Dissecting the molecular hierarchy for mesendoderm differentiation through a
combination of embryonic stem cell culture and RNA interference.

Izumi N(1), Era T, Akimaru H, Yasunaga M, Nishikawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

Although there is a criticism that embryonic stem (ES) cell differentiation does 
not always reflect the differentiation process involved in mouse development, it 
is a suitable model system to dissect the specific differentiation pathway. We
established the culture conditions that selectively differentiated mouse ES cells
into three germ layers containing mesendoderm, definitive endoderm (DE), visceral
endoderm (VE), mesoderm, and neuroectoderm. However, the molecular mechanisms of 
differentiation under each specific condition still remain unclear. Here, in
combination with the RNA interference-mediated gene knockdown (KD) method, we
show that Eomesodermin (Eomes), Mixl1, Brachyury (T), and GATA6 are major
molecular determinants in the differentiation of mesendoderm, DE, VE, and
mesoderm. Eomes plays a pivotal role in an early stage of mesendoderm
differentiation, whereas Mixl1 does the same in the later stage where mesendoderm
differentiates into DE. Further analyses of quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction and overexpression of Mixl1 demonstrated that Mixl1 is 
genetically a downstream molecule of Eomes. In addition, both Eomes and Mixl1 act
as negative regulators of T expression. This strategy also reveals that Eomes and
T play cell-autonomous roles in platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha
(PDGFRalpha)+ vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2)+ and
PDGFRalpha+ mesoderm generations, respectively. Our results obtained from this
study are fully consistent with previous knockout studies of those genes. The
present study, therefore, demonstrates that the major molecular mechanism
underlying in vitro ES cell differentiation largely recapitulates that in actual 
embryogenesis, and the combination of our culture system and RNAi-mediated gene
KD is an useful tool to elucidate the molecular hierarchy in in vitro ES cell
differentiation. Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest is found at the
end of this article.

PMID: 17446562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(7-8):1523-38. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

DNA methylation profiling of transcription factor genes in normal lymphocyte
development and lymphomas.

Ivascu C(1), Wasserkort R, Lesche R, Dong J, Stein H, Thiel A, Eckhardt F.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenomics AG, Kleine Präsidentenstrasse 1, 10178 Berlin, Germany.

Transcription factors play a crucial role during hematopoiesis by orchestrating
lineage commitment and determining cellular fate. Although tight regulation of
transcription factor expression appears to be essential, little is known about
the epigenetic mechanisms involved in transcription factor gene regulation. We
have analyzed DNA methylation profiles of 13 key transcription factor genes in
primary cells of the hematopoietic cascade, lymphoma cell lines and lymph node
biopsies of diffuse large B-cell- and T-cell-non-Hodgkin lymphoma patients.
Several of the transcription factor genes (SPI1, GATA3, TCF-7, Etv5, c-maf and
TBX21) are differentially methylated in specific cell lineages and stages of the 
hematopoietic cascade. For some genes, such as SPI1, Etv5 and Eomes, we found an 
inverse correlation between the methylation of the 5' untranslated region and
expression of the associated gene suggesting that these genes are regulated by
DNA methylation. Differential methylation is not limited to cells of the healthy 
hematopoietic cascade, as we observed aberrant methylation of c-maf, TCF7, Eomes 
and SPI1 in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Our results suggest that epigenetic
remodelling of transcription factor genes is a frequent mechanism during
hematopoietic development. Aberrant methylation of transcription factor genes is 
frequently observed in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and might have a functional
role during tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17433759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Genesis. 2007 Apr;45(4):208-17.

Eomes::GFP-a tool for live imaging cells of the trophoblast, primitive streak,
and telencephalon in the mouse embryo.

Kwon GS(1), Hadjantonakis AK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York
10021, USA.

Expression of T-box family member Eomesodermin (Tbr2) is spatiotemporally
restricted in the mouse embryo; initially expressed in extraembryonic lineages in
the sequential progression from the trophectoderm of the blastocyst, its
derivatives the extraembryonic ectoderm, and thereafter the chorion, in addition 
to the visceral endoderm and primitive streak at gastrula stages, and the
telencephalon at later stages. We describe the spatiotemporal expression of GFP
in embryos of a Tg(Eomes::GFP) BAC transgenic strain, and have compared it with
the localization of endogenous Eomes transcripts and protein. Our analysis
reveals the following: (1) robust easily visualized reporter expression in live
hemizygous transgenic embryos, (2) increased levels of expression in live
homozygous transgenic embryos that are compatible with embryo viability, and (3) 
a close correlation between endogenous Eomes and GFP reporter expression in BAC
transgenic embryos. These features establish the Tg(Eomes::GFP) BAC transgenic
strain as a novel reagent for both live imaging and the isolation of Eomes
expressing cells from specific locations within the embryo.

PMCID: PMC2882854
PMID: 17417802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Nat Genet. 2007 Apr;39(4):454-6. Epub 2007 Mar 11.

Homozygous silencing of T-box transcription factor EOMES leads to microcephaly
with polymicrogyria and corpus callosum agenesis.

Baala L(1), Briault S, Etchevers HC, Laumonnier F, Natiq A, Amiel J, Boddaert N, 
Picard C, Sbiti A, Asermouh A, Attié-Bitach T, Encha-Razavi F, Munnich A, Sefiani
A, Lyonnet S.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National d'Hygiène, Rabat, Maroc.

Neural progenitor proliferation and migration influence brain size during
neurogenesis. We report an autosomal recessive microcephaly syndrome
cosegregating with a homozygous balanced translocation between chromosomes 3p and
10q, and we show that a position effect at the breakpoint on chromosome 3
silences the eomesodermin transcript (EOMES), also known as T-box-brain2 (TBR2). 
Together with the expression pattern of EOMES in the developing human brain, our 
data suggest that EOMES is involved in neuronal division and/or migration. Thus, 
mutations in genes encoding not only mitotic and apoptotic proteins but also
transcription factors may be responsible for malformative microcephaly syndromes.

PMID: 17353897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Immunol. 2007 Mar 1;178(5):2730-6.

Epigenetic and transcriptional programs lead to default IFN-gamma production by
gammadelta T cells.

Chen L(1), He W, Kim ST, Tao J, Gao Y, Chi H, Intlekofer AM, Harvey B, Reiner SL,
Yin Z, Flavell RA, Craft J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2007 Apr 15;178(8):5401.

Gammadelta T cells have unique features and functions compared with alphabeta T
cells and have been proposed to bridge the innate and adaptive immune responses. 
Our earlier studies demonstrated that splenic gammadelta T cells predominantly
produce IFN-gamma upon activation in vitro, which is partially due to the
expression of the Th1-specific transcription factor T-bet. In this study we have 
explored the epigenetic and transcriptional programs that underlie default
IFN-gamma production by gammadelta T cells. We show that the kinetics of
IFN-gamma transcription is faster in gammadelta T cells compared with CD4(+) and 
CD8(+) T cells and that gammadelta T cells produce significantly greater amounts 
of IFN-gamma in a proliferation-independent manner when compared with other T
cell subsets. By analyzing the methylation pattern of intron 1 of the ifn-gamma
locus, we demonstrate that this region in naive gammadelta T cells is
hypomethylated relative to the same element in naive CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells.
Furthermore, naive gammadelta T cells constitutively express eomesodermin
(Eomes), a transcription factor important for IFN-gamma production in CD8(+) T
cells, and Eomes expression levels are enhanced upon activation. Retroviral
transduction of activated gammadelta T cells from both wild-type and
T-bet-deficient mice with a dominant negative form of Eomes significantly reduced
IFN-gamma production, indicating a critical role for this transcription factor in
mediating IFN-gamma production by gammadelta T cells in a T-bet-independent
manner. Our results demonstrate that both epigenetic and transcriptional programs
contribute to the early vigorous IFN-gamma production by gammadelta T cells.

PMID: 17312115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Mar;37(3):818-29.

JNK2 negatively regulates CD8+ T cell effector function and anti-tumor immune
response.

Tao J(1), Gao Y, Li MO, He W, Chen L, Harvev B, Davis RJ, Flavell RA, Yin Z.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06520-8031, USA.

JNK1 and JNK2 have distinct effects on activation, differentiation and function
of CD8+ T cells. Our early studies demonstrated that JNK1 is required for CD8+ T 
cell-mediated tumor immune surveillance. However, the role of JNK2 in CD8+ T cell
response and effector functions, especially in anti-tumor immune response, is
unknown. To define the role of JNK2 in antigen-specific immune response, we have 
investigated CD8+ T cells from OT-1 CD8+ transgenic mice in response to either
high- or low-affinity peptides. JNK2-/- CD8+ T cells proliferated better in
response to both peptides, with more cell division and less cell death. In
addition, JNK2-/- CD8+ T cells produced higher levels of IFN-gamma, which is
associated with increased expression of T-bet and Eomesodermin (Eomes). Moreover,
JNK2-/- CD8+ T cells expresses high levels of granzyme B and show increased CTL
activity. Finally, the enhanced expansion and effector function of JNK2-/- CD8+ T
cells was further evidenced by their capacity to delay tumor growth in vivo. In
summary, our results demonstrate that JNK2 negatively regulates antigen-specific 
CD8+ T cell expansion and effector function, and thus selectively blocking JNK2
in CD8+ T cells may potentially enhance anti-tumor immune response.

PMID: 17301952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 15;178(2):757-64.

Enforced expression of Bcl-2 partially restores cell numbers but not functions of
TCRgammadelta intestinal intraepithelial T lymphocytes in IL-15-deficient mice.

Nakazato K(1), Yamada H, Yajima T, Kagimoto Y, Kuwano H, Yoshikai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Host Defense, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

IL-15 knockout (KO) mice have severely reduced numbers of TCRgammadelta
intestinal intraepithelial T lymphocytes (i-IEL), suggesting requirements of
IL-15 signaling in the development or maintenance of i-IEL. To determine an
involvement of survival signals via Bcl-2 in IL-15-mediated homeostasis of
TCRgammadelta i-IEL, we introduced a bcl-2 transgene into IL-15 KO mice. In situ 
apoptosis of TCRgammadelta i-IEL was decreased in Bcl-2 transgenic (Tg) x IL-15
KO mice compared with IL-15 KO mice. The enforced expression of Bcl-2 partially
restored the numbers of TCRgammadelta i-IEL in IL-15 KO mice. However, effector
functions of TCRgammadelta i-IEL, including cytokine production and cytotoxic
activity, were not recovered in Bcl-2 Tg x IL-15 KO mice. Importantly,
TCRgammadelta i-IEL in Bcl-2 Tg x IL-15 KO mice expressed a reduced level of
eomesodermin, a transcription factor critical for effector functions of NK cells 
and CD8(+) T cells. Similar to the case of TCRgammadelta i-IEL, enforced
expression of Bcl-2 restored the numbers but not the functions of NK cells in
IL-15 KO mice. These results suggest that Bcl-2-mediated survival signal is
involved in the IL-15-mediated homeostasis of TCRgammadelta i-IEL and NK cells,
but other signals from IL-15 are critical for inducing transcription factors,
such as eomesodermin for their effector functions.

PMID: 17202336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Mol Immunol. 2007 Mar;44(9):2324-31. Epub 2006 Dec 27.

Expression analysis of two Eomesodermin homologues in zebrafish lymphoid tissues 
and cells.

Takizawa F(1), Araki K, Ito K, Moritomo T, Nakanishi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fish Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of
Bioresource Sciences, Nihon University, Kameino 1866, Fujisawa, Kanagawa
252-8510, Japan.

Eomesodermin (Eomes) is a T-box transcription factor that is involved in mesoderm
formation in most vertebrates. Eomes is also expressed in CD8+ T cells and NK
cells. No information is available on the role of Eomes in the immune system of
lower vertebrates to date, although developmental studies on Eomes (Eomes1) have 
been performed in zebrafish. Here we report the identification of a second Eomes 
(Eomes2) in zebrafish and compare expression of the two Eomes genes in the immune
system. Zebrafish Eomes1 and Eomes2, composed of 661 and 534 amino acids,
respectively, share 49.3% amino acid identity in their coding regions and 88.7%
amino acid identity in their T-box regions. Conserved synteny between regions of 
the human and zebrafish genomes, gene organization and phylogenetic analysis all 
indicate that the zebrafish Eomes2 gene is a homologue of mammalian Eomes, as
previously found for zebrafish Eomes1. Eomes1 mRNA was found to be expressed in
the gonad, body kidney, spleen and gill, while Eomes2 mRNA was not detected in
any of these tissues. However, strong expression of both Eomes mRNAs was detected
in the leukocytes from the spleen, followed by those from body kidney and
peripheral blood, with expression of Eomes1 always stronger than that of Eomes2. 
RT-PCR analysis of body kidney cells sorted by FACS revealed that Eomes1 was
expressed strongly in lymphocytes, weakly in blast cells, and was not expressed
in granulocytes, while Eomes2 was expressed weakly in lymphocytes. These results 
suggest that both Eomes genes are involved in the zebrafish immune response,
particularly in lymphocyte function as has been found in mammals.

PMID: 17194477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 1;177(11):7515-9.

Cutting Edge: IL-12 inversely regulates T-bet and eomesodermin expression during 
pathogen-induced CD8+ T cell differentiation.

Takemoto N(1), Intlekofer AM, Northrup JT, Wherry EJ, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Cytokines are critical determinants for specification of lineage-defining
transcription factors of CD4+ T cell subsets. Little is known, however, about how
cytokines regulate expression of T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes) in effector and
memory CD8+ T cells. We now report that IL-12, a signature of cell-mediated
immunity, represses Eomes while positively regulating T-bet in effector CD8+ T
cells during infection with Listeria monocytogenes. After resolution of infection
and abatement of IL-12 signaling, Eomes expression rises whereas T-bet expression
declines in memory CD8+ T cells. Eomes becomes derepressed in effector cells by
ablation of IL-12 signaling. In the absence of IL-12, the dynamics of clonal
expansion and contraction are also perturbed. Together, these results reveal how 
a pathogen-associated signal, such as IL-12, could act as a switch, regulating
appropriate clonal growth and decline while, in parallel, shaping a unique
pattern of fate-determining transcription factors.

PMID: 17114419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Stem Cells. 2007 Feb;25(2):500-10. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Analysis of Oct4-dependent transcriptional networks regulating self-renewal and
pluripotency in human embryonic stem cells.

Babaie Y(1), Herwig R, Greber B, Brink TC, Wruck W, Groth D, Lehrach H, Burdon T,
Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Roslin Institute, Department of Gene Function and Development, Roslin,
Midlothian, United Kingdom.

The POU domain transcription factor OCT4 is a key regulator of pluripotency in
the early mammalian embryo and is highly expressed in the inner cell mass of the 
blastocyst. Consistent with its essential role in maintaining pluripotency, Oct4 
expression is rapidly downregulated during formation of the trophoblast lineage. 
To enhance our understanding of the molecular basis of this differentiation event
in humans, we used a functional genomics approach involving RNA
interference-mediated suppression of OCT4 function in a human ESC line and
analysis of the resulting transcriptional profiles to identify OCT4-dependent
genes in human cells. We detected altered expression of >1,000 genes, including
targets regulated directly by OCT4 either positively (NANOG, SOX2, REX1, LEFTB,
LEFTA/EBAF DPPA4, THY1, and TDGF1) or negatively (CDX2, EOMES, BMP4, TBX18,
Brachyury [T], DKK1, HLX1, GATA6, ID2, and DLX5), as well as targets for the
OCT4-associated stem cell regulators SOX2 and NANOG. Our data set includes
regulators of ACTIVIN, BMP, fibroblast growth factor, and WNT signaling. These
pathways are implicated in regulating human ESC differentiation and therefore
further validate the results of our analysis. In addition, we identified a number
of differentially expressed genes that are involved in epigenetics, chromatin
remodeling, apoptosis, and metabolism that may point to underlying molecular
mechanisms that regulate pluripotency and trophoblast differentiation in humans. 
Significant concordance between this data set and previous comparisons between
inner cell mass and trophectoderm in human embryos indicates that the study of
human ESC differentiation in vitro represents a useful model of early embryonic
differentiation in humans.

PMID: 17068183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 1;302(1):50-65. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Pax6 controls cerebral cortical cell number by regulating exit from the cell
cycle and specifies cortical cell identity by a cell autonomous mechanism.

Quinn JC(1), Molinek M, Martynoga BS, Zaki PA, Faedo A, Bulfone A, Hevner RF,
West JD, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Centres for
Integrative Physiology and Neuroscience Research, University of Edinburgh, Hugh
Robson Building, George Square, Edinburgh, UK.

Many cerebral cortical neurons and glia are produced by apical progenitors
dividing at the ventricular surface of the embryonic dorsal telencephalon. Other 
neurons are produced by basal progenitor cells, which are derived from apical
progenitors, dividing away from the ventricular surface. The transcription factor
Pax6 is expressed in apical progenitors and is downregulated in basal
progenitors, which upregulate the transcription factor Tbr2. Here we show that
Pax6(-/-) cells are under-represented in the cortex of Pax6(+/+)<-->Pax6(-/-)
chimeras early in corticogenesis, indicating that Pax6 is required for the
production of normal numbers of cortical cells. We provide evidence that this
underproduction is attributable to an early depletion of the progenitor pool
caused by greater than normal proportions of newly divided cells exiting the cell
cycle. We show that most progenitor cells dividing away from the ventricular
surface in Pax6(-/-) embryos fail to express the transcription factor Tbr2 and
that Pax6 is required cell autonomously for Tbr2 expression in the developing
cortex of Pax6(+/+)<-->Pax6(-/-) chimeras. Transcription factors normally
expressed ventrally in the telencephalic ganglionic eminences (Mash1, Dlx2 and
Gsh2) are upregulated cell autonomously in mutant cells in the developing cortex 
of Pax6(+/+)<-->Pax6(-/-) chimeras; Nkx2.1, which is expressed only in the medial
ganglionic eminence, is not. These data indicate that early functions of Pax6 in 
developing cortical cells are to repress expression of transcription factors
normally found in the lateral ganglionic eminence, to prevent precocious
differentiation and depletion of the progenitor pool, and to induce normal
development of cortical basal progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2384163
PMID: 16979618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Neurosci. 2006 Sep 6;26(36):9184-95.

Unipolar brush cells of the cerebellum are produced in the rhombic lip and
migrate through developing white matter.

Englund C(1), Kowalczyk T, Daza RA, Dagan A, Lau C, Rose MF, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98104, 
USA.

Unipolar brush cells (UBCs) are glutamatergic interneurons in the cerebellar
cortex and dorsal cochlear nucleus. We studied the development of UBCs, using
transcription factor Tbr2/Eomes as a marker for UBCs and their progenitors in
embryonic and postnatal mouse cerebellum. Tbr2+ UBCs appeared to migrate out of
the upper rhombic lip via two cellular streams: a dorsal pathway into developing 
cerebellar white matter, where the migrating cells dispersed widely before
entering the internal granular layer, and a rostral pathway along the cerebellar 
ventricular zone toward the brainstem. Ablation of the rhombic lip in organotypic
slice cultures substantially reduced the production of Tbr2+ UBCs. In coculture
experiments, Tbr2+ UBCs migrated from rhombic lip explants directly into the
developing white matter of adjacent cerebellar slices. The origin of Tbr2+ UBCs
was confirmed by colocalization with beta-galactosidase expressed from the Math1 
locus, a molecular marker of rhombic lip lineages. Moreover, the production of
Tbr2+ UBCs was Math1 dependent, as Tbr2+ UBCs were severely reduced in Math1-null
cerebellum. In reeler mutant mice, Tbr2+ UBCs accumulated near the rhombic lip,
consistent with impaired migration through developing white matter. Our results
suggest that UBCs arise from the rhombic lip and migrate via novel pathways to
their final destinations in the cerebellum and dorsal cochlear nucleus. Our
findings support a model of cerebellar neurogenesis, in which glutamatergic and
GABAergic neurons are produced from separate progenitor pools located mainly in
the rhombic lip and the cerebellar ventricular zone, respectively.

PMID: 16957075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 15;177(6):3721-7.

IL-21 inhibits IFN-gamma production in developing Th1 cells through the
repression of Eomesodermin expression.

Suto A(1), Wurster AL, Reiner SL, Grusby MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Exposure of naive Th cell precursors (Thp) to IL-21 inhibits IFN-gamma production
from developing Th1 cells. The inhibition of IFN-gamma seen in IL-21-treated Thp 
cells is specific as the expression of other Th1 cytokines is unaffected.
Recently, it has been reported that Eomesodermin (Eomes), a member of the T-box
gene family, is expressed in developing CD8+ T cells and plays an important role 
in regulating IFN-gamma production and cytolytic effector function. In this
study, we show that Eomes mRNA and protein are also expressed in developing Th1
cells, and exposure of naive Thp cells to IL-21 results in a decrease in Eomes
expression. Moreover, the repression of Eomes expression by IL-21 is not due to
an indirect effect of IL-21 on the expression of IFN-gamma or STAT4 and is
independent of STAT1 and T-bet expression. Finally, we show that ectopic
expression of Eomes prevents the inhibition of IFN-gamma production from
IL-21-treated Thp cells. Taken together, these results demonstrate that Eomes
plays a role in regulating IFN-gamma production in CD4+ T cells and IL-21
inhibits IFN-gamma production in developing Th1 cells through the repression of
Eomes expression.

PMID: 16951332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Neurosci Res. 2006 Jul;55(3):223-33. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Transcription factors in glutamatergic neurogenesis: conserved programs in
neocortex, cerebellum, and adult hippocampus.

Hevner RF(1), Hodge RD, Daza RA, Englund C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Harborview Medical Center, 
Harborview Pathology, Box 359791, 325 Ninth Ave., Seattle, WA 98104, USA.
rhevner@u.washington.edu

Glutamatergic, pyramidal-projection neurons are produced in the embryonic
cerebral cortex by a series of genetically programmed fate choices, implemented
in large part by developmental transcription factors. Our work has focused on
Pax6, Tbr2/Eomes, NeuroD, and Tbr1, which are expressed sequentially during the
neurogenesis of pyramidal-projection neurons. Recently, we have found that the
same transcription factors are expressed, in the same order, during glutamatergic
neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus, and (with modifications) in the
developing cerebellum. While the precise functional significance of this
transcription factor expression sequence is unknown, its common appearance in
embryonic and adult neurogenesis, and in different brain regions, suggests it is 
part of a conserved genetic program that specifies general properties of
glutamatergic neurons in these regions. Subtypes of glutamatergic neurons (e.g., 
layer-specific fates in the cortex) are further determined by combinations of
transcription factors, superimposed on general sequential programs. These new
perspectives on neurogenesis add to the conceptual framework for strategies to
engineer neural stem cells for the repair of specific brain circuits.

PMID: 16621079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Placenta. 2007 Jan;28(1):14-21. Epub 2006 Mar 24.

Influences of extracellular matrix and of conditioned media on differentiation
and invasiveness of trophoblast stem cells.

Lei T(1), Hohn HP, Behr R, Denker HW.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Anatomie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55, 45122
Essen, Germany.

Embryo implantation in the human and rodents relies on the trophoblast's ability 
to invade into the uterine stroma, partly depending on proteinases degrading
components of basement membrane and underlying extracellular matrix (ECM). We
have utilized mouse trophoblast stem (TS) cells (Science, 1998, 282:2072) to
study trophoblast invasion and trophoblast-ECM interactions in vitro. On plastic 
in fibroblast-conditioned medium containing fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-4 and 
heparin, the cells remain proliferative but display increased differentiation in 
media without these components. Marker gene expression (Eomes, Pl-1, Tpbp) and
invasion assays showed that TS cells exhibit increased invasive capacity when
differentiating into giant cells and spongiotrophoblasts in unconditioned media
without FGF-4 and heparin. Concomitantly, an up-regulation of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP)-9 and -14 was observed. Culture on gels of the basement 
membrane-like Matrigel resulted in striking changes in morphology and gene
expression. Differentiating TS cells invaded into this ECM in a three-dimensional
culture, while in turn ECM contact enhanced differentiation of TS cells and
up-regulated the expression of MMP-9 and its tissue inhibitor (TIMP)-3. These
findings implicate that the TS cell culture system used in this study can be
utilized as a model for studying the regulation of trophoblast-ECM interactions, 
differentiation, and invasion in vitro.

PMID: 16563500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Neurosci. 2006 Mar 15;26(11):3066-76.

Development of the deep cerebellar nuclei: transcription factors and cell
migration from the rhombic lip.

Fink AJ(1), Englund C, Daza RA, Pham D, Lau C, Nivison M, Kowalczyk T, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology (Neuropathology), University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 98104, USA.

The deep cerebellar nuclei (DCN) are the main output centers of the cerebellum,
but little is known about their development. Using transcription factors as cell 
type-specific markers, we found that DCN neurons in mice are produced in the
rhombic lip and migrate rostrally in a subpial stream to the nuclear transitory
zone (NTZ). The rhombic lip-derived cells express transcription factors Pax6,
Tbr2, and Tbr1 sequentially as they enter the NTZ. A subset of rhombic
lip-derived cells also express reelin, a key regulator of Purkinje cell
migrations. In organotypic slice cultures, the rhombic lip was necessary and
sufficient to produce cells that migrate in the subpial stream, enter the NTZ,
and express Pax6, Tbr2, Tbr1, and reelin. In later stages of development, the
subpial stream is replaced by the external granular layer, and the NTZ organizes 
into distinct DCN nuclei. Tbr1 expression persists to adulthood in a subset of
medial DCN projection neurons. In reeler mutant mice, which have a severe
cerebellar malformation, rhombic lip-derived cells migrated to the NTZ, despite
reelin deficiency. Studies in Tbr1 mutant mice suggested that Tbr1 plays a role
in DCN morphogenesis but is not required for reelin expression, glutamatergic
differentiation, or the initial formation of efferent axon pathways. Our findings
reveal underlying similarities in the transcriptional programs for glutamatergic 
neuron production in the DCN and the cerebral cortex, and they support a model of
cerebellar neurogenesis in which glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons are produced
from separate progenitor compartments.

PMID: 16540585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Nat Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;8(2):195-202. Epub 2006 Jan 15.

The Polycomb group protein Eed protects the inactive X-chromosome from
differentiation-induced reactivation.

Kalantry S(1), Mills KC, Yee D, Otte AP, Panning B, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and the Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7264, USA.

The Polycomb group (PcG) encodes an evolutionarily conserved set of
chromatin-modifying proteins that are thought to maintain cellular
transcriptional memory by stably silencing gene expression. In mouse embryos that
are mutated for the PcG protein Eed, X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is not
stably maintained in extra-embryonic tissues. Eed is a component of a
histone-methyltransferase complex that is thought to contribute to stable
silencing in undifferentiated cells due to its enrichment on the inactive
X-chromosome in cells of the early mouse embryo and in stem cells of the
extra-embryonic trophectoderm lineage. Here, we demonstrate that the inactive
X-chromosome in Eed(-/-) trophoblast stem cells and in cells of the
trophectoderm-derived extra-embryonic ectoderm in Eed(-/-) embryos remain
transcriptionally silent, despite lacking the PcG-mediated histone modifications 
that normally characterize the facultative heterochromatin of the inactive
X-chromosome. Whereas undifferentiated Eed(-/-) trophoblast stem cells maintained
XCI, reactivation of the inactive X-chromosome occurred when these cells were
differentiated. These results indicate that PcG complexes are not necessary to
maintain transcriptional silencing of the inactive X-chromosome in
undifferentiated stem cells. Instead, PcG proteins seem to propagate cellular
memory by preventing transcriptional activation of facultative heterochromatin
during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1400591
PMID: 16415857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Differentiation. 2005 Dec;73(9-10):452-62.

Modulation of trophoblast stem cell and giant cell phenotypes: analyses using the
Rcho-1 cell model.

Sahgal N(1), Canham LN, Konno T, Wolfe MW, Soares MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Division of Cancer &
Developmental Biology, Institute of Maternal-Fetal Biology, The University of
Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Trophoblast giant cells are located at the maternal-embryonic interface and have 
fundamental roles in the invasive and endocrine phenotypes of the rodent
placenta. In this report, we describe the experimental modulation of trophoblast 
stem cell and trophoblast giant cell phenotypes using the Rcho-1 trophoblast cell
model. Rcho-1 trophoblast cells can be manipulated to proliferate or
differentiate into trophoblast giant cells. Differentiated Rcho-1 trophoblast
cells are invasive and possess an endocrine phenotype, including the production
of members of the prolactin (PRL) family. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), a known
differentiation-inducing agent, was found to possess profound effects on the in
vitro development of trophoblast cells. Exposure to DMSO, at non-toxic
concentrations, inhibited trophoblast giant cell differentiation in a
dose-dependent manner. These concentrations of DMSO did not significantly affect 
trophoblast cell proliferation or survival. Trophoblast cells exposed to DMSO
exhibited an altered morphology; they were clustered in tightly packed colonies. 
Trophoblast giant cell formation was disrupted, as was the expression of members 
of the PRL gene family. The effects of DMSO were reversible. Removal of DMSO
resulted in the formation of trophoblast giant cells and expression of the PRL
gene family. The phenotype of the DMSO-treated cells was further determined by
examining the expression of a battery of genes characteristic of trophoblast stem
cells and differentiated trophoblast cell lineages. DMSO treatment had a striking
stimulatory effect on eomesodermin expression and a reciprocal inhibitory effect 
on Hand1 expression. In summary, DMSO reversibly inhibits trophoblast
differentiation and induces a quiescent state, which mimics some but not all
aspects of the trophoblast stem cell phenotype.

PMID: 16351689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2005 Dec;54(6):322-31.

A review of trafficking and activation of uterine natural killer cells.

van den Heuvel MJ(1), Xie X, Tayade C, Peralta C, Fang Y, Leonard S, Paffaro VA
Jr, Sheikhi AK, Murrant C, Croy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

Comment in
    Am J Reprod Immunol. 2005 Dec;54(6):321.

PROBLEM: Enrichment of uterine natural killer (uNK) cells occurs during pregnancy
in many species. However, functions of uNK cells and regulation of their uterine 
homing are not fully defined. In mice and women, uNK cells contribute to
angiogenesis, a role reviewed here and now addressed in a mammal with an
alternative placental type.
METHODS OF STUDY: To address lymphocyte functions, RNA from murine or porcine
endometrium and lymphocytes purified from endometrium were analyzed using
real-time or reverse transcription PCR. To address homing potential, human blood 
CD56(+) lymphocytes were evaluated using both RNA and functional adhesion to
endothelium presented under shear force in frozen sections of gestation day 7
C57Bl/6J implantation sites. Women were serially sampled over a menstrual cycle
or a clinical preparatory cycle for embryo transfer.
RESULTS: Activation of murine uNK cells is associated with much greater increases
in transcription for Eomes than for T-bet (Tbx21). Lymphocytes from normal
porcine implantation sites transcribe vascular endothelial growth factor,
placental growth factor, interferon-gamma and hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-1alpha. In fertile women, increases in L-selectin- and
alpha4-integrin-mediated interactions between CD56(+) cells and endothelium occur
at luteinizing hormone (LH) surge (cycling women) to oocyte pick up or embryo
transfer, then return to pre-LH levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Uterine lymphocytes may universally promote pregnancy-associated
endometrial angiogenesis. Recruitment of uNK precursor cells from blood appears
to occur in a window promoted by rising plasma estrogen and LH and limited by
rising progesterone.

PMCID: PMC2967519
PMID: 16305657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Nat Immunol. 2005 Dec;6(12):1236-44. Epub 2005 Nov 6.

Effector and memory CD8+ T cell fate coupled by T-bet and eomesodermin.

Intlekofer AM(1), Takemoto N, Wherry EJ, Longworth SA, Northrup JT, Palanivel VR,
Mullen AC, Gasink CR, Kaech SM, Miller JD, Gapin L, Ryan K, Russ AP, Lindsten T, 
Orange JS, Goldrath AW, Ahmed R, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Jan;7(1):113.

Two seemingly unrelated hallmarks of memory CD8(+) T cells are cytokine-driven
proliferative renewal after pathogen clearance and a latent effector program in
anticipation of rechallenge. Memory CD8(+) T cells and natural killer cells share
cytotoxic potential and dependence on the growth factor interleukin 15. We now
show that mice with compound mutations of the genes encoding the transcription
factors T-bet and eomesodermin were nearly devoid of several lineages dependent
on interleukin 15, including memory CD8(+) T cells and mature natural killer
cells, and that their cells had defective cytotoxic effector programming.
Moreover, T-bet and eomesodermin were responsible for inducing enhanced
expression of CD122, the receptor specifying interleukin 15 responsiveness.
Therefore, these key transcription factors link the long-term renewal of memory
CD8(+) T cells to their characteristic effector potency.

PMID: 16273099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Immunol. 2005 Nov 1;175(9):5783-9.

JNK1 is essential for CD8+ T cell-mediated tumor immune surveillance.

Gao Y(1), Tao J, Li MO, Zhang D, Chi H, Henegariu O, Kaech SM, Davis RJ, Flavell 
RA, Yin Z.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

JNK1 has divergent roles in regulating the effector functions of CD4+ and CD8+ T 
cells. However, the function of JNK1 in tumor immune surveillance is unknown. In 
this study, we show that similar to IFN-gamma-/- mice, JNK1-/- mice are highly
susceptible to tumor development after inoculation of both melanoma cell line B16
and lymphoma cell line EL-4. Using T cell depletion and reconstitution
approaches, we show that CD8+ T cells, but not CD4+ T cells, from JNK1-/- mice
are responsible for tumor susceptibility. JNK1-/- CD8+ T cells have an intrinsic 
defect in early IFN-gamma gene transcription and production after activation by
either anti-CD3/anti-CD28 Abs or dendritic cells loaded with specific Ag in
vitro. The impaired IFN-gamma production in JNK1-/- CD8+ T cells is associated
with reduced expression of both T-bet and Eomesodermin, indicating that JNK1
regulates the transcription program of CD8+ T cells. Finally, JNK1-/- CD8+ T
cells showed reduced perforin expression and impaired CTL function. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that JNK1 plays an important role in tumor
immune surveillance through regulating the effector functions of CD8+ T cells.

PMID: 16237070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Leukoc Biol. 2005 Dec;78(6):1347-55. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

Differential transcription of Eomes and T-bet during maturation of mouse uterine 
natural killer cells.

Tayade C(1), Fang Y, Black GP, V A P Jr, Erlebacher A, Croy BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ontario Veterinary College, University of
Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada N1G 2W1. ctayade@uoguelph.ca

During human and rodent uterine decidualization, transient but abundant numbers
of uterine natural killer (uNK) cells appear, proliferate, and differentiate. uNK
cells share features with peripheral NK cells but are specialized to promote
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)-mediated, pregnancy-associated, structural changes
in maternal placental arteries. In CD8+ T cells and NK cells, the transcription
factors T-bet and eomesodermin (Eomes) regulate maturation and effector
functions, including IFN-gamma production. No studies are reported for uNK cells.
Implantation sites in T-bet null mice, which have a defect in NK cell maturation,
had uNK cells normal in morphology and number and normally modified spiral
arteries. As Eomes null mice are not viable, real-time polymerase chain reaction 
comparisons between C57Bl/6J (B6) and alymphoid (Rag2(0/0)gammac0/0) mice were
used to assess uNK cell expression of T-bet, Eomes, and the target genes
IFN-gamma, granzyme A, and perforin. Gestation dated (gd) uterine tissues (mixed 
cell composition) and 200 morphologically homogeneous, laser-capture,
microdissected uNK cells of different maturation stages were used. In uterus,
Eomes transcripts greatly outnumbered those of T-bet, whether donors were
nonpregnant or pregnant, and increased to gd10. In uNK cells, transcripts for
T-bet, Eomes, and IFN-gamma were most abundant in mature stage cells, and
transcripts for granzyme A and perforin were lower at this stage than in immature
or senescent cells. Thus, Eomes dominance to T-bet discriminates regulation of
the uNK cell subset from that observed for peripheral NK cells.

PMID: 16204645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Dev Cell. 2005 Oct;9(4):523-33.

Eomesodermin is a localized maternal determinant required for endoderm induction 
in zebrafish.

Bjornson CR(1), Griffin KJ, Farr GH 3rd, Terashima A, Himeda C, Kikuchi Y,
Kimelman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195-7350, USA.

In zebrafish, endoderm induction occurs in marginal blastomeres and requires
Casanova (Cas), the first endoderm-specific factor expressed in the embryo.
Whereas the transcription factors Gata5 and Bon are necessary and sufficient for 
cas expression in marginal blastomeres, Bon and Gata5 are unable to induce cas in
animal pole cells, suggesting that cas expression requires an additional,
unidentified factor(s). Here, we show that cas expression depends upon the T box 
transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes), a maternal determinant that is
localized to marginal blastomeres. Eomes synergizes potently with Bon and Gata5
to induce cas, even in animal pole blastomeres. We show that Eomes is required
for endogenous endoderm induction, acting via an essential binding site in the
cas promoter. Direct physical interactions between Eomes, Bon, and Gata5 suggest 
that Eomes promotes endoderm induction in marginal blastomeres by facilitating
the assembly of a transcriptional activating complex on the cas promoter.

PMID: 16198294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Differentiation. 2005 Apr;73(4):154-74.

PTHrP promotes murine secondary trophoblast giant cell differentiation through
induction of endocycle, upregulation of giant-cell-promoting transcription
factors and suppression of other trophoblast cell types.

El-Hashash AH(1), Esbrit P, Kimber SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester
M13 9PT, UK.

The murine trophoblast cell lineage represents an intriguing experimental cell
model as it is composed of four trophoblast stem (TS)-derived cell types:
trophoblast giant cells (TGCs), spongiotrophoblast, syncytotrophoblast, and
glycogen trophoblast cells. To investigate the role of parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP) in TGC differentiation, we analyzed the effect of
exogenous PTHrP on secondary TGCs of day 8.5 p.c. ectoplacental cone explant
culture. Secondary TGCs expressed PTHrP and PTHR1 receptor in vivo and in vitro. 
TGCs treated with PTHrP had reduced proliferation and decreased apoptosis
starting from day 2 in culture, and enhanced properties of giant cell
differentiation: increased DNA synthesis, number of cells with giant nuclei and
expression of placental lactogen-II (PL-II). The induction of TGC formation by
PTHrP correlated with downregulation of cyclin B1 and mSNA expression, but
upregulation of cyclin D1, thus allowing mitotic-endocycle transition. Moreover, 
PTHrP treatment influenced TGC differentiation by inducing the expression of
transcription factors known to stimulate giant cell formation: Stra13 and
AP-2gamma, and inhibiting the formation of other trophoblast cell types by
suppressing trophoblast progenitors and spongiotrophoblast-promoting factors,
Eomes, Mash-2, and mSNA. Taken together with the spatial and temporal patterns of
TGC formation and PTHrP synthesis in vivo, these findings indicate an important
role for PTHrP in the differentiation of secondary TGCs during placentation.

PMID: 15901283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Mol Reprod Dev. 2005 Sep;72(1):16-24.

Expression profiling of genes crucial for placental and preimplantation
development in bovine in vivo, in vitro, and nuclear transfer blastocysts.

Hall VJ(1), Ruddock NT, French AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Early Human Development, Monash Institute of Medical Research,
Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Placental abnormalities and failed implantation are characterized phenotypes that
occur in many species as a result of somatic cell cloning. This study examines a 
number of genes, critical for early placental development and reports aberrant
expression patterns in a number of cloned bovine blastocysts, thus implicating a 
role of these genes in failed implantation. Messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of
eight genes critical for early placental and preimplantation development
including Acrogranin, Cdx2, Eomes, ErbB3, ERR2, Hand1, MRJ, and Rex1 were
analyzed in single, in vivo, in vitro, and cloned bovine blastocysts (produced by
hand-made cloning (HMC) and serial hand-made cloning (SHMC)) following
complementary DNA (cDNA) amplification with a SMART cDNA synthesis kit. Aberrant 
expression of Acrogranin, Cdx2, and ERR2 was detected in a number of blastocysts 
produced by SHMC. Other genes, Eomes and Hand1, were not detectable in, in vivo
bovine blastocysts, suggesting a differential expression pattern between bovine
and murine embryos. A number of control marker genes including Oct4, IFN-tau, and
PolyA were expressed in all single blastocysts analyzed. This is the first study 
to report that failure of implantation may be due to aberrant expression of genes
in the preimplantation cloned embryo, which are crucial for the early regulation 
and differentiation of the placenta.

PMID: 15898073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Mol Reprod Dev. 2005 Aug;71(4):399-404.

Eomesodermin is expressed in mouse oocytes and pre-implantation embryos.

McConnell J(1), Petrie L, Stennard F, Ryan K, Nichols J.

Author information: 
(1)Rowett Research Institute, Bucksburn, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.
josie.mcconnell@kcl.ac.uk

T-box genes are a highly conserved family of genes encoding transcription
factors, which share a conserved DNA binding domain (the T-box). Appropriate
temporal and spatial expression of this gene family is critical for gastrulation 
and organogenesis in a number of species. The T-box containing gene Eomesodermin 
was first identified in Xenopus, where it plays a critical role in mesoderm
formation. In situ analyses in mice have described the expression patterns of the
mouse ortholog of this gene mEomesodermin (mEomes) at the time of implantation
and during fetal development. Additional studies involving the disruption of the 
mEomes gene, have demonstrated an additional role for mEomes in trophoblast
formation. However, these analyses did not address the possibility that
maternally encoded or pre-blastocyst zygotic transcription of mEomes may also
contribute to embryonic development. We show here that mEomes mRNA is present
prior to blastocyst formation, and that the protein product of mEomes is
associated with nuclear DNA during oocyte development and persistently localizes 
within all nuclei of the preimplantation embryo until the early blastocyst stage.
mEomes protein is associated with the meiotic spindle in the unfertilized egg and
with the mitotic spindle at each cell division. Our results are consistent with
mEomesodermin having a role in early preimplantation development and inner cell
mass formation in addition to its function in the trophoblast lineage.

PMID: 15880683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Development. 2005 May;132(9):2093-102. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

Cdx2 is required for correct cell fate specification and differentiation of
trophectoderm in the mouse blastocyst.

Strumpf D(1), Mao CA, Yamanaka Y, Ralston A, Chawengsaksophak K, Beck F, Rossant 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto M5G 1X5, Ontario, Canada.

Blastocyst formation marks the segregation of the first two cell lineages in the 
mammalian preimplantation embryo: the inner cell mass (ICM) that will form the
embryo proper and the trophectoderm (TE) that gives rise to the trophoblast
lineage. Commitment to ICM lineage is attributed to the function of the two
transcription factors, Oct4 (encoded by Pou5f1) and Nanog. However, a positive
regulator of TE cell fate has not been described. The T-box protein eomesodermin 
(Eomes) and the caudal-type homeodomain protein Cdx2 are expressed in the TE, and
both Eomes and Cdx2 homozygous mutant embryos die around the time of
implantation. A block in early TE differentiation occurs in Eomes mutant
blastocysts. However, Eomes mutant blastocysts implant, and Cdx2 and Oct4
expression are correctly restricted to the ICM TE. Blastocoel formation initiates
in Cdx2 mutants but epithelial integrity is not maintained and embryos fail to
implant. Loss of Cdx2 results in failure to downregulate Oct4 and Nanog in outer 
cells of the blastocyst and subsequent death of those cells. Thus, Cdx2 is
essential for segregation of the ICM and TE lineages at the blastocyst stage by
ensuring repression of Oct4 and Nanog in the TE.

PMID: 15788452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Dev Dyn. 2005 May;233(1):105-14.

T-box gene eomesodermin and the homeobox-containing Mix/Bix gene mtx2 regulate
epiboly movements in the zebrafish.

Bruce AE(1), Howley C, Dixon Fox M, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA. abruce@zoo.utoronto.ca

The T-box gene eomesodermin (eomes) has been implicated in mesoderm specification
and patterning in both zebrafish and frog. Here, we describe an additional
function for eomes in the control of morphogenesis. Epiboly, the spreading and
thinning of an epithelial cell sheet, is a central component of gastrulation in
many species; however, despite its importance, little is known about its
molecular control. Here, we show that repression of eomes function in the
zebrafish embryo dramatically inhibits epiboly movements. We also show that eomes
regulates the expression of a zygotic homeobox transcription factor mtx2. Gene
knockdown of mtx2 using antisense morpholino oligonucleotides, likewise, leads to
an inhibition of epiboly; moreover, we show that knockdown of mtx2 function in
the extraembryonic yolk syncytial layer only is sufficient to cause epiboly
defects. Thus, we have identified two components in a molecular pathway
controlling epiboly and show that interactions between deep layer cells of the
embryo proper and extraembryonic tissues contribute in a coordinated manner to
different aspects of epiboly movements.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2804443
PMID: 15765511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Neurosci. 2005 Jan 5;25(1):247-51.

Pax6, Tbr2, and Tbr1 are expressed sequentially by radial glia, intermediate
progenitor cells, and postmitotic neurons in developing neocortex.

Englund C(1), Fink A, Lau C, Pham D, Daza RA, Bulfone A, Kowalczyk T, Hevner RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195-7470, USA.

The developing neocortex contains two types of progenitor cells for
glutamatergic, pyramidal-projection neurons. The first type, radial glia, produce
neurons and glia, divide at the ventricular surface, and express Pax6, a
homeodomain transcription factor. The second type, intermediate progenitor cells,
are derived from radial glia, produce only neurons, and divide away from the
ventricular surface. Here we show that the transition from radial glia to
intermediate progenitor cell is associated with upregulation of Tbr2, a T-domain 
transcription factor, and downregulation of Pax6. Accordingly, Tbr2 expression in
progenitor compartments (the subventricular zone and ventricular zone) rises and 
falls with cortical plate neurogenesis. The subsequent transition from
intermediate progenitor cell to postmitotic neuron is marked by downregulation of
Tbr2 and upregulation of Tbr1, another T-domain transcription factor. These
findings delineate the transcription factor sequence Pax6 --> Tbr2 --> Tbr1 in
the differentiation of radial glia --> intermediate progenitor cell -->
postmitotic projection neuron. This transcription factor sequence is modified in 
preplate neurons, in which Tbr2 is transiently coexpressed with Tbr1, and in the 
direct differentiation pathway from radial glia --> postmitotic projection
neuron, in which Tbr2 is expressed briefly or not at all.

PMID: 15634788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Hum Gene Ther. 2004 Sep;15(9):842-55.

Modulation of eomes activity alters the size of the developing heart:
implications for in utero cardiac gene therapy.

Ryan K(1), Russ AP, Levy RJ, Wehr DJ, You J, Easterday MC.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Joseph Stokes Jr. Research Institute, Division of Cardiology, Abramson 
Research Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, USA. ryank@email.chop.edu

Congenital heart disease is the most prevalent cause of infant morbidity and
mortality in developed countries. The mechanisms responsible for many specific
types of congenital cardiac malformations are strongly associated with gene
abnormalities. However, at this time no strategies for gene therapy of the
various congenital heart malformations have been investigated. In the present
studies we focus on Eomesodermin (Eomes), a T-box transcription factor expressed 
in developing vertebrate mesoderm. Although Eomes is required for early
mesodermal patterning and differentiation, the role of Eomes in cardiac
development is unknown. In the present studies we demonstrate that Eomes is
expressed in the developing heart, with a pronounced myocardial distribution in
the Xenopus ventricle during late cardiac development. Using either a conditional
dominant-interfering approach (GR-Eomes--engrailed) or an Eomes-activating
approach (GR-Eomes-VP16) we demonstrate that manipulating Eomes activity during
late cardiac development can either suppress ventricular development
(GR-Eomes-enR) or increase ventricular myocardial size (GR-Eomes-VP16). Thus, a
potential gene therapy approach for treating both congenital ventricular
hypoplasia (e.g., the hypoplastic left heart syndrome) and hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy is hypothetically implicit from the present results.

PMID: 15353039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Dev Dyn. 2004 Aug;230(4):743-53.

T-box genes in the ascidian Ciona intestinalis: characterization of cDNAs and
spatial expression.

Takatori N(1), Hotta K, Mochizuki Y, Satoh G, Mitani Y, Satoh N, Satou Y,
Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto, Japan.

Members of the T-box family of transcription factors share an evolutionarily
conserved DNA-binding domain and play significant roles in various processes of
embryonic development. Vertebrate T-box genes are categorized into the following 
five major subfamilies (eight groups), depending on sequence similarities:
Brachyury, Tbx1 (Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20), Tbx2/3/4/5 (Tbx2/3 and Tbx4/5),
Tbx6, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21. Ascidians are primitive chordates, and their tadpole
larva are considered to represent the simplified and basic body plan of
vertebrates. In addition, it has been revealed that the ascidian genome contains 
the basic ancestral complement of genes involved in development. The present
characterization of cDNAs and survey of the Ciona intestinalis draft genome
demonstrated that the Ciona genome contains a single copy gene for each of the
Brachyury, Tbx1/10, Tbx15/18/22, Tbx20, Tbx2/3, and Tbr/Eomes/TBX21 groups, and
at least three copies of the Tbx6 subfamily. Each of the Ciona T-box genes shows 
a characteristic expression pattern, although that of Tbx20 was not determined in
the present study. These results provide basic information that will be useful
for future studies of the function of each gene, genetic cascades of different
T-box genes, and genome-wide surveys of evolutionary changes in the T-box gene
structure and organization in this primitive chordate.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15254908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Comp Neurol. 2004 Jul 5;474(4):562-77.

Expression of the genes Emx1, Tbr1, and Eomes (Tbr2) in the telencephalon of
Xenopus laevis confirms the existence of a ventral pallial division in all
tetrapods.

Brox A(1), Puelles L, Ferreiro B, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Murcia, 30100 
Murcia, Spain.

To investigate the pallial organization and the exact location and extension of
the ventral pallium in amphibians, we cloned a fragment of the homeobox
XenopusTbr1 (xTbr1) gene and analyzed its expression compared with that of the
genes xEomes (Tbr2) and xEmx1 in the telencephalon of the frog Xenopus laevis
during embryonic and larval development. The expression of xEmx1 was also
analyzed in the adult frog. We compared the expression patterns of these pallial 
marker genes with that of the subpallial gene xDistal-less-4 (xDll4). Our results
indicate that the whole pallium of Xenopus expresses the T-box genes xTbr1 and
xEomes (in proliferating cells and/or mantle) during embryonic and larval
development, and the expression of these genes is topographically complementary
to that of xDll4 in the subpallium. In addition to their massive expression in
the pallium, both xTbr1 and xEomes are expressed in a few dispersed cells in the 
subpallium, which may represent immigrant cells of pallial origin, because these 
genes are not found in the subpallial proliferating cells. On the other hand,
during development xEmx1 is expressed in a large part of the pallium
(proliferating and postmitotic cells) except for an area adjacent to the
pallio-subpallial boundary, where xEmx1 is observed only in some mantle cells.
This pallial area poor in xEmx1 expression and poor in expression of the
subpallial gene xDll4, but expressing the pallial marker genes xTbr1 and xEomes, 
appears to represent the amphibian ventral pallium, comparable to that described 
in other vertebrates (Puelles et al. [2000] J. Comp. Neurol. 424:409-438). In the
adult frog, the ventral pallium appears to include the rostral part of the
lateral amygdalar nucleus as well as a large part of the medial amygdalar nucleus
(as defined by Marín et al. [1998] J. Comp. Neurol. 392:285-312). In contrast,
the caudal part of the previously termed lateral amygdalar nucleus shows strong
xEmx1 expression and may be a lateral pallial derivative. The possible homology
of these amphibian amygdalar nuclei is discussed. Finally, expression of xTbr1,
xEomes, and xEmx1 is observed in the mitral cell layer of the olfactory bulb from
early developmental stages, further supporting that this structure is a pallial
derivative.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15174073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Dev Dyn. 2004 Jan;229(1):201-18.

T-box genes in early embryogenesis.

Showell C(1), Binder O, Conlon FL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, USA.

The T-box gene family, encoding related DNA-binding transcriptional regulators,
plays an essential role in controlling many aspects of embryogenesis in a wide
variety of organisms. The T-box genes exhibit diverse patterns of spatial and
temporal expression in the developing embryo, and both genetic and molecular
embryological studies have demonstrated their importance in regulating cell fate 
decisions that establish the early body plan, and in later processes underlying
organogenesis. Despite these studies, little is known of either the regulation of
the T-box genes or the identities of their transcriptional targets. The aim of
this review is to examine the diverse yet conserved roles of several T-box genes 
in regulating early patterning in chordates and to discuss possible mechanisms
through which this functional diversity might arise. Developmental Dynamics
229:201-218, 2004.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC1635809
PMID: 14699590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Neuroreport. 2003 Dec 19;14(18):2355-8.

Pallial origin of mitral cells in the olfactory bulbs of Xenopus.

Moreno N(1), Bachy I, Rétaux S, González A.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Biología, Universidad
Complutense, Madrid, Spain.

We used two developmental transcription factors, x-Eomes (T-box family) and
x-Lhx5 (LIM-homeodomain family), to follow the origin and development of the
olfactory bulbs in Xenopus. During embryonic and larval development, x-Eomes and 
x-Lhx5 were expressed in highly similar patterns, in the lateral and
latero-ventral wall of the pallium. In adults, both markers were strongly and
specifically expressed in mitral cells, i.e., in the projection neurons of the
main and accessory olfactory bulbs. These results demonstrate the pallial origin 
of the olfactory projecting cells in Xenopus. Combined with previous results
suggesting a subpallial origin for olfactory interneurons, these findings
emphasize the dual origin of different neuronal populations in the bulbs of
anamniotes, and suggest that this organization is a shared feature of tetrapods.

PMID: 14663190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Science. 2003 Nov 7;302(5647):1041-3.

Control of effector CD8+ T cell function by the transcription factor
Eomesodermin.

Pearce EL(1), Mullen AC, Martins GA, Krawczyk CM, Hutchins AS, Zediak VP, Banica 
M, DiCioccio CB, Gross DA, Mao CA, Shen H, Cereb N, Yang SY, Lindsten T, Rossant 
J, Hunter CA, Reiner SL.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, and Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2003 Nov 7;302(5647):993-4.

Activated CD8+ T cells play a critical role in host defense against viruses,
intracellular microbes, and tumors. It is not clear if a key regulatory
transcription factor unites the effector functions of CD8+ T cells. We now show
that Eomesodermin (Eomes), a paralogue of T-bet, is induced in effector CD8+ T
cells in vitro and in vivo. Ectopic expression of Eomes was sufficient to invoke 
attributes of effector CD8+ T cells, including interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma),
perforin, and granzyme B. Loss-of-function analysis suggests Eomes may also be
necessary for full effector differentiation of CD8+ T cells. We suggest that
Eomesodermin is likely to complement the actions of T-bet and act as a key
regulatory gene in the development of cell-mediated immunity.

PMID: 14605368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Science. 2003 Nov 7;302(5647):993-4.

Immunology. T-bet or not T-bet.

Hatton RD(1), Weaver CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2003 Nov 7;302(5647):1041-3.

PMID: 14605354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Development. 2003 Nov;130(22):5503-17.

The maternally expressed zebrafish T-box gene eomesodermin regulates organizer
formation.

Bruce AE(1), Howley C, Zhou Y, Vickers SL, Silver LM, King ML, Ho RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
IL 60637, USA. abruce@uchicago.edu

Early embryonic development in many organisms relies upon maternal molecules
deposited into the egg prior to fertilization. We have cloned and characterized a
maternal T-box gene in the zebrafish, eomesodermin (eomes). During oogenesis, the
eomes transcript becomes localized to the cortex of the oocyte. After
fertilization during early cleavage stages, eomes is expressed in a vegetal to
animal gradient in the embryo, whereas Eomesodermin protein (Eom) is distributed 
cytoplasmically throughout the blastoderm. Strikingly, following midblastula
transition, nuclear-localized Eomesodermin is detected on the dorsal side of the 
embryo only. Overexpression of eomes results in Nodal-dependent and
nieuwkoid/dharma (nwk/dhm) independent ectopic expression of the organizer
markers goosecoid (gsc), chordin (chd) and floating head (flh) and in the
formation of secondary axes. The same phenotypes are observed when a
VP16-activator construct is injected into early embryos, indicating that eomes
acts as a transcriptional activator. In addition, a dominant-negative construct
and antisense morpholino oligonucleotides led to a reduction in gsc and flh
expression. Together these data indicate that eomes plays a role in specifying
the organizer.

PMID: 14530296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Placenta. 2003 Feb-Mar;24(2-3):123-30.

Genes, development and evolution of the placenta.

Cross JC(1), Baczyk D, Dobric N, Hemberger M, Hughes M, Simmons DG, Yamamoto H,
Kingdom JC.

Author information: 
(1)Genes & Development Research Group, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
jcross@ucalgary.ca

Through studies of transgenic and mutant mice, it is possible to describe
molecular pathways that control the development of all major trophoblast cell
subtypes and structures of the placenta. For example, the proliferation of
trophoblast stem cells is dependent on FGF signalling and downstream
transcription factors Cdx2, Eomes and Err2. Several bHLH transcription factors
regulate the progression from trophoblast stem cells to spongiotrophoblast and to
trophoblast giant cells (Id1/2, Mash2, Hand1, Stra13). Intercellular actions
critical for maintaining stable precursor cell populations are dependent on the
gap junction protein Cx31 and the growth factor Nodal. Differentiation towards
syncytiotrophoblast as well as the initiation of chorioallantoic (villous)
morphogenesis is regulated by the Gcm1 transcription factor, and subsequent
labyrinth development is dependent on Wnt, HGF and FGF signalling. These insights
suggest that most of the genes that evolved to regulate placental development are
either identical to ones used in other organ systems (e.g., FGF and epithelial
branching morphogenesis), were co-opted to take on new functions (e.g.,
AP-2gamma, Dlx3, Hand1), or arose via gene duplication to take on a specialized
placental function (e.g., Gcm1, Mash2). Many of the human orthologues of these
critical genes show restricted expression patterns that are consistent with a
conserved function. Such information is aiding the comparison of the human and
mouse placenta. In addition, the prospect of a conserved function clearly
suggests potential mechanisms for explaining complications of human placental
development.

PMID: 12596737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Exp Zool. 2002 Aug 15;294(2):136-45.

Amphi-Eomes/Tbr1: an amphioxus cognate of vertebrate Eomesodermin and T-Brain1
genes whose expression reveals evolutionarily distinct domain in amphioxus
development.

Satoh G(1), Takeuchi JK, Yasui K, Tagawa K, Saiga H, Zhang P, Satoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8502, Japan. gouki@ascidian.zool.kyoto-u.ac.jp

A cDNA for a novel T-box containing gene was isolated from the amphioxus
Branchiostoma belcheri. A molecular phylogenetic tree constructed from the
deduced amino acid sequence of the isolated cDNA indicates that this gene belongs
to the T-Brain subfamily. In situ hybridization reveals that the expression is
first detected in the invaginating archenteron at the early gastrula stage and
this expression is down-regulated at the neurula stage. In early larvae, the
expression appears again and transcripts are detected exclusively in the pre-oral
pit (wheel organ-Hatschek's pit of the adult). In contrast to the vertebrate
counterparts, no transcripts are detected in the brain vesicle or nerve cord
throughout the development. These results are interpreted to mean that a role of 
T-Brain products in vertebrate forebrain development was acquired after the
amphioxus was split from the lineage leading to the vertebrates. On the other
hand, comparison of the tissue-specific expression domain of T-Brain genes and
other genes between amphioxus and vertebrates revealed that the pre-oral pit of
amphioxus has several molecular features which are comparable to those of the
vertebrate olfactory and hypophyseal placode.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12210114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mech Dev. 2002 Sep;117(1-2):163-72.

Defining pallial and subpallial divisions in the developing Xenopus forebrain.

Bachy I(1), Berthon J, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2197 Développement, Evolution, Plasticité du Système Nerveux, Institut de 
Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, CNRS, Avenue de la Terrasse, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette
cedex, France.

To shed light on the organisation of the Xenopus laevis telencephalon, we have
used two sets of developmental regulators: genes acting in early regional
specification (x-Dll3, x-Nkx2.1, x-Emx1, x-Pax6, x-Eomes) or in cell
determination (x-Lhx5 and x-Lhx7). After expression patterns analysis, separately
or combined, on whole-mount brains and serial sections, we identify the Xenopus
pallium and subpallium, and the subdivisions herein. The data show a conservation
of the same basic Bauplan for Xenopus forebrain patterning compared to other
vertebrates, and suggest the possibility for LIM-homeodomain genes to be
candidate downstream target of the regionalization genes. Comparing the relative 
sizes of the deduced subdivisions, Xenopus seems to have an intermediate
phylogenetic position in terms of pallium contribution to the telencephalon, and 
ventral pallium contribution to the pallium.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12204256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Evol Dev. 2001 Nov-Dec;3(6):443-54.

Molecular studies of hemichordate development: a key to understanding the
evolution of bilateral animals and chordates.

Tagawa K(1), Satoh N, Humphreys T.

Author information: 
(1)Kewalo Marine Laboratory, University of Hawaii, Honolulu 96813-5511, USA.

Using the Hawaiian acorn worm, Ptychodera flava, we began molecular studies on
the development of hemichordates, a phylum previously unstudied at this level.
Here we review results garnered from the examination of a few specific genes
selected to help understand the evolution of vertebrate structures. These studies
suggest new ideas about the evolution of developmental mechanisms in the
deuterostomes. In a seminal observation, we noted an unexpected zone of
expression of the Brachyurygene in the early anterior embryonic ectoderm where
the mouth will form. Typically, the Brachyury gene is closely linked to
development of the notochord and is expressed around the blastopore and in the
posterior mesoderm in most animals. This first expression of Brachyury at the
blastopore may represent a regulatory program associated with organizing the
original animal head and gut opening, as suggested by the expression of Brachyury
during hypostome formation in hydra. We believe that the anterior expression of
Brachyury in deuterostomes represents the cooption of the program for organizing 
the original animal gut opening to form the deuterostome mouth. Recent data from 
the trochophore larva of a polychaete show that an anterior zone of expression of
Brachyury is produced in this protostome by splitting of the Brachyury field
during the formation of a gut with a mouth and anus by the lateral fusion of the 
sides of the blastopore. The ability to initiate independently a secondary
regulatory program to organize the new mouth leading to an anterior field of
Brachyury expression may be a signal event in the evolution of the deuterostomes.
We also noted that the P. flava homolog of T-brain/Eomes, a gene closely related 
by sequence and expression around the blastopore to Brachyury and associated with
development of the vertebrate brain, also exhibits early posterior expression
around the blastopore and a field of de novo anterior ectoderm expression during 
later embryogenesis. The tissue in the zone of de novo anterior ectoderm
expression of Pf-Tbrain produces the apical organ, a larval neural structure that
has been touted as an evolutionary precursor of the chordate dorsal brain. The
gene regulatory mechanisms responsible for initiating the anterior zone of de
novo expression of T-brain may represent a cooption to specify early
neuroectoderm of the regulatory program evolved first to drive anterior Brachyury
expression for deuterostome mouth formation. It will be interesting to examine
the possibilities that an ability to initiate the de novo anterior expression of 
the program that includes T-brain may be a key event in the evolution of the
developmental mechanisms leading to the chordate dorsal nervous system.

PMID: 11806640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Cell Biol. 2001 May 14;153(4):811-22.

Fibroblast growth factor signaling and basement membrane assembly are connected
during epithelial morphogenesis of the embryoid body.

Li X(1), Chen Y, Schéele S, Arman E, Haffner-Krausz R, Ekblom P, Lonai P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Fibroblast growth factors and receptors are intimately connected to the
extracellular matrix by their affinity to heparan sulfate proteoglycans. They
mediate multiple processes during embryonic development and adult life. In this
study, embryonic stem cell-derived embryoid bodies were used to model fibroblast 
growth factor signaling during early epithelial morphogenesis. To avoid
redundancy caused by multiple receptors, we employed a dominant negative mutation
of Fgfr2. Mutant-derived embryoid bodies failed to form endoderm, ectoderm, and
basement membrane and did not cavitate. However, in mixed cultures they displayed
complete differentiation induced by extracellular products of the normal cell.
Evidence will be presented here that at least one of these products is the
basement membrane or factors connected to it. It will be shown that in the
mutant, collagen IV and laminin-1 synthesis is coordinately suppressed. We will
demonstrate that the basement membrane is required for embryoid body
differentiation by rescuing columnar ectoderm differentiation and cavitation in
the mutant by externally added basement membrane proteins. This treatment induced
transcription of Eomesodermin, an early developmental gene, suggesting that
purified basement membrane proteins can activate inherent developmental programs.
Our results provide a new paradigm for the role of fibroblast growth factor
signaling in basement membrane formation and epithelial differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2192393
PMID: 11352941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mech Dev. 2001 Jan;100(1):93-7.

Overlapping expression of zebrafish T-brain-1 and eomesodermin during forebrain
development.

Mione M(1), Shanmugalingam S, Kimelman D, Griffin K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. m.mione@ucl.ac.uk

T-box transcription factors are important determinants of embryonic cell fate and
behaviour. Two T-box genes are expressed in the developing telencephalon of
several vertebrate species, including amphibia, birds and mammals. Here we report
the cloning of zebrafish T-brain-1 (tbr1) and eomesodermin (eom). As a prelude to
genetic studies of neuro-ectodermal fate determination we studied their
expression pattern during embryogenesis and early larval development. Eom is
expressed in the presumptive telencephalon from around the 4-5 somite stage in
bilaterally symmetric groups of cells; the number of positive cells increases
dramatically with time and encompasses the entire dorsal telencephalon by the 22 
somite stage. Tbr1 is expressed from the 18 somite stage in a subset of
eom-expressing cells. By 24 hpf eom and tbr1 are expressed in largely overlapping
domains in the dorsal telencephalon, tbr1 is expressed in postmitotic cells
whereas eomes is also expressed in proliferative ventricular zone cells. Both
genes are also found in a small domain of the diencephalon bordering the
telencephalon. A detailed analysis of the expression of tbr1 and eom in the brain
of 4 day old larvae shows that the two T-box genes are differentially expressed
in various cell populations of the developing brain.

PMID: 11118891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Gene. 2000 Aug 22;254(1-2):29-35.

Genomic organization, sequence and chromosomal localization of the mouse Tbr2
gene and a comparative study with Tbr1.

Ueno M(1), Kimura N, Nakashima K, Saito-Ohara F, Inazawa J, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Members of the T-box family are known to play critical roles in the embryonic
development of most animal species. Recently, we have isolated its new mammalian 
member, Tbr2, from mouse embryonic brain. We have also shown that the expression 
patterns of Tbr2 and the closely related Tbr1 appear to be reciprocal in the
developing brain; Tbr2 is expressed in mesencephalon and rhombencephalon, but
expression of Tbr1 is restricted to telencephalon. To investigate possible
structural and functional relationships of Tbr2 and other T-box containing genes,
we analyzed genomic organization of the murine Tbr2 gene. The Tbr2 gene is
composed of six exons (1353, 155, 122, 159, 62 and 1035bp), and five introns
(920, 643, 602, 85 and 2036bp). This exon/intron organization is very similar to 
that of Tbr1. We also analyzed the 3.9kb sequence of the 5' promoter region
flanking the Tbr2 gene and the corresponding region of the Tbr1 gene. The sites
for Brn-2 and Tst-1 were found in the promoter of Tbr2 but not Tbr1. On the
contrary, there were eight HNF-3beta binding sites in the Tbr1 gene promoter but 
only three in the Tbr2 promoter. The differential presence of putative binding
sites for these brain-specific transcription factors may explain the reciprocal
expression of Tbr1 and Tbr2. Furthermore, a single chromosomal locus for mouse
Tbr2 was assigned to 9F3 by fluorescence in-situ hybridization 1.

PMID: 10974533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mech Dev. 2000 Jun;94(1-2):133-46.

The Xenopus eomesodermin promoter and its concentration-dependent response to
activin.

Ryan K(1), Garrett N, Bourillot P, Stennard F, Gurdon JB.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome CRC Institute, Cambridge, UK. ryank@email.chop.edu

Eomesodermin is an essential early gene in Xenopus mesoderm formation and shows a
morphogen-like response to activin. Here we define the regions of the
Eomesodermin promoter required for mesodermal expression and for
concentration-dependent response to activin. We find an activin response element 
(ARE) located between -5.6 and -5.0 kb which contains two critical FAST2 binding 
sites. The ARE alone is necessary and sufficient for concentration-dependent
response to activin. A 5.6 kb promoter recapitulates Eomes expression in normal
mesoderm cells. A repressor element extinguishes Eomes expression in the
endoderm. We relate our results to mesoderm patterning in early Xenopus
development and to a mechanism of morphogen gradient response.

PMID: 10842065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Nature. 2000 Mar 2;404(6773):95-9.

Eomesodermin is required for mouse trophoblast development and mesoderm
formation.

Russ AP(1), Wattler S, Colledge WH, Aparicio SA, Carlton MB, Pearce JJ, Barton
SC, Surani MA, Ryan K, Nehls MC, Wilson V, Evans MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute for Cancer and Developmental Biology, and Department of
Physiology, University of Cambridge, UK. apr@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

The earliest cell fate decision in the mammalian embryo separates the
extra-embryonic trophoblast lineage, which forms the fetal portion of the
placenta, from the embryonic cell lineages. The body plan of the embryo proper is
established only later at gastrulation, when the pluripotent epiblast gives rise 
to the germ layers ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm. Here we show that the T-box
gene Eomesodermin performs essential functions in both trophoblast development
and gastrulation. Mouse embryos lacking Eomesodermin arrest at the blastocyst
stage. Mutant trophoectoderm does not differentiate into trophoblast, indicating 
that Eomesodermin may be required for the development of trophoblast stem cells. 
In the embryo proper, Eomesodermin is essential for mesoderm formation. Although 
the specification of the anterior-posterior axis and the initial response to
mesoderm-inducing signals is intact in mutant epiblasts, the prospective
mesodermal cells are not recruited into the primitive streak. Our results
indicate that Eomesodermin defines a conserved molecular pathway controlling the 
morphogenetic movements of germ layer formation and has acquired a new function
in mammals in the differentiation of trophoblast.

PMID: 10716450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mech Dev. 1999 Jun;84(1-2):133-8.

Expression pattern of the Tbr2 (Eomesodermin) gene during mouse and chick brain
development.

Bulfone A(1), Martinez S, Marigo V, Campanella M, Basile A, Quaderi N, Gattuso C,
Rubenstein JL, Ballabio A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), San Raffaele Biomedical
Science Park, Milan, Italy. bulfone@tigem.it

The members of the T-box gene family share a highly conserved DNA binding domain 
named the T-domain, and important developmental functions. Here we report the
cloning of chicken Tbr1 and of murine and chicken Tbr2 (orthologs of the Xenopus 
eomesodermin gene), the mapping of the murine Tbr2 to chromosome 9, and their
pattern of expression during mouse and chick embryogenesis. Both Tbr 1 and 2 have
a restricted and conserved domain of expression in the telencephalic pallium of
the two species. Chick Tbr2 has a specific and dynamic expression in the
gastrulating embryo.

PMID: 10473127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 1999 Jun 2;115(2):183-93.

A novel mammalian T-box-containing gene, Tbr2, expressed in mouse developing
brain.

Kimura N(1), Nakashima K, Ueno M, Kiyama H, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, 2-3-10 Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo
101-0062, Japan.

We have identified and characterized a new member of the mammalian brain-specific
T-box gene family, Tbr2, which is closely related to mouse Tbr1, and to the
Xenopus earliest mesodermal gene, Eomesodermin. As Tbr1, Tbr2 is predominantly
expressed in some regions of the developing brain, but in a strikingly
complementary manner. On embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5), Tbr2 mRNA expression was
observed in the mesencephalon and rhombencephalon in contrast to Tbr1 which was
expressed mostly in the telencephalon. At this stage, Tbr2 mRNA was readily
detectable in the postmitotic and differentiating neurons located in various
brain regions, i.e., oculomotor, red, trigeminal, vestibular, facial, and
hypoglossal nuclei. However, expression of Tbr2 in these nuclei became
undetectable on E18.5. In contrast, Tbr2 mRNA expression was detected in the
hippocampus only from E18.5 onwards. Whereas Tbr2 expression disappeared in most 
parts of the mature adult brain, it remained detectable in the hippocampus and
olfactory bulb, regions where some neuronal precursors retain their
differentiation potential. These results suggest that Tbr2 may play a crucial
role in differentiating neurons rather than in proliferating or already
differentiated neurons. In addition, similarly to Xenopus Eomesodermin, mouse
Tbr2 showed biphasic expression; a first peak around E6.5 and a second peak
around E14.5, suggesting that Tbr2 may also be important at early stages of
gastrulation.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10407135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mech Dev. 1999 Mar;81(1-2):205-8.

Mapping and expression analysis of the mouse ortholog of Xenopus Eomesodermin.

Hancock SN(1), Agulnik SI, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Columbia University, 701 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The T-box gene family has been conserved throughout metazoan evolution. The genes
code for putative transcription factors which share a uniquely defining DNA
binding domain, known as the T-box ([Bollag et al., 1994]). They are implicated
in the control of diverse developmental processes by their highly specific
expression patterns throughout gastrulation and organogenesis in mouse and other 
species ([Chapman et al., 1996]) ([Gibson-Brown et al., 1998]), and by mutations 
in T-box genes that have profound developmental effects ([Papaioannou, 1997];
[Chapman and Papaioannou, 1998]; [Papaioannou and Silver, 1998]). In this report,
we describe the mapping and expression pattern of the mouse ortholog of a gene,
Eomesodermin, first identified in Xenopus ([Ryan et al., 1996]). The mouse gene
was previously reported ([Wattler et al., 1998]) under the name MmEomes. The gene
maps to mouse chromosome 9 in a region syntenic with human chromosome 3p. Mouse
eomesodermin is expressed in the trophoblast of the blastocyst and in its
derivative, the chorionic ectoderm. At gastrulation, eomesodermin is expressed in
the primitive streak and embryonic mesoderm as well, but this expression
disappears prior to the end of gastrulation. Later, eomesodermin is expressed in 
the developing forebrain, in a pattern largely overlapping a closely related
T-box gene, Tbr1 ([Bulfone et al., 1995]), and is also seen in a localized area
of each limb.

PMID: 10330501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mech Dev. 1999 Mar;81(1-2):199-203.

Expression of the T-box gene Eomesodermin during early mouse development.

Ciruna BG(1), Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

We report the expression pattern of a murine homolog of the Xenopus laevis T-box 
gene Eomesodermin. mEomes expression is first detected in the extra-embryonic
ectoderm prior to gastrulation, and persists there until head-fold stages. In the
embryo proper, mEomes is expressed throughout the early primitive streak, nascent
mesoderm and in the anterior visceral endoderm. Although mEomes expression
disappears from the embryo at late-streak stages, a second domain of mEomes
expression is observed in the telencephalon beginning around E10.5.

PMID: 10330500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):10-20.

Identification, mapping, and phylogenomic analysis of four new human members of
the T-box gene family: EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19.

Yi CH(1), Terrett JA, Li QY, Ellington K, Packham EA, Armstrong-Buisseret L,
McClure P, Slingsby T, Brook JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Nottingham, Queen's
Medical Centre, Nottingham, NG7 2UH.

Brachyury(T) is a mouse mutation, first described over 70 years ago, that causes 
defects in mesoderm formation. Recently several related genes, the T-box gene
family, that encode a similar N-terminal DNA binding domain, the T-box, and that 
play critical roles in human embryonic development have been identified. It has
been shown that human TBX5 and TBX3, if mutated, cause developmental disorders,
Holt-Oram syndrome (OMIM 142900) and ulnar-mammary syndrome (OMIM 181450),
respectively. We have identified four new human members of the T-box gene family,
EOMES, TBX6, TBX18, and TBX19, and these genes have been mapped to different
chromosomal regions by radiation hybrid mapping. The four T-box genes were
classified into four different subfamilies and have also been subjected to
phylogenomic analysis. Human EOMES maps at 3p21.3-p21.2. This Tbr1-subfamily gene
is likely to play a significant role in early embryogenesis similar to that
described for Xenopus eomesodermin. Human TBX6 maps at 16p12-q12. This
Tbx6-subfamily gene is likely to participate in paraxial mesoderm formation and
somitogenesis in human embryo. TBX18 is a novel member of the Tbx1 subfamily that
maps at 6q14-q15. Two subgroups, TBX1/10 and TBX15/18 subgroups, could be
distinguished within the Tbx1 subfamily. TBX19 is an orthologue of chick TbxT and
maps at 1q23-q24. The genomic organization of TBX19 is highly similar to that of 
human T(Brachyury), another human member of the same subfamily.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9888994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mech Dev. 1998 Jul;75(1-2):155-8.

Xenopus eomesodermin is expressed in neural differentiation.

Ryan K(1), Butler K, Bellefroid E, Gurdon JB.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK.

Our initial description of the Xenopus gene Eomesodermin (Eomes) indicated that
it is expressed largely if not entirely in mesodermal cells of gastrula stage
embryos. A more detailed examination, described here, shows that it continues to 
be expressed in the most anterior (future head) mesoderm during gastrula and
neurula stages. However, during tail-bud stages, Eomes expression is re-born in
the most anterior part of the brain, becoming strongly transcribed in the
olfactory region of the telencephalon. This later Eomes expression marks a very
localized region of the forebrain distinct from that of Otx-2, anterior to that
of En-1 and overlapping that of Sox-3.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 9739133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Apr 14;95(8):4398-403.

Cooperation between the activin and Wnt pathways in the spatial control of
organizer gene expression.

Crease DJ(1), Dyson S, Gurdon JB.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Cancer Research Campaign Institute, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2
1QR England and Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2
3EJ England.

The normal expression pattern of the Wnt responsive homeobox gene Siamois is
restricted to the dorso-vegetal region of the Xenopus embryo. Because the Wnt
signaling pathway (via beta-catenin) is active on the entire dorsal side of the
early embryo, we have asked why Siamois expression is not seen in the dorsal
ectoderm. Only Wnt signaling, via activation of beta-catenin, can induce directly
Siamois, and signaling via the SMAD1 (BMP2/4) or SMAD2 (activin/Vg-1) pathways
cannot. We now directly show that the SMAD2 pathway can cooperate with the Wnt
pathway to induce expression of Siamois much more strongly than the Wnt pathway
alone, in normal embryos. We demonstrate the significance of this cooperation in 
normal embryos by blocking the SMAD2 signaling pathway with a dominant negative
activin receptor. The activin dominant negative receptor blocks this cooperative 
effect and reduces the expression of Siamois by threefold in early embryos.
Furthermore, we find that this cooperative relationship between the SMAD2 and Wnt
pathways is reciprocal. Thus, in normal embryos, the Wnt pathway can enhance
induction, by the SMAD 2 pathway, of the organizer genes Gsc and Chd but not the 
pan-mesodermal marker genes Xbra and Eomes. We conclude that the Wnt and SMAD2
signaling pathways cooperate to induce the expression of Spemann-organizer
specific genes and so help to localize their spatial expression.

PMCID: PMC22500
PMID: 9539748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cell. 1996 Dec 13;87(6):989-1000.

Eomesodermin, a key early gene in Xenopus mesoderm differentiation.

Ryan K(1), Garrett N, Mitchell A, Gurdon JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, England.

Eomesodermin (Eomes) is a novel Xenopus T-domain gene. In normal development, it 
is expressed in mesodermal cells in a ventral-to-dorsal gradient of increasing
concentration. It reaches its peak expression 1-2 hr before any other known
panmesodermal gene. It is strongly inducible by normal vegetal cells and by
mesoderm-inducing factors. Ectopic expression of Eomes in animal caps induces the
transcription of nearly all mesodermal genes in a concentration-dependent way.
Overexpression of Eomes dorsalizes ventral mesoderm, inducing gsc and changing
cell fate to muscle and notochord. Blocking the function of Eomes causes
gastrulation arrest and defective mesoderm-dependent gene activation. We propose 
that Eomes fulfills an essential function in initiating mesoderm differentiation 
and in determining mesodermal cell fate.

PMID: 8978604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Development. 1996 Dec;122(12):3719-24.

An indelible lineage marker for Xenopus using a mutated green fluorescent
protein.

Zernicka-Goetz M(1), Pines J, Ryan K, Siemering KR, Haseloff J, Evans MJ, Gurdon 
JB.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute, Cambridge, UK.

We describe the use of a DNA construct (named GFP.RN3) encoding green fluorescent
protein as a lineage marker for Xenopus embryos. This offers the following
advantages over other lineage markers so far used in Xenopus. When injected as
synthetic mRNA, its protein emits intense fluorescence in living embryos. It is
non-toxic, and the fluorescence does not bleach when viewed under 480 nm light.
It is surprisingly stable, being strongly visible up to the feeding tadpole stage
(5 days), and in some tissues for several weeks after mRNA injection. We also
describe a construct that encodes a blue fluorescent protein. We exemplify the
use of this GFP.RN3 construct for marking the lineage of individual blastomeres
at the 32- to 64-cell stage, and as a marker for single transplanted blastula
cells. Both procedures have revealed that the descendants of one embryonic cell
can contribute single muscle cells to nearly all segmental myotomes rather than
predominantly to any one myotome. An independent aim of our work has been to
follow the fate of cells in which an early regulatory gene has been temporarily
overexpressed. For this purpose, we co-injected GFP.RN3 mRNA and mRNA for the
early Xenopus gene Eomes, and found that a high concentration of Eomes results in
ectopic muscle gene activation in only the injected cells. This marker may
therefore be of general value in providing long term identification of those
cells in which an early gene with ephemeral expression has been overexpressed.

PMID: 9012493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


