
1. J Am Coll Surg. 2016 Jan 14. pii: S1072-7515(16)00031-4. doi:
10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2015.12.047. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of Novel Oncogenic Mutations in Thyroid Cancer.

Pitt SC(1), Hernandez RA(2), Nehs MA(2), Gawande AA(2), Moore FD Jr(2), Ruan
DT(2), Cho NL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA; University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health,
Madison, WI. Electronic address: pitt@surgery.wisc.edu. (2)Departments of
Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid cancer patients frequently have favorable outcomes. However, 
a small subset develops aggressive disease refractory to traditional treatments. 
Therefore, we sought to characterize oncogenic mutations in thyroid cancers to
identify novel therapeutic targets that may benefit patients with advanced,
refractory disease.
STUDY DESIGN: Data on 239 thyroid cancer specimens collected between January 2009
and September 2014 were obtained from the Dana Farber/Brigham and Women's Cancer 
Center. The tumors were analyzed with the OncoMap-4 or OncoPanel high-throughput 
genotyping platforms that survey up to 275 cancer genes and 91 introns for DNA
rearrangement.
RESULTS: Of the 239 thyroid cancer specimens, 128 (54%) had oncogenic mutations
detected. These 128 tumors had 351 different mutations detected in 129 oncogenes 
or tumor suppressors. Examination of the 128 specimens demonstrated that 55% (n =
70) had 1 oncogenic mutation, and 45% (n = 48) had more than 1 mutation. The 351 
oncogenic mutations were in papillary (85%), follicular (4%), medullary (7%), and
anaplastic (4%) thyroid cancers. Analysis revealed that 2.3% (n = 3 genes) of the
somatic gene mutations were novel. These included AR (n = 1), MPL (n = 2), and
EXT2 (n = 1), which were present in 4 different papillary thyroid cancer
specimens. New mutations were found in an additional 13 genes known to have
altered protein expression in thyroid cancer: BLM, CBL, CIITA, EP300, GSTM5,
LMO2, PRAME, SBDS, SF1, TET2, TNFAIP3, XPO1, and ZRSR2.
CONCLUSIONS: This analysis revealed that several previously unreported oncogenic 
gene mutations exist in thyroid cancers and may be targets for the development of
future therapies. Further investigation into the role of these genes is
warranted.

Copyright © 2016 American College of Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 27010584  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 9. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8009. [Epub ahead of print]

Melatonin inhibits TPA-induced oral cancer cell migration by suppressing matrix
metalloproteinase-9 activation through the histone acetylation.

Yeh CM(1), Lin CW(2,)(3), Yang JS(1,)(4), Yang WE(1,)(4), Su SC(5), Yang
SF(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Oral Sciences, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Dentistry, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan. (4)Department of Medical Research, Chung Shan Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (5)Whole-Genome Research Core Laboratory of Human
Diseases, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan.

Melatonin exerts antimetastatic effects on liver and breast cancer and also
inhibits matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity. However, the detailed impacts
and underlying mechanisms of melatonin on oral cancer cell metastasis are still
unclear. This study showed that melatonin attenuated the
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced migration of oral cancer cell lines,
HSC-3 and OECM-1. Zymography, quantitative real-time PCR, and Western blotting
analyses revealed that melatonin lessened MMP-9 enzyme activity as well as the
expression of MMP-9 mRNA and protein. Furthermore, melatonin suppressed the
phosphorylation of the ERK1/2 signalling pathway, which dampened MMP-9 gene
transcription by affecting the expression of transcriptional coactivators, such
as CREB-binding protein (CREBBP) and E1A binding protein p300 (EP300), and
decreasing histone acetylation in HSC-3 and OECM-1 cells. Examinations on
clinical samples exhibited that MMP-9, CREBBP, and EP300 were significantly
increased in oral cancer tissues. Moreover, the relative level of CREBBP was
positively correlated with the expression of MMP-9 and EP300. In conclusion, we
demonstrated that melatonin inhibits the motility of HSC-3 and OECM-1 cells in
vitro through a molecular mechanism that involves attenuation of MMP-9 expression
and activity mediated by decreased histone acetylation.

PMID: 26980735  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Gastroenterology. 2016 Feb 10. pii: S0016-5085(16)00134-7. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2016.01.035. [Epub ahead of print]

Genomic Landscape of Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma in a Japanese Population.

Sawada G(1), Niida A(2), Uchi R(3), Hirata H(3), Shimamura T(2), Suzuki Y(4),
Shiraishi Y(2), Chiba K(2), Imoto S(2), Takahashi Y(1), Iwaya T(5), Sudo T(3),
Hayashi T(6), Takai H(6), Kawasaki Y(6), Matsukawa T(7), Eguchi H(3), Sugimachi
K(3), Tanaka F(3), Suzuki H(8), Yamamoto K(9), Ishii H(10), Shimizu M(11),
Yamazaki H(11), Yamazaki M(10), Tachimori Y(12), Kajiyama Y(13), Natsugoe S(14), 
Fujita H(15), Mafune K(16), Tanaka Y(17), Kelsell DP(18), Scott CA(18), Tsuji
S(7), Yachida S(19), Shibata T(20), Sugano S(4), Doki Y(10), Akiyama T(6),
Aburatani H(21), Ogawa S(8), Miyano S(2), Mori M(22), Mimori K(23).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University Beppu Hospital, Beppu, Japan;
Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Japan. (2)Laboratory of DNA Information Analysis, Human Genome
Center, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University Beppu Hospital, Beppu, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Functional Genomics, Department of Medical Genome Sciences,
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan.
(5)Department of Surgery, Iwate Medical University, Morioka, Japan. (6)Laboratory
of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Neurology,
University of Tokyo, Japan. (8)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan. (9)Department of Medical Chemistry, Kurume University
School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan. (10)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery,
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Japan. (11)Laboratory of
Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Showa Pharmaceutical University, Tokyo,
Japan. (12)Esophageal Surgery Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan. (13)Department of Esophageal and Gastroenterological Surgery, Juntendo
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (14)Department of Surgical Oncology 
and Digestive Surgery, Kagoshima University School of Medicine, Kagoshima, Japan.
(15)Department of Surgery, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Japan.
(16)Department of Surgery, Mitsui Kinen Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (17)Division of
Gastroenterological Surgery, Saitama Cancer Center, Saitama, Japan. (18)Blizard
Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK. (19)Division of Refractory Cancer Research,
National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan. (20)Division of Cancer
Genomics, Center for Medical Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Tokyo, Japan; Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (21)Genome Science
Laboratory, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (22)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate
School of Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Japan. Electronic address:
mmori@gesurg.med.osaka-u.ac.jp. (23)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University
Beppu Hospital, Beppu, Japan. Electronic address:
kmimori@tsurumi.beppu.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the predominant
form of esophageal cancer in Japan. Smoking and drinking alcohol are
environmental risk factors for ESCC, whereas single nucleotide polymorphisms in
ADH1B and ALDH2, which increase harmful intermediates produced by drinking
alcohol, are genetic risk factors. We conducted a large-scale genomic analysis of
ESCCs from patients in Japan to determine the mutational landscape of this
cancer.
METHODS: We performed whole-exome sequence analysis of tumor and nontumor
esophageal tissues collected from 144 patients with ESCC who underwent surgery at
5 hospitals in Japan. We also performed single-nucleotide polymorphism
array-based copy number profile and germline genotype analyses of polymorphisms
in ADH1B and ALDH2. Polymorphisms in CYP2A6, which increase harmful effects of
smoking, were analyzed. Functions of TET2 mutants were evaluated in KYSE410 and
HEK293FT cells.
RESULTS: A high proportion of mutations in the 144 tumor samples were C to T
substitution in CpG dinucleotides (called the CpG signature) and C to G/T
substitutions with a flanking 5' thymine (called the APOBEC signature). Based on 
mutational signatures, patients were assigned to 3 groups, which associated with 
environmental (drinking and smoking) and genetic (polymorphisms in ALDH2 and
CYP2A6) factors. Many tumors contained mutations in genes that regulate the cell 
cycle (TP53, CCND1, CDKN2A, FBXW7); epigenetic processes (MLL2, EP300, CREBBP,
TET2); and the NOTCH (NOTCH1, NOTCH3), WNT (FAT1, YAP1, AJUBA) and
receptor-tyrosine kinase-phosphoinositide 3-kinase signaling pathways (PIK3CA,
EGFR, ERBB2). Mutations in EP300 and TET2 correlated with shorter survival times,
and mutations in ZNF750 associated with an increased number of mutations of the
APOBEC signature. Expression of mutant forms of TET2 did not increase cellular
levels of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in HEK293FT cells, whereas knockdown of TET2
increased the invasive activity of KYSE410 ESCC cells. Computational analyses
associated the mutations in NFE2L2 we identified with transcriptional activation 
of its target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: We associated environmental and genetic factors with base
substitution patterns of somatic mutations and provide a registry of genes and
pathways that are disrupted in ESCCs. These findings might be used to design
specific treatments for patients with esophageal squamous cancers.

Copyright © 2016 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26873401  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Br J Cancer. 2016 Mar 1;114(5):519-23. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2016.20. Epub 2016 Feb
11.

Chetomin, targeting HIF-1a/p300 complex, exhibits antitumour activity in multiple
myeloma.

Viziteu E(1), Grandmougin C(1), Goldschmidt H(2,)(3), Seckinger A(2,)(3), Hose
D(2,)(3), Klein B(1,)(4,)(5), Moreaux J(1,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS-UPR1142, Montpellier F-34396, France.
(2)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik V, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Nationales Centrum für Tumorerkrankungen, Heidelberg,
Germany. (4)Department of Biological Haematology, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier,
France. (5)University of Montpellier 1, UFR de Médecine, Montpellier, France.

BACKGROUND: Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable clonal plasma cell malignancy. 
The constitutive expression of HIF-1a in MM suggests that inhibition of
HIF-1a-mediated transcription represents an interesting target in MM.
METHODS: As p300 is a crucial co-activator of hypoxia-inducible transcription,
disrupting the complex HIF-1a/p300 to target HIF activity appears to be an
attractive strategy.
RESULTS: We reported that chetomin, an inhibitor of HIF-1a/p300 interaction,
exhibits antitumour activity in human myeloma cell lines and primary MM cells
from patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that chetomin may be of clinical value in MM and
especially for patients characterised by a high EP300/HIF-1a expression and a
poor prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4782210 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26867162  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 15;76(6):1538-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1804. Epub
2016 Feb 1.

Inhibition of MUC1-C Suppresses MYC Expression and Attenuates Malignant Growth in
KRAS Mutant Lung Adenocarcinomas.

Bouillez A(1), Rajabi H(1), Pitroda S(2), Jin C(1), Alam M(1), Kharbanda A(1),
Tagde A(1), Wong KK(1), Kufe D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Radiation and Cellular Oncology, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois. (3)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. donald_kufe@dfci.harvard.edu.

Dysregulation of MYC expression is a hallmark of cancer, but the development of
agents that target MYC has remained challenging. The oncogenic MUC1-C
transmembrane protein is, like MYC, aberrantly expressed in diverse human
cancers. The present studies demonstrate that MUC1-C induces MYC expression in
KRAS mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, an effect that can be
suppressed by targeting MUC1-C via shRNA silencing, CRISPR editing, or
pharmacologic inhibition with GO-203. MUC1-C activated the WNT/ß-catenin (CTNNB1)
pathway and promoted occupancy of MUC1-C/ß-catenin/TCF4 complexes on the MYC
promoter. MUC1-C also promoted the recruitment of the p300 histone acetylase
(EP300) and, in turn, induced histone H3 acetylation and activation of MYC gene
transcription. We also show that targeting MUC1-C decreased the expression of key
MYC target genes essential for the growth and survival of NSCLC cells, such as
TERT and CDK4. Based on these results, we found that the combination of GO-203
and the BET bromodomain inhibitor JQ1, which targets MYC transcription,
synergistically suppressed MYC expression and cell survival in vitro as well as
tumor xenograft growth. Furthermore, MUC1 expression significantly correlated
with that of MYC and its target genes in human KRAS mutant NSCLC tumors. Taken
together, these findings suggest a therapeutic approach for targeting
MYC-dependent cancers and provide the framework for the ongoing clinical studies 
addressing the efficacy of MUC1-C inhibition in solid tumors. Cancer Res; 76(6); 
1538-48. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4794417 [Available on 2017-03-15]
PMID: 26833129  [PubMed - in process]


6. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2015 Sep 22;4(1):39-45. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.177. eCollection
2016.

CREBBP and EP300 mutational spectrum and clinical presentations in a cohort of
Swedish patients with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.

Wincent J(1), Luthman A(1), van Belzen M(2), van der Lans C(2), Albert J(3),
Nordgren A(4), Anderlid BM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery Center for Molecular Medicine CMM
L8:02 Karolinska Institutet Karolinska University Hospital Stockholm Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics Leiden University Medical Center Leiden The
Netherlands. (3)Division of Surgery Department of Clinical Science Karolinska
Institutet Danderyd Hospital Stockholm Sweden. (4)Department of Molecular
Medicine and SurgeryCenter for Molecular MedicineCMM L8:02Karolinska
InstitutetKarolinska University HospitalStockholmSweden; Department of Clinical
GeneticsKarolinska University HospitalStockholmSweden.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare autosomal dominant congenital disorder 
characterized by distinctive facial features, broad thumbs and halluces, growth
retardation, and a variable degree of cognitive impairment. CREBBP is the major
causative gene and mutations in EP300 are the cause of RTS in a minority of
patients. In this study, 17 patients with a clinical diagnosis of RTS were
investigated with direct sequencing, MLPA, and array-CGH in search for mutations 
in these two genes. Eleven patients (64.7%) had disease-causing point mutations
or a deletion in CREBBP and in one patient (5.9%) a causal de novo frameshift
mutation in EP300 was identified. This patient had broad thumbs, mild
intellectual disability, and autism. In addition, an inherited missense mutation 
of uncertain clinical significance was identified in EP300 in one patient and his
healthy father, and three patients had intronic nucleotide changes of uncertain
clinical significance in CREBBP. Snoring and sleep apnea were common in both
groups and four of the patients' mothers had preeclampsia during pregnancy.
Importantly, difficulties associated with anesthesia were frequently reported and
included delayed or complicated emergency in 53.3% of patients.

PMCID: PMC4707034
PMID: 26788536  [PubMed]


7. Learn Mem. 2016 Jan 15;23(2):83-9. doi: 10.1101/lm.039438.115. Print 2016 Feb.

Inhibition of different histone acetyltransferases (HATs) uncovers
transcription-dependent and -independent acetylation-mediated mechanisms in
memory formation.

Merschbaecher K(1), Hatko L(1), Folz J(1), Mueller U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department 8.3 Biosciences Zoology/Physiology-Neurobiology, ZHMB (Center of
Human and Molecular Biology), Faculty 8 - Natural Science and Technology III,
Saarland University, D-66041 Saarbrücken, Germany. (2)Department 8.3 Biosciences 
Zoology/Physiology-Neurobiology, ZHMB (Center of Human and Molecular Biology),
Faculty 8 - Natural Science and Technology III, Saarland University, D-66041
Saarbrücken, Germany uli.mueller@mx.uni-saarland.de.

Acetylation of histones changes the efficiency of the transcription processes and
thus contributes to the formation of long-term memory (LTM). In our comparative
study, we used two inhibitors to characterize the contribution of different
histone acetyl transferases (HATs) to appetitive associative learning in the
honeybee. For one we applied garcinol, an inhibitor of the HATs of the p300
(EP300 binding protein)/CBP (CREB-binding protein) family, and the HATs of the
PCAF (p300/CBP-associated factor) family. As comparative agent we applied C646, a
specific inhibitor that selectively blocks HATS of the p300/CBP family.
Immunochemical analysis reveals differences in histone H3 acetylation in the
honeybee brain, in response to the injection of either C646 or garcinol.
Behavioral assessment reveals that the two drugs cause memory impairment of
different nature when injected after associative conditioning: processes
disturbed by garcinol are annihilated by the established transcription blocker
actinomycin D and thus seem to require transcription processes. Actions of C646
are unaltered by actinomycin D, and thus seem to be independent of transcription.
The outcome of our different approaches as summarized suggests that distinct HATs
contribute to different acetylation-mediated processes in memory formation. We
further deduce that the acetylation-mediated processes in memory formation
comprise transcription-dependent and transcription-independent mechanisms.

© 2016 Merschbaecher et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4749833 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26773101  [PubMed - in process]


8. Gastroenterology. 2016 Apr;150(4):931-43. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.12.036. Epub
2016 Jan 5.

Whole-Exome Sequencing Analyses of Inflammatory Bowel Disease-Associated
Colorectal Cancers.

Robles AI(1), Traverso G(2), Zhang M(3), Roberts NJ(4), Khan MA(1), Joseph C(3), 
Lauwers GY(5), Selaru FM(6), Popoli M(3), Pittman ME(7), Ke X(6), Hruban RH(7),
Meltzer SJ(6), Kinzler KW(8), Vogelstein B(9), Harris CC(10), Papadopoulos N(11).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute's Center for
Cancer Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (2)Division
of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Chemical Engineering, Koch Institute for
Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts. (3)Ludwig Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland. (4)Ludwig 
Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Pathology, The Sol
Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (5)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (6)Division of
Gastroenterology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland. (7)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research 
Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(8)Ludwig Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland; Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland. (9)Ludwig Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland;
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland; Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland. Electronic address: bertvog@gmail.com. (10)Laboratory of
Human Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute's Center for Cancer Research,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. Electronic address:
harrisc@mail.nih.gov. (11)Ludwig Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland;
Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. Electronic address: npapado1@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: A long duration of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) increases 
the risk for colorectal cancer. Mutation analysis of limited numbers of genes has
indicated that colorectal tumors that develop in patients with IBD differ from
those of patients without IBD. We performed whole-exome sequencing analyses to
characterize the genetic landscape of these tumors.
METHODS: We collected colorectal tumor and non-neoplastic tissues from 31
patients with IBD and colorectal cancer (15 with ulcerative colitis, 14 with
Crohn's disease, and 2 with indeterminate colitis) and performed whole-exome
sequencing analyses of the microdissected tumor and matched nontumor tissues. We 
identified somatic alterations by comparing matched specimens. The prevalence of 
mutations in sporadic colorectal tumors was obtained from previously published
exome-sequencing studies.
RESULTS: Two specimens had somatic mutations in the DNA proofreading or mismatch 
repair genes POLE, MLH1, and MSH6 and the tumor cells had a hypermutable
phenotype. The remaining tumors had, on average, 71 alterations per sample. TP53 
was the most commonly mutated gene, with prevalence similar to that of sporadic
colorectal tumors (63% of cases). However, tumors from the patients with IBD had 
a different mutation spectrum. APC and KRAS were mutated at significantly lower
rates in tumors from patients with IBD than in sporadic colorectal tumors (13%
and 20% of cases, respectively). Several genes were mutated more frequently or
uniquely in tumors from patients with IBD, including SOX9 and EP300 (which encode
proteins in the WNT pathway), NRG1 (which encodes an ERBB ligand), and IL16
(which encodes a cytokine). Our study also revealed recurrent mutations in
components of the Rho and Rac GTPase network, indicating a role for noncanonical 
WNT signaling in development of colorectal tumors in patients with IBD.
CONCLUSIONS: Colorectal tumors that develop in patients with IBD have distinct
genetic features from sporadic colorectal tumors. These findings could be used to
develop disease-specific markers for diagnosis and treatment of patients with IBD
and colorectal cancer.

Copyright © 2016 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26764183  [PubMed - in process]


9. Elife. 2016 Jan 5;5. pii: e10483. doi: 10.7554/eLife.10483.

Bromodomain inhibition of the transcriptional coactivators CBP/EP300 as a
therapeutic strategy to target the IRF4 network in multiple myeloma.

Conery AR(1), Centore RC(1), Neiss A(1), Keller PJ(1), Joshi S(1), Spillane
KL(1), Sandy P(1), Hatton C(1), Pardo E(1), Zawadzke L(1), Bommi-Reddy A(1),
Gascoigne KE(2), Bryant BM(1), Mertz JA(1), Sims RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Constellation Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, United States. (2)Genentech, South
San Francisco, United States.

Pharmacological inhibition of chromatin co-regulatory factors represents a
clinically validated strategy to modulate oncogenic signaling through selective
attenuation of gene expression. Here, we demonstrate that CBP/EP300 bromodomain
inhibition preferentially abrogates the viability of multiple myeloma cell lines.
Selective targeting of multiple myeloma cell lines through CBP/EP300 bromodomain 
inhibition is the result of direct transcriptional suppression of the
lymphocyte-specific transcription factor IRF4, which is essential for the
viability of myeloma cells, and the concomitant repression of the IRF4 target
gene c-MYC. Ectopic expression of either IRF4 or MYC antagonizes the phenotypic
and transcriptional effects of CBP/EP300 bromodomain inhibition, highlighting the
IRF4/MYC axis as a key component of its mechanism of action. These findings
suggest that CBP/EP300 bromodomain inhibition represents a viable therapeutic
strategy for targeting multiple myeloma and other lymphoid malignancies dependent
on the IRF4 network.

PMCID: PMC4775225
PMID: 26731516  [PubMed - in process]


10. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 5;11(1):e0146366. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146366.
eCollection 2016.

Mutation of the CH1 Domain in the Histone Acetyltransferase CREBBP Results in
Autism-Relevant Behaviors in Mice.

Zheng F(1), Kasper LH(1), Bedford DC(1), Lerach S(1), Teubner BJ(2), Brindle
PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 
38105, United States of America. (2)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St 
Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, United States of America.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of neurodevelopmental afflictions
characterized by repetitive behaviors, deficits in social interaction, and
impaired communication skills. For most ASD patients, the underlying causes are
unknown. Genetic mutations have been identified in about 25 percent of ASD cases,
including mutations in epigenetic regulators, suggesting that dysregulated
chromatin or DNA function is a critical component of ASD. Mutations in the
histone acetyltransferase CREB binding protein (CBP, CREBBP) cause
Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome (RTS), a developmental disorder that includes ASD-like 
symptoms. Recently, genomic studies involving large numbers of ASD patient
families have theoretically modeled CBP and its paralog p300 (EP300) as critical 
hubs in ASD-associated protein and gene interaction networks, and have identified
de novo missense mutations in highly conserved residues of the CBP
acetyltransferase and CH1 domains. Here we provide animal model evidence that
supports this notion that CBP and its CH1 domain are relevant to autism. We show 
that mice with a deletion mutation in the CBP CH1 (TAZ1) domain (CBP<U+0394>CH1/<U+0394>CH1)
have an RTS-like phenotype that includes ASD-relevant repetitive behaviors,
hyperactivity, social interaction deficits, motor dysfunction, impaired
recognition memory, and abnormal synaptic plasticity. Our results therefore
indicate that loss of CBP CH1 domain function contributes to RTS, and possibly
ASD, and that this domain plays an essential role in normal motor function,
cognition and social behavior. Although the key physiological functions affected 
by ASD-associated mutation of epigenetic regulators have been enigmatic, our
findings are consistent with theoretical models involving CBP and p300 in ASD,
and with a causative role for recently described ASD-associated CBP mutations.

PMCID: PMC4701386
PMID: 26730956  [PubMed - in process]


11. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb;13(2):1746-64. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4707. Epub 2015 Dec
22.

Differential gene expression analysis and network construction of recurrent
cardiovascular events.

Liao J(1), Chen Z(1), He Q(1), Liu Y(1), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences, Beijing 100053, P.R. China.

Recurrent cardiovascular events are vital to the prevention and treatment
strategies in patients who have experienced primary cardiovascular events.
However, the susceptibility of recurrent cardiovascular events varies among
patients. Personalized treatment and prognosis prediction are urged. Microarray
profiling of samples from patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI), with
or without recurrent cardiovascular events, were obtained from the Gene
Expression Omnibus database. Bioinformatics analysis, including Gene Oncology
(GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), were used to identify
genes and pathways specifically associated with recurrent cardiovascular events. 
A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed and visualized. A
total of 1,329 genes were differentially expressed in the two group samples.
Among them, 1,023 differentially expressed genes (DEGs; 76.98%) were upregulated 
in the recurrent cardiovascular events group and 306 DEGs (23.02%) were
downregulated. Significantly enriched GO terms for molecular functions were
nucleotide binding and nucleic acid binding, for biological processes were signal
transduction and regulation of transcription (DNA-dependent), and for cellular
component were cytoplasm and nucleus. The most significant pathway in our KEGG
analysis was Pathways in cancer (P=0.000336681), and regulation of actin
cytoskeleton was also significantly enriched (P=0.00165229). In the PPI network, 
the significant hub nodes were GNG4, MAPK8, PIK3R2, EP300, CREB1 and PIK3CB. The 
present study demonstrated the underlying molecular differences between patients 
with AMI, with and without recurrent cardiovascular events, including DEGs, their
biological function, signaling pathways and key genes in the PPI network. With
the use of bioinformatics and genomics these findings can be used to investigate 
the pathological mechanism, and improve the prevention and treatment of recurrent
cardiovascular events.

PMID: 26708382  [PubMed - in process]


12. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Feb 29;44(4):1854-70. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv1500. Epub 2015
Dec 23.

A genome landscape of SRSF3-regulated splicing events and gene expression in
human osteosarcoma U2OS cells.

Ajiro M(1), Jia R(1), Yang Y(2), Zhu J(2), Zheng ZM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Virus RNA Biology Section, Gene Regulation and Chromosome Biology
Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. (2)DNA Sequencing and Genomics
Core, System Biology Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)Tumor Virus RNA Biology
Section, Gene Regulation and Chromosome Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD
21702, USA zhengt@exchange.nih.gov.

Alternative RNA splicing is an essential process to yield proteomic diversity in 
eukaryotic cells, and aberrant splicing is often associated with numerous human
diseases and cancers. We recently described serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 
3 (SRSF3 or SRp20) being a proto-oncogene. However, the SRSF3-regulated splicing 
events responsible for its oncogenic activities remain largely unknown. By global
profiling of the SRSF3-regulated splicing events in human osteosarcoma U2OS
cells, we found that SRSF3 regulates the expression of 60 genes including ERRFI1,
ANXA1 and TGFB2, and 182 splicing events in 164 genes, including EP300, PUS3,
CLINT1, PKP4, KIF23, CHK1, SMC2, CKLF, MAP4, MBNL1, MELK, DDX5, PABPC1, MAP4K4,
Sp1 and SRSF1, which are primarily associated with cell proliferation or cell
cycle. Two SRSF3-binding motifs, CCAGC(G)C and A(G)CAGCA, are enriched to the
alternative exons. An SRSF3-binding site in the EP300 exon 14 is essential for
exon 14 inclusion. We found that the expression of SRSF1 and SRSF3 are mutually
dependent and coexpressed in normal and tumor tissues/cells. SRSF3 also
significantly regulates the expression of at least 20 miRNAs, including a subset 
of oncogenic or tumor suppressive miRNAs. These data indicate that SRSF3 affects 
a global change of gene expression to maintain cell homeostasis.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4770227
PMID: 26704980  [PubMed - in process]


13. Epigenomics. 2016 Jan;8(1):77-84. doi: 10.2217/epi.15.96. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Epigenetic dysregulation in follicular lymphoma.

Araf S(1), Okosun J(1), Koniali L(1), Fitzgibbon J(1), Heward J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of 
London, John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London, EC1M 6BQ, UK.

The adoption of next-generation sequencing technologies has led to a remarkable
shift in our understanding of the genetic landscape of follicular lymphoma. While
the disease has been synonymous with the t(14;18), the prevalence of alterations 
in genes that regulate the epigenome has been established as a pivotal hallmark
of these lymphomas. Giant strides are being made in unraveling the biological
consequences of these alterations in tumorigenesis opening up new opportunities
for directed therapies.

PMID: 26698557  [PubMed - in process]


14. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 21;5:18655. doi: 10.1038/srep18655.

miRNA-132-3p inhibits osteoblast differentiation by targeting Ep300 in simulated 
microgravity.

Hu Z(1), Wang Y(1), Sun Z(1,)(2), Wang H(1), Zhou H(1), Zhang L(1), Zhang S(1),
Cao X(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Aerospace Medicine, Ministry of Education, The Fourth
Military Medical University, 710032, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China. (2)Department of
orthopedics, No.454 Hospital of PLA, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.

Recent studies have demonstrated that miRNAs can play important roles in
osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. However, the function of miRNAs in
bone loss induced by microgravity remains unclear. In this study, we investigated
the differentially expressed miRNAs in both the femur tissues of hindlimb
unloading rats and primary rat osteoblasts (prOB) exposed to simulated
microgravity. Specifically, miR-132-3p was found up-regulated and negatively
correlated with osteoblast differentiation. Overexpression of miR-132-3p
significantly inhibited prOB differentiation, whereas inhibition of miR-132-3p
function yielded an opposite effect. Furthermore, silencing of miR-132-3p
expression effectively attenuated the negative effects of simulated microgravity 
on prOB differentiation. Further experiments confirmed that E1A binding protein
p300 (Ep300), a type of histone acetyltransferase important for Runx2 activity
and stability, was a direct target of miR-132-3p. Up-regulation of miR-132-3p by 
simulated microgravity could inhibit osteoblast differentiation in part by
decreasing Ep300 protein expression, which, in turn, resulted in suppression of
the activity and acetylation of Runx2, a key regulatory factor of osteoblast
differentiation. Taken together, our findings are the first to demonstrate that
miR-132-3p can inhibit osteoblast differentiation and participate in the
regulation of bone loss induced by simulated microgravity, suggesting a potential
target for counteracting decreases in bone formation.

PMCID: PMC4685444
PMID: 26686902  [PubMed - in process]


15. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 26;7(4):4024-35. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6602.

Identification of the BRAF V600E mutation in gastroenteropancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors.

Park C(1), Ha SY(1), Kim ST(2), Kim HC(3), Heo JS(3), Park YS(2), Lauwers G(4),
Lee J(2), Kim KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Translational Genomics, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Surgery, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Genomic profiles of gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs) are
still insufficiently understood, and the genetic alterations associated with drug
responses have not been studied. Here, we performed whole exome sequencing of 12 
GEP-NETs from patients enrolled in a nonrandomized, open-labeled, single-center
phase II study for pazopanib, and integrated our results with previously
published results on pancreas (n = 12) and small intestine NETs (n = 50). The
mean numbers of somatic mutations in each case varied widely from 20 to 4682.
Among 12 GEP-NETs, eight showed mutations of more than one cancer-related gene,
including TP53, CNBD1, RB1, APC, BCOR, BRAF, CTNNB1, EGFR, EP300, ERBB3, KDM6A,
KRAS, MGA, MLL3, PTEN, RASA1, SMARCB1, SPEN, TBC1D12, and VHL. TP53 was
recurrently mutated in three cases, whereas CNBD1 and RB1 mutations were
identified in two cases. Three GEP-NET patients with TP53 mutations demonstrated 
a durable response and one small intestinal grade (G) 1 NET patient with BRAF
V600E mutation showed progression after pazopanib treatment. We found BRAF V600E 
(G1 NET from rectum and two G3 NETs from colon) and BRAF G593S (G2 NET from
pancreas) missense mutations (9.1%) in an independent cohort of 44 GEP-NETs from 
the rectum (n = 26), colon (n = 7), pancreas (n = 4), small intestine (n = 3),
stomach (n = 3) and appendix (n = 1) by Sanger sequencing. All tumor specimens
were obtained before chemotherapy. In conclusion, BRAF V600E mutation is likely
to result in resistance to pazopanib but may be a potentianally actionable
mutation in metastatic GEP-NETs patients.

PMID: 26684240  [PubMed - in process]


16. BMC Cancer. 2015 Dec 18;15:984. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1955-9.

The genomic and transcriptomic landscape of anaplastic thyroid cancer:
implications for therapy.

Kasaian K(1), Wiseman SM(2), Walker BA(3), Schein JE(4), Zhao Y(5), Hirst M(6),
Moore RA(7), Mungall AJ(8), Marra MA(9,)(10), Jones SJ(11,)(12,)(13,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. kkasaian@bcgsc.ca. (2)Department of Surgery,
St. Paul's Hospital and University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. SMWiseman@providencehealth.bc.ca. (3)Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, St. Paul's Hospital and University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. BWalker@providencehealth.bc.ca. (4)Canada's 
Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada. jschein@bcgsc.ca. (5)Canada's Michael Smith Genome
Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada. yzhao@bcgsc.ca. (6)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British
Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. mhirst@bcgsc.ca.
(7)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. rmoore@bcgsc.ca. (8)Canada's Michael Smith
Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. amungall@bcgsc.ca. (9)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences
Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
mmarra@bcgsc.ca. (10)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. mmarra@bcgsc.ca. (11)Canada's
Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada. sjones@bcgsc.ca. (12)Department of Medical Genetics,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
sjones@bcgsc.ca. (13)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon
Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada. sjones@bcgsc.ca. (14), 570 
West 7th Ave, Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 4S6, Canada. sjones@bcgsc.ca.

BACKGROUND: Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is the most undifferentiated form of
thyroid cancer and one of the deadliest of all adult solid malignancies. Here we 
report the first genomic and transcriptomic profile of anaplastic thyroid cancer 
including those of several unique cell lines and outline novel potential drivers 
of malignancy and targets of therapy.
METHODS: We describe whole genomic and transcriptomic profiles of 1 primary
anaplastic thyroid tumor and 3 authenticated cell lines. Those profiles augmented
by the transcriptomes of 4 additional and unique cell lines were compared to 58
pairs of papillary thyroid carcinoma and matched normal tissue transcriptomes
from The Cancer Genome Atlas study.
RESULTS: The most prevalent mutations were those of TP53 and BRAF; repeated
alterations of the epigenetic machinery such as frame-shift deletions of HDAC10
and EP300, loss of SMARCA2 and fusions of MECP2, BCL11A and SS18 were observed.
Sequence data displayed aneuploidy and large regions of copy loss and gain in all
genomes. Common regions of gain were however evident encompassing chromosomes 5p 
and 20q. We found novel anaplastic gene fusions including MKRN1-BRAF, FGFR2-OGDH 
and SS18-SLC5A11, all expressed in-frame fusions involving a known
proto-oncogene. Comparison of the anaplastic thyroid cancer expression datasets
with the papillary thyroid cancer and normal thyroid tissue transcriptomes
suggested several known drug targets such as FGFRs, VEGFRs, KIT and RET to have
lower expression levels in anaplastic specimens compared with both papillary
thyroid cancers and normal tissues, confirming the observed lack of response to
therapies targeting these pathways. Further integrative data analysis identified 
the mTOR signaling pathway as a potential therapeutic target in this disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma possessed heterogeneous and unique
profiles revealing the significance of detailed molecular profiling of individual
tumors and the treatment of each as a unique entity; the cell line sequence data 
promises to facilitate the more accurate and intentional drug screening studies
for anaplastic thyroid cancer.

PMCID: PMC4683857
PMID: 26680454  [PubMed - in process]


17. J Mol Endocrinol. 2016 Feb;56(2):113-22. doi: 10.1530/JME-15-0148. Epub 2015 Dec 
7.

Regulation of human subcutaneous adipocyte differentiation by EID1.

Vargas D(1), Shimokawa N(1), Kaneko R(1), Rosales W(1), Parra A(1), Castellanos
Á(1), Koibuchi N(1), Lizcano F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Biomedical Research (CIBUS)Universidad de La Sabana, Km. 7 Autopista
Norte de Bogota, 140013 Chia, ColombiaDepartment of Integrative PhysiologyGunma
University, Maebashi, JapanInstitute of Experimental Animal ResearchGunma
University, Maebashi, Japan. (2)Center of Biomedical Research (CIBUS)Universidad 
de La Sabana, Km. 7 Autopista Norte de Bogota, 140013 Chia, ColombiaDepartment of
Integrative PhysiologyGunma University, Maebashi, JapanInstitute of Experimental 
Animal ResearchGunma University, Maebashi, Japan
fernando.lizcano@unisabana.edu.co.

Increasing thermogenesis in white adipose tissues can be used to treat
individuals at high risk for obesity and cardiovascular disease. The objective of
this study was to determine the function of EP300-interacting inhibitor of
differentiation (EID1), an inhibitor of muscle differentiation, in the induction 
of beige adipocytes from adipose mesenchymal stem cells (ADMSCs). Subcutaneous
adipose tissue was obtained from healthy women undergoing abdominoplasty. ADMSCs 
were isolated in vitro, grown, and transfected with EID1 or EID1 siRNA, and
differentiation was induced after 48<U+200A>h by administering rosiglitazone. The
effects of EID1 expression under the control of the aP2 promoter (aP2-EID1) were 
also evaluated in mature adipocytes that were differentiated from ADMSCs.
Transfection of EID1 into ADMSCs reduced triglyceride accumulation while
increasing levels of thermogenic proteins, such as PGC1a, TFAM, and mitochondrial
uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1), all of which are markers of energy expenditure and
mitochondrial activity. Furthermore, increased expression of the beige phenotype 
markers CITED1 and CD137 was observed. Transfection of aP2-EID1 transfection
induced the conversion of mature white adipocytes to beige adipocytes, as
evidenced by increased expression of PGC1a, UCP1, TFAM, and CITED1. These results
indicate that EID1 can modulate ADMSCs, inducing a brown/beige lineage. EID1 may 
also activate beiging in white adipocytes obtained from subcutaneous human
adipose tissue.

© 2016 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 26643909  [PubMed - in process]


18. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Dec 4. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10567. [Epub ahead of print]

Induction of pancreatic ß cell gene expression in mesenchymal stem cells.

Mehrfarjam Z(1), Esmaeili F(2,)(3), Shabani L(3), Ebrahimie E(4,)(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Razi Herbal Medicines Research Center, Lorestan University of Medical
Sciences, P.O. Box 681499468, Khorramabad, Iran. (2)Department of Biology,
Faculty of Basic Sciences, University of Isfahan, P.O. Box 8174673441, Isfahan,
Iran. (3)Research Institute of Biotechnology, Shahrekord University, P.O. Box
115, Shahrekord, Iran. (4)Institute of Biotechnology, Shiraz University, Shiraz, 
Iran. (5)School of Information Technology and Mathematical Sciences, Division of 
Information Technology Engineering & Environment, University of South Australia, 
Aselaide, Australia. (6)Department of Genetics and Evolution, School of
Biological Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. (7)School
of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Flinders University, 
Adelaide, Australia.

Transdifferentiation potential of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into
insulin-producing cells (IPCs) has been suggested recently. In our recent works, 
we demonstrated the high performance of mouse neonate pancreas extract (MPE) in
production of functional IPCs from carcinoma stem cells. In this study, MPE was
used to generate IPCs from MSCs without any genetic manipulation. To this end,
bone marrow MSCs were isolated and characterized. In order to differentiate, MSCs
were induced by selection of nestin-expressing cells and treatment with 100<U+2009>µg/ml
MPE. Morphological features of the differentiated cells were confirmed by
dithizone staining. Immunoreactivity to insulin receptor beta, proinsulin,
insulin and C-peptide was observed by immunoflourescence. We also quantified
glucose-dependent insulin production and secretion by ELISA. Real-time PCR
indicated the expressions of ß cell related genes, PDX-1, INS1, INS2, EP300 and
CREB1 in IPC cells. Possible pathways governed by CREB1, EP300, and PDX-1
transcription factors in differentiation of MSCs to IPCs were determined based on
Gene Set Enrichment (GSE) approach at p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05. Pathway discovery highlighted the
negative regulatory effects of MIR124-2, HDAC5 protein, REST and NR0B2
transcription factors on expression of CREB1, EP300, and PDX-1 and inhabitation
of IPC differentiations. In contrast, a crosstalk between FOXA2 and TCF7L2
transcription factors, DNA-PK complex, KAT2B protein positively interacting with 
PDX-1, CREB1, EP300 resulted in the induction of IPC and following insulin
production. In conclusion, we report an efficient, simple, and easy method for
production of functional IPCs from MSCs by MPE treatment.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26634639  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Dec 15;112(50):15372-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1522006112. Epub 2015 Dec 2.

Peptidic degron in EID1 is recognized by an SCF E3 ligase complex containing the 
orphan F-box protein FBXO21.

Zhang C(1), Li X(2), Adelmant G(3), Dobbins J(4), Geisen C(5), Oser MG(1),
Wucherpfenning KW(4), Marto JA(3), Kaelin WG Jr(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; (2)State Key
Laboratory for Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen
University, Xiamen, Fujian 361102, China; (3)Department of Cancer Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215; Blais Proteomics Center,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215; Department of Biological
Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215;
(4)Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02215; Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215; (5)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02215; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815. (6)Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy 
Chase, MD 20815 william_kaelin@dfci.harvard.edu.

EP300-interacting inhibitor of differentiation 1 (EID1) belongs to a protein
family implicated in the control of transcription, differentiation, DNA repair,
and chromosomal maintenance. EID1 has a very short half-life, especially in G0
cells. We discovered that EID1 contains a peptidic, modular degron that is
necessary and sufficient for its polyubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation. 
We found that this degron is recognized by an Skp1, Cullin, and F-box
(SCF)-containing ubiquitin ligase complex that uses the F-box Only Protein 21
(FBXO21) as its substrate recognition subunit. SCF(FBXO21) polyubiquitylates EID1
both in vitro and in vivo and is required for the efficient degradation of EID1
in both cycling and quiescent cells. The EID1 degron partially overlaps with its 
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein-binding domain and is congruent with a
previously defined melanoma-associated antigen-binding motif shared by EID family
members, suggesting that binding to retinoblastoma tumor suppressor and
melanoma-associated antigen family proteins could affect the polyubiquitylation
and turnover of EID family members in cells.

PMCID: PMC4687553 [Available on 2016-06-15]
PMID: 26631746  [PubMed - in process]


20. Oncol Lett. 2015 Sep;10(3):1704-1708. Epub 2015 Jun 16.

A 10-gene expression signature of Notch pathway predicts recurrence in ovarian
carcinoma.

Chen F(1), Liu N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Weifang People's Hospital, Weifang,
Shandong 261000, P.R. China. (2)Department of Gynecological Oncology, Shandong
Cancer Hospital and Institute, Jinan, Shandong 250117, P.R. China.

Patients with ovarian carcinoma are at high risk of tumor recurrence. In the
present study, 81 Notch pathway genes were selected to find recurrence-related
genes in The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset. A 10-gene signature (FZD4, HES1, PSEN2,
JAG2, PPARG, FOS, HEY1, CDC16, MFNG, and EP300) was identified and validated that
is associated with recurrence-free survival time, but not with overall survival
time, in the TCGA dataset and in other two independent datasets, GSE9891 and
GSE30161. This gene signature gave a significant performance in discriminating
patients at high risk of recurrence from those at low risk, as measured by the
area under the receiver operating characteristic curve. Cox proportional hazards 
regression analyses demonstrated that the prognostic value of this 10-gene set is
independent of other clinical variables in all three datasets. The potential as a
biomarker for predicting high- and low-risk subgroups for recurrence in ovarian
cancer patients deserves further investigation in prospective patient cohorts in 
the future.

PMCID: PMC4533720
PMID: 26622736  [PubMed]


21. Cancer Discov. 2015 Nov 24. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeting p300 Addiction in CBP-Deficient Cancers Causes Synthetic Lethality by
Apoptotic Cell Death due to Abrogation of MYC Expression.

Ogiwara H(1), Sasaki M(1), Mitachi T(1), Oike T(2), Higuchi S(3), Tominaga Y(3), 
Kohno T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genome Biology, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, 
Japan. (2)Division of Genome Biology, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo, Japan. Department of Radiation Oncology, Gunma University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Gunma, Japan. (3)Oncology Research Laboratories, Daiichi-Sankyo Co.,
Ltd., Tokyo, Japan. (4)Division of Genome Biology, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan. tkkohno@ncc.go.jp.

Loss-of-function mutations in the CBP/CREBBP gene, which encodes a histone
acetyltransferase (HAT), are present in a variety of human tumors, including
lung, bladder, gastric, and hematopoietic cancers. Consequently, development of a
molecular targeting method capable of specifically killing CBP-deficient cancer
cells would greatly improve cancer therapy. Functional screening of
synthetic-lethal genes in CBP-deficient cancers identified the CBP paralog
p300/EP300. Ablation of p300 in CBP-knockout and CBP-deficient cancer cells
induced G1-S cell-cycle arrest, followed by apoptosis. Genome-wide gene
expression analysis revealed that MYC is a major factor responsible for the
synthetic lethality. Indeed, p300 ablation in CBP-deficient cells caused
downregulation of MYC expression via reduction of histone acetylation in its
promoter, and this lethality was rescued by exogenous MYC expression. The
p300-HAT inhibitor C646 specifically suppressed the growth of CBP-deficient lung 
and hematopoietic cancer cells in vitro and in vivo; thus p300 is a promising
therapeutic target for treatment of CBP-deficient cancers.SIGNIFICANCE: Targeting
synthetic-lethal partners of genes mutated in cancer holds great promise for
treating patients without activating driver gene alterations. Here, we propose a 
"synthetic lethal-based therapeutic strategy" for CBP-deficient cancers by
inhibition of the p300 HAT activity. Patients with CBP-deficient cancers could
benefit from therapy using p300-HAT inhibitors. Cancer Discov; 6(4); 1-16. ©2015 
AACR.See related commentary by Kadoch, p. xxx.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26603525  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Oncol Rep. 2016 Feb;35(2):1170-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4412. Epub 2015 Nov 12.

miR-106b~25 cluster regulates multidrug resistance in an ABC
transporter-independent manner via downregulation of EP300.

Hu Y(1), Li K(2), Asaduzzaman M(2), Cuella R(2), Shi H(3), Raguz S(4), Coombes
RC(2), Zhou Y(3), Yagüe E(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Third Department of Breast Cancer, China Tianjin Breast Cancer Prevention,
Treatment and Research Center, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and
Hospital, National Clinical Research Center of Cancer, Tianjin 300060, P.R.
China. (2)Division of Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital
Campus, London W12 0NN, UK. (3)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology,
Institute of Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin 300020, P.R. China.
(4)Division of Clinical Sciences, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital
Campus, London W12 0NN, UK.

MicroRNA (miR)-106b~25 cluster regulates bypass of doxorubicin and <U+03B3>-radiation
induced senescence by downregulation of the E-cadherin transcriptional activator 
EP300. We asked whether upregulation of miR-106~25 cluster generates cells with a
truly multidrug resistant (MDR) phenotype and whether this is due to upregulation
of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter P-glycoprotein. We used minimally
transformed mammary epithelial breast cancer cells (MTMECs) in which the
miR-106b~25 cluster was experimentally upregulated by lentiviral transfection or 
in which hairpins targeting either EP300 or E-cadherin mRNAs have been expressed 
with lentiviruses. We find that overexpression of miR-106b~25 cluster led to the 
generation of MDR MTMECs (resistant to etoposide, colchicine and paclitaxel).
Paclitaxel resistance was also studied after experimental downregulation of EP300
or E-cadherin. However none of these cells overexpressed P-glycoprotein or where 
able to efflux a fluorescent derivative of paclitaxel, making this phenotype
drug-transporter independent. Paclitaxel treatment in MTMECs led to an increase
in early apoptotic cells (Annexin V-positive), activation of caspase-9 and
increase in the proportion of cells at the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. However,
MTMEC overexpressing miR-106b~25 cluster, or with EP300 or E-cadherin
downregulated, showed less activation of apoptosis, caspase-9 and caspase-3/-7
activities. Thus, miR-106b~25 cluster controls transporter-independent MDR by
apoptosis evasion via downregulation of EP300.

PMID: 26573761  [PubMed - in process]


23. Autophagy. 2016 Feb;12(2):357-68. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1110667. Epub 2015
Nov 13.

Autophagy positively regulates DNA damage recognition by nucleotide excision
repair.

Qiang L(1), Zhao B(1), Shah P(1), Sample A(1), Yang S(1), He YY(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine, Section of Dermatology , University of Chicago ,
Chicago , IL , USA.

Macroautophagy (hereafter autophagy) is a cellular catabolic process that is
essential for maintaining tissue homeostasis and regulating various normal and
pathologic processes in human diseases including cancer. One cancer-driving
process is accumulation of genetic mutations due to impaired DNA damage repair,
including nucleotide excision repair. Here we show that autophagy positively
regulates nucleotide excision repair through enhancing DNA damage recognition by 
the DNA damage sensor proteins XPC and DDB2 via 2 pathways. First, autophagy
deficiency downregulates the transcription of XPC through TWIST1-dependent
activation of the transcription repressor complex E2F4-RBL2. Second, autophagy
deficiency impairs the recruitment of DDB2 to ultraviolet radiation (UV)-induced 
DNA damage sites through TWIST1-mediated inhibition of EP300. In mice, the
pharmacological autophagy inhibitor Spautin-1 promotes UVB-induced tumorigenesis,
whereas the autophagy inducer rapamycin reduces UVB-induced tumorigenesis. These 
findings demonstrate the crucial role of autophagy in maintaining proper
nucleotide excision repair in mammalian cells and suggest a previously
unrecognized tumor-suppressive mechanism of autophagy in cancer.

PMID: 26565512  [PubMed - in process]


24. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 24;6(37):39821-38. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5496.

Combined inhibition of heat shock proteins 90 and 70 leads to simultaneous
degradation of the oncogenic signaling proteins involved in muscle invasive
bladder cancer.

Cavanaugh A(1), Juengst B(2), Sheridan K(1), Danella JF(3), Williams H(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Weis Center for Research, Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA, USA. (2)Penn 
State University, Department of Plant Biology, State College, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Urology, Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA, USA.

Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) plays a critical role in the survival of cancer
cells including muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC). The addiction of tumor
cells to HSP90 has promoted the development of numerous HSP90 inhibitors and
their use in clinical trials. This study evaluated the role of inhibiting HSP90
using STA9090 (STA) alone or in combination with the HSP70 inhibitor VER155008
(VER) in several human MIBC cell lines. While both STA and VER inhibited MIBC
cell growth and migration and promoted apoptosis, combination therapy was more
effective. Therefore, the signaling pathways involved in MIBC were systematically
interrogated following STA and/or VER treatments. STA and not VER reduced the
expression of proteins in the p53/Rb, PI3K and SWI/SWF pathways. Interestingly,
STA was not as effective as VER or combination therapy in degrading proteins
involved in the histone modification pathway such as KDM6A (demethylase) and
EP300 (acetyltransferase) as predicted by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data.
This data suggests that dual HSP90 and HSP70 inhibition can simultaneously
disrupt the key signaling pathways in MIBC.

PMCID: PMC4741863
PMID: 26556859  [PubMed - in process]


25. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Dec;99(3):682-6. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.11.002. Epub 2015
Nov 10.

Implementing amplicon-based next generation sequencing in the diagnosis of small 
cell lung carcinoma metastases.

Meder L(1), König K(2), Fassunke J(1), Ozretic L(1), Wolf J(3), Merkelbach-Bruse 
S(1), Heukamp LC(1), Buettner R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, 50937
Cologne, Germany; Center for Integrated Oncology Cologne/Bonn, University of
Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, 50937 Cologne, Germany; Lung Cancer Group Cologne,
University of Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, 50937 Cologne, Germany. (2)Institute
of Pathology, University Hospital Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, 50937 Cologne,
Germany; Center for Integrated Oncology Cologne/Bonn, University of Cologne,
Kerpener Straße 62, 50937 Cologne, Germany; Lung Cancer Group Cologne, University
of Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, 50937 Cologne, Germany; Labor Dr. Quade und
Kollegen GmbH, Aachener Straße 338, 50933 Cologne, Germany. (3)Center for
Integrated Oncology Cologne/Bonn, University of Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62,
50937 Cologne, Germany; Lung Cancer Group Cologne, University of Cologne,
Kerpener Straße 62, 50937 Cologne, Germany; Clinic for Internal Medicine I,
University of Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, 50937 Cologne, Germany. (4)Institute
of Pathology, University Hospital Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, 50937 Cologne,
Germany; Center for Integrated Oncology Cologne/Bonn, University of Cologne,
Kerpener Straße 62, 50937 Cologne, Germany; Lung Cancer Group Cologne, University
of Cologne, Kerpener Straße 62, 50937 Cologne, Germany. Electronic address:
Reinhard.Buettner@uk-koeln.de.

Small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) is the most aggressive entity of lung cancer.
Rapid cancer progression and early formation of systemic metastases drive the
deadly outcome of SCLC. Recent advances in identifying oncogenes by cancer whole 
genome sequencing improved the understanding of SCLC carcinogenesis. However,
tumor material is often limited in the clinic. Thus, it is a compulsive issue to 
improve SCLC diagnostics by combining established immunohistochemistry and next
generation sequencing. We implemented amplicon-based next generation deep
sequencing in our routine diagnostics pipeline to analyze RB1, TP53, EP300 and
CREBBP, frequently mutated in SCLC. Thereby, our pipeline combined routine SCLC
histology and identification of somatic mutations. We comprehensively analyzed
fifty randomly collected SCLC metastases isolated from trachea and lymph nodes in
comparison to specimens derived from primary SCLC. SCLC lymph node metastases
showed enhanced proliferation and frequently a collapsed keratin cytoskeleton
compared to SCLC metastases isolated from trachea. We identified characteristic
synchronous mutations in RB1 and TP53 and non-synchronous CREBBP and EP300
mutations. Our data showed the benefit of implementing deep sequencing into
routine diagnostics. We here identify oncogenic drivers and simultaneously gain
further insights into SCLC tumor biology.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26546837  [PubMed - in process]


26. BMC Med Genomics. 2015 Oct 27;8:69. doi: 10.1186/s12920-015-0144-7.

Identification of potential mutations and genomic alterations in the epithelial
and spindle cell components of biphasic synovial sarcomas using a human exome SNP
chip.

Qi Y(1,)(2,)(3), Wang N(4,)(5), Pang LJ(6,)(7), Zou H(8,)(9), Hu JM(10,)(11),
Zhao J(12,)(13), Zhang J(14,)(15), Liu CX(16,)(17), Zhang WJ(18,)(19), Yuan
XL(20), Li F(21,)(22,)(23).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430000, China.
qiyanyan-2004@126.com. (2)Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School of
Medicine, North 4th Road, Shihezi, 832002, Xinjiang, China.
qiyanyan-2004@126.com. (3)Key Laboratories for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic
Diseases, Shihezi University and Chinese Ministry of Education, Shihezi,
Xinjiang, 832002, China. qiyanyan-2004@126.com. (4)Department of Pathology,
Shihezi University School of Medicine, North 4th Road, Shihezi, 832002, Xinjiang,
China. wangning_729@126.com. (5)Key Laboratories for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic 
Diseases, Shihezi University and Chinese Ministry of Education, Shihezi,
Xinjiang, 832002, China. wangning_729@126.com. (6)Department of Pathology,
Shihezi University School of Medicine, North 4th Road, Shihezi, 832002, Xinjiang,
China. ocean123456@163.com. (7)Key Laboratories for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic
Diseases, Shihezi University and Chinese Ministry of Education, Shihezi,
Xinjiang, 832002, China. ocean123456@163.com. (8)Department of Pathology, Shihezi
University School of Medicine, North 4th Road, Shihezi, 832002, Xinjiang, China. 
zouhong_patho@163.com. (9)Key Laboratories for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic
Diseases, Shihezi University and Chinese Ministry of Education, Shihezi,
Xinjiang, 832002, China. zouhong_patho@163.com. (10)Department of Pathology,
Shihezi University School of Medicine, North 4th Road, Shihezi, 832002, Xinjiang,
China. jianming.120@163.com. (11)Key Laboratories for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic
Diseases, Shihezi University and Chinese Ministry of Education, Shihezi,
Xinjiang, 832002, China. jianming.120@163.com. (12)Department of Pathology,
Shihezi University School of Medicine, North 4th Road, Shihezi, 832002, Xinjiang,
China. zhaojin7736@126.com. (13)Key Laboratories for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic 
Diseases, Shihezi University and Chinese Ministry of Education, Shihezi,
Xinjiang, 832002, China. zhaojin7736@126.com. (14)Key Laboratories for Xinjiang
Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, Shihezi University and Chinese Ministry of
Education, Shihezi, Xinjiang, 832002, China. zhangjunyc@163.com. (15)Department
of Medical Genetics, Shihezi University School of Medicine, Bei-Er-Lu, Shihezi,
Xinjiang, 832000, China. zhangjunyc@163.com. (16)Department of Pathology, Shihezi
University School of Medicine, North 4th Road, Shihezi, 832002, Xinjiang, China. 
342682442@qq.com. (17)Key Laboratories for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, 
Shihezi University and Chinese Ministry of Education, Shihezi, Xinjiang, 832002, 
China. 342682442@qq.com. (18)Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School
of Medicine, North 4th Road, Shihezi, 832002, Xinjiang, China.
zhangwj82@yahoo.com. (19)Key Laboratories for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic
Diseases, Shihezi University and Chinese Ministry of Education, Shihezi,
Xinjiang, 832002, China. zhangwj82@yahoo.com. (20)Department of Oncology, Tongji 
Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430000, China. yxl@medmail.com.cn. (21)Department of
Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430000, China. lifeng7855@126.com.
(22)Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School of Medicine, North 4th
Road, Shihezi, 832002, Xinjiang, China. lifeng7855@126.com. (23)Key Laboratories 
for Xinjiang Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, Shihezi University and Chinese Ministry
of Education, Shihezi, Xinjiang, 832002, China. lifeng7855@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Synovial sarcoma (SS) is one of the most aggressive soft-tissue
sarcomas and is noted for late local recurrence and metastasis. It is of
uncertain histological origin and exhibits a biphasic histopathological form
involving both the mesenchyme and epithelium. Thus, its diagnosis and therapy
remain a huge challenge for clinicians and pathologists. This study aimed to
determine whether differential morphological-associated genomic changes could aid
in ascertaining the histogenesis of SS and to determine whether these sarcomas
showed some specific mutated genes between epithelial and spindle cells that
would promote tumor invasion and metastasis.
METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive genomic analysis of mesenchymal and
epithelial components in 12 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded biphasic SS samples 
using the Illumina human exon microarray. Exome capture sequencing was performed 
to validate the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-chip data, and de novo data 
were generated using a whole-exome chip with the Illumina exon microarray.
Fisher's exact test based on PLINK analysis of the SNP-chip data.
RESULTS: Here, the SNP-chip data showed that 336 SNPs had association P-values of
less than 0.05 by chi-square test. We identified 23 significantly mutated genes
between epithelial and spindle cell regions of SSs. Fifteen gene mutations were
specific for the spindle cell component (65.2 %) and eight for the epithelial
cell component (34.8 %). Most of these genes have not been previously reported in
SS, and neuroguidin (NGDN), RAS protein activator like 3 (RASAL3), KLHL34 and
MUM1L1 have not previously been linked to cancer; only one gene (EP300) has been 
reported in SS. Genomic analyses suggested that the differential SNPs in genes
used for functional enrichment are mainly related to the inflammatory response
pathway, adhesion, ECM-receptor interactions, TGF-ß signaling, JAK-STAT
signaling, phenylalanine metabolism, the intrinsic pathway and formation of
fibrin.
CONCLUSIONS: This study investigated novel biological markers and tumorigenic
pathways that would greatly improve therapeutic strategies for SS. The identified
pathways may be closely correlated with the pathogenic mechanisms underlying SS, 
and SS development is associated with morphological features.

PMCID: PMC4621929
PMID: 26503545  [PubMed - in process]


27. Hum Mutat. 2016 Feb;37(2):175-83. doi: 10.1002/humu.22922. Epub 2015 Nov 4.

From Whole Gene Deletion to Point Mutations of EP300-Positive Rubinstein-Taybi
Patients: New Insights into the Mutational Spectrum and Peculiar Clinical
Hallmarks.

Negri G(1), Magini P(2), Milani D(3), Colapietro P(1), Rusconi D(1), Scarano
E(4), Bonati MT(5), Priolo M(6), Crippa M(7), Mazzanti L(4), Wischmeijer A(2),
Tamburrino F(4), Pippucci T(2), Finelli P(7,)(8), Larizza L(1,)(7), Gervasini
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Scienze della Salute, Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Milano, Italia. (2)Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di
Scienze Mediche e Chirurgiche, Policlinico Ospedaliero Universitario S.
Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italia. (3)Unità di Pediatria ad alta Intensità di
Cura, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Milano, Italia. (4)UO di Endocrinologia
Pediatrica e Malattie Rare, Dipartimento di Pediatria, Ospedale Universitario S. 
Orsola Malpighi, Università degli Studi di Bologna, Bologna, Italia. (5)Clinica
di Genetica Medica, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italia. (6)UOC
Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Bianchi-Melacrino-Morelli, Reggio Calabria, 
Italia. (7)Laboratorio di Citogenetica e Genetica Molecolare, Centro di Ricerche 
e Tecnologie Biomediche, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italia.
(8)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università
degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italia.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a rare congenital neurodevelopmental disorder
characterized by growth deficiency, skeletal abnormalities, dysmorphic features, 
and intellectual disability. Causative mutations in CREBBP and EP300 genes have
been identified in ~55% and ~8% of affected individuals. To date, only 28 EP300
alterations in 29 RSTS clinically described patients have been reported. EP300
analysis of 22 CREBBP-negative RSTS patients from our cohort led us to identify
six novel mutations: a 376-kb deletion depleting EP300 gene; an exons 17-19
deletion (c.(3141+1_3142-1)_(3590+1_3591-1)del/p.(Ile1047Serfs*30)); two stop
mutations, (c.3829A>T/p.(Lys1277*) and c.4585C>T/p.(Arg1529*)); a splicing
mutation (c.1878-12A>G/p.(Ala627Glnfs*11)), and a duplication
(c.4640dupA/p.(Asn1547Lysfs*3)). All EP300-mutated individuals show a mild RSTS
phenotype and peculiar findings including maternal gestosis, skin manifestation, 
especially nevi or keloids, back malformations, and a behavior predisposing to
anxiety. Furthermore, the patient carrying the complete EP300 deletion does not
show a markedly severe clinical picture, even if a more composite phenotype was
noticed. By characterizing six novel EP300-mutated patients, this study provides 
further insights into the EP300-specific clinical presentation and expands the
mutational repertoire including the first case of a whole gene deletion. These
new data will enhance EP300-mutated cases identification highlighting distinctive
features and will improve the clinical practice allowing a better
genotype-phenotype correlation.

© 2015 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMID: 26486927  [PubMed - in process]


28. Blood Cancer J. 2015 Oct 16;5:e361. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2015.89.

Mutation of chromatin modifiers; an emerging hallmark of germinal center B-cell
lymphomas.

Lunning MA(1,)(2), Green MR(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma Precision Medicine Laboratory, Dr James O Armitage Center for
Leukemia and Lymphoma Research, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE,
USA. (2)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University
of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. (3)Department of Internal Medicine,
College of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

Subtypes of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas align with different stages of B-cell
development. Germinal center B-cell (GCB)-like diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), follicular lymphoma (FL) and Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) each share
molecular similarities with normal GCB cells. Recent next-generation sequencing
studies have gained insight into the genetic etiology of these malignancies and
revealed a high frequency of mutations within genes encoding proteins that
modifying chromatin. These include activating and inactivating mutations of genes
that perform post-translational modification of histones and organize chromatin
structure. Here, we discuss the function of histone acetyltransferases (CREBBP,
EP300), histone methyltransferases (KDM2C/D, EZH2) and regulators of higher order
chromatin structure (HIST1H1C/D/E, ARID1A and SMARCA4) that have been reported to
be mutated in <U+2A7E>5% of DLBCL, FL or BL. Mutations of these genes are an emerging
hallmark of lymphomas with GCB-cell origins, and likely represent the next
generation of therapeutic targets for these malignancies.

PMCID: PMC4635197
PMID: 26473533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Sep 15;6:199. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00199. eCollection
2015.

Systems pharmacology of adiposity reveals inhibition of EP300 as a common
therapeutic mechanism of caloric restriction and resveratrol for obesity.

Nishimura Y(1), Sasagawa S(2), Ariyoshi M(2), Ichikawa S(2), Shimada Y(2),
Kawaguchi K(2), Kawase R(2), Yamamoto R(3), Uehara T(3), Yanai T(3), Takata R(3),
Tanaka T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Pharmacogenomics and
Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Mie 
University Medical Zebrafish Research Center Tsu, Japan ; Department of Systems
Pharmacology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Department 
of Omics Medicine, Mie University Industrial Technology Innovation Institute Tsu,
Japan ; Department of Bioinformatics, Mie University Life Science Research Center
Tsu, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,
Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of
Medicine Tsu, Japan. (3)Product Development Research Institute, Mercian
Corporation Fujisawa, Japan.

Both caloric restriction (CR) and resveratrol (RSV) have beneficial effects on
obesity. However, the biochemical pathways that mediate these beneficial effects 
might be complex and interconnected and have not been fully elucidated. To reveal
the common therapeutic mechanism of CR and RSV, we performed a comparative
transcriptome analysis of adipose tissues from diet-induced obese (DIO) zebrafish
and obese humans. We identified nine genes in DIO zebrafish and seven genes in
obese humans whose expressions were regulated by CR and RSV. Although the gene
lists did not overlap except for one gene, the gene ontologies enriched in the
gene lists were highly overlapped, and included genes involved in adipocyte
differentiation, lipid storage and lipid metabolism. Bioinformatic analysis of
cis-regulatory sequences of these genes revealed that their transcriptional
regulators also overlapped, including EP300, HDAC2, CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and
FOXA2. We also identified 15 and 46 genes that were dysregulated in the adipose
tissue of DIO zebrafish and obese humans, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis
identified EP300, HDAC2, and CEBPB as common transcriptional regulators for these
genes. EP300 is a histone and lysyl acetyltransferase that modulates the function
of histone and various proteins including CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and FOXA2. We
demonstrated that adiposity in larval zebrafish was significantly reduced by
C646, an inhibitor of EP300 that antagonizes acetyl-CoA. The reduction of
adiposity by C646 was not significantly different from that induced by RSV or
co-treatment of C646 and RSV. These results indicate that the inhibition of EP300
might be a common therapeutic mechanism between CR and RSV in adipose tissues of 
obese individuals.

PMCID: PMC4569862
PMID: 26441656  [PubMed]


30. Indian J Pediatr. 2015 Sep 15. [Epub ahead of print]

Rubinstein Taybi Syndrome in an Indian Child due to EP300 Gene Mutation.

Tamhankar PM(1), Merchant R(2), Shah A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Research Centre, National Institute for Research in Reproductive
Health, Parel (East), Mumbai, 400012, India. paragtmd@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Nanavati Super Specialty Hospital, Mumbai, India.

PMID: 26374735  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


31. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Aug;23(4):1184-9. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2015.04.054.

[Advances of Researches on the Role of Histone Modification in Hematological
Neoplasms].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun F(1), Pan Y(2), Li Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Basic Medicine, DaLi University, Dali
671000, Yunnan Province, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Hospital
of Dali University, Dali 671000, Yunnan Province, China. (3)Department of
Pathology, College of Basic Medicine, DaLi University, Dali 671000, Yunnan
Province, China. E-mail: bigbigsmile04@gmail.com.

As a crucial part of epigenetic regulation, the histone modification catalyzed by
histone modification enzymes can alter the chromatin structure and modulate the
gene expression. The role of histone modification in disease pathogenesis,
especially in tumorigenesis, has become a research hotspot. The deregulation of
histone modification, such as the overexpression and gain-of-function mutations
of histone methyltransferase EZH2, the inactive mutations of histone
methyltransferase MLL2, histone acetyltransferase CREBBP and EP300 are crucial
for the development of hematological neoplasms. Some of Epi-drugs such as HDAC
inhibitors, EZH2 inhibitors, are already clinically used, some are still in basic
research stage, which are important field of new drug development for
hematological neoplasms. In this review, the researches advances of basic medical
sciences and clinical applications of aberrant histone modifications in
hematological neoplasms are summarized.

PMID: 26314470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 Aug 21;8:100. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0197-2.

Establishment and genetic characterization of a novel mixed-phenotype acute
leukemia cell line with EP300-ZNF384 fusion.

Ping N(1,)(2), Qiu H(3), Wang Q(4), Dai H(5), Ruan C(6,)(7), Ehrentraut S(8),
Drexler HG(9), MacLeod RA(10), Chen S(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis
of Ministry of Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, People's Republic of China. ping.chengcheng@163.com. (2)Collaborative
Innovation Center of Hematology, Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic of
China. ping.chengcheng@163.com. (3)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key
Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis of Ministry of Health, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic of China.
qiuhuiying@suda.edu.cn. (4)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of
Thrombosis and Hemostasis of Ministry of Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic of China. shirley-1214@163.com.
(5)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis
of Ministry of Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, People's Republic of China. daihaiping8@126.com. (6)Jiangsu Institute of 
Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis of Ministry of Health,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic of
China. changgengruan@hotmail.com. (7)Collaborative Innovation Center of
Hematology, Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic of China.
changgengruan@hotmail.com. (8)DSMZ - German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell
Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany. Stefan.Ehrentraut@dsmz.de. (9)DSMZ - German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.
hdr@dsmz.de. (10)DSMZ - German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures,
Braunschweig, Germany. rml@dsmz.de. (11)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key
Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis of Ministry of Health, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic of China.
chensuning@suda.edu.cn. (12)Collaborative Innovation Center of Hematology,
Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic of China. chensuning@suda.edu.cn.

Herein, we describe the establishment and characterization of the first
mixed-phenotype acute leukemia cell line (JIH-5). The JIH-5 cell line was
established from leukemia cells with B lymphoid/myeloid phenotype from a female
mixed-phenotype acute leukemia patient. JIH-5 cells exhibit an immunophenotype
comprised of myeloid and B lymphoid antigens. Whole-exome sequencing revealed
somatic mutations in nine genes in JIH-5 cells. Transcriptional sequencing of
JIH-5 cells identified EP300-ZNF384 fusion transcript, which is a recurrent
alteration in B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Our results suggest that the
JIH-5 cell line may serve as a tool for the study of mixed-phenotype acute
leukemia or EP300-ZNF384.

PMCID: PMC4546145
PMID: 26293203  [PubMed - in process]


33. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Sep 25;465(3):437-42. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.08.033. Epub 2015 Aug 14.

A network-based approach to identify disease-associated gene modules through
integrating DNA methylation and gene expression.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang J(2), Liu Z(1), Liu Y(1), Tuo S(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi'an 710071, PR
China. (2)School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi'an
710071, PR China. Electronic address: jyzhang@mail.xidian.edu.cn.

Formation and progression of complex diseases are generally the joint effect of
genetic and epigenetic disorders, thus an integrative analysis of epigenetic and 
genetic data is essential for understanding mechanism of the diseases. In this
study, we integrate Illuminate 450k DNA methylation and gene expression data to
calculate the weights of gene network using Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
and Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA). The approach considers all methylation 
values of CpG sites in a gene, rather than averaging them which was used in other
studies ignoring the variability of the methylation sites. Through comparing
topological features of control network with those of case network, including
global and local features, candidate disease-associated genes and gene modules
are identified. We apply the approach to real data, breast invasive carcinoma
(BRCA). It successfully identifies susceptibility breast cancer-related genes,
such as TP53, BRCA1, EP300, CDK2, MCM7 and so forth, within which most are
previously known to breast cancer. Also, GO and pathway enrichment analysis
indicate that these genes enrich in cell apoptosis and regulation of cell death
which are cancer-related biological processes. Importantly, through analyzing the
functions and comparing expression and methylation values of these genes between 
cases and controls, we find some genes, such as VASN, SNRPD3, and gene modules,
targeted by POLR2C, CHMP1B and TAF9, which might be novel breast cancer-related
biomarkers.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26282201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mol Syndromol. 2015 Jul;6(2):99-103. doi: 10.1159/000375542. Epub 2015 Mar 3.

Exome Sequencing Identification of EP300 Mutation in a Proband with Coloboma and 
Imperforate Anus: Possible Expansion of the Phenotypic Spectrum of
Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome.

Masuda K(1), Akiyama K(1), Arakawa M(2), Nishi E(3), Kitazawa N(4), Higuchi T(5),
Katou Y(1), Shirahige K(6), Izumi K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Research Center for
Epigenetic Disease, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Division of Medical
Genetics, Nagano Children's Hospital, Azumino, Japan. (3)Department of Medical
Genetics, Shinshu University Graduate School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan ;
Division of Medical Genetics, Nagano Children's Hospital, Azumino, Japan.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Nagano Children's Hospital, Azumino, Japan.
(5)General Pediatrics, Nagano Children's Hospital, Azumino, Japan. (6)Institute
for Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Research Center for Epigenetic Disease,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan ; CREST, Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Kawaguchi, Japan. (7)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
Research Center for Epigenetic Disease, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan ;
Division of Medical Genetics, Nagano Children's Hospital, Azumino, Japan.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a multisystem developmental disorder
characterized by facial dysmorphisms, broad thumbs and halluces, growth
retardation, and intellectual disability. In about 8% of RSTS cases, mutations
are found in EP300. Previously, the EP300 mutation has been shown to cause the
highly variable RSTS phenotype. Using exome sequencing, we identified a de novo
EP300 frameshift mutation in a proband with coloboma, facial asymmetry and
imperforate anus with minimal RSTS features. Previous molecular studies have
demonstrated the importance of EP300 in oculogenesis, supporting the possibility 
that EP300 mutation may cause ocular coloboma. Since a wide phenotypic spectrum
is well known in EP300-associated RSTS cases, the atypical phenotype identified
in our proband may be an example of rare manifestations of RSTS.

PMCID: PMC4521068
PMID: 26279656  [PubMed]


35. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2015 Summer;45(4):458-61.

Letter to the Editor: A Novel Mutation in the CREBBP Gene of a Korean Girl with
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.

Huh R(1), Cho SY(1), Kim J(1), Ki CS(2), Jin DK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Genetics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea jindk@skku.edu.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by
broad thumbs and halluces, dysmorphic facial features, mental retardation, and
short stature. Mutations in the cAMP-response element binding protein-BP (CREBBP)
gene (50-60% of cases) and E1A-binding protein (EP300, 3%) are known genetic
causes in affected individuals. Here, we describe a genetically confirmed Korean 
RTS patient with atypical features, including Hirschsprung disease and growth
hormone deficiency. Mutational analysis revealed a novel heterozygous frameshift 
mutation, c.2064_2077del14 (p.Gly689Cysfs*32) in the CREBBP gene.

© 2015 by the Association of Clinical Scientists, Inc.

PMID: 26275701  [PubMed - in process]


36. Rhinology. 2015 Dec;53(4):345-52. doi: 10.4193/Rhin14.086.

Pilot study of DNA methylation in the pathogenesis of chronic rhinosinusitis with
nasal polyps.

Zheng YB, Zhao Y, Yue LY, Lin P, Liu YF, Xian JM, Zhou GY, Wang DY.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of allergy
and atopy. This study aimed to identify whether DNA methylation also plays an
important role in the pathogenesis of nasal polyps (NP).
METHODOLOGY: NP tissues were obtained from 32 patients with chronic
rhinosinusitis with bilateral NP. Biopsies of inferior turbinate mucosa (ITM)
were taken from 18 patients who underwent rhinoseptoplasty (control group). The
methylated genes, which were detected by DNA methylation microarray, were
validated by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction, bisulphite
sequencing, real-time polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: DNA methylation microarray identified 8,008 CpG islands in 2,848 genes. 
One hundred and ninety-eight genes were found to have a methylated signal in the 
promoter region in NP samples compared with ITM samples. The four top genes that 
changed, COL18A1, EP300, GNAS and SMURF1, were selected for further study. The
methylation frequency of COL18A1 was significantly higher in NP samples than in
ITM samples.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation might play an important role in the pathogenesis of 
NP. Promoter methylation of COL18A1 was found to be significantly increased in NP
tissues, further studies are necessary to confirm the significance of these
epigenetic factors in the mechanisms underlying the development or persistence of
NP.

PMID: 26275402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Oct;1849(10):1248-59. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.07.016. Epub 2015 Aug 7.

NF<U+03BA>B- and AP-1-mediated DNA looping regulates matrix metalloproteinase-9
transcription in TNF-a-treated human leukemia U937 cells.

Chen YJ(1), Chang LS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen University, Kaohsiung
804, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, National Sun Yat-Sen
University, Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan; Department of Biotechnology, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung 807, Taiwan. Electronic address: lschang@mail.nsysu.edu.tw.

The aim of this study is to explore the spatial association of critical genomic
elements in the effect of TNF-a on matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) expression 
in human leukemia U937 cells. TNF-a up-regulated MMP-9 protein expression and
mRNA level in U937 cells, and Akt-mediated-NF<U+03BA>B/p65 activation and JNK-mediated
c-Jun activation were proven to be involved in TNF-a-induced MMP-9 up-regulation.
Promoter luciferase activity assay revealed that NF<U+03BA>B (nt-600) and AP-1 (nt-79)
binding sites were crucial for TNF-a-induced transcription of MMP-9 gene. The
results of a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay indicated that TNF-a reduced
histone deacetylase-1 (HDAC-1) recruitment but increased p300 (a histone
acetyltransferase) recruitment to MMP-9 promoter regions surrounding NF<U+03BA>B and
AP-1 binding sites. Consistently, TNF-a increased enrichment of the acetylated
histone H3 mark on MMP-9 promoter regions. DNA affinity purification assay
revealed that p300 and HDAC1 could bind oligonucleotides containing AP-1/c-Jun
and NF<U+03BA>B/p65 binding sites. Chromosome conformation capture assay showed that
TNF-a stimulated chromosomal loops in the MMP-9 promoter via NF<U+03BA>B/p65 and
AP-1/c-Jun. The p300-associated acetyltransferase activity was crucial for
p65/c-Jun-mediated DNA looping, and inhibition of HDAC activity increased the
level of DNA looping. Reduction in the level of DNA looping eliminated all
TNF-a-stimulated MMP-9 up-regulation. Taken together, our data suggest that
p65/c-Jun-mediated DNA looping is involved in TNF-a-induced MMP-9 up-regulation
and that the recruitment of p300 or HDAC1 to NF<U+03BA>B and AP-1 binding sites modifies
the level of DNA looping.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26260845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Lancet Oncol. 2015 Sep;16(9):1111-22. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00169-2. Epub
2015 Aug 6.

Integration of gene mutations in risk prognostication for patients receiving
first-line immunochemotherapy for follicular lymphoma: a retrospective analysis
of a prospective clinical trial and validation in a population-based registry.

Pastore A(1), Jurinovic V(2), Kridel R(3), Hoster E(2), Staiger AM(4),
Szczepanowski M(5), Pott C(6), Kopp N(7), Murakami M(7), Horn H(4), Leich E(8),
Moccia AA(3), Mottok A(3), Sunkavalli A(9), Van Hummelen P(9), Ducar M(9),
Ennishi D(3), Shulha HP(3), Hother C(3), Connors JM(3), Sehn LH(3), Dreyling
M(1), Neuberg D(7), Möller P(10), Feller AC(11), Hansmann ML(12), Stein H(13),
Rosenwald A(8), Ott G(14), Klapper W(5), Unterhalt M(1), Hiddemann W(15),
Gascoyne RD(3), Weinstock DM(7), Weigert O(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany. (2)Department of Internal 
Medicine III, University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,
Munich, Germany; Institute for Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany. (3)Department of Lymphoid 
Cancer Research and the Centre for Lymphoid Cancer, British Columbia Cancer
Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (4)Department of Clinical Pathology,
Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus, Stuttgart, Germany; Dr Margarete
Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany; University 
of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (5)Haematopathology Section, University Hospital 
Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany. (6)Second Medical Department,
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(7)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (8)Institute of Pathology,
University of Würzburg, and Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, Würzburg,
Germany. (9)Center for Cancer Genome Discovery, Boston, MA, USA; Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (10)Institute of Pathology, University of Ulm,
Ulm, Germany. (11)Department of Pathology, University Hospital of
Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck, Germany. (12)Senckenberg Institute of Pathology,
Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (13)Berlin Reference Center for
Lymphoma and Haematopathology, Berlin, Germany. (14)Department of Clinical
Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus, Stuttgart, Germany. (15)Department of
Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University
Munich, Munich, Germany; Clinical Cooperative Group Leukemia, Helmholtz-Center
Munich, Munich, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany;
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (16)Department of
Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University
Munich, Munich, Germany; Clinical Cooperative Group Leukemia, Helmholtz-Center
Munich, Munich, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany;
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
oliver.weigert@med.uni-muenchen.de.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2015 Sep;16(9):1011-2.

BACKGROUND: Follicular lymphoma is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous
disease, but the prognostic value of somatic mutations has not been
systematically assessed. We aimed to improve risk stratification of patients
receiving first-line immunochemotherapy by integrating gene mutations into a
prognostic model.
METHODS: We did DNA deep sequencing to retrospectively analyse the mutation
status of 74 genes in 151 follicular lymphoma biopsy specimens that were obtained
from patients within 1 year before beginning immunochemotherapy consisting of
rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP).
These patients were recruited between May 4, 2000, and Oct 20, 2010, as part of a
phase 3 trial (GLSG2000). Eligible patients had symptomatic, advanced stage
follicular lymphoma and were previously untreated. The primary endpoints were
failure-free survival (defined as less than a partial remission at the end of
induction, relapse, progression, or death) and overall survival calculated from
date of treatment initiation. Median follow-up was 7·7 years (IQR 5·5-9·3).
Mutations and clinical factors were incorporated into a risk model for
failure-free survival using multivariable L1-penalised Cox regression. We
validated the risk model in an independent population-based cohort of 107
patients with symptomatic follicular lymphoma considered ineligible for curative 
irradiation. Pretreatment biopsies were taken between Feb 24, 2004, and Nov 24,
2009, within 1 year before beginning first-line immunochemotherapy consisting of 
rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CVP). Median
follow-up was 6·7 years (IQR 5·7-7·6).
FINDINGS: We established a clinicogenetic risk model (termed m7-FLIPI) that
included the mutation status of seven genes (EZH2, ARID1A, MEF2B, EP300, FOXO1,
CREBBP, and CARD11), the Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic Index
(FLIPI), and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status. In the
training cohort, m7-FLIPI defined a high-risk group (28%, 43/151) with 5-year
failure-free survival of 38·29% (95% CI 25·31-57·95) versus 77·21% (95% CI
69·21-86·14) for the low-risk group (hazard ratio [HR] 4·14, 95% CI 2·47-6·93;
p<0·0001; bootstrap-corrected HR 2·02), and outperformed a prognostic model of
only gene mutations (HR 3·76, 95% CI 2·10-6·74; p<0·0001; bootstrap-corrected HR 
1·57). The positive predictive value and negative predictive value for 5-year
failure-free survival were 64% and 78%, respectively, with a C-index of 0·80 (95%
CI 0·71-0·89). In the validation cohort, m7-FLIPI again defined a high-risk group
(22%, 24/107) with 5-year failure-free survival of 25·00% (95% CI 12·50-49·99)
versus 68·24% (58·84-79·15) in the low-risk group (HR 3·58, 95% CI 2·00-6·42;
p<0.0001). The positive predictive value for 5-year failure-free survival was 72%
and 68% for negative predictive value, with a C-index of 0·79 (95% CI 0·69-0·89).
In the validation cohort, risk stratification by m7-FLIPI outperformed FLIPI
alone (HR 2·18, 95% CI 1·21-3·92), and FLIPI combined with ECOG performance
status (HR 2·03, 95% CI 1·12-3·67).
INTERPRETATION: Integration of the mutational status of seven genes with clinical
risk factors improves prognostication for patients with follicular lymphoma
receiving first-line immunochemotherapy and is a promising approach to identify
the subset at highest risk of treatment failure.
FUNDING: Deutsche Krebshilfe, Terry Fox Research Institute.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26256760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):1061-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.3358. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Exome sequencing identifies somatic mutations of DDX3X in natural killer/T-cell
lymphoma.

Jiang L(1), Gu ZH(1), Yan ZX(1), Zhao X(1), Xie YY(1), Zhang ZG(1), Pan CM(1), Hu
Y(2), Cai CP(2), Dong Y(3), Huang JY(1), Wang L(1), Shen Y(1), Meng G(1), Zhou
JF(4), Hu JD(5), Wang JF(6), Liu YH(7), Yang LH(8), Zhang F(9), Wang JM(10), Wang
Z(11), Peng ZG(12), Chen FY(13), Sun ZM(14), Ding H(15), Shi JM(16), Hou J(17),
Yan JS(18), Shi JY(1), Xu L(1), Li Y(1), Lu J(1), Zheng Z(1), Xue W(1), Zhao
WL(1,)(19), Chen Z(1,)(19), Chen SJ(1,)(19).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU) School of Medicine and
Collaborative Innovation Center of Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Rui Jin Hospital, SJTU School of Medicine, 
Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital of
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China. (4)Department of
Hematology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Tongji Hospital, Wuhan, China. (5)Fujian Institute of Hematology,
Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou, China. (6)Department of
Pathology, Shanxi Oncology Hospital, Taiyuan, China. (7)Department of Oncology,
Jiangsu Cancer Hospital, Nanjing, China. (8)Department of Hematology, Second
Affiliated Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, China. (9)Department
of Hematology, Anhui Oncology Hospital, Bengbu Medical College, Bengbu, China.
(10)Department of Hematology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China. (11)Department of Hematology, Beijing Friendship
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. (12)Department of
Hematology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning,
China. (13)Department of Hematology, Renji Hospital, SJTU School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. (14)Department of Hematology, Anhui Provincial Hospital, Hefei, 
China. (15)Department of Radiation Oncology, Eye and ENT Hospital of Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. (16)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Tenth
People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(17)Department of Hematology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China. (18)Department of Hematology, Second Hospital of
Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China. (19)Pôle de Recherches Sino-Français en
Science du Vivant et Génomique, Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Shanghai,
China.

Natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (NKTCL) is a malignant proliferation of CD56(+)
and cytoCD3(+) lymphocytes with aggressive clinical course, which is prevalent in
Asian and South American populations. The molecular pathogenesis of NKTCL has
largely remained elusive. We identified somatic gene mutations in 25 people with 
NKTCL by whole-exome sequencing and confirmed them in an extended validation
group of 80 people by targeted sequencing. Recurrent mutations were most
frequently located in the RNA helicase gene DDX3X (21/105 subjects, 20.0%), tumor
suppressors (TP53 and MGA), JAK-STAT-pathway molecules (STAT3 and STAT5B) and
epigenetic modifiers (MLL2, ARID1A, EP300 and ASXL3). As compared to wild-type
protein, DDX3X mutants exhibited decreased RNA-unwinding activity, loss of
suppressive effects on cell-cycle progression in NK cells and transcriptional
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and MAPK pathways. Clinically, patients with DDX3X mutations 
presented a poor prognosis. Our work thus contributes to the understanding of the
disease mechanism of NKTCL.

PMID: 26192917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2015 Feb 24;8:9. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-8-9. eCollection
2015.

Altering cancer transcriptomes using epigenomic inhibitors.

Gaddis M(1), Gerrard D(2), Frietze S(2), Farnham PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)USC/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California,
1450 Biggy Street, NRT 6503, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9601 USA. (2)School of
Biological Sciences, University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO 80639 USA.

BACKGROUND: Due to the hyper-activation of WNT signaling in a variety of cancer
types, there has been a strong drive to develop pathway-specific inhibitors with 
the eventual goal of providing a chemotherapeutic antagonist of WNT signaling to 
cancer patients. A new category of drugs, called epigenetic inhibitors, are being
developed that hold high promise for inhibition of the WNT pathway. The canonical
WNT signaling pathway initiates when WNT ligands bind to receptors, causing the
nuclear localization of the co-activator ß-catenin (CTNNB1), which leads to an
association of ß-catenin with a member of the TCF transcription factor family at 
regulatory regions of WNT-responsive genes. The TCF/ß-catenin complex then
recruits CBP (CREBBP) or p300 (EP300), leading to histone acetylation and gene
activation. A current model in the field is that CBP-driven expression of WNT
target genes supports proliferation whereas p300-driven expression of WNT target 
genes supports differentiation. The small molecule inhibitor ICG-001 binds to
CBP, but not to p300, and competitively inhibits the interaction of CBP with
ß-catenin. Upon treatment of cancer cells, this should reduce expression of
CBP-regulated transcription, leading to reduced tumorigenicity and enhanced
differentiation.
RESULTS: We have compared the genome-wide effects on the transcriptome after
treatment with ICG-001 (the specific CBP inhibitor) versus C646, a compound that 
competes with acetyl-coA for the Lys-coA binding pocket of both CBP and p300. We 
found that both drugs cause large-scale changes in the transcriptome of HCT116
colon cancer cells and PANC1 pancreatic cancer cells and reverse some
tumor-specific changes in gene expression. Interestingly, although the epigenetic
inhibitors affect cell cycle pathways in both the colon and pancreatic cancer
cell lines, the WNT signaling pathway was affected only in the colon cancer
cells. Notably, WNT target genes were similarly downregulated after treatment of 
HCT116 with C646 as with ICG-001.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that treatment with a general HAT inhibitor
causes similar effects on the transcriptome as does treatment with a CBP-specific
inhibitor and that epigenetic inhibition affects the WNT pathway in HCT116 cells 
and the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway in PANC1 cells.

PMCID: PMC4506402
PMID: 26191083  [PubMed]


41. Leuk Res. 2015 Sep;39(9):990-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.06.005. Epub 2015 
Jun 14.

Next-generation-sequencing of recurrent childhood high hyperdiploid acute
lymphoblastic leukemia reveals mutations typically associated with high risk
patients.

Chen C(1), Bartenhagen C(2), Gombert M(3), Okpanyi V(3), Binder V(3), Röttgers
S(4), Bradtke J(4), Teigler-Schlegel A(4), Harbott J(4), Ginzel S(5), Thiele
R(6), Husemann P(3), Krell PF(3), Borkhardt A(3), Dugas M(2), Hu J(7), Fischer
U(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology,
University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany; Fujian Institute of Hematology, Fujian Medical University
Union Hospital, Fuzhou, China. (2)Institute of Medical Informatics, University of
Münster, Münster, Germany. (3)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and
Clinical Immunology, University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich
Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany. (4)Oncogenetic Laboratory, Department of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology,
University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany; Department of Computer Science, Bonn-Rhine-Sieg University
of Applied Sciences, Sankt Augustin, Germany. (6)Department of Computer Science, 
Bonn-Rhine-Sieg University of Applied Sciences, Sankt Augustin, Germany.
(7)Fujian Institute of Hematology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital,
Fuzhou, China. Electronic address: jdhu@medmail.com.cn. (8)Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, University Children's
Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
Electronic address: ute.fischer@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

20% of children suffering from high hyperdiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia
develop recurrent disease. The molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we
analyzed the genetic landscape of five patients at relapse, who developed
recurrent disease without prior high-risk indication using whole-exome- and
whole-genome-sequencing. Oncogenic mutations of RAS pathway genes (NRAS, KRAS,
FLT3, n=4) and deactivating mutations of major epigenetic regulators (CREBBP,
EP300, each n=2 and ARID4B, EZH2, MACROD2, MLL2, each n=1) were prominent in
these cases and virtually absent in non-recurrent cases (n=6) or other pediatric 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia cases (n=18). In relapse nucleotide variations were 
detected in cell fate determining transcription factors (GLIS1, AKNA). Structural
genomic alterations affected genes regulating B-cell development (IKZF1, PBX1,
RUNX1). Eleven novel translocations involved the genes ART4, C12orf60, MACROD2,
TBL1XR1, LRRN4, KIAA1467, and ELMO1/MIR1200. Typically, patients harbored only
single structural variations, except for one patient who displayed massive
rearrangements in the context of a germline tumor suppressor TP53 mutation and a 
Li-Fraumeni syndrome-like family history. Another patient harbored a germline
mutation in the DNA repair factor ATM. In summary, the relapse patients of our
cohort were characterized by somatic mutations affecting the RAS pathway,
epigenetic and developmental programs and germline mutations in DNA repair
pathways.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26189108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Sep 11;465(1):5-11. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.07.072. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

The Tax oncogene enhances ELL incorporation into p300 and P-TEFb containing
protein complexes to activate transcription.

Fufa TD(1), Byun JS(1), Wakano C(1), Fernandez AG(1), Pise-Masison CA(1), Gardner
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: gardnerk@mail.nih.gov.

The eleven-nineteen lysine-rich leukemia protein (ELL) is a key regulator of RNA 
polymerase II mediated transcription. ELL facilitates RNA polymerase II
transcription pause site entry and release by dynamically interacting with p300
and the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). In this study, we
investigated the role of ELL during the HTLV-1 Tax oncogene induced
transactivation. We show that ectopic expression of Tax enhances ELL
incorporation into p300 and P-TEFb containing transcriptional complexes and the
subsequent recruitment of these complexes to target genes in vivo. Depletion of
ELL abrogates Tax induced transactivation of the immediate early genes Fos, Egr2 
and NF-kB, suggesting that ELL is an essential cellular cofactor of the Tax
oncogene. Thus, our study identifies a novel mechanism of ELL-dependent
transactivation of immediate early genes by Tax and provides the rational for
further defining the genome-wide targets of Tax and ELL.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26188510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 14;10(7):e0132468. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132468.
eCollection 2015.

Meta-Analysis of Placental Transcriptome Data Identifies a Novel Molecular
Pathway Related to Preeclampsia.

van Uitert M(1), Moerland PD(2), Enquobahrie DA(3), Laivuori H(4), van der Post
JA(5), Ris-Stalpers C(6), Afink GB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Biology Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (2)Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of Clinical Epidemiology,
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands. (3)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, United States of America. (4)Medical Genetics and Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, and the Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of
Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Finland. (5)Women's and Children's
Clinic, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (6)Reproductive
Biology Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Women's 
and Children's Clinic, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Studies using the placental transcriptome to identify key molecules relevant for 
preeclampsia are hampered by a relatively small sample size. In addition, they
use a variety of bioinformatics and statistical methods, making comparison of
findings challenging. To generate a more robust preeclampsia gene expression
signature, we performed a meta-analysis on the original data of 11 placenta RNA
microarray experiments, representing 139 normotensive and 116 preeclamptic
pregnancies. Microarray data were pre-processed and analyzed using standardized
bioinformatics and statistical procedures and the effect sizes were combined
using an inverse-variance random-effects model. Interactions between genes in the
resulting gene expression signature were identified by pathway analysis
(Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, Graphite) and
protein-protein associations (STRING). This approach has resulted in a
comprehensive list of differentially expressed genes that led to a 388-gene
meta-signature of preeclamptic placenta. Pathway analysis highlights the
involvement of the previously identified hypoxia/HIF1A pathway in the
establishment of the preeclamptic gene expression profile, while analysis of
protein interaction networks indicates CREBBP/EP300 as a novel element central to
the preeclamptic placental transcriptome. In addition, there is an apparent high 
incidence of preeclampsia in women carrying a child with a mutation in
CREBBP/EP300 (Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome). The 388-gene preeclampsia
meta-signature offers a vital starting point for further studies into the
relevance of these genes (in particular CREBBP/EP300) and their concomitant
pathways as biomarkers or functional molecules in preeclampsia. This will result 
in a better understanding of the molecular basis of this disease and opens up the
opportunity to develop rational therapies targeting the placental dysfunction
causal to preeclampsia.

PMCID: PMC4501668
PMID: 26171964  [PubMed - in process]


44. BMC Cancer. 2015 Jul 10;15:514. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1463-y.

Acquired genetic alterations in tumor cells dictate the development of high-risk 
neuroblastoma and clinical outcomes.

Khan FH(1), Pandian V(2), Ramraj S(3), Natarajan M(4), Aravindan S(5), Herman
TS(6,)(7), Aravindan N(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Science Center, 940 Stanton L. Young Blvd., BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104,
USA. Faizan-Khan@ouhsc.edu. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Science Center, 940 Stanton L. Young Blvd., BMSB 737,
Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. Vijayabaskar-Pandian@ouhsc.edu. (3)Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Science Center, 940
Stanton L. Young Blvd., BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
Satish-Ramraj@ouhsc.edu. (4)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Health
Sciences Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. natarajan@uthscsa.edu. (5)Stephenson
Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Sheeja-Aravindan@ouhsc.edu. (6)Department 
of Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Science Center, 940
Stanton L. Young Blvd., BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
Terence-Herman@ouhsc.edu. (7)Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
Terence-Herman@ouhsc.edu. (8)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Science Center, 940 Stanton L. Young Blvd., BMSB 737,
Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. naravind@ouhsc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Determining the driving factors and molecular flow-through that
define the switch from favorable to aggressive high-risk disease is critical to
the betterment of neuroblastoma cure.
METHODS: In this study, we examined the cytogenetic and tumorigenic physiognomies
of distinct population of metastatic site- derived aggressive cells (MSDACs) from
high-risk tumors, and showed the influence of acquired genetic rearrangements on 
poor patient outcomes.
RESULTS: Karyotyping in SH-SY5Y and MSDACs revealed trisomy of 1q, with
additional non-random chromosomal rearrangements on 1q32, 8p23, 9q34, 15q24,
22q13 (additions), and 7q32 (deletion). Array CGH analysis of individual clones
of MSDACs revealed genetic alterations in chromosomes 1, 7, 8, and 22,
corresponding to a gain in the copy numbers of LOC100288142, CD1C, CFHR3, FOXP2, 
MDFIC, RALYL, CSMD3, SAMD12-AS1, and MAL2, and a loss in ADAM5, LOC400927,
APOBEC3B, RPL3, MGAT3, SLC25A17, EP300, L3MBTL2, SERHL, POLDIP3, A4GALT, and
TTLL1. QPCR analysis and immunoblotting showed a definite association between
DNA-copy number changes and matching transcriptional/translational expression in 
clones of MSDACs. Further, MSDACs exert a stem-like phenotype. Under serum-free
conditions, MSDACs demonstrated profound tumorosphere formation ex vivo.
Moreover, MSDACs exhibited high tumorigenic capacity in vivo and prompted
aggressive metastatic disease. Tissue microarray analysis coupled with automated 
IHC revealed significant association of RALYL to the tumor grade in a cohort of
25 neuroblastoma patients. Clinical outcome association analysis showed a strong 
correlation between the expression of CFHR3, CSMD3, MDFIC, FOXP2, RALYL, POLDIP3,
SLC25A17, SERHL, MGAT3, TTLL1, or LOC400927 and overall and relapse-free survival
in patients with neuroblastoma.
CONCLUSION: Together, these data highlight the ongoing acquired genetic
rearrangements in undifferentiated tumor-forming neural crest cells, and suggest 
that these alterations could switch favorable neuroblastoma to high-risk
aggressive disease, promoting poor clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4496850
PMID: 26159519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2015 Sep;43(7):1248-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jcms.2015.05.017.
Epub 2015 Jun 3.

Genetic variation analysis in a Chinese Maffucci syndrome patient.

Xue Y(1), Ni J(1), Zhou M(1), Wang W(2), Liu Y(3), Yang Y(4), Duan X(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology, Department of Oral Biology,
Clinic of Oral Rare and Genetic Diseases, School of Stomatology, the Fourth
Military Medical University, 145 West Changle Road, Xi'an 710032, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology, Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Stomatology, the Fourth Military Medical
University, 145 West Changle Road, Xi'an 710032, PR China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Military Stomatology, Department of Oral Histology and Pathology,
School of Stomatology, the Fourth Military Medical University, 145 West Changle
Road, Xi'an 710032, PR China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology,
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Stomatology, the Fourth
Military Medical University, 145 West Changle Road, Xi'an 710032, PR China.
Electronic address: yangyaowu@fmmu.edu.cn. (5)State Key Laboratory of Military
Stomatology, Department of Oral Biology, Clinic of Oral Rare and Genetic
Diseases, School of Stomatology, the Fourth Military Medical University, 145 West
Changle Road, Xi'an 710032, PR China. Electronic address: xhduan@fmmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To report on the molecular genetic analysis of a Chinese patient with 
Maffucci syndrome.
METHODS: Using the genomic DNA extracted from the patient's hemangioma sample,
the coding exons and exon/intron splice junctions of the IDH1 and IDH2 genes were
amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and then sequenced. Genomic DNA was 
extracted from blood and a hemangioma sample from the patient, and also from her 
mother's blood, for chromosome microarray analysis (CMA) by Affymetrix CytoScan
HD array.
RESULTS: None of the known pathogenic mutations in the whole IDH1 or IDH2 genes
was found in the patient's hemangioma sample. CMA detected 40 tumor-specific copy
number variations (CNVs), and one copy number neutral loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) region. Among the 73 known genes included in the 40 CNV regions, only 2
genes, CHEK2 (604373) located in 22q12.1 and EP300 (602700) located in 22q13.2,
were found to be related to tumorigenesis. We did not find any CNVs at the IDH1
and IDH2 loci.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first molecular genetic analysis report on a Chinese
patient with Maffucci syndrome and our data enrich the understanding of the
genetic background of Maffucci syndrome in different ethnic groups. The
relationship between CHEK2, EP300 and Maffucci syndrome needs to be further
explored.

Copyright © 2015 European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26123062  [PubMed - in process]


46. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015 Aug;1348(1):46-54. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12812. Epub 2015 Jun 
24.

The effects of resveratrol and SIRT1 activation on dystrophic cardiomyopathy.

Kuno A(1), Tanno M(2), Horio Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan. (2)Department of Cardiovascular, Renal, and Metabolic Medicine,
Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

The muscular dystrophies, which cause progressive weakening of the skeletal
muscles, are frequently associated with cardiomyopathy. In fact, the leading
cause of mortality in patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most common 
and most severe type of muscular dystrophy, is heart failure due to
cardiomyopathy. Therefore, more effective methods for treating cardiomyopathy are
expected to improve long-term outcomes for patients with Duchenne muscular
dystrophy. Our recent preclinical data show that treatment with the SIRT1
activator resveratrol is beneficial for dystrophic cardiomyopathy. We examined
the effects of resveratrol treatment in two different models of muscular
dystrophy: dystrophin-deficient mdx mice and d-sarcoglycan-deficient TO-2
hamsters. In both models, resveratrol suppressed cardiac hypertrophy, preserved
cardiac function, and reduced tissue fibrosis in the diseased heart. Importantly,
resveratrol significantly improved survival in TO-2 hamsters. Resveratrol also
attenuated skeletal muscle pathology in mdx mice. These promising results
indicate resveratrol's potential for clinical translation to treat cardiomyopathy
in patients with muscular dystrophies.

© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 26109180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Chem. 2015 Aug 7;290(32):19544-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.638924. Epub 2015
Jun 23.

G Protein-coupled Receptor 40 (GPR40) and Peroxisome Proliferator-activated
Receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>): AN INTEGRATED TWO-RECEPTOR SIGNALING PATHWAY.

Wang S(1), Awad KS(2), Elinoff JM(2), Dougherty EJ(2), Ferreyra GA(2), Wang
JY(2), Cai R(2), Sun J(2), Ptasinska A(2), Danner RL(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Critical Care Medicine Department, Clinical Center, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892 swang@cc.nih.gov. (2)From the
Critical Care Medicine Department, Clinical Center, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892. (3)From the Critical Care Medicine Department, 
Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892
rdanner@nih.gov.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) ligands have been widely
used to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus. However, knowledge of PPAR<U+03B3> signaling
remains incomplete. In addition to PPAR<U+03B3>, these drugs also activate G
protein-coupled receptor 40 (GPR40), a Gaq-coupled free fatty acid receptor
linked to MAPK networks and glucose homeostasis. Notably, p38 MAPK activation has
been implicated in PPAR<U+03B3> signaling. Here, rosiglitazone (RGZ) activation of GPR40
and p38 MAPK was found to boost PPAR<U+03B3>-induced gene transcription in human
endothelium. Inhibition or knockdown of p38 MAPK or expression of a dominant
negative (DN) p38 MAPK mutant blunted RGZ-induced PPAR<U+03B3> DNA binding and reporter 
activity in EA.hy926 human endothelial cells. GPR40 inhibition or knockdown, or
expression of a DN-Gaq mutant likewise blocked activation of both p38 MAPK and
PPAR<U+03B3> reporters. Importantly, RGZ induction of PPAR<U+03B3> target genes in primary
human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (PAECs) was suppressed by knockdown of
either p38 MAPK or GPR40. GPR40/PPAR<U+03B3> signal transduction was dependent on p38
MAPK activation and induction of PPAR<U+03B3> co-activator-1 (PGC1a). Silencing of p38
MAPK or GPR40 abolished the ability of RGZ to induce phosphorylation and
expression of PGC1a in PAECs. Knockdown of PGC1a, its essential activator SIRT1, 
or its binding partner/co-activator EP300 inhibited RGZ induction of
PPAR<U+03B3>-regulated genes in PAECs. RGZ/GPR40/p38 MAPK signaling also led to EP300
phosphorylation, an event that enhances PPAR<U+03B3> target gene transcription. Thus,
GPR40 and PPAR<U+03B3> can function as an integrated two-receptor signal transduction
pathway, a finding with implications for rational drug development.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4528122 [Available on 2016-08-07]
PMID: 26105050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Sep 1;35(17):3005-16. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00421-15. Epub 2015
Jun 22.

p300 Regulates Liver Functions by Controlling p53 and C/EBP Family Proteins
through Multiple Signaling Pathways.

Breaux M(1), Lewis K(1), Valanejad L(2), Iakova P(1), Chen F(1), Mo Q(1), Medrano
E(1), Timchenko L(3), Timchenko N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology and Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. (2)Division of Pediatric General and
Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio, USA. (3)Division of Neurology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. (4)Division of Pediatric General and Thoracic
Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA
Nikolai.Timchenko@cchmc.org.

The histone acetyltransferase p300 has been implicated in the regulation of liver
biology; however, molecular mechanisms of this regulation are not known. In this 
paper, we examined these mechanisms using transgenic mice expressing a dominant
negative p300 molecule (dnp300). While dnp300 mice did not show abnormal growth
within 1 year, these mice have many alterations in liver biology and liver
functions. We found that the inhibition of p300 leads to the accumulation of
heterochromatin foci in the liver of 2-month-old mice. Transcriptome sequencing
(RNA-Seq) analysis showed that this inhibition of p300 also causes alterations of
gene expression in many signaling pathways, including chromatin remodeling,
apoptosis, DNA damage, translation, and activation of the cell cycle. Livers of
dnp300 mice have a high rate of proliferation and a much higher rate of
proliferation after partial hepatectomy. We found that livers of dnp300 mice are 
resistant to CCl4-mediated injury and have reduced apoptosis but have increased
proliferation after injury. Underlying mechanisms of resistance to liver injury
and increased proliferation in dnp300 mice include ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated 
degradation of C/EBPa and translational repression of the p53 protein by the
CUGBP1-eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) repressor complex. Our data
demonstrate that p300 regulates a number of critical signaling pathways that
control liver functions.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4525310
PMID: 26100016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cancer Genet. 2015 Jul-Aug;208(7-8):374-81. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.04.002.
Epub 2015 Apr 14.

Exome-level comparison of primary well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors and
their cell lines.

Boora GK(1), Kanwar R(1), Kulkarni AA(1), Pleticha J(1), Ames M(2), Schroth G(3),
Beutler AS(4), Banck MS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (2)Department
of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN, USA. (3)Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA; Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Rochester, MN, USA.
Electronic address: beutler.andreas@mayo.edu. (5)Department of Medical Oncology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA; Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Rochester, MN, USA.
Electronic address: banck.michaela@mayo.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Genet. 2015 Oct;208(10):523.

Neuroendocrine cancer cell lines are used to investigate therapeutic targets in
neuroendocrine tumors (NET) and have been instrumental in the design of clinical 
trials targeting the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways, VEGF inhibitors, and somatostatin
analogues. It remains unknown, however, whether the genomic makeup of NET cell
lines reflect that of primary NET since comprehensive unbiased genome sequencing 
has not been performed on the cell lines. Four bronchopulmonary NET
(BP-NET)-NCI-H720, NCI-H727, NCI-H835, and UMC11-and two pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (panNET)-BON-1 and QGP1-were cultured. DNA was isolated,
and exome sequencing was done. GATK and EXCAVATOR were used for bioinformatic
analysis. We detected a total of 1,764 nonsynonymous single nucleotide variants
at a rate of 8 per Mb in BP-NET and 4.3 per Mb in panNET cell lines, including 52
mutated COSMIC cancer genes in these cell lines, such as TP53, BRCA1, RB1, TSC2, 
NOTCH1, EP300, GNAS, KDR, STK11, and APC but not ATRX, DAXX, nor MEN1. Our data
suggest that mutation rate, the pattern of copy number variations, and the
mutational spectra in the BP-NET cell lines are more similar to the changes
observed in small cell lung cancer than those found in primary BP-NET. Likewise, 
mutation rate and pattern including the absence of mutations in ATRX/DAXX, MEN1, 
and YY1 in the panNET cell lines BON1 and QGP1 suggest that these cell lines do
not have the genetic signatures of a primary panNET. These results suggest that
results from experiments with BP-NET and panNET cell lines need to be interpreted
with caution.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26087898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Genes Cells. 2015 Aug;20(8):667-74. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12260. Epub 2015 Jun 18.

FBXO21 mediates the ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of EID1.

Watanabe K(1), Yumimoto K(1), Nakayama KI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, 
Japan.

Although identification of substrates for ubiquitin ligase (E3) is important for 
understanding its biological functions, detection of the interaction between an
E3 and its substrates has remained challenging. We recently developed a new
approach, termed differential proteomics-based identification of ubiquitylation
substrates (DiPIUS), for the discovery of substrates of a given E3 ligase. We
have now applied this approach to an uncharacterized human F-box protein, FBXO21,
which serves as the substrate-recognition subunit of a SKP1-CUL1-F-box protein
(SCF)-type E3, thereby identifying EID1 (EP300-interacting inhibitor of
differentiation 1) as a candidate substrate. The central and COOH-terminal
portion of FBXO21 was found to interact with the COOH-terminal region of EID1 in 
transfected cells. Over-expression of FBXO21 resulted in the down-regulation of
EID1, whereas disruption of the FBXO21 gene with the CRISPR/Cas9 system
stabilized EID1 and led to its accumulation in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. An
in vitro ubiquitylation assay showed that EID1 is a direct substrate of
SCF(FBXO)(21). Collectively, our results suggest that EID1 is a bona fide
substrate of FBXO21 and that the control of EID1 abundance by SCF(FBXO)(21) might
affect the transcriptional repression activity of EID1.

© 2015 The Molecular Biology Society of Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 26085330  [PubMed - in process]


51. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2015 Apr 23;8:16. doi: 10.1186/s13072-015-0009-5.
eCollection 2015.

Occupancy by key transcription factors is a more accurate predictor of enhancer
activity than histone modifications or chromatin accessibility.

Dogan N(1), Wu W(2), Morrissey CS(1), Chen KB(1), Stonestrom A(3), Long M(1),
Keller CA(1), Cheng Y(4), Jain D(1), Visel A(5), Pennacchio LA(5), Weiss MJ(6),
Blobel GA(3), Hardison RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, 304 Wartik Laboratory, 
University Park, PA 16802 USA. (2)Center for Comparative Genomics and
Bioinformatics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The
Pennsylvania State University, 304 Wartik Laboratory, University Park, PA 16802
USA ; Bioinformatics Core, Department of Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2218 USA. (3)Division
of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 3401 Civic Center
Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA ; Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, Mail Stop-5120, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305 USA. (5)Genomics Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1
Cyclotron Road, Mailstop 84-171, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA ; DOE Joint Genome
Institute, 2800 Mitchell Drive, Walnut Creek, CA 94598 USA. (6)Department of
Hematology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place,
Memphis, TN 38105 USA.

BACKGROUND: Regulated gene expression controls organismal development, and
variation in regulatory patterns has been implicated in complex traits. Thus
accurate prediction of enhancers is important for further understanding of these 
processes. Genome-wide measurement of epigenetic features, such as histone
modifications and occupancy by transcription factors, is improving enhancer
predictions, but the contribution of these features to prediction accuracy is not
known. Given the importance of the hematopoietic transcription factor TAL1 for
erythroid gene activation, we predicted candidate enhancers based on genomic
occupancy by TAL1 and measured their activity. Contributions of multiple features
to enhancer prediction were evaluated based on the results of these and other
studies.
RESULTS: TAL1-bound DNA segments were active enhancers at a high rate both in
transient transfections of cultured cells (39 of 79, or 56%) and transgenic mice 
(43 of 66, or 65%). The level of binding signal for TAL1 or GATA1 did not help
distinguish TAL1-bound DNA segments as active versus inactive enhancers, nor did 
the density of regulation-related histone modifications. A meta-analysis of
results from this and other studies (273 tested predicted enhancers) showed that 
the presence of TAL1, GATA1, EP300, SMAD1, H3K4 methylation, H3K27ac, and CAGE
tags at DNase hypersensitive sites gave the most accurate predictors of enhancer 
activity, with a success rate over 80% and a median threefold increase in
activity. Chromatin accessibility assays and the histone modifications H3K4me1
and H3K27ac were sensitive for finding enhancers, but they have high false
positive rates unless transcription factor occupancy is also included.
CONCLUSIONS: Occupancy by key transcription factors such as TAL1, GATA1, SMAD1,
and EP300, along with evidence of transcription, improves the accuracy of
enhancer predictions based on epigenetic features.

PMCID: PMC4432502
PMID: 25984238  [PubMed]


52. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Feb 1;8(2):1427-34. eCollection 2015.

Role of ursolic acid chalcone, a synthetic analogue of ursolic acid, in
inhibiting the properties of CD133(+) sphere-forming cells in liver stem cells.

Lin RX(1), Gong LL(1), Fan LM(2), Zhao ZK(3), Yang SL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery, The Second Hospital of Jilin 
University Changchun 130041, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
The Second Hospital of Jilin University Changchun 130041, China. (3)Department of
Medicine, Jilin University Changchun 130041, China.

The expression of CD133 decreases with differentiation of tumor cell, indicating 
that CD133 is a specific marker for isolation and identification of CSCs. In the 
present study the effect of Ursolic acid chalcone (UAC) on CD133(+)
hepatocellular carcinoma cell (HCC CSCs) differentiation, their self-renewal,
tumorigenic capacity and sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs was studied. The
results demonstrated that UAC inhibits the expression of CD133(+) in a dose and
time-dependent manner in PLC/PRF/5 and Huh7 HCC cells. The inhibition was
significant at 50 µM and on day 8. The percentage of CD133(+) cells decreased
from an initial 59.3% in PLC/PRF/5 to 37.1% and 78.2% in Huh7 to 59.2% on
treatment with UAC. There was inhibition of Oct4, Tert, Bmi1, ß-catenin, ABCG2,
and tumor sphere-related gene Ep300. In addition it also decreased number of
CK19-positive cells and increased number of CK8/18-positive cells. UAC treatment 
caused a decrease in self-renewal capability and increase in sensitivity to
doxorubicin and vincristine drugs in CD133(+) HCC CSCs. Therefore, UAC can be a
potent therapeutic agent to target differentiation of CSC in HCC.

PMCID: PMC4396281
PMID: 25973027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Leukemia. 2015 Dec;29(12):2445-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.111. Epub 2015 May 6.

A novel recurrent EP300-ZNF384 gene fusion in B-cell precursor acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Gocho Y(1,)(2), Kiyokawa N(1), Ichikawa H(3), Nakabayashi K(4), Osumi T(5),
Ishibashi T(1,)(6), Ueno H(1), Terada K(1,)(7), Oboki K(8), Sakamoto H(3), Shioda
Y(5), Imai M(9), Noguchi Y(7), Arakawa Y(10), Kojima Y(11), Toyama D(12), Hata
K(4), Yoshida T(3), Matsumoto K(13), Kato M(14), Fukushima T(15), Koh K(10),
Manabe A(16), Ohara A(11); Tokyo Childrens Cancer Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology Research, National Research
Institute for Child Health and Development, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Nippon Medical School, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Division of Genetics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Maternal-Fetal Biology, National Research
Institute for Child Health and Development, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Division of Leukemia and Lymphoma, Children's Cancer Center, National Center
for Child Health and Development, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Japanese Red Cross Narita
Hospital, Narita, Chiba, Japan. (8)Department of Molecular Medical Research,
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Japanese Red Cross Musashino Hospital, Musashino,
Tokyo, Japan. (10)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Saitama Children's Medical
Center, Saitama, Japan. (11)Department of Pediatrics, Toho University Omori
Medical Center, Ota-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (12)Department of Pediatrics, Showa
University Fujigaoka Hospital, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. (13)Department of
Allergy and Immunology, National Research Institute for Child Health and
Development, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (14)Department of Pediatrics, The
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (15)Department of Pediatrics,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, St. Luke's International Hospital, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 
Japan.

PMID: 25943178  [PubMed - in process]


54. BMC Res Notes. 2015 Apr 30;8:177. doi: 10.1186/s13104-015-1136-6.

Transcriptional profiling of PRKG2-null growth plate identifies putative
down-stream targets of PRKG2.

Koltes JE(1), Kumar D(2,)(3), Kataria RS(4), Cooper V(5), Reecy JM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, 2255 Kildee Hall, Ames,
IA, 50011, USA. jekoltes@iastate.edu. (2)National Bureau of Animal Genetic
Resources, Karnal, 132001, Haryana, India. dineshkumarbhu@gmail.com. (3)Current
address: Centre for Agricultural Bioinformatics, Indian Agricultural Statistics
Research Institute, Library Avenue, PUSA, New Delhi, 110012, India.
dineshkumarbhu@gmail.com. (4)National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources, Karnal,
132001, Haryana, India. katariaranji@yahoo.co.in. (5)Veterinary Diagnostics and
Production Animal Medicine, Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine,
Ames, IA, 50011-3150, USA. vcooper@iastate.edu. (6)Department of Animal Science, 
Iowa State University, 2255 Kildee Hall, Ames, IA, 50011, USA.
jreecy@iastate.edu.

BACKGROUND: Kinase activity of cGMP-dependent, type II, protein kinase (PRKG2) is
required for the proliferative to hypertrophic transition of growth plate
chondrocytes during endochondral ossification. Loss of PRKG2 function in rodent
and bovine models results in dwarfism. The objective of this study was to
identify pathways regulated or impacted by PRKG2 loss of function that may be
responsible for disproportionate dwarfism at the molecular level.
METHODS: Microarray technology was used to compare growth plate cartilage gene
expression in dwarf versus unaffected Angus cattle to identify putative
downstream targets of PRGK2.
RESULTS: Pathway enrichment of 1284 transcripts (nominal p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) was used to
identify candidate pathways consistent with the molecular phenotype of
disproportionate dwarfism. Analysis with the DAVID pathway suite identified
differentially expressed genes that clustered in the MHC, cytochrome B, WNT, and 
Muc1 pathways. A second analysis with pathway studio software identified
differentially expressed genes in a host of pathways (e.g. CREB1, P21, CTNNB1,
EGFR, EP300, JUN, P53, RHOA, and SRC). As a proof of concept, we validated the
differential expression of five genes regulated by P53, including CEBPA, BRCA1,
BUB1, CD58, and VDR by real-time PCR (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Known and novel targets of PRKG2 were identified as enriched
pathways in this study. This study indicates that loss of PRKG2 function results 
in differential expression of P53 regulated genes as well as additional pathways 
consistent with increased proliferation and apoptosis in the growth plate due to 
achondroplastic dwarfism.

PMCID: PMC4419418
PMID: 25924610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 14;6(23):19780-91.

Expression alterations define unique molecular characteristics of spinal
ependymomas.

Lourdusamy A(1), Rahman R(1), Grundy RG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Brain Tumour Research Centre, School of Medicine, Queen's Medical
Centre University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

Ependymomas are glial tumors that originate in either intracranial or spinal
regions. Although tumors from different regions are histologically similar, they 
are biologically distinct. We therefore sought to identify molecular
characteristics of spinal ependymomas (SEPN) in order to better understand the
disease biology of these tumors. Using gene expression profiles of 256 tumor
samples, we identified increased expression of 1,866 genes in SEPN when compared 
to intracranial ependymomas. These genes are mainly related to anterior/posterior
pattern specification, response to oxidative stress, glial cell differentiation, 
DNA repair, and PPAR signalling, and also significantly enriched with cellular
senescence genes (P = 5.5 × 10-03). In addition, a high number of significantly
down-regulated genes in SEPN are localized to chromosome 22 (81 genes from chr22:
43,325,255 - 135,720,974; FDR = 1.77 × 10-23 and 22 genes from chr22: 324,739 -
32,822,302; FDR = 2.07 × 10-09) including BRD1, EP300, HDAC10, HIRA, HIC2, MKL1, 
and NF2. Evaluation of NF2 co-expressed genes further confirms the enrichment of 
chromosome 22 regions. Finally, systematic integration of chromosome 22 genes
with interactome and NF2 co-expression data identifies key candidate genes. Our
results reveal unique molecular characteristics of SEPN such as altered
expression of cellular senescence and chromosome 22 genes.

PMCID: PMC4637320
PMID: 25909290  [PubMed - in process]


56. J Am Chem Soc. 2015 Apr 29;137(16):5569-75. doi: 10.1021/jacs.5b02156. Epub 2015 
Apr 20.

Structural Elucidation and Synthesis of Eudistidine A: An Unusual Polycyclic
Marine Alkaloid that Blocks Interaction of the Protein Binding Domains of p300
and HIF-1a.

Chan ST(1), Patel PR(2,)(3), Ransom TR(1), Henrich CJ(1,)(4), McKee TC(1), Goey
AK(5), Cook KM(5), Figg WD(5), McMahon JB(1), Schnermann MJ(2), Gustafson KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Targets Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, United States. (2)Chemical Biology
Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201, United States. (3)§National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, 
United States. (4)<U+22A5>Basic Science Program, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc.,
Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, Maryland
21702-1201, United States. (5)<U+2225>Genitourinary Malignancies Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, United
States.

Low oxygen environments are a hallmark of solid tumors, and transcription of many
hypoxia-responsive genes needed for survival under these conditions is regulated 
by the transcription factor HIF-1 (hypoxia-inducible factor 1). Activation of
HIF-1 requires binding of its a-subunit (HIF-1a) to the transcriptional
coactivator protein p300. Inhibition of the p300/HIF-1a interaction can suppress 
HIF-1 activity. A screen for inhibitors of the protein binding domains of p300
(CH1) and HIF-1a (C-TAD) identified an extract of the marine ascidian Eudistoma
sp. as active. Novel heterocyclic alkaloids eudistidines A (1) and B (2) were
isolated from the extract, and their structures assigned by spectroscopic
analyses. They contain an unprecedented tetracyclic core composed of two
pyrimidine rings fused with an imidazole ring. Eudistidine A (1) was synthesized 
in a concise four-step sequence featuring a condensation/cyclization reaction
cascade between 4-(2-aminophenyl)pyrimidin-2-amine (3) and
4-methoxy-phenylglyoxal (4), while eudistidine B (2) was synthesized in a similar
fashion with glyoxylic acid (5) in place of 4. Naturally occurring eudistidine A 
(1) effectively inhibited CH1/C-TAD binding with an IC50 of 75 µM, and synthetic 
1 had similar activity. The eudistidine A (1) scaffold, which can be synthesized 
in a concise, scalable manner, may provide potential therapeutic lead compounds
or molecular probes to study p300/HIF-1a interactions and the role these proteins
play in tumor response to low oxygen conditions. The unique structural scaffolds 
and functional group arrays often found in natural products make these secondary 
metabolites a rich source of new compounds that can disrupt critical
protein-protein binding events.

PMID: 25892103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Endod. 2015 Jun;41(6):877-83. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2015.02.004. Epub 2015 Apr
11.

Bioinformatics, interaction network analysis, and neural networks to characterize
gene expression of radicular cyst and periapical granuloma.

Poswar Fde O(1), Farias LC(2), Fraga CA(1), Bambirra W Jr(3), Brito-Júnior M(1), 
Sousa-Neto MD(4), Santos SH(5), de Paula AM(1), D'Angelo MF(6), Guimarães AL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, Universidade Estadual de Montes Claros, Minas Gerais,
Brazil. (2)Department of Physiopathology, Universidade Estadual de Montes Claros,
Minas Gerais, Brazil. (3)Department of Restorative Dentistry, Faculty of
Dentistry, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Department of Restorative Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Universidade de São
Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Department of Physiopathology,
Universidade Estadual de Montes Claros, Minas Gerais, Brazil; Department of
Computer Science, Universidade Estadual de Montes Claros, Minas Gerais, Brazil;
(6)Department of Computer Science, Universidade Estadual de Montes Claros, Minas 
Gerais, Brazil; (7)Department of Dentistry, Universidade Estadual de Montes
Claros, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Electronic address: andreluizguimaraes@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Bioinformatics has emerged as an important tool to analyze the
large amount of data generated by research in different diseases. In this study, 
gene expression for radicular cysts (RCs) and periapical granulomas (PGs) was
characterized based on a leader gene approach.
METHODS: A validated bioinformatics algorithm was applied to identify leader
genes for RCs and PGs. Genes related to RCs and PGs were first identified in
PubMed, GenBank, GeneAtlas, and GeneCards databases. The Web-available STRING
software (The European Molecular Biology Laboratory [EMBL], Heidelberg,
Baden-Württemberg, Germany) was used in order to build the interaction map among 
the identified genes by a significance score named weighted number of links.
Based on the weighted number of links, genes were clustered using k-means. The
genes in the highest cluster were considered leader genes. Multilayer perceptron 
neural network analysis was used as a complementary supplement for gene
classification.
RESULTS: For RCs, the suggested leader genes were TP53 and EP300, whereas PGs
were associated with IL2RG, CCL2, CCL4, CCL5, CCR1, CCR3, and CCR5 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data revealed different gene expression for RCs and PGs,
suggesting that not only the inflammatory nature but also other biological
processes might differentiate RCs and PGs.

Copyright © 2015 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25873079  [PubMed - in process]


58. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2015 Nov;53(5):664-75. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2014-0356OC.

The effects of in utero vitamin D deficiency on airway smooth muscle mass and
lung function.

Foong RE(1), Bosco A(1), Jones AC(1), Gout A(1), Gorman S(1), Hart PH(1), Zosky
GR(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Telethon Kids Institute, the University of Western Australia, Perth, Western
Australia, Australia; and. (2)2 School of Medicine, Faculty of Health Science,
University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia.

We have previously demonstrated increased airway smooth muscle (ASM) mass and
airway hyperresponsiveness in whole-life vitamin D-deficient female mice. In this
study, we aimed to uncover the molecular mechanisms contributing to altered lung 
structure and function. RNA was extracted from lung tissue of whole-life vitamin 
D-deficient and -replete female mice, and gene expression patterns were profiled 
by RNA sequencing. The data showed that genes involved in embryonic organ
development, pattern formation, branching morphogenesis, Wingless/Int signaling, 
and inflammation were differentially expressed in vitamin D-deficient mice.
Network analysis suggested that differentially expressed genes were connected by 
the hubs matrix metallopeptidase 9; NF-<U+03BA> light polypeptide gene enhancer in B
cells inhibitor, a; epidermal growth factor receptor; and E1A binding protein
p300. Given our findings that developmental pathways may be altered, we
investigated if the timing of vitamin D exposure (in utero vs. postnatal) had an 
impact on lung health outcomes. Gene expression was measured in in utero or
postnatal vitamin D-deficient mice, as well as whole-life vitamin D-deficient and
-replete mice at 8 weeks of age. Baseline lung function, airway
hyperresponsiveness, and airway inflammation were measured and lungs fixed for
lung structure assessment using stereological methods and quantification of ASM
mass. In utero vitamin D deficiency was sufficient to increase ASM mass and
baseline airway resistance and alter lung structure. There were increased
neutrophils but decreased lymphocytes in bronchoalveolar lavage. Expression of
inflammatory molecules S100A9 and S100A8 was mainly increased in postnatal
vitamin D-deficient mice. These observations suggest that in utero vitamin D
deficiency can alter lung structure and function and increase inflammation,
contributing to symptoms in chronic diseases, such as asthma.

PMID: 25867172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Immunity. 2015 Apr 21;42(4):613-26. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.03.005. Epub 2015 
Apr 7.

The methylcytosine dioxygenase Tet2 promotes DNA demethylation and activation of 
cytokine gene expression in T cells.

Ichiyama K(1), Chen T(2), Wang X(3), Yan X(4), Kim BS(5), Tanaka S(6),
Ndiaye-Lobry D(7), Deng Y(2), Zou Y(2), Zheng P(1), Tian Q(4), Aifantis I(7), Wei
L(8), Dong C(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Immunology Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA. (2)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510275, China. (3)Institute for Immunology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. (4)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 
98109, USA. (5)Department of Immunology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
77054, USA. (6)Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka
565-0871, Japan. (7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Pathology, 
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. (8)State Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China.
Electronic address: weil9@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (9)Institute for Immunology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. Electronic address: chendong@tsinghua.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Immunity. 2015 Jun 16;42(6):1214.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2015 Apr 21;42(4):593-5.

Epigenetic regulation of lineage-specific genes is important for the
differentiation and function of T cells. Ten-eleven translocation (Tet) proteins 
catalyze 5-methylcytosine (5 mC) conversion to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5 hmC) to
mediate DNA demethylation. However, the roles of Tet proteins in the immune
response are unknown. Here, we characterized the genome-wide distribution of 5
hmC in CD4(+) T cells and found that 5 hmC marks putative regulatory elements in 
signature genes associated with effector cell differentiation. Moreover, Tet2
protein was recruited to 5 hmC-containing regions, dependent on lineage-specific 
transcription factors. Deletion of Tet2 in T cells decreased their cytokine
expression, associated with reduced p300 recruitment. In vivo, Tet2 plays a
critical role in the control of cytokine gene expression in autoimmune disease.
Collectively, our findings suggest that Tet2 promotes DNA demethylation and
activation of cytokine gene expression in T cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25862091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nat Biotechnol. 2015 May;33(5):510-7. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3199. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

Epigenome editing by a CRISPR-Cas9-based acetyltransferase activates genes from
promoters and enhancers.

Hilton IB(1), D'Ippolito AM(2), Vockley CM(3), Thakore PI(1), Crawford GE(4),
Reddy TE(5), Gersbach CA(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina, USA. [2] Center for Genomic &Computational Biology, Duke University,
Durham, North Carolina, USA. (2)1] Center for Genomic &Computational Biology,
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2] University Program in Genetics 
and Genomics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (3)1] 
Center for Genomic &Computational Biology, Duke University, Durham, North
Carolina, USA. [2] Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, USA. (4)1] Center for Genomic &Computational Biology,
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2] Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Medical Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA. (5)1] Center for Genomic &Computational Biology, Duke University, 
Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2] Department of Biostatistics &Bioinformatics,
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (6)1] Department of 
Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA. [2] Center 
for Genomic &Computational Biology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
[3] Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015 May;16(5):266-7.

Technologies that enable targeted manipulation of epigenetic marks could be used 
to precisely control cell phenotype or interrogate the relationship between the
epigenome and transcriptional control. Here we describe a programmable,
CRISPR-Cas9-based acetyltransferase consisting of the nuclease-null dCas9 protein
fused to the catalytic core of the human acetyltransferase p300. The fusion
protein catalyzes acetylation of histone H3 lysine 27 at its target sites,
leading to robust transcriptional activation of target genes from promoters and
both proximal and distal enhancers. Gene activation by the targeted
acetyltransferase was highly specific across the genome. In contrast to previous 
dCas9-based activators, the acetyltransferase activates genes from enhancer
regions and with an individual guide RNA. We also show that the core p300 domain 
can be fused to other programmable DNA-binding proteins. These results support
targeted acetylation as a causal mechanism of transactivation and provide a
robust tool for manipulating gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC4430400
PMID: 25849900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2015 Apr;168B(3):179-87. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32295.

ACN9 and alcohol dependence: family-based association analysis in multiplex
alcohol dependence families.

Hill SY(1), Jones BL, Zezza N, Stiffler S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Departments of Human Genetics, Graduate School of
Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

A previous genome-wide linkage study of alcohol dependence (AD) in the
Pittsburgh-based multiplex family study found suggestive evidence for linkage on 
Chromosome 7q, a region in which the ACN9 gene is located. Using the same two
generation Pittsburgh family data in which linkage was found, data for a third
generation was added. The expanded sample included 133 pedigrees with 995
individuals. Finer mapping was undertaken using six SNPs extending from rs1917939
to rs13475 with minor allele frequency (MAF) =0.15 and pair-wise linkage
disequilibrium (LD) of r(2) <0.8 using the HapMap CEU population. Binary
affection status, visual, and auditory P300 data were tested for family-based
association. Family-based analyses found all six SNPs associated with affected
status. Three SNPs are located upstream of the gene, two SNPs are within intron 1
and one is in Exon 4. FBAT P-values for the six SNPs ranged between 0.05 and
0.0005. Haplotype analysis revealed one four-SNP block formed by rs10499934,
rs7794886, rs12056091, and rs13475 with an overall significant association at
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0008. Analysis of visual P300 amplitude data, a known endophenotype of
alcohol dependence risk, revealed a significant association for SNPs within
intron 1 and exon 4 under a dominant model of transmission. Family-based
association analysis shows the ACN9 gene significantly associated with alcohol
dependence and P300 amplitude variation. The potential importance of the ACN9
gene for AD risk may be related to its role in gluconeogenesis which may be
involved in the regulation of alcohol metabolism.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25821040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Cell. 2015 Apr 16;58(2):203-15. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.02.029. Epub 2015 
Mar 26.

Intracellular crotonyl-CoA stimulates transcription through p300-catalyzed
histone crotonylation.

Sabari BR(1), Tang Z(2), Huang H(3), Yong-Gonzalez V(4), Molina H(5), Kong HE(1),
Dai L(3), Shimada M(2), Cross JR(4), Zhao Y(3), Roeder RG(2), Allis CD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chromatin Biology and Epigenetics, The Rockefeller University,
New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The
Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA. (3)Ben May Department of Cancer 
Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (4)Donald B. and
Catherine C. Marron Cancer Metabolism Center, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (5)Proteomics Resource Center, The Rockefeller
University, New York, NY 10065, USA. (6)Laboratory of Chromatin Biology and
Epigenetics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic
address: alliscd@rockefeller.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015 May;16(5):265.
    Mol Cell. 2015 Apr 16;58(2):195-6.

Acetylation of histones at DNA regulatory elements plays a critical role in
transcriptional activation. Histones are also modified by other acyl moieties,
including crotonyl, yet the mechanisms that govern acetylation versus
crotonylation and the functional consequences of this "choice" remain unclear. We
show that the coactivator p300 has both crotonyltransferase and acetyltransferase
activities, and that p300-catalyzed histone crotonylation directly stimulates
transcription to a greater degree than histone acetylation. Levels of histone
crotonylation are regulated by the cellular concentration of crotonyl-CoA, which 
can be altered through genetic and environmental perturbations. In a cell-based
model of transcriptional activation, increasing or decreasing the cellular
concentration of crotonyl-CoA leads to enhanced or diminished gene expression,
respectively, which correlates with the levels of histone crotonylation flanking 
the regulatory elements of activated genes. Our findings support a general
principle wherein differential histone acylation (i.e., acetylation versus
crotonylation) couples cellular metabolism to the regulation of gene expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4501262 [Available on 2016-04-16]
PMID: 25818647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 25;6:6644. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7644.

A family of transposable elements co-opted into developmental enhancers in the
mouse neocortex.

Notwell JH(1), Chung T(2), Heavner W(3), Bejerano G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 279 Campus Drive West (MC
5329), Beckman Center B-300, Stanford, California 94305-5329, USA. (2)Department 
of Developmental Biology, Stanford University, 279 Campus Drive West (MC 5329),
Beckman Center B-300, Stanford, California 94305-5329, USA. (3)1] Department of
Developmental Biology, Stanford University, 279 Campus Drive West (MC 5329),
Beckman Center B-300, Stanford, California 94305-5329, USA [2] Department of
Biology, Stanford University, 279 Campus Drive West (MC 5329), Beckman Center
B-300, Stanford, California 94305-5329, USA. (4)1] Department of Computer
Science, Stanford University, 279 Campus Drive West (MC 5329), Beckman Center
B-300, Stanford, California 94305-5329, USA [2] Department of Developmental
Biology, Stanford University, 279 Campus Drive West (MC 5329), Beckman Center
B-300, Stanford, California 94305-5329, USA [3] Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Medical Genetics, Stanford University, 279 Campus Drive West (MC
5329), Beckman Center B-300, Stanford, California 94305-5329, USA.

The neocortex is a mammalian-specific structure that is responsible for higher
functions such as cognition, emotion and perception. To gain insight into its
evolution and the gene regulatory codes that pattern it, we studied the overlap
of its active developmental enhancers with transposable element (TE) families and
compared this overlap to uniformly shuffled enhancers. Here we show a striking
enrichment of the MER130 repeat family among active enhancers in the mouse dorsal
cerebral wall, which gives rise to the neocortex, at embryonic day 14.5. We show 
that MER130 instances preserve a common code of transcriptional regulatory logic,
function as enhancers and are adjacent to critical neocortical genes. MER130, a
nonautonomous interspersed TE, originates in the tetrapod or possibly
Sarcopterygii ancestor, which far predates the appearance of the neocortex. Our
results show that MER130 elements were recruited, likely through their common
regulatory logic, as neocortical enhancers.

PMCID: PMC4438107
PMID: 25806706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Mar 19;7(1):31. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0058-4.
eCollection 2015.

Methylation analysis of histone H4K12ac-associated promoters in sperm of healthy 
donors and subfertile patients.

Vieweg M(1), Dvorakova-Hortova K(2), Dudkova B(3), Waliszewski P(4), Otte M(5),
Oels B(5), Hajimohammad A(5), Turley H(6), Schorsch M(6), Schuppe HC(4), Weidner 
W(4), Steger K(1), Paradowska-Dogan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section Molecular Andrology, Biomedical Research Center Seltersberg, Justus
Liebig University of Giessen, 35392 Giessen, Germany. (2)Laboratory of
Reproductive Biology, Institute of Biotechnology AS CR, v.v.i., Videnska 1083,
14220 Prague 4, Czech Republic ; Biocev Group, Department of Zoology, Faculty of 
Science, Charles University in Prague, 12844 Prague, Czech Republic. (3)Biocev
Group, Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University in Prague,
12844 Prague, Czech Republic. (4)Department of Urology, Pediatric Urology and
Andrology, Justus Liebieg University of Giessen, 35392 Giessen, Germany.
(5)Fertility Center, 35578 Wetzlar, Germany. (6)Fertility Center, 65189
Wiesbaden, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Histone to protamine exchange and the hyperacetylation of the
remaining histones are hallmarks of spermiogenesis. Acetylation of histone H4 at 
lysine 12 (H4K12ac) was observed prior to full decondensation of sperm chromatin 
after fertilization suggesting an important role for the regulation of gene
expression in early embryogenesis. Similarly, DNA methylation may contribute to
gene silencing of several developmentally important genes. Following the
identification of H4K12ac-binding promoters in sperm of fertile and subfertile
patients, we aimed to investigate whether the depletion of histone-binding is
associated with aberrant DNA methylation in sperm of subfertile men. Furthermore,
we monitored the transmission of H4K12ac, 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) from the paternal chromatin to the embryo applying
mouse in vitro fertilization and immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with anti-H4K12ac antibody was
performed with chromatin isolated from spermatozoa of subfertile patients with
impaired sperm chromatin condensation assessed by aniline blue staining. Fertile 
donors were used as control. DNA methylation analysis of selected
H4K12ac-interacting promoters in spermatozoa was performed by pyrosequencing.
Depletion of binding sites for H4K12ac was observed within the following
developmentally important promoters: AFF4, EP300, LRP5, RUVBL1, USP9X, NCOA6,
NSD1, and POU2F1. We found 5% to 10% hypomethylation within CpG islands of
selected promoters in the sperm of fertile donors, and it was not significantly
altered in the subfertile group. Our results demonstrate that the H4K12ac
depletion in selected developmentally important promoters of subfertile patients 
was not accompanied by a change of DNA methylation. Using a murine model,
immunofluorescence revealed that H4K12ac co-localize with 5mC in the sperm
nucleus. During fertilization, when the pronuclei are formed, the paternal
pronucleus exhibits a strong acetylation signal on H4K12, while in the maternal
pronucleus, there is a permanent increase of H4K12ac until pronuclei fusion.
Simultaneously, there is an increase of the 5hmC signal and a decrease of the 5mC
signal.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that aberrant histone acetylation within developmentally 
important gene promoters in subfertile men, but not DNA methylation, may reflect 
insufficient sperm chromatin compaction affecting the transfer of epigenetic
marks to the oocyte.

PMCID: PMC4372182
PMID: 25806092  [PubMed]


65. Hum Genet. 2015 Jun;134(6):613-26. doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1542-9. Epub 2015 Mar 
25.

Characterization of 14 novel deletions underlying Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: an
update of the CREBBP deletion repertoire.

Rusconi D(1), Negri G, Colapietro P, Picinelli C, Milani D, Spena S, Magnani C,
Silengo MC, Sorasio L, Curtisova V, Cavaliere ML, Prontera P, Stangoni G, Ferrero
GB, Biamino E, Fischetto R, Piccione M, Gasparini P, Salviati L, Selicorni A,
Finelli P, Larizza L, Gervasini C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Via A. di Rudinì, 8, 20142, Milan, Italy.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a rare, clinically heterogeneous disorder
characterized by cognitive impairment and several multiple congenital anomalies. 
The syndrome is caused by almost private point mutations in the CREBBP (~55% of
cases) and EP300 (~8%) genes. The CREBBP mutational spectrum is variegated and
characterized by point mutations (30-50 %) and deletions (~10%). The latter are
diverse in size and genomic position and remove either the whole CREBBP gene and 
its flanking regions or only an intragenic portion. Here, we report 14 novel
CREBBP deletions ranging from single exons to the whole gene and flanking regions
which were identified by applying complementary cytomolecular techniques:
fluorescence in situ hybridization, multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification and array comparative genome hybridization, to a large cohort of
RSTS patients. Deletions involving CREBBP account for 23% of our detected CREBBP 
mutations, making an important contribution to the mutational spectrum.
Genotype-phenotype correlations revealed that patients with CREBBP deletions
extending beyond this gene did not always have a more severe phenotype than
patients harboring CREBBP point mutations, suggesting that neighboring genes play
only a limited role in the etiopathogenesis of CREBBP-centerd contiguous gene
syndrome. Accordingly, the extent of the deletion is not predictive of the
severity of the clinical phenotype.

PMID: 25805166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell. 2015 Mar 19;57(6):952-4. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.03.001.

All in the family: a portrait of a nuclear receptor co-activator complex.

Fant CB(1), Taatjes DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 
80303, USA. (2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, CO 80303, USA. Electronic address: taatjes@colorado.edu.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2015 Mar 19;57(6):1047-58.

In this issue of Molecular Cell, Yi et al. (2015) use biochemical assays and
cryo-EM to determine the molecular architecture of an estrogen receptor (ERa)
co-activator complex bound to DNA.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25794613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. EMBO Mol Med. 2015 Mar 9;7(4):438-49. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201404580.

A DNA/HDAC dual-targeting drug CY190602 with significantly enhanced anticancer
potency.

Liu C(1), Ding H(2), Li X(2), Pallasch CP(3), Hong L(4), Guo D(4), Chen Y(5),
Wang D(6), Wang W(7), Wang Y(8), Hemann MT(9), Jiang H(10).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology,
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China Department of Oncology,
Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Systems Biology, State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. (3)Clinic for Internal Medicine,
University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (4)Hangzhou Minsheng Pharma
Research Institute Ltd, Hangzhou, China. (5)Crystal Biopharmaceutical LLC,
Pleasanton, CA, USA. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular
Biology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA. (7)Department
of Chemistry, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA. (8)Department of
Oncology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China 
yajiewa0459@163.com hemann@mit.edu hai@sibcb.ac.cn. (9)The Koch Institute for
Integrative Cancer Research at MIT, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA yajiewa0459@163.com hemann@mit.edu hai@sibcb.ac.cn. (10)Key
Laboratory of Systems Biology, State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China yajiewa0459@163.com hemann@mit.edu
hai@sibcb.ac.cn.

Genotoxic drugs constitute a major treatment modality for human cancers; however,
cancer cells' intrinsic DNA repair capability often increases the threshold of
lethality and renders these drugs ineffective. The emerging roles of HDACs in DNA
repair provide new opportunities for improving traditional genotoxic drugs. Here,
we report the development and characterization of CY190602, a novel
bendamustine-derived drug with significantly enhanced anticancer potency. We show
that CY190602's enhanced potency can be attributed to its newly gained ability to
inhibit HDACs. Using this novel DNA/HDAC dual-targeting drug as a tool, we
further explored HDAC's role in DNA repair. We found that HDAC activities are
essential for the expression of several genes involved in DNA synthesis and
repair, including TYMS, Tip60, CBP, EP300, and MSL1. Importantly, CY190602, the
first-in-class example of such DNA/HDAC dual-targeting drugs, exhibited
significantly enhanced anticancer activity in vitro and in vivo. These findings
provide rationales for incorporating HDAC inhibitory moieties into genotoxic
drugs, so as to overcome the repair capacity of cancer cells. Systematic
development of similar DNA/HDAC dual-targeting drugs may represent a novel
opportunity for improving cancer therapy.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4403045
PMID: 25759362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Biochemistry. 2015 Mar 24;54(11):2001-10. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b00044. Epub 
2015 Mar 16.

Characterization of the p300 Taz2-p53 TAD2 complex and comparison with the p300
Taz2-p53 TAD1 complex.

Miller Jenkins LM(1), Feng H(2), Durell SR(1), Tagad HD(1), Mazur SJ(1), Tropea
JE(3), Bai Y(2), Appella E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, United States. (2)Laboratory of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, United States. (3)§Macromolecular Crystallography
Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland 21702, United States.

The p53 tumor suppressor is a critical mediator of the cellular response to
stress. The N-terminal transactivation domain of p53 makes protein interactions
that promote its function as a transcription factor. Among those cofactors is the
histone acetyltransferase p300, which both stabilizes p53 and promotes local
chromatin unwinding. Here, we report the nuclear magnetic resonance solution
structure of the Taz2 domain of p300 bound to the second transactivation
subdomain of p53. In the complex, p53 forms an a-helix between residues 47 and 55
that interacts with the a1-a2-a3 face of Taz2. Mutational analysis indicated
several residues in both p53 and Taz2 that are critical for stabilizing the
interaction. Finally, further characterization of the complex by isothermal
titration calorimetry revealed that complex formation is pH-dependent and
releases a bound chloride ion. This study highlights differences in the
structures of complexes formed by the two transactivation subdomains of p53 that 
may be broadly observed and play critical roles in p53 transcriptional activity.

PMID: 25753752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 30;6(9):6959-76.

ZBRK1, a novel tumor suppressor, activates VHL gene transcription through
formation of a complex with VHL and p300 in renal cancer.

Chen K(1,)(2), Yu G(1,)(2), Gumireddy K(3), Li A(3), Yao W(1,)(2), Gao L(4), Chen
S(5), Hao J(6), Wang J(7), Huang Q(3), Xu H(1,)(2), Ye Z(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (2)Institute of Urology,
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China. (3)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Union Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China. (5)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(6)Cardiovascular Research Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(7)Department of Cell Death and Cancer Genetics, The Hormel Institute, University
of Minnesota, Austin, MN, USA.

Inactivation or mutation of the VHL gene causes various tumors, including clear
cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). In the present study, we identified ZBRK1 as a
novel VHL interacting protein by yeast two-hybrid screening, and found a single
ZBRK1-binding site located in the VHL promoter region. Ectopic expression of
ZBRK1 increases transcriptional activity of the VHL, whereas the depletion of
endogenous ZBRK1 by shRNA leads to reduction of VHL expression. We also
demonstrate that the inhibition of VEGF transcription by ZBRK1 overexpression is 
dependent on VHL/HIF pathway. Moreover, VHL is confirmed to serve as a bridge
component for the association of ZBRK1 and p300, which leads to an increase in
ZBRK1 transcriptional activity in the VHL promoter. We further provide striking
evidences that ZBRK1 acts as a tumor suppressor in renal carcinoma by a variety
of in vitro and in vivo assays, and ZBRK1 may represent a molecular marker to
distinguish patients with ccRCC at high risk from those with a better survival
prognosis. Taken together, these findings suggest that ZBRK1 suppresses renal
cancer progression perhaps by regulating VHL expression.

PMCID: PMC4466662
PMID: 25749518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Cancer Immunol Res. 2015 Jul;3(7):795-805. doi: 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-14-0164.
Epub 2015 Mar 3.

IFN<U+03B3> Induces DNA Methylation-Silenced GPR109A Expression via pSTAT1/p300 and
H3K18 Acetylation in Colon Cancer.

Bardhan K(1), Paschall AV(2), Yang D(3), Chen MR(1), Simon PS(2), Bhutia YD(1),
Martin PM(1), Thangaraju M(4), Browning DD(4), Ganapathy V(4), Heaton CM(5), Gu
K(6), Lee JR(7), Liu K(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, 
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, Georgia. Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia.
Charlie Norwood VA Medical Center, Augusta, Georgia. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia. Charlie Norwood VA Medical Center, Augusta,
Georgia. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of 
Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. Cancer Center, Georgia
Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. (5)Department of Pathology, Medical College
of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. (6)University Hospital,
Augusta, Georgia. (7)Charlie Norwood VA Medical Center, Augusta, Georgia.
Department of Pathology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, 
Augusta, Georgia. (8)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical
College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. Cancer Center, 
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia. Charlie Norwood VA Medical Center, 
Augusta, Georgia. Kliu@gru.edu.

Short-chain fatty acids, metabolites produced by colonic microbiota from
fermentation of dietary fiber, act as anti-inflammatory agents in the intestinal 
tract to suppress proinflammatory diseases. GPR109A is the receptor for
short-chain fatty acids. The functions of GPR109A have been the subject of
extensive studies; however, the molecular mechanisms underlying GPR109A
expression is largely unknown. We show that GPR109A is highly expressed in normal
human colon tissues, but is silenced in human colon carcinoma cells. The GPR109A 
promoter DNA is methylated in human colon carcinoma. Strikingly, we observed that
IFN<U+03B3>, a cytokine secreted by activated T cells, activates GPR109A transcription
without altering its promoter DNA methylation. Colon carcinoma grows
significantly faster in IFN<U+03B3>-deficient mice than in wild-type mice in an
orthotopic colon cancer mouse model. A positive correlation was observed between 
GPR109A protein level and tumor-infiltrating T cells in human colon carcinoma
specimens, and IFN<U+03B3> expression level is higher in human colon carcinoma tissues
than in normal colon tissues. We further demonstrated that IFN<U+03B3> rapidly activates
pSTAT1 that binds to the promoter of p300 to activate its transcription. p300
then binds to the GPR109A promoter to induce H3K18 hyperacetylation, resulting in
chromatin remodeling in the methylated GPR109A promoter. The IFN<U+03B3>-activated
pSTAT1 then directly binds to the methylated but hyperacetylated GPR109 promoter 
to activate its transcription. Overall, our data indicate that GPR109A acts as a 
tumor suppressor in colon cancer, and the host immune system might use IFN<U+03B3> to
counteract DNA methylation-mediated GPR109A silencing as a mechanism to suppress 
tumor development.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4491007 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25735954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Cell. 2015 Mar 19;57(6):1047-58. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.025. Epub 2015
Feb 26.

Structure of a biologically active estrogen receptor-coactivator complex on DNA.

Yi P(1), Wang Z(2), Feng Q(3), Pintilie GD(2), Foulds CE(3), Lanz RB(3), Ludtke
SJ(2), Schmid MF(2), Chiu W(4), O'Malley BW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Clayton Foundation for Research, Houston, TX 77056, USA. 
(2)National Center for Macromolecular Imaging, Verna and Marrs McLean Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; National Center for 
Macromolecular Imaging, Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic
address: wah@bcm.edu. (5)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: berto@bcm.edu.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2015 Mar 19;57(6):952-4.

Estrogen receptor (ER/ESR1) is a transcription factor critical for development,
reproduction, metabolism, and cancer. ER function hinges on its ability to
recruit primary and secondary coactivators, yet structural information on the
full-length receptor-coactivator complex to complement preexisting and sometimes 
controversial biochemical information is lacking. Here, we use cryoelectron
microscopy (cryo-EM) to determine the quaternary structure of an active complex
of DNA-bound ERa, steroid receptor coactivator 3 (SRC-3/NCOA3), and a secondary
coactivator (p300/EP300). Our structural model suggests the following assembly
mechanism for the complex: each of the two ligand-bound ERa monomers
independently recruits one SRC-3 protein via the transactivation domain of ERa;
the two SRC-3s in turn bind to different regions of one p300 protein through
multiple contacts. We also present structural evidence for the location of
activation function 1 (AF-1) in a full-length nuclear receptor, which supports a 
role for AF-1 in SRC-3 recruitment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4369429
PMID: 25728767  [PubMed - in process]


72. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 May;167A(5):1111-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36883. Epub 2015
Feb 25.

Expanding the phenotypic spectrum in EP300-related Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.

Solomon BD(1), Bodian DL, Khromykh A, Mora GG, Lanpher BC, Iyer RK, Baveja R,
Vockley JG, Niederhuber JE.

Author information: 
(1)Inova Translational Medicine Institute, Inova Health System, Falls Church,
Virginia; Department of Pediatrics, Inova Health System, Falls Church, Virginia; 
Department of Pediatrics, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine,
Richmond, Virginia.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) can be caused by heterozygous mutations or
deletions involving CREBBP or, less commonly, EP300. To date, only 15 patients
with EP300 mutations have been clinically described. Frequently reported
manifestations in these patients include characteristic facial and limb features,
varying degrees of neurocognitive dysfunction, and maternal preeclampsia. Other
congenital anomalies are less frequently reported. We describe a child found to
have a de novo EP300 mutation (c.4933C>T, predicted to result in p.Arg1645X)
through research-based whole-genome sequencing of the family trio. The child's
presentation involved dysmorphic features as well as unilateral renal agenesis, a
myelomeningocele, and minor genitourinary anomalies. The involvement of
congenital anomalies in all 16 clinically described patients with EP300 mutations
(25% of which have been identified by "hypothesis free" methods, including
microarray, exome, and whole-genome sequencing) is reviewed. In summary,
genitourinary anomalies have been identified in 38%, cardiovascular anomalies in 
25%, spinal/vertebral anomalies in 19%, other skeletal anomalies in 19%, brain
anomalies in 13%, and renal anomalies in 6%. Our patient expands the phenotypic
spectrum in EP300-related RSTS; this case demonstrates the evolving practice of
clinical genomics related to increasing availability of genomic sequencing
methods.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25712426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:724715. doi: 10.1155/2015/724715. Epub 2015 Feb 1.

Detecting key genes regulated by miRNAs in dysfunctional crosstalk pathway of
myasthenia gravis.

Cao Y(1), Wang J(2), Zhang H(2), Tian Q(2), Chen L(2), Ning S(3), Liu P(2), Sun
X(2), Lu X(2), Song C(2), Zhang S(2), Xiao B(4), Wang L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081, China ; Department of Neurology, Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, China. (2)Department 
of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 
Heilongjiang 150081, China. (3)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, 
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081, China. (4)Department of
Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008,
China.

Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a neuromuscular autoimmune disorder resulting from
autoantibodies attacking components of the neuromuscular junction. Recent studies
have implicated the aberrant expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) in the pathogenesis
of MG; however, the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. This study
aimed to identify key genes regulated by miRNAs in MG. Six dysregulated pathways 
were identified through differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNAs in MG, and
significant crosstalk was detected between five of these. Notably, crosstalk
between the "synaptic long-term potentiation" pathway and four others was
mediated by five genes involved in the MAPK signaling pathway. Furthermore, 14
key genes regulated by miRNAs were detected, of which six-MAPK1, RAF1, PGF,
PDGFRA, EP300, and PPP1CC-mediated interactions between the dysregulated
pathways. MAPK1 and RAF1 were responsible for most of this crosstalk (80%),
likely reflecting their central roles in MG pathogenesis. In addition, most key
genes were enriched in immune-related local areas that were strongly disordered
in MG. These results provide new insight into the pathogenesis of MG and offer
new potential targets for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC4331476
PMID: 25705681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. RNA Biol. 2014;11(11):1447-56. doi: 10.4161/15476286.2014.992286.

Positive correlation between ADAR expression and its targets suggests a complex
regulation mediated by RNA editing in the human brain.

Liscovitch N(1), Bazak L, Levanon EY, Chechik G.

Author information: 
(1)a Gonda Multidisiplinary Brain Research Center ; Bar-Ilan University ; Ramat
Gan , Israel.

A-to-I RNA editing by adenosine deaminases acting on RNA is a
post-transcriptional modification that is crucial for normal life and development
in vertebrates. RNA editing has been shown to be very abundant in the human
transcriptome, specifically at the primate-specific Alu elements. The functional 
role of this wide-spread effect is still not clear; it is believed that editing
of transcripts is a mechanism for their down-regulation via processes such as
nuclear retention or RNA degradation. Here we combine 2 neural gene expression
datasets with genome-level editing information to examine the relation between
the expression of ADAR genes with the expression of their target genes.
Specifically, we computed the spatial correlation across structures of
post-mortem human brains between ADAR and a large set of targets that were found 
to be edited in their Alu repeats. Surprisingly, we found that a large fraction
of the edited genes are positively correlated with ADAR, opposing the assumption 
that editing would reduce expression. When considering the correlations between
ADAR and its targets over development, 2 gene subsets emerge, positively
correlated and negatively correlated with ADAR expression. Specifically, in
embryonic time points, ADAR is positively correlated with many genes related to
RNA processing and regulation of gene expression. These findings imply that the
suggested mechanism of regulation of expression by editing is probably not a
global one; ADAR expression does not have a genome wide effect reducing the
expression of editing targets. It is possible, however, that RNA editing by ADAR 
in non-coding regions of the gene might be a part of a more complex expression
regulation mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4615195
PMID: 25692240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Feb 12;6:e1634. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.17.

A pro-apoptotic function of iASPP by stabilizing p300 and CBP through inhibition 
of BRMS1 E3 ubiquitin ligase activity.

Kramer D(1), Schön M(2), Bayerlová M(3), Bleckmann A(4), Schön MP(2), Zörnig
M(5), Dobbelstein M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, University Medical Center Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany. (2)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology,
University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. (3)Department of Medical
Statistics, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, University Medical Center
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. (5)Institute of Tumor Biology and Experimental
Therapy, Georg Speyer Haus, Frankfurt am Main,Germany.

The p53 family and its cofactors are potent inducers of apoptosis and form a
barrier to cancer. Here, we investigated the impact of the supposedly inhibitory 
member of the apoptosis-stimulating protein of p53, iASPP, on the activity of the
p53 homolog TAp73, and its cofactors p300 and CBP. We found that iASPP interacted
with and stabilized the histone acetyltransferase p300 and its homolog CBP upon
cisplatin treatment. Vice versa, iASPP depletion by shRNA resulted in decreased
amounts of p300 and CBP, impaired binding of p300 and TAp73 to target site
promoters, reduced induction of pro-apoptotic TAp73 target genes, and impaired
apoptosis. Mechanistically, we observed that the p300-regulatory E3 ubiquitin
ligase BRMS1 could rescue the degradation of p300 and CBP in cisplatin-treated,
iASPP-depleted cells. This argues that iASPP stabilizes p300 and CBP by
interfering with their BRMS1-mediated ubiquitination, thereby contributing to
apoptotic susceptibility. In line, iASPP overexpression partially abolished the
interaction of BRMS1 and CBP upon DNA damage. Reduced levels of iASPP mRNA and
protein as well as CBP protein were observed in human melanoma compared with
normal skin tissue and benign melanocytic nevi. In line with our findings, iASPP 
overexpression or knockdown of BRMS1 each augmented p300/CBP levels in melanoma
cell lines, thereby enhancing apoptosis upon DNA damage. Taken together,
destabilization of p300/CBP by downregulation of iASPP expression levels appears 
to represent a molecular mechanism that contributes to chemoresistance in
melanoma cells.

PMCID: PMC4669821
PMID: 25675294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Mar;34(2):132-5. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000125.

Synchronous ovarian and endometrial carcinomas in a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome: a case report and literature review.

Johannesen EJ(1), Williams T, Miller DC, Tuller E.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences (E.J.J., T.W., D.C.M.)
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women's Health (E.T.), University of Missouri
Hospitals and Clinics, Columbia, Missouri.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome is characterized by distinctive facial and limb
features and is associated with several types of tumors. A 29-yr-old woman with
this syndrome presented with a large, complex ovarian mass. She was subsequently 
diagnosed with a low-grade serous carcinoma of the ovary and an endometrioid
adenocarcinoma of the uterus. Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome is an autosomal dominant,
multiple congenital anomalies-mental retardation syndrome. Two genes, CREBBP and 
EP300, have been found to be associated with this disorder, although some cases
do not have an identifiable cause. These genes code for proteins that acetylate
histone tails, an epigenetic modification that serves to control transcription.
They also serve as cofactors to several transcription factors and modulate p53.
Although these patients have a predisposition to benign and malignant neoplasms, 
no malignant gynecologic neoplasm has been described thus far. Although no
significant evidence linking CREBBP and EP300 to gynecologic malignancies has yet
been found, some studies have suggested that hypoacetylation of histones may be
involved in endometrial and ovarian carcinomas.

PMID: 25675181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Exp Eye Res. 2015 Jun;135:102-8. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2015.02.005. Epub 2015 Feb
7.

Acetylated 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase 1 and its relationship with p300 and
SIRT1 in lens epithelium cells from age-related cataract.

Kang L(1), Zhao W(2), Zhang G(1), Wu J(1), Guan H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Eye Institute, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu
Province, China. (2)Eye Institute, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong, Jiangsu Province, China; Department of Ophthalmology, First People's
Hospital of Changshu City, Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Changshu,
Jiangsu Province, China. (3)Eye Institute, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, China. Electronic address:
gtnantongeye@gmail.com.

The human 8-oxoguanine-DNA glycosylase 1 (OGG1) is the major DNA glycosylase
responsible for repair of 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) and ring-opened
fapyguanine, critical mutagenic DNA lesions that are induced by reactive oxygen
species. OGG1 acetylation has been demonstrated playing an important role in
response to DNA damage. Here, we investigated the relationship between acetylated
OGG1 (Ac-OGG1) and ARC, and clarified the effect of p300 and SIRT1 on the 8-oxoG 
excision ability of OGG1 in ARC development. Our results showed that anterior
lens capsules from ARC group had higher proportion of 8-oxoG positive LECs than
those from control group. OGG1 mRNA and protein levels significantly increased in
ARC group compared with control group, while the protein levels of Ac-OGG1 were
lower in ARC group. We investigated the factors involved in OGG1 acetylation and 
found that p300 and SIRT1 are the major acetyltransferases for OGG1 acetylation. 
We also identified acetylation of K338/K341 lysine residues in OGG1 has an
important role on the repair activity of OGG1 to oxidative damage after H2O2
exposure in human lens epithelial cells (HLE-B3). Taken together, these data
demonstrate that OGG1 acetylation regulates its function in response to DNA
damage and could be one of the mechanisms of ARC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25660075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2015 Mar 16;54(12):3735-9. doi: 10.1002/anie.201411658.
Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Fragment screening and druggability assessment for the CBP/p300 KIX domain
through protein-observed 19F NMR spectroscopy.

Gee CT(1), Koleski EJ, Pomerantz WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Minnesota, 207 Pleasant St. SE, Twin
Cities (USA).

(19)F NMR spectroscopy of labeled proteins is a sensitive method for
characterizing structure, conformational dynamics, higher-order assembly, and
ligand binding. Fluorination of aromatic side chains has been suggested as a
labeling strategy for small-molecule ligand discovery for protein-protein
interaction interfaces. Using a model transcription factor binding domain of the 
CREB binding protein (CBP)/p300, KIX, we report the first full small-molecule
screen using protein-observed (19)F NMR spectroscopy. Screening of 508 compounds 
and validation by (1)H-(15)N HSQC NMR spectroscopy led to the identification of a
minimal pharmacaphore for the MLL-KIX interaction site. Hit rate analysis for the
CREB-KIX and MLL-KIX sites provided a metric to assess the ligandability or
"druggability" of each interface informing future medicinal chemistry efforts.
The structural information from the simplified spectra and data collection speed,
affords a new screening tool for analysis of protein interfaces and discovery of 
small molecules.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4423596
PMID: 25651535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Hypertens. 2015 Mar;33(3):664-5. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0000000000000507.

Potential impact of fetal genotype on maternal blood pressure during pregnancy:
the example of EP300.

Milani D(1), Pezzani L, Negri G, Gervasini C, Esposito S.

Author information: 
(1)aPediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and
Transplantation, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico
bMedical Genetics, Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milan, Italy.

Comment on
    J Hypertens. 2014 Aug;32(8):1553-61; discussion 1561.

PMID: 25629367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Apr;35(4):973-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2081. Epub 2015 Jan
27.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing predicts p300 binding sites in the MCF7 
human breast cancer cell line.

Wang X(1), Li S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine and Tumor Research, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400016, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to identify the distribution characters of p300 
binding sites in estradiol (E2) stimulated MCF7 cell lines and controls, and to
study the roles of transcriptional coactivator p300 in the tumorigenesis and
progression of various human cancers following E2 stimulation. The chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing data of GSES9623 was downloaded from
the Gene Expression Omnibus database, including breast cancer data of GSM986085
and control data of GSM986087. MACS peak-calling software was employed to
identify the p300-bound sites in the two groups. The differential target genes of
p300-bound sites were further analyzed and the concordant factors were predicted.
The Gene Ontology (GO) was used to conduct functional enrichment analysis. There 
were 32,249 p300 binding sites identified in the E2 stimulation group and 43,156 
in the control group. GO enrichment analysis of the target genes showed that
p300-regulated target genes mainly participated in the neural cell
differentiation-associated biology process; while in the E2 stimulation group,
partial functions of the target genes had changed. A total of 24,899 differential
p300-bound sites of the two groups were identified and GO enrichment analysis
demonstrated that E2 stimulation changed p300 binding sites, but did not
influence the regulatory function of p300. The effect of E2 in the MCF7 cells
suggested that E2 affected the binding affinity of DNA and transcription factors 
in a large scale. By analyzing the concordant factors, several important factors 
were discovered, such as BRCA1 and ESR1. Overall, the results of the present
study suggested an association between p300 and carcinogenic genes. This may
provide theoretical guidance for cancer therapy.

PMID: 25625638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 24;10(1):e0116784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116784.
eCollection 2015.

Detrusor induction of miR-132/212 following bladder outlet obstruction:
association with MeCP2 repression and cell viability.

Sadegh MK(1), Ekman M(2), Krawczyk K(1), Svensson D(1), Göransson O(1), Dahan
D(1), Nilsson BO(1), Albinsson S(1), Uvelius B(3), Swärd K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden;
Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. (3)Department of Clinical
Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

The microRNAs (miRNAs) miR-132 and miR-212 have been found to regulate synaptic
plasticity and cholinergic signaling and recent work has demonstrated roles
outside of the CNS, including in smooth muscle. Here, we examined if miR-132 and 
miR-212 are induced in the urinary bladder following outlet obstruction and
whether this correlates with effects on gene expression and cell growth. Three to
seven-fold induction of miR-132/212 was found at 10 days of obstruction and this 
was selective for the detrusor layer. We cross-referenced putative binding sites 
in the miR-132/212 promoter with transcription factors that were predicted to be 
active in the obstruction model. This suggested involvement of Creb and Ahr in
miR-132/212 induction. Creb phosphorylation (S-133) was not increased, but the
number of Ahr positive nuclei increased. Moreover, we found that serum
stimulation and protein kinase C activation induced miR-132/212 in human detrusor
cells. To identify miR-132/212 targets, we correlated the mRNA levels of
validated targets with the miRNA levels. Significant correlations between
miR-132/212 and MeCP2, Ep300, Pnkd and Jarid1a were observed, and the protein
levels of MeCP2, Pnkd and Ache were reduced after obstruction. Reduction of Ache 
however closely matched a 90% reduction of synapse density arguing that its
repression was unrelated to miR-132/212 induction. Importantly, transfection of
antimirs and mimics in cultured detrusor cells increased and decreased,
respectively, the number of cells and led to changes in MeCP2 expression. In all,
these findings show that obstruction of the urethra increases miR-132 and miR-212
in the detrusor and suggests that this influences gene expression and limits cell
growth.

PMCID: PMC4305303
PMID: 25617893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2015 Mar 15;118(6):776-82. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01050.2014. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Effects of caffeine and maltodextrin mouth rinsing on P300, brain imaging, and
cognitive performance.

De Pauw K(1), Roelands B(2), Knaepen K(1), Polfliet M(3), Stiens J(4), Meeusen
R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Physiology, Faculty of Physical Education and Physical
Therapy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium; (2)Department of Human
Physiology, Faculty of Physical Education and Physical Therapy, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium; Fund for Scientific Research Flanders
(FWO), Brussels, Belgium; (3)Department of Electronics and Informatics (ETRO),
Faculty of Engineering Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium;
Department of Medical IT (iMinds), Ghent, Belgium; and. (4)Department of
Electronics and Informatics (ETRO), Faculty of Engineering Sciences, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium; (5)Department of Human Physiology,
Faculty of Physical Education and Physical Therapy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Brussels, Belgium; School of Public Health, Tropical Medicine and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, James Cook University, Townsville, Queensland, Australia
rmeeusen@vub.ac.be.

Caffeine (CAF) and maltodextrin (MALT) mouth rinses (MR) improve exercise
performance. The current experiment aims to determine the effect of CAF and MALT 
MR on cognitive performance and brain activity. Ten healthy male subjects (age 27
± 3 yr) completed three experimental trials. Each trial included four Stroop
tasks: two familiarization tasks, and one task before and one task after an MR
period. The reaction time (in milliseconds) and accuracy (percent) of simple,
congruent, and incongruent stimuli were assessed. Electroencephalography was
applied throughout the experiment to record brain activity. The amplitudes and
latencies of the P300 were determined during the Stroop tasks before and after
the MR period. Subjects received MR with CAF (0.3 g/25 ml), MALT (1.6 g/25 ml),
or placebo (PLAC) in a randomized, double-blind, crossover design. During MR, the
brain imaging technique standardized low-resolution brain electromagnetic
tomography was applied. Magnitude-based inferences showed that CAF MR is likely
trivial (63.5%) and likely beneficial (36.4%) compared with PLAC MR, and compared
with MALT MR likely beneficial to reaction time on incongruent stimuli (61.6%).
Additionally, both the orbitofrontal and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex were
activated only during CAF MR, potentially explaining the likely beneficial effect
on reaction times. MALT MR increased brain activity only within the orbitofrontal
cortex. However, this brain activation did not alter the reaction time.
Furthermore, no significant differences in the accuracy of stimuli responses were
observed between conditions. In conclusion, only CAF MR exerted a likely
beneficial effect on reaction time due to the subsequent activation of both the
orbitofrontal and dorsolateral prefrontal cortexes.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25614603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Ital J Pediatr. 2015 Jan 20;41:4. doi: 10.1186/s13052-015-0110-1.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: clinical features, genetic basis, diagnosis, and
management.

Milani D(1), Manzoni FM(2), Pezzani L(3), Ajmone P(4), Gervasini C(5), Menni
F(6), Esposito S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and
Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via Commenda 9, 20122, Milano, Italy.
donatella.milani@policlinico.mi.it. (2)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit,
Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via Commenda
9, 20122, Milano, Italy. fmp.manzoni@gmail.com. (3)Pediatric Highly Intensive
Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli
Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via
Commenda 9, 20122, Milano, Italy. lidia.pezzani@unimi.it. (4)UO Neuropsichiatria 
dell'Infanzia e dell'Adolescenza, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milano, Italy. paola.ajmone@policlinico.mi.it. (5)Department of
Health Science, Medical Genetics, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano,
Italy. cristina.gervasini@unimi.it. (6)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit,
Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via Commenda
9, 20122, Milano, Italy. francescamenni@hotmail.com. (7)Pediatric Highly
Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation,
Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Via Commenda 9, 20122, Milano, Italy. susanna.esposito@unimi.it.

BACKGROUND: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is an extremely rare autosomal
dominant genetic disease, with an estimated prevalence of one case per 125,000
live births. RSTS is characterized by typical facial features, microcephaly,
broad thumbs and first toes, intellectual disability, and postnatal growth
retardation. However, no standard diagnostic criteria are available for RSTS. In 
this review, we summarized the clinical features and genetic basis of RSTS and
highlighted areas for future studies on an appropriate diagnostic protocol and
follow-up care for RSTS.
DISCUSSION: RSTS is primarily characterized by delayed growth in height and
weight, microcephaly, dysmorphic facial features, and broad thumbs and big toe.
Over 90% RSTS individuals with disabilities survive to adulthood, but healthcare 
for these patients is particularly complex, time-consuming, and costly. In
addition, no standard diagnostic criteria and follow-up care guidelines are
available for RSTS. It has been shown that mutations in the genes encoding the
cyclic-AMP-regulated enhancer binding protein (CREBBP) and the E1A-binding
protein p300 (EP300) contributed to the development of RSTS. Therefore, genetic
tests are useful for the diagnosis of RSTS, although most RSTS cases are
currently diagnosed based on clinical features. The clinical features of RSTS
have been extensively studied, which significantly contributes to the diagnosis
of this extremely rare syndrome. However, the pathogenesis and genotype-phenotype
associations of RSTS are largely unknown. Therefore, multicenter studies and
international cooperation are highlighted for better understanding of this
disease, establishing standard diagnostic criteria, and providing professional
management and follow-up care of RSTS.

PMCID: PMC4308897
PMID: 25599811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Mar;22(3):509-16. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.215. Epub 2014
Dec 19.

Spermidine induces autophagy by inhibiting the acetyltransferase EP300.

Pietrocola F(1), Lachkar S(1), Enot DP(2), Niso-Santano M(1), Bravo-San Pedro
JM(1), Sica V(1), Izzo V(1), Maiuri MC(1), Madeo F(3), Mariño G(1), Kroemer G(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le cancer, INSERM U1138,
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris 75006, France [2] Université Paris
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. (2)Metabolomics and Molecular Cell
Biology Platforms, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif 94805, France. (3)1] Institute of
Molecular Biosciences, University of Graz, Graz 8010, Austria [2] BioTechMed
Graz, Graz 8010, Austria. (4)1] Equipe 11 labellisée par la Ligue Nationale
contre le cancer, INSERM U1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris 75006, 
France [2] Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France [3]
Metabolomics and Molecular Cell Biology Platforms, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif
94805, France [4] Université de Paris Sud, Villejuif 94805, France [5] Pôle de
Biologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris 75015, France.

Several natural compounds found in health-related food items can inhibit
acetyltransferases as they induce autophagy. Here we show that this applies to
anacardic acid, curcumin, garcinol and spermidine, all of which reduce the
acetylation level of cultured human cells as they induce signs of increased
autophagic flux (such as the formation of green fluorescent
protein-microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B-light chain 3 (GFP-LC3) puncta and
the depletion of sequestosome-1, p62/SQSTM1) coupled to the inhibition of the
mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1). We performed a screen to
identify the acetyltransferases whose depletion would activate autophagy and
simultaneously inhibit mTORC1. The knockdown of only two acetyltransferases
(among 43 candidates) had such effects: EP300 (E1A-binding protein p300), which
is a lysine acetyltranferase, and NAA20 (N(a)-acetyltransferase 20, also known as
NAT5), which catalyzes the N-terminal acetylation of methionine residues.
Subsequent studies validated the capacity of a pharmacological EP300 inhibitor,
C646, to induce autophagy in both normal and enucleated cells (cytoplasts),
underscoring the capacity of EP300 to repress autophagy by cytoplasmic
(non-nuclear) effects. Notably, anacardic acid, curcumin, garcinol and spermidine
all inhibited the acetyltransferase activity of recombinant EP300 protein in
vitro. Altogether, these results support the idea that EP300 acts as an
endogenous repressor of autophagy and that potent autophagy inducers including
spermidine de facto act as EP300 inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4326581
PMID: 25526088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 30;290(5):2744-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.600759. Epub 2014 
Dec 15.

Mechanistic analysis of the role of bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) in
BRD4-NUT oncoprotein-induced transcriptional activation.

Wang R(1), You J(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6076. (2)From the Department
of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6076 jianyou@mail.med.upenn.edu.

NUT midline carcinoma (NMC) is a rare but highly aggressive cancer typically
caused by the translocation t(15;19), which results in the formation of the
BRD4-NUT fusion oncoprotein. Previous studies have demonstrated that fusion of
the NUT protein with the double bromodomains of BRD4 may significantly alter the 
cellular gene expression profile to contribute to NMC tumorigenesis. However, the
mechanistic details of this BRD4-NUT function remain poorly understood. In this
study, we examined the NUT function in transcriptional regulation by targeting it
to a LacO transgene array integrated in U2OS 2-6-3 cells, which allow us to
visualize how NUT alters the in situ gene transcription dynamic. Using this
system, we demonstrated that the NUT protein tethered to the LacO locus recruits 
p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP), induces histone hyperacetylation, and enriches
BRD4 to the transgene array chromatin foci. We also discovered that, in BRD4-NUT 
expressed in NMC cells, the NUT moiety of the fusion protein anchored to
chromatin by the double bromodomains also stimulates histone hyperacetylation,
which causes BRD4 to bind tighter to chromatin. Consequently, multiple
BRD4-interacting factors are recruited to the NUT-associated chromatin locus to
activate in situ transgene expression. This gene transcription function was
repressed by either expression of a dominant negative inhibitor of the p300-NUT
interaction or treatment with (+)-JQ1, which dissociates BRD4 from the LacO
chromatin locus. Our data support a model in which BRD4-NUT-stimulated histone
hyperacetylation recruits additional BRD4 and interacting partners to support
transcriptional activation, which underlies the BRD4-NUT oncogenic mechanism in
NMC.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4317035
PMID: 25512383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Feb;29(2):274-88. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1066. Epub 2014 Dec
12.

NFAT targets signaling molecules to gene promoters in pancreatic ß-cells.

Lawrence MC(1), Borenstein-Auerbach N, McGlynn K, Kunnathodi F, Shahbazov R, Syed
I, Kanak M, Takita M, Levy MF, Naziruddin B.

Author information: 
(1)Islet Cell Laboratory (M.C.L., N.B.-A., F.K., R.S., I.S., M.T.), Baylor
Research Institute, Dallas, Texas 75226; Department of Pharmacology (K.M.),
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390; Institute
of Biomedical Studies (M.K.), Baylor University, Waco, Texas 76798; and Annette
C. and Harold C. Simmons Transplant Institute (M.F.L., B.N.), Baylor University
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75246.

Nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) is activated by calcineurin in
response to calcium signals derived by metabolic and inflammatory stress to
regulate genes in pancreatic islets. Here, we show that NFAT targets MAPKs,
histone acetyltransferase p300, and histone deacetylases (HDACs) to gene
promoters to differentially regulate insulin and TNF-a genes. NFAT and ERK
associated with the insulin gene promoter in response to glucagon-like peptide 1,
whereas NFAT formed complexes with p38 MAPK (p38) and Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)
upon promoters of the TNF-a gene in response to IL-1ß. Translocation of NFAT and 
MAPKs to gene promoters was calcineurin/NFAT dependent, and complex stability
required MAPK activity. Knocking down NFATc2 expression, eliminating NFAT DNA
binding sites, or interfering with NFAT nuclear import prevented association of
MAPKs with gene promoters. Inhibiting p38 and JNK activity increased NFAT-ERK
association with promoters, which repressed TNF-a and enhanced insulin gene
expression. Moreover, inhibiting p38 and JNK induced a switch from
NFAT-p38/JNK-histone acetyltransferase p300 to NFAT-ERK-HDAC3 complex formation
upon the TNF-a promoter, which resulted in gene repression. Histone
acetyltransferase/HDAC exchange was reversed on the insulin gene by p38/JNK
inhibition in the presence of glucagon-like peptide 1, which enhanced gene
expression. Overall, these data indicate that NFAT directs signaling enzymes to
gene promoters in islets, which contribute to protein-DNA complex stability and
promoter regulation. Furthermore, the data suggest that TNF-a can be repressed
and insulin production can be enhanced by selectively targeting signaling
components of NFAT-MAPK transcriptional/signaling complex formation in pancreatic
ß-cells. These findings have therapeutic potential for suppressing islet
inflammation while preserving islet function in diabetes and islet
transplantation.

PMCID: PMC4318885
PMID: 25496032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(21):3414-22. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.953424.

Histone H3 K27 acetylation marks a potent enhancer element on the adipogenic
master regulator gene Pparg2.

Ramlee MK(1), Zhang Q, Idris M, Peng X, Sim CK, Han W, Xu F.

Author information: 
(1)a Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences ; Agency for Science ; Technology 
and Research (A*STAR ); Singapore.

PPAR<U+03B3>2 is expressed almost exclusively in adipose tissue and plays a central role
in adipogenesis. Despite intensive studies over the last 2 decades, the mechanism
regulating the expression of the Pparg2 gene, especially the role of
cis-regulatory elements, is still not completely understood. Here, we report a
comprehensive investigation of the enhancer elements within the murine Pparg2
gene. Utilizing the combined techniques of sequence conservation analysis and
chromatin marker examination, we identified a potent enhancer element that
augmented the expression of a reporter gene under the control of the Pparg2
promoter by 20-fold. This enhancer element was first identified as highly
conserved non-coding sequence 10 (CNS10) and was later shown to be enriched with 
the enhancer marker H3 K27 acetylation. Further studies identified a binding site
for p300 as the essential enhancer element in CNS10. Moreover, p300 physically
binds to CNS10 and is required for the enhancer activity of CNS10. The depletion 
of p300 by siRNA resulted in significantly impaired activation of Pparg2 at the
early stages of 3T3-L1 adipogenesis. In summary, our study identified a novel
enhancer element on the murine Pparg2 gene and suggested a novel mechanism for
the regulation of Pparg2 expression by p300 in 3T3-L1 adipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4614625
PMID: 25485585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Sep;52(9):673-7.

[CREBBP gene mutation in two boys with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang J(1), Wang C(1), Li M(1), Qiu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital and Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital and Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.
Email: zhengqingqiu33@aliyun.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical and genetic features of 2 patients with
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.
METHOD: Using next generation sequencing (NGS) the CREBBP and EP300 genes of 2
children who were diagnosed as Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome at Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital. The mutations identified by NGS were verified by PCR were
analyzed.
RESULT: The 2 patients at the age of 5 months and 4.5 years manifested short
stature (the height were 60 cm and 99 cm respectively), low hairline, thick and
dense hair and eyebrows, long lash, epicanthus of both eyes, protruded
supercilliary arch, broad and flat thumbs and halluces, and particular facial
abnormalities. Patient 2 had language retardation besides. One missense mutation 
of c.3535A>G, p.Ser1179Gly was found in CREBBP gene in patient 1 and one
microdeletion mutation of c.4995_4999delCGCCT, p. Ala1666Pro fs66x was found
inpatient 2. Both mutations were reported for the first time.
CONCLUSION: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome is characterized by mental and growth
retardation, wide and flat thumbs and first toes, and dysmorphic facial features.
CREBBP is one of the causative genes. Mutation detection on CREBBP gene can
confirm the diagnosis of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.

PMID: 25476429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Mol Biol. 2014 Dec 12;426(24):4030-48. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.10.021. Epub
2014 Nov 1.

The high-risk HPV16 E7 oncoprotein mediates interaction between the
transcriptional coactivator CBP and the retinoblastoma protein pRb.

Jansma AL(1), Martinez-Yamout MA(1), Liao R(2), Sun P(2), Dyson HJ(1), Wright
PE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps
Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute,
10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (3)Department of
Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, The Scripps Research Institute,
10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Skaggs Institute for
Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: wright@scripps.edu.

The oncoprotein E7 from human papillomavirus (HPV) strains that confer high
cancer risk mediates cell transformation by deregulating host cellular processes 
and activating viral gene expression through recruitment of cellular proteins
such as the retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and the cyclic-AMP response element
binding binding protein (CBP) and its paralog p300. Here we show that the
intrinsically disordered N-terminal region of E7 from high-risk HPV16 binds the
TAZ2 domain of CBP with greater affinity than E7 from low-risk HPV6b. HPV E7 and 
the tumor suppressor p53 compete for binding to TAZ2. The TAZ2 binding site in E7
overlaps the LxCxE motif that is crucial for interaction with pRb. While TAZ2 and
pRb compete for binding to a monomeric E7 polypeptide, the full-length E7 dimer
mediates an interaction between TAZ2 and pRb by promoting formation of a ternary 
complex. Cell-based assays show that expression of full-length HPV16 E7 promotes 
increased pRb acetylation and that this response depends both on the presence of 
CBP/p300 and on the ability of E7 to form a dimer. These observations suggest a
model for the oncogenic effect of high-risk HPV16 E7. The disordered region of
one E7 molecule in the homodimer interacts with the pocket domain of pRb, while
the same region of the other E7 molecule binds the TAZ2 domain of CBP/p300.
Through its ability to dimerize, E7 recruits CBP/p300 and pRb into a ternary
complex, bringing the histone acetyltransferase domain of CBP/p300 into proximity
to pRb and promoting acetylation, leading to disruption of cell cycle control.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4258470
PMID: 25451029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cancer Lett. 2015 Feb 1;357(1):179-85. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.11.024. Epub
2014 Nov 18.

Gene mutations in primary tumors and corresponding patient-derived xenografts
derived from non-small cell lung cancer.

Hao C(1), Wang L(1), Peng S(2), Cao M(1), Li H(1), Hu J(1), Huang X(1), Liu W(1),
Zhang H(1), Wu S(1), Pataer A(1), Heymach JV(3), Eterovic AK(4), Zhang Q(5), Shaw
KR(5), Chen K(6), Futreal A(7), Wang M(8), Hofstetter W(1), Mehran R(1), Rice
D(1), Roth JA(1), Sepesi B(1), Swisher SG(1), Vaporciyan A(1), Walsh GL(1),
Johnson FM(3), Fang B(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, The University of Texas MD 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (2)Department of Thoracic and 
Head/Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (3)Department of Thoracic and Head/Neck Medical
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA; The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Houston, Texas, USA. (4)Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (5)Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al
Nahyan Institute for Personalized Cancer Therapy, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (6)Department of
Bioinformatics and Computation Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (7)Department of Genomic Medicine, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(8)Department of Lymphoma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (9)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA; The
University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas, USA. 
Electronic address: bfang@mdanderson.org.

Molecular annotated patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models are useful for the
preclinical investigation of anticancer drugs and individualized anticancer
therapy. We established 23 PDXs from 88 surgical specimens of lung cancer
patients and determined gene mutations in these PDXs and their paired primary
tumors by ultradeep exome sequencing on 202 cancer-related genes. The numbers of 
primary tumors with deleterious mutations in TP53, KRAS, PI3KCA, ALK, STK11, and 
EGFR were 43.5%, 21.7%, 17.4%, 17.4%, 13.0%, and 8.7%, respectively. Other genes 
with deleterious mutations in =3 (13.0%) primary tumors were MLL3, SETD2, ATM,
ARID1A, CRIPAK, HGF, BAI3, EP300, KDR, PDGRRA and RUNX1. Of 315 mutations
detected in the primary tumors, 293 (93%) were also detected in their
corresponding PDXs, indicating that PDXs have the capacity to recapitulate the
mutations in primary tumors. Nevertheless, a substantial number of mutations had 
higher allele frequencies in the PDXs than in the primary tumors, or were not
detectable in the primary tumor, suggesting the possibility of tumor cell
enrichment in PDXs or heterogeneity in the primary tumors. The molecularly
annotated PDXs generated from this study could be useful for future translational
studies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4301580
PMID: 25444907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Dec;54(12):1626-35. doi: 10.1002/mc.22235. Epub 2014 Nov 14.

p28(GANK) associates with p300 to attenuate the acetylation of RelA.

Ren YB(1,)(2), Luo T(1,)(2), Li J(3), Fu J(1,)(2), Wang Q(4), Cao GW(5), Chen
Y(1,)(2), Wang HY(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)International Co-Operation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern
Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China. (2)National Center for Liver Cancer, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Clinical Nutrition, Changhai
Hospital, The Second Military University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Internal Hepatobiliary I, Eastern Hepatobiliry Surgery Hospital,
The Second Military University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.

Oncoprotein p28(GANK), overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC), binds to
RelA and retains NF-<U+03BA>B in the cytoplasm to suppress NF-<U+03BA>B transactivation.
However, the mechanism has not yet been elucidated. In this study, we clarified
the mechanism of NF-<U+03BA>B regulated by p28(GANK). p28(GANK) reduced TNF-a-induced
nuclear translocation of RelA/NF-<U+03BA>B independent of HDAC3. p28(GANK) interacted
with p300 to attenuate assembly of RelA with p300, which lessened acetylation of 
RelA on the lysine 310 sites. Moreover, overexpression of p28(GANK) attenuated
the capability of NF-<U+03BA>B binding to the target gene I<U+03BA>Ba promoter, but also
weakened adriamycin-induced NF-<U+03BA>B pro-apoptotic gene Fas and FasL expression,
which subsequently made p53-deficient tumor cells resistance to adriamycin. These
results present mechanistic insight into the key role of p28(GANK) in
post-translational regulation of RelA/NF-<U+03BA>B.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25400040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Clin Genet. 2015 Nov;88(5):431-40. doi: 10.1111/cge.12537. Epub 2014 Dec 9.

Insights into genotype-phenotype correlations from CREBBP point mutation
screening in a cohort of 46 Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome patients.

Spena S(1), Milani D(2), Rusconi D(1), Negri G(1), Colapietro P(1), Elcioglu
N(3), Bedeschi F(4), Pilotta A(5), Spaccini L(6), Ficcadenti A(7), Magnani C(8), 
Scarano G(9), Selicorni A(10), Larizza L(1,)(11), Gervasini C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milano, Italy. (2)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Fondazione IRCCS 
Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore, Policlinico, Milano, Italy. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Marmara University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. (4)Clinical 
Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico,
Milano, Italy. (5)Centro di Auxoendocrinologia, Department of Paediatrics,
Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy. (6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Children's Hospital V. Buzzi, Milano, Italy. (7)Rare diseases Regional Centre,
Pediatric Institute of Maternal-Infantile Sciences Department, Polytechnic
University of Marche, Salesi Hospital of United Hospitals of Ancona, Ancona,
Italy. (8)Neonatology and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Maternal and Child
Department, Parma University, Parma, Italy. (9)Medical Genetics Department,
Gaetano Rummo Hospital, Benevento, Italy. (10)Department of Pediatrics,
Università Milano Bicocca, Fondazione MBBM, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy.
(11)Laboratory of Medical Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto
Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy.

The genetic basis of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS), a rare, sporadic,
clinically heterogeneous disorder characterized by cognitive impairment and a
wide spectrum of multiple congenital anomalies, is primarily due to private
mutations in CREBBP (approximately 55% of cases) or EP300 (approximately 8% of
cases). Herein, we report the clinical and the genetic data taken from a cohort
of 46 RSTS patients, all carriers of CREBBP point mutations. Molecular analysis
revealed 45 different gene alterations including 31 inactivating (21 frameshift
and 10 nonsense), 10 missense and 4 splicing mutations. Bioinformatic tools and
transcript analyses were used to predict the functional effects of missense and
splicing alterations. Of the 45 mutations, 42 are unreported and 3 were described
previously. Recurrent mutations maybe a key tool in addressing genotype-phenotype
correlations in patients sharing the same defects (at the genomic or transcript
level) and specific clinical signs, demonstrated here in two cases. The clinical 
data of our cohort evidenced frequent signs such as arched eyebrows, epicanthus, 
synophrys and/or frontal hypertrichosis and broad phalanges that, previously
overlooked in RSTS diagnosis, now could be considered. Some suggested
correlations between organ-specific anomalies and affected CREB-binding protein
domains broaden the RSTS clinical spectrum and perhaps will enhance patient
follow-up and clinical care.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25388907  [PubMed - in process]


93. Cancer Biol Med. 2014 Sep;11(3):202-7. doi: 10.7497/j.issn.2095-3941.2014.03.006.

The gene expression patterns of BMPR2, EP300, TGFß2, and TNFAIP3 in B-Lymphoma
cells.

He DM(1), Wu H(1), Wu XL(1), Ding L(1), Xu L(1), Li YQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Institute of Hematology, Medical College, 2 Key Laboratory for Regenerative 
Medicine of Ministry of Education, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.

OBJECTIVE: The results of a previous study showed that a clear dysregulation was 
evident in the global gene expression of the BCL11A-suppressed B-lymphoma cells. 
In this study, the bone morphogenetic protein receptor, type II (BMPR2), E1A
binding protein p300 (EP300), transforming growth factor-ß2 (TGFß2), and tumor
necrosis factor, and alpha-induced protein 3 (TNFAIP3) gene expression patterns
in B-cell malignancies were studied.
METHODS: The relative expression levels of BMPR2, EP300, TGFß2, and TNFAIP3 mRNA 
in B-lymphoma cell lines, myeloid cell lines, as well as in cells from healthy
volunteers, were determined by real-time quantitative reverse
transcript-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) with SYBR Green Dye.
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as reference.
RESULTS: The expression level of TGFß2 mRNA in B-lymphoma cell lines was
significantly higher than those in the cells from the healthy control (P<0.05).
However, the expression level of TNFAIP3 mRNA in B-malignant cells was
significantly lower than that of the healthy control (P<0.05). The expression
levels of BMPR2 and EP300 mRNA showed no significant difference between
B-malignant cell lines and the healthy group (P>0.05). In B-lymphoma cell lines, 
correlation analyses revealed that the expression of BMPR2 and TNFAIP3 (r=0.882, 
P=0.04) had significant positive relation. The expression levels of BMPR2, EP300,
and TNFAIP3 mRNA in cell lines from myeloid leukemia were significantly lower
than those in the cells from the healthy control (P<0.05). The expression levels 
of TGFß2 mRNA showed no significant difference between myeloid leukemia cell
lines and the healthy control or B-malignant cell lines (P>0.05). The expression 
levels of BMPR2, EP300, and TNFAIP3 mRNA in B-lymphoma cells were significantly
higher than those of the myeloid leukemia cells (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Different expression patterns of BMPR2, EP300, TGFß2, and TNFAIP3
genes in B-lymphoma cells exist.

PMCID: PMC4197423
PMID: 25364581  [PubMed]


94. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Oct 21;55(11):7321-31. doi:
10.1167/iovs.14-15167.

Mechanisms of endothelial to mesenchymal transition in the retina in diabetes.

Cao Y(1), Feng B(2), Chen S(2), Chu Y(3), Chakrabarti S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada Medical
Research Center, Mudanjiang Medical University, Mudanjiang, Heilongjiang,
People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Pathology, Western University,
London, Ontario, Canada. (3)Medical Research Center, Mudanjiang Medical
University, Mudanjiang, Heilongjiang, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: Hyperglycemia-induced endothelial damage is a key pathogenetic factor in
diabetic retinopathy. Endothelial damage may lead to phenotypic changes in the
cells manifested by reduced expression of endothelial markers and increased
expression of mesenchymal markers, termed endothelial to mesenchymal transition
(EndMT). We investigated mechanisms of such changes in the retinal endothelial
cells and in the retina of diabetic animals.
METHODS: Human retinal microvascular endothelial cells were grown in medium
containing 5 mM glucose or 25 mM glucose with or without TGFß1 peptide or TGFß1
inhibitor or miR-200b mimic transfection. Messenger RNA levels of endothelial
markers, mesenchymal markers, and specific signaling molecules of TGFß pathway
were quantified. Expression of miR-200b and histone acetylator p300 was
quantified. Retinal tissues from mice with endothelial-specific overexpression of
miR-200b, with or without streptozotocin-induced diabetes, were similarly
examined.
RESULTS: Glucose caused decreased expression of mRNA and protein levels of
endothelial markers and increased expression of mesenchymal markers with reduced 
miR-200b. A glucose-like effect was seen using TGFß1 peptide. Such changes were
mediated by miR-200b and p300. In the retinas of wild-type diabetic mice, EndMT
was observed, which was prevented in miR-200b transgenic mice with diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate glucose-induced EndMT in vitro and in vivo is
possibly mediated through TGFß and regulated by miR-200b and p300.

Copyright 2014 The Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology, Inc.

PMID: 25335984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. ACS Chem Biol. 2015 Jan 16;10(1):146-56. doi: 10.1021/cb500726b. Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Changing the selectivity of p300 by acetyl-CoA modulation of histone acetylation.

Henry RA(1), Kuo YM, Bhattacharjee V, Yen TJ, Andrews AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, 333 Cottman Avenue, Fox Chase Cancer Center ,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania United States.

Determining how histone acetylation is regulated is vital for treating the many
diseases associated with its misregulation, including heart disease, neurological
disorders, and cancer. We have previously reported that acetyl-CoA levels alter
p300 histone acetylation in a site-specific manner in vitro. Here, we further
investigate how changing acetyl-CoA concentrations alter the histone acetylation 
pattern by altering p300 specificity. Interestingly, these changes are not a
simple global change in acetylation, but rather site specific changes, whereby
acetylation at some sites increase while others decrease. We also demonstrate how
the p300 inhibitor C646 can pharmacologically alter p300 histone acetylation
patterns in vitro and in cells. This study provides insight into the mechanisms
regulating p300 residue specificity, a potential means for altering p300
dependent histone acetylation, and an investigation into altering histone
acetylation patterns in cells.

PMCID: PMC4327817
PMID: 25325435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 16;5:e1476. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.422.

HDAC8 and STAT3 repress BMF gene activity in colon cancer cells.

Kang Y(1), Nian H(2), Rajendran P(3), Kim E(3), Dashwood WM(3), Pinto JT(4),
Boardman LA(5), Thibodeau SN(5), Limburg PJ(5), Löhr CV(6), Bisson WH(7),
Williams DE(8), Ho E(1), Dashwood RH(9).

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN, USA. (3)Center for Epigenetics & Disease Prevention, Institute of 
Biosciences & Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY, USA. (5)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (6)College of Veterinary
Medicine, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. (7)Department of
Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR,
USA. (8)1] Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
[2] Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, OR, USA. (9)1] Center for Epigenetics & Disease
Prevention, Institute of Biosciences & Technology, Texas A&M Health Science
Center, Houston, TX, USA [2] Department of Nutrition & Food Science, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX, USA [3] Department of Clinical Cancer
Prevention, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA [4] Department of
Molecular & Cellular Medicine, Texas A&M University College of Medicine, College 
Station, TX, USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors are undergoing clinical trials as
anticancer agents, but some exhibit resistance mechanisms linked to
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 functions, such as BH3-only protein silencing. HDAC
inhibitors that reactivate BH3-only family members might offer an improved
therapeutic approach. We show here that a novel seleno-a-keto acid triggers
global histone acetylation in human colon cancer cells and activates apoptosis in
a p21-independent manner. Profiling of multiple survival factors identified a
critical role for the BH3-only member Bcl-2-modifying factor (Bmf). On the
corresponding BMF gene promoter, loss of HDAC8 was associated with signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)/specificity protein 3 (Sp3)
transcription factor exchange and recruitment of p300. Treatment with a p300
inhibitor or transient overexpression of exogenous HDAC8 interfered with BMF
induction, whereas RNAi-mediated silencing of STAT3 activated the target gene.
This is the first report to identify a direct target gene of HDAC8 repression,
namely, BMF. Interestingly, the repressive role of HDAC8 could be uncoupled from 
HDAC1 to trigger Bmf-mediated apoptosis. These findings have implications for the
development of HDAC8-selective inhibitors as therapeutic agents, beyond the
reported involvement of HDAC8 in childhood malignancy.

PMCID: PMC4237248
PMID: 25321483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 15;5(21):10558-70.

De-acetylation and degradation of HSPA5 is critical for E1A metastasis
suppression in breast cancer cells.

Chang YW(1), Chen HA(2), Tseng CF(3), Hong CC(1), Ma JT(3), Hung MC(4), Wu CH(2),
Huang MT(2), Su JL(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Zhunan, Miaoli Country, Taiwan. (2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine,
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. Division of
General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical
University, New Taipei City, Taiwan. (3)National Institute of Cancer Research,
National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Miaoli Country, Taiwan. Graduate
Program of Biotechnology in Medicine College of Life Science, National Tsing Hua 
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (4)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. Center for Molecular Medicine, China
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. Department of Biotechnology, Asia 
University, Taichung, Taiwan. Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (5)National
Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Miaoli
Country, Taiwan. Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan. Center for Molecular Medicine, China Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. Department of Biotechnology, Asia University,
Taichung, Taiwan.

Elevated expression of heat shock protein 5 (HSPA5) promotes drug resistance and 
metastasis and is a marker of poor prognosis in breast cancer patients.
Adenovirus type 5 E1A gene therapy has demonstrated antitumor efficacy but the
mechanisms of metastasis-inhibition are unclear. Here, we report that E1A
interacts with p300 histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and blocks p300-mediated
HSPA5 acetylation at K353, which in turn promotes HSPA5 ubiquitination by GP78
(E3 ubiquitin ligase) and subsequent proteasome-mediated degradation. Our
findings point out the Ying-Yang regulation of two different post-translational
modifications (ubiquitination and acetylation) of HSPA5 in tumor metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4279393
PMID: 25301734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Open Biol. 2014 Oct;4(10). pii: 130119. doi: 10.1098/rsob.130119.

A systems biology analysis of the changes in gene expression via silencing of
HPV-18 E1 expression in HeLa cells.

Castillo A(1), Wang L(2), Koriyama C(3), Eizuru Y(4), Jordan K(2), Akiba S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and The Basic Sciences School, Health Faculty at
Universidad del Valle, Cali, Colombia UniValle-Georgia Tech Genome Research
Center, Health Faculty at Universidad del Valle, Cali, Colombia Department of
Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Kagoshima University Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan
Division of Oncogenic and Persistent Viruses, Center for Chronic Viral Diseases, 
Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1
Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan acastillo.doc@gmail.com.
(2)UniValle-Georgia Tech Genome Research Center, Health Faculty at Universidad
del Valle, Cali, Colombia School of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA, USA PanAmerican Bioinformatics Institute, Santa Marta, Magdalena,
Colombia. (3)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Kagoshima
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka,
Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan. (4)Division of Oncogenic and Persistent Viruses,
Center for Chronic Viral Diseases, Kagoshima University Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan.

Previous studies have reported the detection of a truncated E1 mRNA generated
from HPV-18 in HeLa cells. Although it is unclear whether a truncated E1 protein 
could function as a replicative helicase for viral replication, it would still
retain binding sites for potential interactions with different host cell
proteins. Furthermore, in this study, we found evidence in support of expression 
of full-length HPV-18 E1 mRNA in HeLa cells. To determine whether interactions
between E1 and cellular proteins play an important role in cellular processes
other than viral replication, genome-wide expression profiles of HPV-18 positive 
HeLa cells were compared before and after the siRNA knockdown of E1 expression.
Differential expression and gene set enrichment analysis uncovered four
functionally related sets of genes implicated in host defence mechanisms against 
viral infection. These included the toll-like receptor, interferon and apoptosis 
pathways, along with the antiviral interferon-stimulated gene set. In addition,
we found that the transcriptional coactivator E1A-binding protein p300 (EP300)
was downregulated, which is interesting given that EP300 is thought to be
required for the transcription of HPV-18 genes in HeLa cells. The observed
changes in gene expression produced via the silencing of HPV-18 E1 expression in 
HeLa cells indicate that in addition to its well-known role in viral replication,
the E1 protein may also play an important role in mitigating the host's ability
to defend against viral infection.

PMCID: PMC4221889
PMID: 25297386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 21;111(42):15078-83. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1318780111. Epub 2014 Oct 6.

KAISO, a critical regulator of p53-mediated transcription of CDKN1A and apoptotic
genes.

Koh DI(1), Han D(2), Ryu H(3), Choi WI(1), Jeon BN(1), Kim MK(1), Kim Y(2), Kim
JY(4), Parry L(5), Clarke AR(5), Reynolds AB(6), Hur MW(7).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 Plus Project for Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Severance Biomedical Research Institute, Yonsei University
School of Medicine, SeoDaeMoon-Ku, Seoul 120-752, Korea; (2)Department of
Biomedical Sciences and Biomedical Engineering, Seoul National University College
of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea; (3)VA Boston Healthcare System and Department 
of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02130; (4)Mass
Spectrometry Research Center, Korea Basic Science Institute, Ochang-eup,
Cheongwon-gun, Chungbuk 363-883, Korea; (5)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff
University, Cardiff CF10 3XQ, United Kingdom; and. (6)Department of Cell Biology,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232-2175. (7)Brain Korea 21 Plus Project
for Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Severance
Biomedical Research Institute, Yonsei University School of Medicine,
SeoDaeMoon-Ku, Seoul 120-752, Korea; mwhur2@yuhs.ac.

An unresolved issue in genotoxic stress response is identification of induced
regulatory proteins and how these activate tumor suppressor p53 to determine
appropriate cell responses. Transcription factor KAISO was previously described
to repress transcription following binding to methylated DNA. In this study, we
show that KAISO is induced by DNA damage in p53-expressing cells and then
interacts with the p53-p300 complex to increase acetylation of p53 K320 and K382 
residues, although decreasing K381 acetylation. Moreover, the p53 with this
particular acetylation pattern shows increased DNA binding and potently induces
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis by activating transcription of CDKN1A
(cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1) and various apoptotic genes. Analogously,
in Kaiso KO mouse embryonic fibroblast cells, p53-to-promoter binding and
up-regulation of p21 and apoptosis gene expression is significantly compromised. 
KAISO may therefore be a critical regulator of p53-mediated cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis in response to various genotoxic stresses in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC4210320
PMID: 25288747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Oncotarget. 2014 Oct 15;5(19):8906-23.

The head and neck cancer cell oncogenome: a platform for the development of
precision molecular therapies.

Martin D(1), Abba MC(2), Molinolo AA(1), Vitale-Cross L(1), Wang Z(1), Zaida
M(1), Delic NC(3), Samuels Y(4), Lyons JG(3), Gutkind JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
USA. (2)CINIBA, Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata,
La Plata, Argentina. (3)Dermatology, University of Sydney, Camperdown, Australia.
Cancer Services, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, Australia.
(4)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, The Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, Israel.

The recent elucidation of the genomic landscape of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) has provided a unique opportunity to develop selective cancer
treatment options. These efforts will require the establishment of relevant HNSCC
models for preclinical testing. Here, we performed full exome and transcriptome
sequencing of a large panel of HNSCC-derived cells from different anatomical
locations and human papillomavirus (HPV) infection status. These cells exhibit
typical mutations in TP53, FAT1, CDK2NA, CASP8, and NOTCH1, and copy number
variations (CNVs) and mutations in PIK3CA, HRAS, and PTEN that reflect the
widespread activation of the PI3K-mTOR pathway. SMAD4 alterations were observed
that may explain the decreased tumor suppressive effect of TGF-ß in HNSCC.
Surprisingly, we identified HPV+ HNSCC cells harboring TP53 mutations, and
documented aberrant TP53 expression in a subset of HPV+ HNSCC cases. This
analysis also revealed that most HNSCC cells harbor multiple mutations and CNVs
in epigenetic modifiers (e.g., EP300, CREBP, MLL1, MLL2, MLL3, KDM6A, and KDM6B) 
that may contribute to HNSCC initiation and progression. These
genetically-defined experimental HNSCC cellular systems, together with the
identification of novel actionable molecular targets, may now facilitate the
pre-clinical evaluation of emerging therapeutic agents in tumors exhibiting each 
precise genomic alteration.

PMCID: PMC4253406
PMID: 25275298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Gastroenterology. 2015 Jan;148(1):148-157.e7. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.09.032. 
Epub 2014 Sep 28.

Epigenetic regulation of genes that modulate chronic stress-induced visceral pain
in the peripheral nervous system.

Hong S(1), Zheng G(2), Wiley JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. 
Electronic address: hongss@med.umich.edu. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Chronic stress alters the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
increases gut motility, and increases the perception of visceral pain. We
investigated whether epigenetic mechanisms regulate chronic stress-induced
visceral pain in the peripheral nervous systems of rats.
METHODS: Male rats were subjected to 1 hour of water avoidance stress each day,
or given daily subcutaneous injections of corticosterone, for 10 consecutive
days. L4-L5 and L6-S2 dorsal root ganglia (DRG) were collected and compared
between stressed and control rats (placed for 1 hour each day in a tank without
water). Levels of cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1), DNA
(cytosine-5-)-methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), transient receptor potential vanilloid
type 1 (TRPV1), and EP300 were knocked down in DRG neurons in situ with small
interfering RNAs. We measured DNA methylation and histone acetylation at genes
encoding the glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1), CNR1, and TRPV1. Visceral pain was 
measured in response to colorectal distention.
RESULTS: Chronic stress was associated with increased methylation of the Nr3c1
promoter and reduced expression of this gene in L6-S2, but not L4-L5, DRGs.
Stress also was associated with up-regulation in DNMT1-associated methylation of 
the Cnr1 promoter and down-regulation of glucocorticoid-receptor-mediated
expression of CNR1 in L6-S2, but not L4-L5, DRGs. Concurrently, chronic stress
increased expression of the histone acetyltransferase EP300 and increased histone
acetylation at the Trpv1 promoter and expression of the TRPV1 receptor in L6-S2
DRG neurons. Knockdown of DNMT1 and EP300 in L6-S2 DRG neurons of rats reduced
DNA methylation and histone acetylation, respectively, and prevented chronic
stress-induced increases in visceral pain.
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic stress increases DNA methylation and histone acetylation of 
genes that regulate visceral pain sensation in the peripheral nervous system of
rats. Blocking epigenetic regulatory pathways in specific regions of the spinal
cord might be developed to treat patients with chronic abdominal pain.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4274248
PMID: 25263804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Sep 25;5:e1426. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.386.

MiR-630 inhibits proliferation by targeting CDC7 kinase, but maintains the
apoptotic balance by targeting multiple modulators in human lung cancer A549
cells.

Cao JX(1), Lu Y(1), Qi JJ(1), An GS(1), Mao ZB(1), Jia HT(2), Li SY(1), Ni JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health
Science Center, Xue Yuan Road 38, Beijing 100191, People's Republic of China.
(2)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health 
Science Center, Xue Yuan Road 38, Beijing 100191, People's Republic of China [2] 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Capital Medical University, You
An Men 8, Beijing 100069, People's Republic of China.

MicroRNAome analyses have shown microRNA-630 (miR-630) to be involved in the
regulation of apoptosis. However, its apoptotic role is still debated and its
participation in DNA replication is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that miR-630
inhibits cell proliferation by targeting cell-cycle kinase 7 (CDC7) kinase, but
maintains the apoptotic balance by targeting multiple activators of apoptosis
under genotoxic stress. We identified a novel regulatory mechanism of CDC7 gene
expression, in which miR-630 downregulated CDC7 expression by recognizing and
binding to four binding sites in CDC7 3'-UTR. We found that miR-630 was highly
expressed in A549 and NIH3T3 cells where CDC7 was downregulated, but lower in
H1299, MCF7, MDA-MB-231, HeLa and 2BS cells where CDC7 was upregulated.
Furthermore, the induction of miR-630 occurred commonly in a variety of human
cancer and immortalized cells in response to genotoxic agents. Importantly,
downregulation of CDC7 by miR-630 was associated with cisplatin (CIS)-induced
inhibitory proliferation in A549 cells. Mechanistically, miR-630 exerted its
inhibitory proliferation by blocking CDC7-mediated initiation of DNA synthesis
and by inducing G1 arrest, but maintains apoptotic balance under CIS exposure. On
the one hand, miR-630 promoted apoptosis by downregulation of CDC7; on the other 
hand, it reduced apoptosis by downregulating several apoptotic modulators such as
PARP3, DDIT4, EP300 and EP300 downstream effector p53, thereby maintaining the
apoptotic balance. Our data indicate that miR-630 has a bimodal role in the
regulation of apoptosis in response to DNA damage. Our data also support the
notion that a certain mRNA can be targeted by several miRNAs, and in particular
an miRNA may target a set of mRNAs. These data afford a comprehensive view of
microRNA-dependent control of gene expression in the regulation of apoptosis
under genotoxic stress.

PMCID: PMC4225225
PMID: 25255219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Cell Physiol. 2015 May;230(5):1042-53. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24832.

LIGHT is a crucial mediator of airway remodeling.

Hung JY(1), Chiang SR, Tsai MJ, Tsai YM, Chong IW, Shieh JM, Hsu YL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department
of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Chronic inflammatory airway diseases like asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease are major health problems globally. Airway epithelial cells
play important role in airway remodeling, which is a critical process in the
pathogenesis of diseases. This study aimed to demonstrate that LIGHT, an
inflammatory factor secreted by T cells after allergen exposure, is responsible
for promoting airway remodeling. LIGHT increased primary human bronchial
epithelial cells (HBECs) undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
expressing MMP-9. The induction of EMT was associated with increased NF-<U+03BA>B
activation and p300/NF-<U+03BA>B association. The interaction of NF-<U+03BA>B with p300
facilitated NF-<U+03BA>B acetylation, which in turn, was bound to the promoter of ZEB1, 
resulting in E-cadherin downregulation. LIGHT also stimulated HBECs to produce
numerous cytokines/chemokines that could worsen airway inflammation. Furthermore,
LIGHT enhanced HBECs to secrete activin A, which increased bronchial smooth
muscle cell (BSMC) migration. In contrast, depletion of activin A decreased such 
migration. The findings suggest a new molecular determinant of LIGHT-mediated
pathogenic changes in HBECs and that the LIGHT-related vicious cycle involving
HBECs and BSMCs may be a potential target for the treatment of chronic
inflammation airway diseases with airway remodeling.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25251281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct;42(18):11363-82. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku827. Epub 2014
Sep 23.

Genome-wide and single-cell analyses reveal a context dependent relationship
between CBP recruitment and gene expression.

Kasper LH(1), Qu C(2), Obenauer JC(2), McGoldrick DJ(2), Brindle PK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny
Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA lawryn.kasper@stjude.org. (2)Department of
Computational Biology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas
Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's 
Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Genome-wide distribution of histone H3K18 and H3K27 acetyltransferases, CBP
(CREBBP) and p300 (EP300), is used to map enhancers and promoters, but whether
these elements functionally require CBP/p300 remains largely uncertain. Here we
compared global CBP recruitment with gene expression in wild-type and CBP/p300
double-knockout (dKO) fibroblasts. ChIP-seq using CBP-null cells as a control
revealed nearby CBP recruitment for 20% of constitutively-expressed genes, but
surprisingly, three-quarters of these genes were unaffected or slightly activated
in dKO cells. Computationally defined enhancer-promoter-units (EPUs) having a CBP
peak near the enhancer-like element were more predictive, with CBP/p300 deletion 
attenuating expression of 40% of such constitutively-expressed genes. Examining
signal-responsive (Hypoxia Inducible Factor) genes showed that 97% were within 50
kilobases of an inducible CBP peak, and 70% of these required CBP/p300 for full
induction. Unexpectedly, most inducible CBP peaks occurred near
signal-nonresponsive genes. Finally, single-cell expression analysis revealed
additional context dependence where some signal-responsive genes were not
uniformly dependent on CBP/p300 in individual cells. While CBP/p300 was needed
for full induction of some genes in single-cells, for other genes CBP/p300
increased the probability of maximal expression. Thus, target gene context
influences the transcriptional requirement for CBP/p300, possibly by multiple
mechanisms.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4191404
PMID: 25249627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Exp Mol Pathol. 2014 Dec;97(3):411-24. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2014.09.019. Epub
2014 Sep 18.

Inhibition of p300 suppresses growth of breast cancer. Role of p300 subcellular
localization.

Fermento ME(1), Gandini NA(2), Salomón DG(3), Ferronato MJ(4), Vitale CA(5),
Arévalo J(6), López Romero A(7), Nuñez M(8), Jung M(9), Facchinetti MM(10),
Curino AC(11).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología del Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas
Bahía Blanca, Centro Científico Tecnológico (INIBIBB-CCT-CONICET), Camino La
Carrindanga Km. 7, 8000 Bahía Blanca, Argentina. Electronic address:
efermento@criba.edu.ar. (2)Laboratorio de Biología del Cáncer, Instituto de
Investigaciones Bioquímicas Bahía Blanca, Centro Científico Tecnológico
(INIBIBB-CCT-CONICET), Camino La Carrindanga Km. 7, 8000 Bahía Blanca, Argentina.
Electronic address: ngandini@uns.edu.ar. (3)Laboratorio de Biología del Cáncer,
Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas Bahía Blanca, Centro Científico
Tecnológico (INIBIBB-CCT-CONICET), Camino La Carrindanga Km. 7, 8000 Bahía
Blanca, Argentina. Electronic address: dsalomon@criba.edu.ar. (4)Laboratorio de
Biología del Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas Bahía Blanca,
Centro Científico Tecnológico (INIBIBB-CCT-CONICET), Camino La Carrindanga Km. 7,
8000 Bahía Blanca, Argentina. Electronic address: jferronato@criba.edu.ar.
(5)Departamento de Química, Instituto de Química del Sur (INQUISUR-CONICET),
Universidad Nacional del Sur, Av. Alem 1253, 8000 Bahía Blanca, Argentina.
Electronic address: cvitale@criba.edu.ar. (6)Servicio de Patología del Hospital
Interzonal General de Agudos Dr. José Penna, Av. Lainez 2401, 8000 Bahía Blanca, 
Argentina. Electronic address: arevalo_julian@hotmail.com. (7)Departamento de
Hematología, IACA, San Martín 68, 8000 Bahía Blanca, Argentina. Electronic
address: hematologia@iaca.com.ar. (8)Cátedra de Matemática, Departamento de
Físico-Matemática, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Viamonte 444, C1053ABJ Ciudad autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Electronic address: myr1710@yahoo.com. (9)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Albert-Ludwigs University Freiburg, Albertstrasse 25, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
Electronic address: manfred.jung@pharmazie.uni-freiburg.de. (10)Laboratorio de
Biología del Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas Bahía Blanca,
Centro Científico Tecnológico (INIBIBB-CCT-CONICET), Camino La Carrindanga Km. 7,
8000 Bahía Blanca, Argentina. Electronic address: facchinm@criba.edu.ar.
(11)Laboratorio de Biología del Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas 
Bahía Blanca, Centro Científico Tecnológico (INIBIBB-CCT-CONICET), Camino La
Carrindanga Km. 7, 8000 Bahía Blanca, Argentina. Electronic address:
acurino@criba.edu.ar.

There is evidence that p300, a transcriptional co-factor and a lysine
acetyl-transferase, could play a role both as an oncoprotein and as a tumor
suppressor, although little is known regarding its role in breast cancer (BC).
First we investigated the role p300 has on BC by performing pharmacological
inhibition of p300 acetyl-transferase function and analyzing the effects on cell 
count, migration and invasion in LM3 murine breast cancer cell line and on tumor 
progression in a syngeneic murine model. We subsequently studied p300 protein
expression in human BC biopsies and evaluated its correlation with clinical and
histopathological parameters of the patients. We observed that inhibition of p300
induced apoptosis and reduced migration and invasion in cultured LM3 cells.
Furthermore, a significant reduction in tumor burden, number of lung metastases
and number of tumors invading the abdominal cavity was observed in a syngeneic
tumor model of LM3 following treatment with the p300 inhibitor. This reduction in
tumor burden was accompanied by a decrease in the mitotic index and Ki-67 levels 
and an increase in Bax expression. Moreover, the analysis of p300 expression in
human BC samples showed that p300 immunoreactivity is significantly higher in the
cancerous tissues than in the non-malignant mammary tissues and in the
histologically normal adjacent tissues. Interestingly, p300 was observed in the
cytoplasm, and the rate of cytoplasmic p300 was higher in BC than in non-tumor
tissues. Importantly, we found that cytoplasmic localization of p300 is
associated with a longer overall survival time of the patients. In conclusion, we
demonstrated that inhibition of the acetylase function of p300 reduces both cell 
count and invasion in LM3 cells, and decreases tumor progression in the animal
model. In addition, we show that the presence of p300 in the cytoplasm correlates
with increased survival of patients suggesting that its nuclear localization is
necessary for the pro-tumoral effects.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25240203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 17;9(9):e107888. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107888.
eCollection 2014.

Aortic and carotid arterial stiffness and epigenetic regulator gene expression
changes precede blood pressure rise in stroke-prone Dahl salt-sensitive
hypertensive rats.

Herrera VL(1), Decano JL(1), Giordano N(1), Moran AM(1), Ruiz-Opazo N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Whitaker Cardiovascular Institute, Department of Medicine, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Multiple clinical studies show that arterial stiffness, measured as pulse wave
velocity (PWV), precedes hypertension and is an independent predictor of
hypertension end organ diseases including stroke, cardiovascular disease and
chronic kidney disease. Risk factor studies for arterial stiffness implicate age,
hypertension and sodium. However, causal mechanisms linking risk factor to
arterial stiffness remain to be elucidated. Here, we studied the causal
relationship of arterial stiffness and hypertension in the Na-induced,
stroke-prone Dahl salt-sensitive (S) hypertensive rat model, and analyzed
putative molecular mechanisms. Stroke-prone and non-stroke-prone male and female 
rats were studied at 3- and 6-weeks of age for arterial stiffness (PWV, strain), 
blood pressure, vessel wall histology, and gene expression changes. Studies
showed that increased left carotid and aortic arterial stiffness preceded
hypertension, pulse pressure widening, and structural wall changes at the 6-week 
time-point. Instead, differential gene induction was detected implicating
molecular-functional changes in extracellular matrix (ECM) structural
constituents, modifiers, cell adhesion, and matricellular proteins, as well as in
endothelial function, apoptosis balance, and epigenetic regulators.
Immunostaining testing histone modifiers Ep300, HDAC3, and PRMT5 levels confirmed
carotid artery-upregulation in all three layers: endothelial, smooth muscle and
adventitial cells. Our study recapitulates observations in humans that given
salt-sensitivity, increased Na-intake induced arterial stiffness before
hypertension, increased pulse pressure, and structural vessel wall changes.
Differential gene expression changes associated with arterial stiffness suggest a
molecular mechanism linking sodium to full-vessel wall response affecting
gene-networks involved in vascular ECM structure-function, apoptosis balance, and
epigenetic regulation.

PMCID: PMC4168262
PMID: 25229245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Dec 1;34(23):4257-71. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00734-14. Epub 2014
Sep 15.

A cell-autonomous molecular cascade initiated by AMP-activated protein kinase
represses steroidogenesis.

Abdou HS(1), Bergeron F(1), Tremblay JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction, Mother and Child Health, Centre de Recherche du Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Québec City, Québec, Canada.
(2)Reproduction, Mother and Child Health, Centre de Recherche du Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Québec City, Québec, Canada Centre for
Research in Biology of Reproduction, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and
Reproduction, Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, Québec City, Québec, Canada 
Jacques-J.Tremblay@crchul.ulaval.ca.

Steroid hormones regulate essential physiological processes, and inadequate
levels are associated with various pathological conditions. In
testosterone-producing Leydig cells, steroidogenesis is strongly stimulated by
luteinizing hormone (LH) via its receptor leading to increased cyclic AMP (cAMP) 
production and expression of the steroidogenic acute regulatory (STAR) protein,
which is essential for the initiation of steroidogenesis. Steroidogenesis then
passively decreases with the degradation of cAMP into AMP by phosphodiesterases. 
In this study, we show that AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is activated
following cAMP-to-AMP breakdown in MA-10 and MLTC-1 Leydig cells. Activated AMPK 
then actively inhibits cAMP-induced steroidogenesis by repressing the expression 
of key regulators of steroidogenesis, including Star and Nr4a1. Similar results
were obtained in Y-1 adrenal cells and in the constitutively steroidogenic R2C
cells. We have also determined that maximum AMPK activation following stimulation
of steroidogenesis in MA-10 Leydig cells occurs when steroid hormone production
has reached a plateau. Our data identify AMPK as a molecular rheostat that
actively represses steroid hormone biosynthesis to preserve cellular energy
homeostasis and prevent excess steroid production.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4248749
PMID: 25225331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014 Aug;18(16):2306-10.

Partial least squares based gene expression analysis in posttraumatic stress
disorder.

Dong K(1), Zhang F, Zhu W, Wang Z, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Wuxi Mental Health Center of Nanjing Medical
University, Wuxi, China. kunlundong2013@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is an adverse psychological
response to traumatic events. Microarray technology for large-scale gene
expression analysis facilitates the identification of signatures that underlie
the pathogenesis of PTSD. Previous studies mostly used variance/regression
analysis without considering array specific factors. We aim to investigate the
underlying mechanism of PTSD through partial least squares (PLS) based analysis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: With a gene expression profile data set for 17 chronic
PTSD patients and 16 controls recovered from psychological trauma from the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, we performed Partial Least Square (PLS) based 
analysis.
RESULTS: We acquired 230 down-regulated genes and 335 up-regulated genes.
Significantly increased representations of dysregulated genes in immune,
endocrine and nervous pathways were identified. Among the top 5 hub genes in the 
network, PRKCA has been reported to be related with PTSD before. Three other
genes, TP53, EP300 and CALM1 might also contribute to the pathogenesis of PTSD
since they are all related with other neuronal disorders.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings shed light on expression signatures of PTSD with the
hope to give further theoretical supports for future therapeutic study.

PMID: 25219830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Cell. 2014 Oct 23;56(2):261-74. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.08.007. Epub 2014 
Sep 11.

Modification of ASC1 by UFM1 is crucial for ERa transactivation and breast cancer
development.

Yoo HM(1), Kang SH(1), Kim JY(1), Lee JE(2), Seong MW(1), Lee SW(1), Ka SH(1),
Sou YS(3), Komatsu M(3), Tanaka K(3), Lee ST(2), Noh DY(2), Baek SH(1), Jeon
YJ(4), Chung CH(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-742, Korea. (2)Departments of Internal Medicine, Surgery,
and Neurology, College of Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-744,
Korea. (3)Laboratory of Frontier Science, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical
Science, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan. (4)School of Biological Sciences, College of
Natural Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea. Electronic
address: gydbs98@snu.ac.kr. (5)School of Biological Sciences, College of Natural 
Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea. Electronic address:
chchung@snu.ac.kr.

Biological roles for UFM1, a ubiquitin-like protein, are largely unknown, and
therefore we screened for targets of ufmylation. Here we show that ufmylation of 
the nuclear receptor coactivator ASC1 is a key step for ERa transactivation in
response to 17ß-estradiol (E2). In the absence of E2, the UFM1-specific protease 
UfSP2 was bound to ASC1, which maintains ASC1 in a nonufmylated state. In the
presence of E2, ERa bound ASC1 and displaced UfSP2, leading to ASC1 ufmylation.
Polyufmylation of ASC1 enhanced association of p300, SRC1, and ASC1 at promoters 
of ERa target genes. ASC1 overexpression or UfSP2 knockdown promoted ERa-mediated
tumor formation in vivo, which could be abrogated by treatment with the
anti-breast cancer drug tamoxifen. In contrast, expression of
ufmylation-deficient ASC1 mutant or knockdown of the UFM1-activating E1 enzyme
UBA5 prevented tumor growth. These findings establish a role for ASC1 ufmylation 
in breast cancer development by promoting ERa transactivation.

PMID: 25219498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2014 Jun;49(6):849-53.

[Development of a novel screening assay for inhibitors targeting HIF-1alpha and
P300 interaction].

[Article in Chinese]

Lai FF, Niu F, Yang HZ, Zhou WQ, Chen XG.

Hypoxia is a general characteristic of most solid malignancies and intimately
related to cancer progression. Homeostatic response to hypoxia is primarily
mediated by hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) that elicits
transcriptional activity through recruitment P300 coactivator. Targeting the
interaction of HIF- alpha and P300 would thus constitute a novel approach for
cancer treatment by suppressing tumor angiogenesis and metastasis. Here, a
screening assay was developed for inhibitors targeting the interaction between
HIF-1alpha and P300. The nucleotide sequence of human HIF-1alpha and P300 were
cloned into pBIND and pACT vectors, named pBIND-HIF1alpha and pACT-P300. The
interaction of HIF-1alpha and P300 was identified in HEK293 cell using mammalian 
two-hybrid system. And compound chetomin decreased their interaction in this
mammalian two-hybrid system. We further verified HIF-1 inhibition effect of
chetomin in U251-HRE cells. Therefore, we established a screening assay combined 
HIF-1alpha and P300 mammalian two-hybrid system and U251-HRE reporter assay for
HIF-1 selective inhibitors.

PMID: 25212031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 16;111(37):13457-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1408023111. Epub 2014 Sep 3.

Stat3 promotes IL-10 expression in lupus T cells through trans-activation and
chromatin remodeling.

Hedrich CM(1), Rauen T(2), Apostolidis SA(3), Grammatikos AP(3), Rodriguez
Rodriguez N(3), Ioannidis C(3), Kyttaris VC(3), Crispin JC(3), Tsokos GC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; Pädiatrische
Rheumatologie und Immunologie, Klinik und Poliklinik für Kinder- und
Jugendmedizin, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany; and christian.hedrich@uniklinikum-dresden.de
gtsokos@bidmc.harvard.edu. (2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215;
Klinik für Nieren- und Hochdruckkrankheiten, Rheumatologie und Immunologische
Erkrankungen, Medizinische Klinik III, Uniklinikum Rheinisch-Westfälische
Technische Hochschule Aachen, 52062 Aachen, Germany. (3)Division of Rheumatology,
Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215; (4)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215;
christian.hedrich@uniklinikum-dresden.de gtsokos@bidmc.harvard.edu.

The immune-regulatory cytokine IL-10 plays a central role during innate and
adaptive immune responses. IL-10 is elevated in the serum and tissues of patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), an autoimmune disorder characterized by 
autoantibody production, immune-complex formation, and altered cytokine
expression. Because of its B cell-promoting effects, IL-10 may contribute to
autoantibody production and tissue damage in SLE. We aimed to determine molecular
events governing T cell-derived IL-10 expression in health and disease. We link
reduced DNA methylation of the IL10 gene with increased recruitment of Stat
family transcription factors. Stat3 and Stat5 recruitment to the IL10 promoter
and an intronic enhancer regulate gene expression. Both Stat3 and Stat5 mediate
trans-activation and epigenetic remodeling of IL10 through their interaction with
the histone acetyltransferase p300. In T cells from SLE patients, activation of
Stat3 is increased, resulting in enhanced recruitment to regulatory regions and
competitive replacement of Stat5, subsequently promoting IL-10 expression. A
complete understanding of the molecular events governing cytokine expression will
provide new treatment options in autoimmune disorders, including SLE. The
observation that altered activation of Stat3 influences IL-10 expression in T
cells from SLE patients offers molecular targets in the search for novel
target-directed treatment options.

PMCID: PMC4169908
PMID: 25187566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 29;9(8):e106277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106277.
eCollection 2014.

Diet-induced obesity modulates epigenetic responses to ionizing radiation in
mice.

Vares G(1), Wang B(1), Ishii-Ohba H(1), Nenoi M(1), Nakajima T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Radiation Protection, National Institute of Radiological
Sciences, Inage-ku, Chiba, Japan.

Both exposure to ionizing radiation and obesity have been associated with various
pathologies including cancer. There is a crucial need in better understanding the
interactions between ionizing radiation effects (especially at low doses) and
other risk factors, such as obesity. In order to evaluate radiation responses in 
obese animals, C3H and C57BL/6J mice fed a control normal fat or a high fat (HF) 
diet were exposed to fractionated doses of X-rays (0.75 Gy ×4). Bone marrow
micronucleus assays did not suggest a modulation of radiation-induced
genotoxicity by HF diet. Using MSP, we observed that the promoters of p16 and
Dapk genes were methylated in the livers of C57BL/6J mice fed a HF diet
(irradiated and non-irradiated); Mgmt promoter was methylated in irradiated
and/or HF diet-fed mice. In addition, methylation PCR arrays identified Ep300 and
Socs1 (whose promoters exhibited higher methylation levels in non-irradiated HF
diet-fed mice) as potential targets for further studies. We then compared
microRNA regulations after radiation exposure in the livers of C57BL/6J mice fed 
a normal or an HF diet, using microRNA arrays. Interestingly, radiation-triggered
microRNA regulations observed in normal mice were not observed in obese mice.
miR-466e was upregulated in non-irradiated obese mice. In vitro free fatty acid
(palmitic acid, oleic acid) administration sensitized AML12 mouse liver cells to 
ionizing radiation, but the inhibition of miR-466e counteracted this
radio-sensitization, suggesting that the modulation of radiation responses by
diet-induced obesity might involve miR-466e expression. All together, our results
suggested the existence of dietary effects on radiation responses (especially
epigenetic regulations) in mice, possibly in relationship with obesity-induced
chronic oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC4149562
PMID: 25171162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Mol Biol. 2014 Dec 12;426(24):3960-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.08.011. Epub
2014 Aug 23.

The PHD finger of p300 influences its ability to acetylate histone and
non-histone targets.

Rack JG(1), Lutter T(2), Kjæreng Bjerga GE(3), Guder C(4), Ehrhardt C(5), Värv
S(2), Ziegler M(2), Aasland R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, Postbox 7803, 5020
Bergen, Norway; Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3RE, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Molecular Biology,
University of Bergen, Postbox 7803, 5020 Bergen, Norway. (3)Department of
Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, Postbox 7803, 5020 Bergen, Norway;
Centre for Applied Biotechnology, Uni Research, Postbox 7810, 5020 Bergen,
Norway. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, Postbox 7803,
5020 Bergen, Norway; Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Bergen,
Haukelandsveien 28, 5020 Bergen, Norway. (5)Department of Molecular Biology,
University of Bergen, Postbox 7803, 5020 Bergen, Norway; Institute of Molecular
Biotechnology (IMBA), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria. (6)Department of
Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, Postbox 7803, 5020 Bergen, Norway.
Electronic address: aasland@mbi.uib.no.

In enzymes that regulate chromatin structure, the combinatorial occurrence of
modules that alter and recognise histone modifications is a recurrent feature. In
this study, we explored the functional relationship between the acetyltransferase
domain and the adjacent bromodomain/PHD finger (bromo/PHD) region of the
transcriptional coactivator p300. We found that the bromo/PHD region of p300 can 
bind to the acetylated catalytic domain in vitro and augment the catalytic
activity of the enzyme. Deletion of the PHD finger, but not the bromodomain,
impaired the ability of the enzyme to acetylate histones in vivo, whilst it
enhanced p300 self-acetylation. A point mutation in the p300 PHD finger that is
related to the Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome resulted in increased self-acetylation
but retained the ability to acetylate histones. Hence, the PHD finger appears to 
negatively regulate self-acetylation. Furthermore, our data suggest that the PHD 
finger has a role in the recruitment of p300 to chromatin.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25158095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Strahlenther Onkol. 2015 Jan;191(1):59-66. doi: 10.1007/s00066-014-0741-y. Epub
2014 Aug 26.

Association between SNPs in defined functional pathways and risk of early or late
toxicity as well as individual radiosensitivity.

Reuther S(1), Szymczak S, Raabe A, Borgmann K, Ziegler A, Petersen C, Dikomey E, 
Hoeller U.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Radiobiology & Experimental Radiooncology, Department of
Radiotherapy and Radiooncology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistr. 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to determine the impact of
functional single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) pathways involved in the ROS
pathway, DNA repair, or TGFB1 signaling on acute or late normal toxicity as well 
as individual radiosensitivity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients receiving breast-conserving surgery and
radiotherapy were examined either for erythema (n = 83), fibrosis (n = 123), or
individual radiosensitivity (n = 123). The 17 SNPs analyzed are involved in the
ROS pathway (GSTP1, SOD2, NQO1, NOS3, XDH), DNA repair (XRCC1, XRCC3, XRCC6,
ERCC2, LIG4, ATM) or TGFB signaling (SKIL, EP300, APC, AXIN1, TGFB1).
Associations with biological and clinical endpoints were studied for single SNPs 
but especially for combinations of SNPs assuming that a SNP is either beneficial 
or deleterious and needs to be weighted.
RESULTS: With one exception, no significant association was seen between a single
SNP and the three endpoints studied. No significant associations were also
observed when applying a multi-SNP model assuming that each SNP was deleterious. 
In contrast, significant associations were obtained when SNPs were suggested to
be either beneficial or deleterious. These associations increased, when each SNP 
was weighted individually. Detailed analysis revealed that both erythema and
individual radiosensitivity especially depend on SNPs affecting DNA repair and
TGFB1 signaling, while SNPs in ROS pathway were of minor importance.
CONCLUSION: Functional pathways of SNPs may be used to form a risk score allowing
to predict acute and late radiation-induced toxicity but also to unravel the
underlying biological mechanisms.

PMID: 25156511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Oral Pathol Med. 2015 Mar;44(3):185-92. doi: 10.1111/jop.12227. Epub 2014 Aug
26.

The role of p300 in the tumor progression of oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Cho YA(1), Hong JS, Choe EJ, Yoon HJ, Hong SD, Lee JI, Hong SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology, School of Dentistry and
Research Center for Tooth and Periodontal Regeneration (MRC), Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: EP300 gene encoding p300 is a candidate tumor suppressor gene. This
study investigated p300 expression and gene alteration in oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) specimens to assess its role in OSCC development.
METHODS: Genomic DNA extracted from 13 human OSCC cell lines and 40 OSCC patient 
specimens was subjected to methylation-specific PCR and exon sequencing.
Immunohistochemical staining with primary antibodies against p300 and p53 was
performed in 48 patients with OSCC. We analyzed the association between the data 
and clinicopathological factors of OSCC patients.
RESULTS: Methylation-specific PCR revealed that the EP300 promoter region was not
hypermethylated in OSCC. Only one cell line demonstrated a point mutation at exon
31. On immunohistochemical examination, patients with metastatic lymph nodes (P =
0.009) and advanced clinical stage (P = 0.046) tended to show increased
expression of p300. There was no statistically significant relationship between
p300 expression and p53 accumulation in OSCC tissue samples. Patient survival was
not correlated with p300 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: EP300 is not a tumor suppressor gene because there was neither
epigenetic inactivation of the gene nor a mutation resulting in functional
impairment. Based on p300 overexpression and its association with clinical
factors in patients with OSCC, it is likely that p300 itself or one of its target
genes plays a key role in the aggressive phenotypes of OSCC.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25154636  [PubMed - in process]


116. Nat Genet. 2014 Oct;46(10):1097-102. doi: 10.1038/ng.3076. Epub 2014 Aug 24.

Genetic landscape of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Gao YB(1), Chen ZL(1), Li JG(1), Hu XD(1), Shi XJ(1), Sun ZM(1), Zhang F(1), Zhao
ZR(2), Li ZT(2), Liu ZY(1), Zhao YD(1), Sun J(1), Zhou CC(1), Yao R(1), Wang
SY(1), Wang P(2), Sun N(1), Zhang BH(1), Dong JS(1), Yu Y(1), Luo M(1), Feng
XL(3), Shi SS(3), Zhou F(1), Tan FW(1), Qiu B(1), Li N(1), Shao K(1), Zhang
LJ(4), Zhang LJ(5), Xue Q(1), Gao SG(1), He J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Cancer Institute and Hospital Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Cancer Institute and Hospital Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. (4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking
University Cancer Hospital, Beijing, China. (5)Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China.

Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is one of the deadliest cancers. We
performed exome sequencing on 113 tumor-normal pairs, yielding a mean of 82
non-silent mutations per tumor, and 8 cell lines. The mutational profile of ESCC 
closely resembles those of squamous cell carcinomas of other tissues but differs 
from that of esophageal adenocarcinoma. Genes involved in cell cycle and
apoptosis regulation were mutated in 99% of cases by somatic alterations of TP53 
(93%), CCND1 (33%), CDKN2A (20%), NFE2L2 (10%) and RB1 (9%). Histone modifier
genes were frequently mutated, including KMT2D (also called MLL2; 19%), KMT2C
(MLL3; 6%), KDM6A (7%), EP300 (10%) and CREBBP (6%). EP300 mutations were
associated with poor survival. The Hippo and Notch pathways were dysregulated by 
mutations in FAT1, FAT2, FAT3 or FAT4 (27%) or AJUBA (JUB; 7%) and NOTCH1, NOTCH2
or NOTCH3 (22%) or FBXW7 (5%), respectively. These results define the mutational 
landscape of ESCC and highlight mutations in epigenetic modulators with
prognostic and potentially therapeutic implications.

PMID: 25151357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Jul 15;7(7):1659-68. eCollection 2014.

Camk2b protects neurons from homocysteine-induced apoptosis with the involvement 
of HIF-1a signal pathway.

Fang M(1), Feng C(2), Zhao YX(1), Liu XY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji University
Shanghai, China. (2)The Fourth Affiliated Hospital Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine Yiwu, China.

In our previous study using iTRAQ technique we found that the level of
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 2b (Camk2b) was lower in rats with
hyperhomocysteinemia. We presumed that Camk2b might be involved in
homocysteine-induced apoptosis and tried to explore its role in this study
through the transfection with Camk2b gene. Results showed that neurons of HHcy
group had lower activity measured by MTT, higher percentage of apoptotic neurons,
lower expression levels of Camk2b mRNA and protein than those in normal group.
Neurons with overexpression of Camk2b (Camk2b group) had lower percentage of
apoptosis and higher activity than those in control group. After exposure to
2-Methoxyestradiol, the activity of neurons with overexpression of Camk2b was
suppressed with more apoptotic cells observed. The expressions of BCL2, eNOS,
EP300 and EPO were all elevated at both mRNA and protein levels in neurons of
CamK2b group compared with other three groups. Thus, Camk2b protects neurons from
Homocysteine-induced apoptosis with the involvement of HIF-1a signal pathway.

PMCID: PMC4132126
PMID: 25126162  [PubMed]


118. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Dec 5;455(1-2):24-34. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.004. Epub 2014 Aug 9.

Somatic alterations and dysregulation of epigenetic modifiers in cancers.

Aumann S(1), Abdel-Wahab O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Leukemia
Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
Electronic address: abdelwao@mskcc.org.

Genomic discovery efforts in patients with cancer have been critical in
identifying a recurrent theme of mutations in epigenetic modifiers. A number of
novel and exciting basic biological findings have come from this work including
the discovery of an enzymatic pathway for DNA cytosine demethylation, a link
between cancer metabolism and epigenetics, and the critical importance of
post-translational modifications at specific histone residues in malignant
transformation. Identification of cancer cell dependency on a number of these
mutations has quickly resulted in the development of therapies targeting several 
of these genetic alterations. This includes, the development of mutant-selective 
IDH1 and IDH2 inhibitors, DOT1L inhibitors for MLL rearranged leukemias, EZH2
inhibitors for several cancer types, and the development of bromodomain
inhibitors for many cancer types--all of which are in early phase clinical
trials. In many cases, however, specific genetic targets linked to malignant
transformation following mutations in individual epigenetic modifiers are not yet
known. In this review we present functional evidence of how alterations in
frequently mutated epigenetic modifiers promote malignant transformation and how 
these alterations are being targeted for cancer therapeutics.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25111821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Chem Biol Interact. 2014 Sep 25;221:35-41. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2014.07.011. Epub
2014 Aug 2.

Caffeine induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy via p300 and CaMKII pathways.

Shi L(1), Xu H(1), Wei J(1), Ma X(1), Zhang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of
Education, School of Life Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University,
Xi'an 710049, People's Republic of China. (2)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical
Information Engineering of Ministry of Education, School of Life Science and
Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, People's Republic of China. 
Electronic address: zhangjb@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.

Caffeine is commonly utilized to trigger intracellular calcium in cardiomyocyte. 
It is well accepted that caffeine could induce cardiac arrhythmia, but it is not 
clear with regard of its impacts on the cardiac function. This article presents a
recent study concerning the effects of caffeine on the cardiomyocyte hypertrophy 
and the associated signal pathway. The experimental results showed that the total
protein contents, the surface area of cardiomyocyte and ß-myosin heavy chain
(ß-MHC) expression increased in ventricular myocytes of neonatal Sprague-Dawley
(SD) rats after 24h caffeine incubation. It is also observed that the basal
intracellular calcium (Ca(2+)) level has increased, while the amplitude of Ca(2+)
oscillation and Ca(2+) content have decreased in sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). The
caffeine-induced myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) expression and hypertrophy can 
be completely abolished by the inhibition of cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2),
as well as KN93 and curcumin treatments. Meanwhile, the amplitude of Ca(2+)
oscillation and the Ca(2+) content of SR in the completely-inhibited group have
reached the physiological level. These results suggest that the caffeine-induced 
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy established the connection between Ca(2+) release from 
SR and cytosol that activates CaMKII and p300, which in turn enhances the
expression of MEF2 that promotes cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25093688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Sep;395(1-2):19-31. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.07.020.
Epub 2014 Aug 1.

Reciprocal occupancy of BCL6 and STAT5 on Growth Hormone target genes:
contrasting transcriptional outcomes and promoter-specific roles of p300 and
HDAC3.

Lin G(1), LaPensee CR(2), Qin ZS(3), Schwartz J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular & Molecular Biology Program, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA; Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (2)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. (4)Department of Molecular & 
Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. Electronic
address: jeschwar@umich.edu.

Expression of the Growth Hormone (GH)-stimulated gene Socs2 (Suppressor of
Cytokine Signaling 2) is mediated by the transcription activator STAT5 (Signal
Transducer and Activator of Transcription 5) and the transcription repressor BCL6
(B-Cell Lymphoma 6). ChIP-Sequencing identified Cish (Cytokine-Inducible
SH2-containing protein) and Bcl6 as having similar patterns of reciprocal
occupancy by BCL6 and STAT5 in response to GH, though GH stimulates Cish and
inhibits Bcl6 expression. The co-activator p300 occupied Socs2, Cish and Bcl6
promoters, and enhanced STAT5-mediated activation of Socs2 and Cish. In contrast,
on Bcl6, p300 functioned as a repressor and inhibited in conjunction with STAT5
or BCL6. The co-repressor HDAC3 (Histone deacetylase 3) inhibited the Socs2, Cish
and Bcl6 promoters in the presence of STAT5. Thus transcriptional outcomes on
GH-regulated genes occupied by BCL6 and STAT5 are determined in a
promoter-specific fashion by co-regulatory proteins which mediate the distinction
between activating and repressive transcription factors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4176921
PMID: 25088465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2014 Sep;35(9):1157-66. doi: 10.1038/aps.2014.54. Epub 2014
Aug 4.

P300-dependent STAT3 acetylation is necessary for angiotensin II-induced
pro-fibrotic responses in renal tubular epithelial cells.

Ni J(1), Shen Y(1), Wang Z(1), Shao DC(1), Liu J(1), Kong YL(1), Fu LJ(2), Zhou
L(1), Xue H(1), Huang Y(3), Zhang W(1), Yu C(2), Lu LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200032, China. (2)Department of Nephrology, Tongji Hospital,
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. (3)School of
Biomedical Sciences and Institute of Vascular Medicine, Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

AIM: To explore the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)
signaling pathway, especially STAT3 acetylation, in angiotensin II (Ang
II)-induced pro-fibrotic responses in renal tubular epithelial cells.
METHODS: Rat renal tubular epithelial cell line (NRK-52E) was used. STAT3
acetylation and phosphorylation, as well as the expression of fibronectin,
collagen IV and transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) were examined using
Western blotting. The level and localization of STAT3 phosphorylation on Tyr705
were detected with fluorescence immunocytochemistry. The cells were transfected
with a plasmid vector carrying p300 gene or siRNA targeting p300 to regulate p300
expression.
RESULTS: Overexpression of p300 significantly increased STAT3 acetylation on
Lys685, STAT3 phosphorylation on Tyr705, and the expression of TGF-ß1, collagen
IV and fibronectin in the cells. Treatment of the cells with Ang II (1 µmol/L)
significantly increased STAT3 phosphorylation on Tyr705 through JAK2 activation, 
and dose-dependently increased the expression of fibronectin, collagen IV and
TGF-ß1. Pretreatment with curcumin, an inhibitor of JAK2 and p300, blocked Ang
II-induced effects. Knockdown of p300 significantly decreased STAT3 acetylation
on Lys685, and abolished Ang II-stimulated STAT3 phosphorylation on Tyr705,
whereas pretreatment of the cells with C646, a selective inhibitor of p300,
inhibited Ang II-induced STAT3 nuclear translocation and the expression of
TGF-ß1, collagen IV and fibronectin. Pretreatment of the cells with AG490, a JAK2
inhibitor, markedly inhibited Ang II-induced STAT3 phosphorylation on Tyr705 and 
fibronectin expression.
CONCLUSION: p300-dependent STAT3 acetylation is necessary for Ang II-induced
STAT3 phosphorylation and the consequent pro-fibrotic responses in renal tubular 
epithelial cells in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4155527
PMID: 25088002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Cell Sci. 2014 Sep 1;127(Pt 17):3659-65. doi: 10.1242/jcs.149328. Epub 2014 Jul
29.

p300-mediated acetylation of COMMD1 regulates its stability, and the
ubiquitylation and nucleolar translocation of the RelA NF-<U+03BA>B subunit.

O'Hara A(1), Simpson J(1), Morin P(1), Loveridge CJ(1), Williams AC(2), Novo
SM(1), Stark LA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, IGMM, University of Edinburgh, Western
General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK. (2)Colorectal Tumour Biology
Group, School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol 
BS8 1TH, UK. (3)Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, IGMM, University of Edinburgh, 
Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK
Lesley.Stark@IGMM.ed.ac.uk.

Nucleolar sequestration of the RelA subunit of nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B is an
important mechanism for regulating NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional activity.
Ubiquitylation, facilitated by COMMD1 (also known as MURR1), acts as a crucial
nucleolar-targeting signal for RelA, but how this ubiquitylation is regulated,
and how it differs from cytokine-mediated ubiquitylation, which causes
proteasomal degradation of RelA, is poorly understood. Here, we report a new role
for p300 (also known as EP300) in controlling stimulus-specific ubiquitylation of
RelA, through modulation of COMMD1. We show that p300 is required for
stress-mediated ubiquitylation and nucleolar translocation of RelA, but that this
effect is indirect. We also demonstrate that COMMD1 is acetylated by p300 and
that acetylation protects COMMD1 from XIAP-mediated proteosomal degradation.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that COMMD1 acetylation is enhanced by
aspirin-mediated stress, and that this acetylation is absolutely required for the
protein to bind RelA under these conditions. In contrast, tumour necrosis factor 
(TNF) has no effect on COMMD1 acetylation. Finally, we demonstrate these findings
have relevance in a whole tissue setting. These data offer a new paradigm for the
regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional activity, and the multiple other pathways
controlled by COMMD1.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4150058
PMID: 25074812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 22;9(7):e103067. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103067.
eCollection 2014.

Histone acetyltransferase p300 mediates histone acetylation of PS1 and BACE1 in a
cellular model of Alzheimer's disease.

Lu X(1), Deng Y(1), Yu D(2), Cao H(1), Wang L(3), Liu L(4), Yu C(5), Zhang Y(6), 
Guo X(6), Yu G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, P.R. China; Laboratory Research Center, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (3)Department of
Bio-therapy & Hemato-oncology, Chingqing Cancer Institute, Chongqing, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Chongqing Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Chongqing, P.R. China. (5)Genetics and Molecular Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois, United States of America. (6)Department of
Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, P.R. China.

Epigenetic modifications, particularly histone acetylation, have been implicated 
in Alzheimer's disease (AD). While previous studies have suggested that histone
hypoacetylation may regulate the expression of genes associated with memory and
learning in AD, little is known about histone regulation of AD-related genes such
as Presenilin 1(PS1) and beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme
1(BACE1). By utilizing neuroblastoma N2a cells transfected with Swedish mutated
human amyloid precursor protein (APP) (N2a/APPswe) and wild-type APP (N2a/APPwt) 
as cellular models of AD, we examined the alterations of histone acetylation at
the promoter regions of PS1 and BACE1 in these cells. Our results revealed that
histone H3 acetylation in PS1 and BACE1 promoters is markedly increased in
N2a/APPswe cells when compared to N2a/APPwt cells and control cells
(vector-transfected), respectively, causing the elevated expression of PS1 and
BACE1. In addition, expression of histone acetyltransferase (HAT) adenoviral
E1A-associated 300-kDa protein (p300) is dramatically enhanced in N2a/APPswe
cells compared to N2a/APPwt and control cells. We have further demonstrated the
direct binding of p300 protein to the PS1 and BACE1 promoters in N2a/APPswe
cells. The expression levels of H3 acetylation of the PS1 and BACE1 promoters and
p300 protein, however, were found to be not significantly different in N2a/APPwt 
cells when compared to controls in our studies. Furthermore, curcumin, a natural 
selective inhibitor of p300 in HATs, significantly suppressed the expression of
PS1 and BACE1 through inhibition of H3 acetylation in their promoter regions in
N2a/APPswe cells. These findings indicated that histone acetyltransferase p300
plays a critical role in controlling the expression of AD-related genes through
regulating the acetylation of their promoter regions, suggesting that p300 may
represent a novel potential therapeutic target for AD.

PMCID: PMC4106886
PMID: 25051175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Sep;28(9):1522-33. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1130. Epub 2014 Jul 
22.

Transient estrogen receptor binding and p300 redistribution support a squelching 
mechanism for estradiol-repressed genes.

Guertin MJ(1), Zhang X, Coonrod SA, Hager GL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression (M.J.G., G.L.H.), National 
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892; State Key Laboratory of Reproductive 
Medicine (X.Z.), Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China; and Baker
Institute for Animal Health (X.Z., S.A.C.), College of Veterinary Medicine,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853.

Proper gene regulation is essential for proper organismal development and
appropriate responses to external stimuli. Specialized factors, termed master
regulators, are often responsible for orchestrating the molecular events that
result from signaling cascades. Master regulators coordinate the activation and
repression of specific gene classes. Estrogen receptor a (ER) precipitates the
signaling cascade that results from endogenous or exogenous estrogen hormones. ER
is a classic transcriptional activator and the mechanisms by which ER coordinates
gene activation are well characterized. However, it remains unclear how ER
coordinates the immediate repression of genes. We integrated genomic
transcription, chromosome looping, transcription factor binding, and chromatin
structure data to analyze the molecular cascade that results from estradiol
(E2)-induced signaling in human MCF-7 breast cancer cells and addressed the
context-specific nature of gene regulation. We defined a class of genes that are 
immediately repressed upon estrogen stimulation, and we compared and contrasted
the molecular characteristics of these repressed genes vs activated and
unregulated genes. The most striking and unique feature of the repressed gene
class is transient binding of ER at early time points after estrogen stimulation.
We also found that p300, a coactivator and acetyltransferase, quantitatively
redistributes from non-ER enhancers to ER enhancers after E2 treatment. These
data support an extension of the classic physiological squelching model, whereby 
ER hijacks coactivators from repressed genes and redistributes the coactivators
to ER enhancers that activate transcription.

PMCID: PMC4154243
PMID: 25051172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Tissue Eng Regen Med. 2014 Jul 6. doi: 10.1002/term.1927. [Epub ahead of print]

Differentiation of P19 embryonal carcinoma stem cells into insulin-producing
cells promoted by pancreas-conditioned medium.

Mansouri A(1), Esmaeili F, Nejatpour A, Houshmand F, Shabani L, Ebrahimie E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Shahrekord University, Iran.

The ability of embryonal carcinoma )EC (stem cells to generate insulin-producing 
cells (IPCs) is still unknown. We examined the trophic effects of
pancreas-conditioned medium (PCM) on in vitro production of IPCs. Initially, P19 
EC cells were characterized by the expression of stem cell markers, Oct3/4, Sox-2
and Nanog. To direct differentiation, P19-derived embryoid bodies (EBs) were
induced by selection of nestin-positive cells and treatment with different
concentrations of PCM. Morphological studies documented the presence of
islet-like cell IPCs clusters. The differentiated cells were immunoreactive for ß
cell-specific proteins, including insulin, proinsulin, C-peptide and insulin
receptor-ß. The expression of genes related to pancreatic ß cell development and 
function (PDX-1, INS1, INS2, EP300 and CREB1) was confirmed by qPCR. During
differentiation, the expression of EP300 and CREB1 increased by 2.5 and 3.1
times, respectively. In contrast, a sharp decrease in the expression of Oct3/4,
Sox-2 and Nanog by 4, 1.5 and 1.5 times, respectively, was observed. The
differentiated cells were functionally active, synthesizing and secreting insulin
in a glucose-regulated manner. Network prediction highlighted crosstalk between
PDX-1 transcription factor and INS2 ligand in IPC generation and revealed
positive regulatory effects of EP300, CREB1, PPARA, EGR, KIT, GLP1R, and PKT2 on 
activation of PDX-1 and INS2. This is the first report of the induction of IPC
differentiation from EC cells by using neonate mouse PCM. Since P19 EC cells are 
widely available, easily cultured without feeders and do not require special
growth conditions, they would provide a valuable tool for studying pancreatic ß
cell differentiation and development. Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25044225  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


126. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 26;289(39):26752-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.587865. Epub
2014 Jul 17.

Nuclear factor of activated T cells regulates the expression of interleukin-4 in 
Th2 cells in an all-or-none fashion.

Köck J(1), Kreher S(1), Lehmann K(1), Riedel R(1), Bardua M(1), Lischke T(1),
Jargosch M(1), Haftmann C(1), Bendfeldt H(1), Hatam F(1), Mashreghi MF(1),
Baumgrass R(1), Radbruch A(1), Chang HD(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the German Rheumatism Research Center Berlin, a Leibniz Institute,
Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany. (2)From the German Rheumatism Research
Center Berlin, a Leibniz Institute, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany
chang@drfz.de.

Th2 memory lymphocytes have imprinted their Il4 genes epigenetically for
expression in dependence of T cell receptor restimulation. However, in a given
restimulation, not all Th cells with a memory for IL-4 expression express IL-4.
Here, we show that in reactivated Th2 cells, the transcription factors NFATc2,
NF-kB p65, c-Maf, p300, Brg1, STAT6, and GATA-3 assemble at the Il4 promoter in
Th2 cells expressing IL-4 but not in Th2 cells not expressing it. NFATc2 is
critical for assembly of this transcription factor complex. Because NFATc2
translocation into the nucleus occurs in an all-or-none fashion, dependent on
complete dephosphorylation by calcineurin, NFATc2 controls the frequencies of
cells reexpressing Il4, translates analog differences in T cell receptor
stimulation into a digital decision for Il4 reexpression, and instructs all
reexpressing cells to express the same amount of IL-4. This analog-to-digital
conversion may be critical for the immune system to respond to low concentrations
of antigens.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4175318
PMID: 25037220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Eur J Med Chem. 2015 Apr 13;94:509-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2014.06.006. Epub
2014 Jun 27.

Inhibition of the HIF1a-p300 interaction by quinone- and indandione-mediated
ejection of structural Zn(II).

Jayatunga MK(1), Thompson S(2), McKee TC(3), Chan MC(1), Reece KM(4), Hardy
AP(1), Sekirnik R(1), Seden PT(1), Cook KM(4), McMahon JB(3), Figg WD(5),
Schofield CJ(1), Hamilton AD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Chemistry Research Laboratory, University of Oxford, 
Oxford OX1 3TA, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Chemistry, Chemistry Research
Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TA, United Kingdom. Electronic
address: sam.thompson@chem.ox.ac.uk. (3)Center for Cancer Research, Molecular
Targets Laboratory, Frederick National Laboratory Cancer Research, Frederick, MD 
21702, USA. (4)NCI, Mol. Pharmacol. Sect., Med. Oncol. Branch, Ctr. Canc. Res.,
NIH, Bldg. 10, Room 5A01, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (5)NCI,
Mol. Pharmacol. Sect., Med. Oncol. Branch, Ctr. Canc. Res., NIH, Bldg. 10, Room
5A01, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address:
figgw@helix.nih.gov. (6)Department of Chemistry, Chemistry Research Laboratory,
University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TA, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
andrew.hamilton@admin.ox.ac.uk.

Protein-protein interactions between the hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) and the
transcriptional coactivators p300/CBP are potential cancer targets due to their
role in the hypoxic response. A natural product based screen led to the
identification of indandione and benzoquinone derivatives that reduce the tight
interaction between a HIF-1a fragment and the CH1 domain of p300. The indandione 
derivatives were shown to fragment to give ninhydrin, which was identified as the
active species. Both the naphthoquinones and ninhydrin were observed to induce
Zn(II) ejection from p300 and the catalytic domain of the histone demethylase
KDM4A. Together with previous reports on the effects of related compounds on
HIF-1a and other systems, the results suggest that care should be taken in
interpreting biological results obtained with highly electrophilic/thiol
modifying compounds.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4277744 [Available on 2016-04-13]
PMID: 25023609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. RNA Biol. 2014;11(7):865-74. doi: 10.4161/rna.29441. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

CRE promoter sites modulate alternative splicing via p300-mediated histone
acetylation.

Duková E(1), Hnilicová J(2), Stanek D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of RNA Biology, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic; Faculty of Science,
Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. (2)Institute of
Microbiology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. 
(3)Department of RNA Biology, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.

Histone acetylation modulates alternative splicing of several hundred genes.
Here, we tested the role of the histone acetyltransferase p300 in alternative
splicing and showed that knockdown of p300 promotes inclusion of the fibronectin 
(FN1) alternative EDB exon. p300 associates with CRE sites in the promoter via
the CREB transcription factor. We created mini-gene reporters driven by an
artificial promoter containing CRE sites. Both deletion and mutation of the CRE
site affected EDB alternative splicing in the same manner as p300 knockdown. Next
we showed that p300 controls histone H4 acetylation along the FN1 gene.
Consistently, p300 depletion and CRE deletion/mutation both reduced histone H4
acetylation on mini-gene reporters. Finally, we provide evidence that the effect 
of CRE inactivation on H4 acetylation and alternative splicing is counteracted by
the inhibition of histone deacetylases. Together, these data suggest that histone
acetylation could be one of the mechanisms how promoter and promoter binding
proteins influence alternative splicing.

PMCID: PMC4179961
PMID: 25019513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 7;9(7):e99943. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099943. eCollection 
2014.

Melatonin enhances the anti-tumor effect of fisetin by inhibiting COX-2/iNOS and 
NF-<U+03BA>B/p300 signaling pathways.

Yi C(1), Zhang Y(2), Yu Z(1), Xiao Y(3), Wang J(4), Qiu H(4), Yu W(3), Tang R(1),
Yuan Y(1), Guo W(1), Deng W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Medical University Cancer Center,
Dalian, China; The First Affiliated Hospital, Dalian Medical University Cancer
Center, Dalian, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Guangdong No. 2 Provincial 
People's Hospital, Guangzhou, China. (3)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian
Medical University Cancer Center, Dalian, China. (4)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer
Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center of Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China. (5)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell,
Dalian Medical University Cancer Center, Dalian, China; Sun Yat-sen University
Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative
Innovation Center of Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China; The First Affiliated
Hospital, Dalian Medical University Cancer Center, Dalian, China.

Melatonin is a hormone identified in plants and pineal glands of mammals and
possesses diverse physiological functions. Fisetin is a bio-flavonoid widely
found in plants and exerts antitumor activity in several types of human cancers. 
However, the combinational effect of melatonin and fisetin on antitumor activity,
especially in melanoma treatment, remains unclear. Here, we tested the hypothesis
that melatonin could enhance the antitumor activity of fisetin in melanoma cells 
and identified the underlying molecular mechanisms. The combinational treatment
of melanoma cells with fisetin and melatonin significantly enhanced the
inhibitions of cell viability, cell migration and clone formation, and the
induction of apoptosis when compared with the treatment of fisetin alone.
Moreover, such enhancement of antitumor effect by melatonin was found to be
mediated through the modulation of the multiply signaling pathways in melanoma
cells. The combinational treatment of fisetin with melatonin increased the
cleavage of PARP proteins, triggered more release of cytochrome-c from the
mitochondrial inter-membrane, enhanced the inhibition of COX-2 and iNOS
expression, repressed the nuclear localization of p300 and NF-<U+03BA>B proteins, and
abrogated the binding of NF-<U+03BA>B on COX-2 promoter. Thus, these results
demonstrated that melatonin potentiated the anti-tumor effect of fisetin in
melanoma cells by activating cytochrome-c-dependent apoptotic pathway and
inhibiting COX-2/iNOS and NF-<U+03BA>B/p300 signaling pathways, and our study suggests
the potential of such a combinational treatment of natural products in melanoma
therapy.

PMCID: PMC4085069
PMID: 25000190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Br J Dermatol. 2015 Jan;172(1):111-9. doi: 10.1111/bjd.13226. Epub 2014 Dec 7.

Overexpression of p300 correlates with poor prognosis in patients with cutaneous 
squamous cell carcinoma.

Chen MK(1), Cai MY, Luo RZ, Tian X, Liao QM, Zhang XY, Han JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen
University, No. 58, Zhongshan Er Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510080, China.

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that the p300 transcriptional coactivator
participates in the regulation of a wide range of cell biological processes, and 
mutations in p300 have been identified in various cancers.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate p300 expression in cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
(cSCC) tissues and its effect on the outcome of patients with cSCC.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on a tissue microarray to
investigate p300 expression levels in cSCC tissues. Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve analysis, Kaplan-Meier plots and a Cox proportional
hazards regression model were used to analyse the data.
RESULTS: Based on the ROC curves, we defined the cut-off score for high p300
expression as > 55% of tumour cells positively stained. High expression of p300
was observed in 86 of 165 (52·1%) of the cSCC samples and six of 30 (20%) of the 
adjacent normal skin tissue samples (P < 0·001). High expression of p300 was
positively correlated with lymph node metastasis (P = 0·006) and advanced
clinical stage (P < 0·001). In univariate survival analysis, high expression of
p300 was correlated with poor patient outcomes in terms of recurrence-free
survival (P = 0·006) and overall survival (P < 0·001). Moreover, p300 expression 
was evaluated as an independent prognostic factor in a multivariate analysis
(P = 0·004).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that high p300 expression is associated with
aggressive features of cSCC and suggest that p300 expression, as examined by IHC,
will be a promising biomarker for predicting clinical outcomes in patients with
cSCC.

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 24975674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Jun 4;136(22):7877-88. doi: 10.1021/ja502310r. Epub 2014 May 
23.

Rational design of topographical helix mimics as potent inhibitors of
protein-protein interactions.

Lao BB(1), Drew K, Guarracino DA, Brewer TF, Heindel DW, Bonneau R, Arora PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Departments of Biology and Computer Science, New 
York University , New York, New York 10003, United States.

Protein-protein interactions encompass large surface areas, but often a handful
of key residues dominate the binding energy landscape. Rationally designed small 
molecule scaffolds that reproduce the relative positioning and disposition of
important binding residues, termed "hotspot residues", have been shown to
successfully inhibit specific protein complexes. Although this strategy has led
to development of novel synthetic inhibitors of protein complexes, often direct
mimicry of natural amino acid residues does not lead to potent inhibitors.
Experimental screening of focused compound libraries is used to further optimize 
inhibitors but the number of possible designs that can be efficiently synthesized
and experimentally tested in academic settings is limited. We have applied the
principles of computational protein design to optimization of nonpeptidic helix
mimics as ligands for protein complexes. We describe the development of
computational tools to design helix mimetics from canonical and noncanonical
residue libraries and their application to two therapeutically important
protein-protein interactions: p53-MDM2 and p300-HIF1a. The overall study provides
a streamlined approach for discovering potent peptidomimetic inhibitors of
protein-protein interactions.

PMCID: PMC4353027
PMID: 24972345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:731091. doi: 10.1155/2014/731091. Epub 2014 May
12.

Gene expression profile analysis in epilepsy by using the partial least squares
method.

Wang D(1), Song X(1), Wang Y(1), Li X(1), Jia S(1), Wang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Xi'an Children's Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710003,
China.

PURPOSE: Epilepsy is a common chronic neurological disorder. We aim to
investigate the underlying mechanism of epilepsy with partial least squares-
(PLS-) based gene expression analysis, which is more sensitive than routine
variance/regression analysis.
METHODS: Two microarray data sets were downloaded from the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database. PLS analysis was used to identify differentially
expressed genes. Gene ontology and network analysis were also implemented.
RESULTS: A total of 752 genes were identified to be differentially expressed,
including 575 depressed and 177 overexpressed genes in patients. For GO
enrichment analysis, except for processes related to the nervous system, we also 
identified overrepresentation of dysregulated genes in angiogenesis. Network
analysis revealed two hub genes, CUL3 and EP300, which may serve as potential
targets in further therapeutic studies.
CONCLUSION: Our results here may provide new understanding for the underlying
mechanisms of epilepsy pathogenesis and will offer potential targets for
producing new treatments.

PMCID: PMC4052702
PMID: 24959624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Jul 2;136(26):9308-19. doi: 10.1021/ja412434f. Epub 2014 Jun 
19.

Discovery and optimization of small-molecule ligands for the CBP/p300
bromodomains.

Hay DA(1), Fedorov O, Martin S, Singleton DC, Tallant C, Wells C, Picaud S,
Philpott M, Monteiro OP, Rogers CM, Conway SJ, Rooney TP, Tumber A, Yapp C,
Filippakopoulos P, Bunnage ME, Müller S, Knapp S, Schofield CJ, Brennan PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford , South Parks Road, Oxford OX1
3TA, U.K.

Small-molecule inhibitors that target bromodomains outside of the bromodomain and
extra-terminal (BET) sub-family are lacking. Here, we describe highly potent and 
selective ligands for the bromodomain module of the human lysine acetyl
transferase CBP/p300, developed from a series of 5-isoxazolyl-benzimidazoles. Our
starting point was a fragment hit, which was optimized into a more potent and
selective lead using parallel synthesis employing Suzuki couplings,
benzimidazole-forming reactions, and reductive aminations. The selectivity of the
lead compound against other bromodomain family members was investigated using a
thermal stability assay, which revealed some inhibition of the structurally
related BET family members. To address the BET selectivity issue, X-ray crystal
structures of the lead compound bound to the CREB binding protein (CBP) and the
first bromodomain of BRD4 (BRD4(1)) were used to guide the design of more
selective compounds. The crystal structures obtained revealed two distinct
binding modes. By varying the aryl substitution pattern and developing
conformationally constrained analogues, selectivity for CBP over BRD4(1) was
increased. The optimized compound is highly potent (Kd = 21 nM) and selective,
displaying 40-fold selectivity over BRD4(1). Cellular activity was demonstrated
using fluorescence recovery after photo-bleaching (FRAP) and a p53 reporter
assay. The optimized compounds are cell-active and have nanomolar affinity for
CBP/p300; therefore, they should be useful in studies investigating the
biological roles of CBP and p300 and to validate the CBP and p300 bromodomains as
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4183655
PMID: 24946055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 19;9(6):e99989. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099989. eCollection
2014.

Promoter-bound p300 complexes facilitate post-mitotic transmission of
transcriptional memory.

Wong MM(1), Byun JS(1), Sacta M(1), Jin Q(2), Baek S(3), Gardner K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States 
of America. (2)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Receptor Biology, National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States of America. (3)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, 
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(8):e106126.

A central hallmark of epigenetic inheritance is the parental transmission of
changes in patterns of gene expression to progeny without modification of DNA
sequence. Although, the trans-generational conveyance of this molecular memory
has been traditionally linked to covalent modification of histone and/or DNA,
recent studies suggest a role for proteins that persist or remain bound within
chromatin to "bookmark" specific loci for enhanced or potentiated responses in
daughter cells immediately following cell division. In this report we describe a 
role for p300 in enabling gene bookmarking by pre-initiation complexes (PICs)
containing RNA polymerase II (pol II), Mediator and TBP. Once formed these
complexes require p300 to enable reacquisition of protein complex assemblies,
chromatin modifications and long range chromatin interactions that facilitate
post-mitotic transmission of transcriptional memory of prior environmental
stimuli.

PMCID: PMC4063784
PMID: 24945803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2014;54(1):23-30.

Molecular pathogenesis of follicular lymphoma.

Kishimoto W(1), Nishikori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University.

t(14;18) translocation has been recognized as a genetic hallmark of follicular
lymphoma (FL), but it is now known that additional genetic aberrations are
required for the development of FL. With recent advances in the technology for
DNA analysis, recurrent gene aberrations such as TNFRSF14, EPHA7, EZH2, CREBBP,
EP300, MLL2 and MEF2B have been identified. A few t(14;18)-positive B cells can
be detected in healthy individuals, and these B cells are reported to have their 
own biological features that are closely associated with the pathogenesis of FL. 
On the other hand, FL is characterized by a unique microenvironment. Further
understanding of the pathogenesis of FL is expected to contribute to the
development of novel treatment approaches for this disease.

PMID: 24942943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(10):4271-4.

An epigenetic mechanism underlying doxorubicin induced EMT in the human BGC-823
gastric cancer cell.

Han RF(1), Ji X, Dong XG, Xiao RJ, Liu YP, Xiong J, Zhang QP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Wuhan University School of Basic Medical Science,
Wuhan, China E-mail : annie106xiong@hotmail.com, qpzhang@whu.edu.cn.

The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a key step during embryonic
morphogenesis and plays an important role in drug resistance and metastasis in
diverse solid tumors. We previously reported that 48 h treatment of anti-cancer
drug doxorubicin could induce EMT in human gastric cancer BGC-823 cells. However,
the long term effects of this transient drug treatment were unknown. In this
study we found that after 48 h treatment with 0.1 µg/ml doxorubicin, most cells
died during next week, while a minor population of cells survived and formed
colonies. We propagated the surviving cells in drug free medium and found that
these long term cultured drug survival cells (abbreviated as ltDSCs) retained a
mesenchymal-like cell morphology, and expressed high levels of EMT-related
molecules such as vimentin, twist and ß-catenin. The expression of chromatin
reprogramming factors, Oct4 and c-myc, were also higher in ltDSCs than parental
cells. We further demonstrated that the protein level of p300 was upregulated in 
ltDSCs, and inhibition of p300 by siRNA suppressed the expression of vimentin.
Moreover, the ltDSCs had higher colony forming ability and were more drug
resistant when compared to parental cells. Our results suggested that an
epigenetic mechanism is involved in the EMT of ltDSCs.

PMID: 24935383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3596-606. doi: 10.1021/pr500045f. Epub 2014 Jul 
15.

Analysis of candidate genes for lineage-specific expression changes in humans and
primates.

Lindskog C(1), Kuhlwilm M, Davierwala A, Fu N, Hegde G, Uhlén M, Navani S, Pääbo 
S, Pontén F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University , Dag Hammarskjölds väg 20, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

RUNX2, a gene involved in skeletal development, has previously been shown to be
potentially affected by positive selection during recent human evolution. Here we
have used antibody-based proteomics to characterize potential differences in
expression patterns of RUNX2 interacting partners during primate evolution.
Tissue microarrays consisting of a large set of normal tissues from human and
macaque were used for protein profiling of 50 RUNX2 partners with
immunohistochemistry. Eleven proteins (AR, CREBBP, EP300, FGF2, HDAC3, JUN,
PRKD3, RUNX1, SATB2, TCF3, and YAP1) showed differences in expression between
humans and macaques. These proteins were further profiled in tissues from
chimpanzee, gorilla, and orangutan, and the corresponding genes were analyzed
with regard to genomic features. Moreover, protein expression data were compared 
with previously obtained RNA sequencing data from six different organs. One gene 
(TCF3) showed significant expression differences between human and macaque at
both the protein and RNA level, with higher expression in a subset of germ cells 
in human testis compared with macaque. In conclusion, normal tissues from macaque
and human showed differences in expression of some RUNX2 partners that could be
mapped to various defined cell types. The applied strategy appears advantageous
to characterize the consequences of altered genes selected during evolution.

PMID: 24911366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. BMC Cancer. 2014 Jun 3;14:398. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-398.

A combination of p300 and Braf expression in the diagnosis and prognosis of
melanoma.

Bhandaru M, Ardekani GS, Zhang G, Martinka M, McElwee KJ, Li G, Rotte A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Skin Cancer Biology Laboratory, Department of Dermatology and Skin Science,
University of British Columbia, Research Pavilion, 828 West, 10th Avenue,
Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 L8, Canada. anand.rotte@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: To date only a handful of drugs are available for the treatment of
melanoma. Among them vemurafenib, a BrafV600E specific inhibitor, showed
promising results in terms of response rate and increase in median survival time.
However, its effectiveness is limited by development of resistance and the search
for additional drugs for melanoma treatment is ongoing. The present study was
performed to analyze the correlation between Braf expression and the expression
of p300, a known down stream target of the mitogen activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway, which was recently shown by us to be a prognostic marker for
melanoma progression and patient survival.
METHODS: The expression of Braf and p300 expression were correlated and analyzed 
by Chi-square test. A total of 327 melanoma patient cases (193 primary melanoma
and 134 metastatic melanoma) were used for the study. Classification & regression
tree (CRT), Kaplan-Meier, and multivariate Cox regression analysis were used to
elucidate the significance of the combination of Braf and p300 expression in the 
diagnosis and prognosis of melanoma.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrate that Braf expression is inversely correlated
with nuclear p300 and positively correlated with cytoplasmic p300 expression.
Braf and cytoplasmic p300 were found to be associated with melanoma progression, 
tumor size and ulceration status. CRT analysis revealed that a combination of
Braf and p300 expression (nuclear and cytoplasmic), could be used to distinguish 
between nevi and melanoma, and primary from metastatic melanoma lesions. The
combination of Braf and nuclear p300 was significantly associated with patient
survival and nuclear p300 was found to be an independent predictor of patient
survival.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate a cross-talk between Braf and p300 in melanoma
and demonstrate the importance Braf and p300 expression in the diagnosis and
prognosis of melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4051389
PMID: 24893747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2014 May 5;13:89. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-13-89.

High glucose induces Smad activation via the transcriptional coregulator p300 and
contributes to cardiac fibrosis and hypertrophy.

Bugyei-Twum A, Advani A, Advani SL, Zhang Y, Thai K, Kelly DJ, Connelly KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Keenan Research Centre for Biomedical Science, St, Michael's Hospital, 209
Victoria Street, Toronto, ON M5B 1T8, Canada. connellyk@smh.ca.

BACKGROUND: Despite advances in the treatment of heart failure, mortality remains
high, particularly in individuals with diabetes. Activated transforming growth
factor beta (TGF-ß) contributes to the pathogenesis of the fibrotic interstitium 
observed in diabetic cardiomyopathy. We hypothesized that high glucose enhances
the activity of the transcriptional co-activator p300, leading to the activation 
of TGF-ß via acetylation of Smad2; and that by inhibiting p300, TGF-ß activity
will be reduced and heart failure prevented in a clinically relevant animal model
of diabetic cardiomyopathy.
METHODS: p300 activity was assessed in H9c2 cardiomyoblasts under normal glucose 
(5.6 mmol/L-NG) and high glucose (25 mmol/L-HG) conditions. 3H-proline
incorporation in cardiac fibroblasts was also assessed as a marker of collagen
synthesis. The role of p300 activity in modifying TGF-ß activity was investigated
with a known p300 inhibitor, curcumin or p300 siRNA in vitro, and the functional 
effects of p300 inhibition were assessed using curcumin in a hemodynamically
validated model of diabetic cardiomyopathy - the diabetic TG m(Ren-2)27 rat.
RESULTS: In vitro, H9c2 cells exposed to HG demonstrated increased p300 activity,
Smad2 acetylation and increased TGF-ß activity as assessed by Smad7 induction
(all p <<U+2009>0.05 c/w NG). Furthermore, HG induced 3H-proline incorporation as a
marker of collagen synthesis (p <<U+2009>0.05 c/w NG). p300 inhibition, using either
siRNA or curcumin reduced p300 activity, Smad acetylation and TGF-ß activity (all
p <<U+2009>0.05 c/w vehicle or scrambled siRNA). Furthermore, curcumin therapy reduced
3H-proline incorporation in HG and TGF-ß stimulated fibroblasts (p <<U+2009>0.05 c/w
NG). To determine the functional significance of p300 inhibition, diabetic Ren-2 
rats were randomized to receive curcumin or vehicle for 6 weeks. Curcumin
treatment reduced cardiac hypertrophy, improved diastolic function and reduced
extracellular matrix production, without affecting glycemic control, along with a
reduction in TGF-ß activity as assessed by Smad7 activation (all p <<U+2009>0.05 c/w
vehicle treated diabetic animals).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that high glucose increases the activity of
the transcriptional co-regulator p300, which increases TGF-ß activity via Smad2
acetylation. Modulation of p300 may be a novel strategy to treat diabetes induced
heart failure.

PMCID: PMC4108062
PMID: 24886336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Autophagy. 2014 Jul;10(7):1341-2. doi: 10.4161/auto.28979. Epub 2014 May 15.

BAG6/BAT3 modulates autophagy by affecting EP300/p300 intracellular localization.

Sebti S(1), Prébois C(1), Pérez-Gracia E(1), Bauvy C(2), Desmots F(3), Pirot
N(1), Gongora C(1), Bach AS(1), Hubberstey AV(4), Palissot V(5), Berchem G(5),
Codogno P(2), Linares LK(1), Liaudet-Coopman E(1), Pattingre S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier; Montpellier, France;
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U896; Montpellier,
France; Université Montpellier 1; Montpellier, France; Institut Régional du
Cancer Montpellier; Montpellier, France. (2)Institut Necker Enfants-Malades;
Paris, France; Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM)
U1151; Paris, France; CNRS UMR 8243; Paris, France; Université Paris
Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité; Paris, France. (3)Service d'Hématologie;
Immunologie et Thérapie Cellulaire; CHU de Rennes; Hôpital Pontchaillou; Rennes, 
France. (4)Department of Biological Sciences; University of Windsor; Windsor,
Ontario CA. (5)Laboratory of Experimental Hemato-Oncology; Centre de Recherche
Public-Santé; Luxembourg, Luxembourg.

We recently reported that BAG6/BAT3 (BCL2-associated athanogene 6) is essential
for basal and starvation-induced autophagy in E18.5 bag6(-/-) mouse embryos and
in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) through the modulation of the
EP300/p300-dependent acetylation of TRP53 and autophagy-related (ATG) proteins.
We observed that BAG6 increases TRP53 acetylation during starvation and
pro-autophagic TRP53-target gene expression. BAG6 also decreases the EP300
dependent-acetylation of ATG5, ATG7, and LC3-I, posttranslational modifications
that inhibit autophagy. In addition, in the absence of BAG6 or when using a
mutant of BAG6 exclusively located in the cytoplasm, autophagy is inhibited, ATG7
is hyperacetylated, TRP53 acetylation is abrogated, and EP300 accumulates in the 
cytoplasm indicating that BAG6 is involved in the regulation of the nuclear
localization of EP300. We also reported that the interaction between BAG6 and
EP300 occurs in the cytoplasm rather than the nucleus. Moreover, during
starvation, EP300 is transported to the nucleus in a BAG6-dependent manner. We
concluded that BAG6 regulates autophagy by controlling the localization of EP300 
and its accessibility to nuclear (TRP53) and cytoplasmic (ATGs) substrates.

PMCID: PMC4203559
PMID: 24852146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2014 Jun;166C(2):140-55. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31400. Epub 2014 May 16.

Genetic disorders associated with postnatal microcephaly.

Seltzer LE, Paciorkowski AR.

Several genetic disorders are characterized by normal head size at birth,
followed by deceleration in head growth resulting in postnatal microcephaly.
Among these are classic disorders such as Angelman syndrome and MECP2-related
disorder (formerly Rett syndrome), as well as more recently described clinical
entities associated with mutations in CASK, CDKL5, CREBBP, and EP300
(Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome), FOXG1, SLC9A6 (Christianson syndrome), and TCF4
(Pitt-Hopkins syndrome). These disorders can be identified clinically by
phenotyping across multiple neurodevelopmental and neurobehavioral realms, and
enough data are available to recognize these postnatal microcephaly disorders as 
separate diagnostic entities in their own right. A second diagnostic grouping,
comprised of Warburg MICRO syndrome, Cockayne syndrome, and Cerebral-oculo-facial
skeletal syndrome, share similar features of somatic growth failure,
ophthalmologic, and dysmorphologic features. Many postnatal microcephaly
syndromes are caused by mutations in genes important in the regulation of gene
expression in the developing forebrain and hindbrain, although important synaptic
structural genes also play a role. This is an emerging group of disorders with a 
fascinating combination of brain malformations, specific epilepsies, movement
disorders, and other complex neurobehavioral abnormalities.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24839169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2014 Sep;24(6):377-84. doi: 10.3109/15376516.2014.920448.
Epub 2014 Jun 27.

Expression of histone deacetylase-1 and p300 in aristolochic acid nephropathy
models.

Tian Y(1), Yang Y, Gao L, Zhao H, Peng X, Zhang Z, Wu G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology of Chinese Veterinary Medicine, Department of
Animal Science and Technology, College of Animal Science and Technology, Beijing 
University of Agriculture , Beijing , China.

Aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAN) is mainly caused by aristolochic acid I
(AAI), but the actual mechanism is still uncertain. The current study explored
the correlation among the expression of Smad7, p300, histone deacetylase-1
(HDAC1) and the development of AAN using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), 
RT-PCR, and western blotting in the AAN mouse model and in the AAN cell model.
TEM revealed that the renal tubular epithelial cells from the AAI-treated mice
presented organelle damages and nuclear deformation. We found that a certain dose
of AAI caused renal fibrosis and induced renal tubular epithelial cells to
differentiate into myofibroblasts. There was a gradual increase in the expression
of HDAC1 mRNA and protein observed using RT-PCR and western blotting in the AAN
cell model compared with the control group. Gradual decrease in the expression of
Smad7 and p300 mRNA and protein was revealed in the AAN mouse and cell models
compared with the control group. These results suggest that AAI dose dependently 
contributed to the development of AAN, and HDAC1 and p300 participate in the
modulation of TGF-ß/Smad pathway-mediated renal interstitial fibrosis.

PMID: 24796935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Tumour Biol. 2014 Aug;35(8):7499-504. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1991-0. Epub 2014
May 2.

Midazolam inhibits the proliferation of human head and neck squamous carcinoma
cells by downregulating p300 expression.

Dou YL(1), Lin JP, Liu FE, Wang LY, Shu HH, Jiang N, Xie Y, Duan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, 510080, China, yunlingdousci@163.com.

The objective of this study was to investigate the mechanism of midazolam in
inhibiting the proliferation of hypopharyngeal squamous carcinoma cells. Cultured
FaDu cancer cells were treated with different concentrations of midazolam. MTT
and BrdU incorporation assays were then used to evaluate cancer cell
proliferation. The mRNA and protein levels of p300, a key factor involved in the 
tumorigenesis of numerous cancers, were measured with RT-PCR and Western
blotting, respectively. Midazolam inhibited the expression of p300 and the
proliferation of FaDu cells. Additionally, knockdown of p300 resulted in
increased expression of p21 and p27 and decreased expression of p-Rb while
inhibiting the proliferation of FaDu cells. Midazolam inhibits the proliferation 
of human head and neck squamous carcinoma cells by downregulating p300. Midazolam
may be useful for the treatment of hypopharyngeal squamous cancers.

PMID: 24789432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Chembiochem. 2014 May 26;15(8):1083-7. doi: 10.1002/cbic.201400009. Epub 2014 Apr
29.

Small-molecule proteomimetic inhibitors of the HIF-1a-p300 protein-protein
interaction.

Burslem GM(1), Kyle HF, Breeze AL, Edwards TA, Nelson A, Warriner SL, Wilson AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Leeds, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds LS2 9JT (UK); 
Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Woodhouse
Lane, Leeds, LS2 9JT (UK).

The therapeutically relevant hypoxia inducible factor HIF-1a-p300 protein-protein
interaction can be orthosterically inhibited with a-helix mimetics based on an
oligoamide scaffold that recapitulates essential features of the C-terminal helix
of the HIF-1a C-TAD (C-terminal transactivation domain). Preliminary SAR studies 
demonstrated the important role of side-chain size and
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity in determining potency. These small molecules
represent the first biophysically characterised HIF-1a-p300 PPI inhibitors and
the first examples of small-molecule aromatic oligoamide helix mimetics to be
shown to have a selective binding profile. Although the compounds were less
potent than HIF-1a, the result is still remarkable in that the mimetic reproduces
only three residues from the 42-residue HIF-1a C-TAD from which it is derived.

© 2014 The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. This is an
open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, 
which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original work is properly cited.

PMCID: PMC4159589
PMID: 24782431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Cancer. 2014 Apr 28;13:91. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-91.

Epidithiodiketopiperazines (ETPs) exhibit in vitro antiangiogenic and in vivo
antitumor activity by disrupting the HIF-1a/p300 complex in a preclinical model
of prostate cancer.

Reece KM, Richardson ED, Cook KM, Campbell TJ, Pisle ST, Holly AJ, Venzon DJ,
Liewehr DJ, Chau CH, Price DK, Figg WD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Section, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. figgw@helix.nih.gov.

The downstream targets of hypoxia inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1a) play an
important role in tumor progression and angiogenesis. Therefore, inhibition of
HIF-mediated transcription has potential in the treatment of cancer. One
attractive strategy for inhibiting HIF activity is the disruption of the
HIF-1a/p300 complex, as p300 is a crucial coactivator of hypoxia-inducible
transcription. Several members of the epidithiodiketopiperazine (ETP) family of
natural products have been shown to disrupt the HIF-1a/p300 complex in vitro;
namely, gliotoxin, chaetocin, and chetomin. Here, we further characterized the
molecular mechanisms underlying the antiangiogenic and antitumor effects of these
ETPs using a preclinical model of prostate cancer. In the rat aortic ring
angiogenesis assay, gliotoxin, chaetocin, and chetomin significantly inhibited
microvessel outgrowth at a GI50 of 151, 8, and 20 nM, respectively. In vitro
co-immunoprecipitation studies in prostate cancer cell extracts demonstrated that
these compounds disrupted the HIF-1a/p300 complex. The downstream effects of
inhibiting the HIF-1a/p300 interaction were evaluated by determining HIF-1a
target gene expression at the mRNA and protein levels. Dose-dependent decreases
in levels of secreted VEGF were detected by ELISA in the culture media of treated
cells, and the subsequent downregulation of VEGFA, LDHA, and ENO1 HIF-1a target
genes were confirmed by semi-quantitative real-time PCR. Finally, treatment with 
ETPs in mice bearing prostate tumor xenografts resulted in significant inhibition
of tumor growth. These results suggest that directly targeting the HIF-1a/p300
complex with ETPs may be an effective approach for inhibiting angiogenesis and
tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC4113146
PMID: 24775564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cancer Res. 2014 Jun 15;74(12):3238-47. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0013. Epub 
2014 Apr 22.

Colorectal cancer cell lines are representative models of the main molecular
subtypes of primary cancer.

Mouradov D(1), Sloggett C(2), Jorissen RN(1), Love CG(1), Li S(1), Burgess AW(1),
Arango D(1), Strausberg RL(1), Buchanan D(2), Wormald S(1), O'Connor L(1),
Wilding JL(2), Bicknell D(2), Tomlinson IP(2), Bodmer WF(2), Mariadason JM(3),
Sieber OM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research; Systems Biology
and Personalised Medicine Division; Structural Biology Division; Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research; Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health
Sciences, Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville;
VLSCI Life Sciences Computation Centre, a collaboration between Melbourne, Monash
and LaTrobe Universities, c/o The University of Melbourne, Carlton; Oncogenic
Transcription Laboratory, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Austin, VIC,
Australia; Cancer and Population Studies Group, Queensland Institute of Medical
Research, Herston, QLD, Australia; Group of Molecular Oncology,
CIBBIM-Nanomedicine, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Research Institute
(VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Passeig Vall d'Hebron, 119-129, 08035 
Barcelona; CIBER de Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (CIBER-BBN);
Spain; Ludwig Collaborative Laboratory for Cancer Biology and Therapy, Department
of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland; Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd., New York, New York; Cancer
and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine (WIMM),
John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford; and Molecular and Population
Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United
KingdomAuthors' Affiliations: Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research; Systems
Biology and Personalised Medicine Division; Structural Biology Division; Walter
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research; Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Health Sciences, Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne,
Parkville; VLSCI Life Sciences Computation Centre, a collaboration between
Melbourne, Monash and LaTrobe Universities, c/o The University of Melbourne,
Carlton; Oncogenic Transcription Laboratory, Ludwig Institute for Cancer
Research, Austin, VIC, Australia; Cancer and Population Studies (2)Authors'
Affiliations: Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research; Systems Biology and
Personalised Medicine Division; Structural Biology Division; Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research; Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health
Sciences, Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville;
VLSCI Life Sciences Computation Centre, a collaboration between Melbourne, Monash
and LaTrobe Universities, c/o The University of Melbourne, Carlton; Oncogenic
Transcription Laboratory, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Austin, VIC,
Australia; Cancer and Population Studies Group, Queensland Institute of Medical
Research, Herston, QLD, Australia; Group of Molecular Oncology,
CIBBIM-Nanomedicine, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Research Institute
(VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Passeig Vall d'Hebron, 119-129, 08035 
Barcelona; CIBER de Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina (CIBER-BBN);
Spain; Ludwig Collaborative Laboratory for Cancer Biology and Therapy, Department
of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland; Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd., New York, New York; Cancer
and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine (WIMM),
John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford; and Molecular and Population
Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United
Kingdom. (3)Authors' Affiliations: Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research; Systems 
Biology and Personalised Medicine Division; Structural Biology Division; Walter
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research; Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Health Sciences, Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne,
Parkville; VLSCI Life Sciences Computation Centre, a collaboration between
Melbourne, Monash and LaTrobe Universities, c/o The University of Melbourne,
Carlton; Oncogenic Transcription Laboratory, Ludwig Institute for Cancer
Research, Austin, VIC, Australia; Cancer and Population Studies Group, Queensland
Institute of Medical Research, Herston, QLD, Australia; Group of Molecular
Oncology, CIBBIM-Nanomedicine, Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Research
Institute (VHIR), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Passeig Vall d'Hebron,
119-129, 08035 Barcelona; CIBER de Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina
(CIBER-BBN); Spain; Ludwig Collaborative Laboratory for Cancer Biology and
Therapy, Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland; Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd., New York, New
York; Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular
Medicine (WIMM), John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford; and Molecular and
Population Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford,
United Kingdom John.Mariadason@ludwig.edu.au Oliver.Sieber@wehi.edu.au.

Human colorectal cancer cell lines are used widely to investigate tumor biology, 
experimental therapy, and biomarkers. However, to what extent these established
cell lines represent and maintain the genetic diversity of primary cancers is
uncertain. In this study, we profiled 70 colorectal cancer cell lines for
mutations and DNA copy number by whole-exome sequencing and SNP microarray
analyses, respectively. Gene expression was defined using RNA-Seq. Cell line data
were compared with those published for primary colorectal cancers in The Cancer
Genome Atlas. Notably, we found that exome mutation and DNA copy-number spectra
in colorectal cancer cell lines closely resembled those seen in primary
colorectal tumors. Similarities included the presence of two hypermutation
phenotypes, as defined by signatures for defective DNA mismatch repair and DNA
polymerase e proofreading deficiency, along with concordant mutation profiles in 
the broadly altered WNT, MAPK, PI3K, TGFß, and p53 pathways. Furthermore, we
documented mutations enriched in genes involved in chromatin remodeling (ARID1A, 
CHD6, and SRCAP) and histone methylation or acetylation (ASH1L, EP300, EP400,
MLL2, MLL3, PRDM2, and TRRAP). Chromosomal instability was prevalent in
nonhypermutated cases, with similar patterns of chromosomal gains and losses.
Although paired cell lines derived from the same tumor exhibited considerable
mutation and DNA copy-number differences, in silico simulations suggest that
these differences mainly reflected a preexisting heterogeneity in the tumor
cells. In conclusion, our results establish that human colorectal cancer lines
are representative of the main subtypes of primary tumors at the genomic level,
further validating their utility as tools to investigate colorectal cancer
biology and drug responses.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24755471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Apr 17;5:e1176. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.153.

Sublytic C5b-9 triggers glomerular mesangial cell apoptosis via XAF1 gene
activation mediated by p300-dependent IRF-1 acetylation.

Qiu W(1), Zhou J(1), Zhu G(1), Zhao D(1), He F(1), Zhang J(1), Lu Y(1), Yu T(1), 
Liu L(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

The apoptosis of glomerular mesangial cells (GMCs) in rat Thy-1 nephritis
(Thy-1N), a model of human mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis (MsPGN), is
accompanied by sublytic C5b-9 deposition. However, the mechanism by which
sublytic C5b-9 induces GMC apoptosis is unclear. In the present studies, the
effect of X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis-associated factor 1 (XAF1) expression
on GMC apoptosis and the role of p300 and interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) 
in mediating XAF1 gene activation were determined, both in the GMCs induced by
sublytic C5b-9 (in vitro) and in the renal tissues of rats with Thy-1N (in vivo).
The in vitro studies demonstrated that IRF-1-enhanced XAF1 gene activation and
its regulation by p300-mediated IRF-1 acetylation were involved in GMC apoptosis 
induced by sublytic C5b-9. The element of IRF-1 binding to XAF1 promoter and two 
acetylated sites of IRF-1 protein were also revealed. In vivo, silence of p300,
IRF-1 or XAF1 genes in the renal tissues diminished GMC apoptosis and secondary
GMC proliferation as well as urinary protein secretion in Thy-1N rats. Together, 
these data implicate that sublytic C5b-9 induces the expression of both p300 and 
IRF-1, as well as p300-dependent IRF-1 acetylation that may contribute to XAF1
gene activation and subsequent GMC apoptosis in Thy-1N rats.

PMCID: PMC4001307
PMID: 24743731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Stem Cells. 2014 Aug;32(8):2278-89. doi: 10.1002/stem.1723.

EDAG positively regulates erythroid differentiation and modifies GATA1
acetylation through recruiting p300.

Zheng WW(1), Dong XM, Yin RH, Xu FF, Ning HM, Zhang MJ, Xu CW, Yang Y, Ding YL,
Wang ZD, Zhao WB, Tang LJ, Chen H, Wang XH, Zhan YQ, Yu M, Ge CH, Li CY, Yang XM.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing 
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Erythroid differentiation-associated gene (EDAG) has been considered to be a
transcriptional regulator that controls hematopoietic cell differentiation,
proliferation, and apoptosis. The role of EDAG in erythroid differentiation of
primary erythroid progenitor cells and in vivo remains unknown. In this study, we
found that EDAG is highly expressed in CMPs and MEPs and upregulated during the
erythroid differentiation of CD34(+) cells following erythropoietin (EPO)
treatment. Overexpression of EDAG induced erythroid differentiation of CD34(+)
cells in vitro and in vivo using immunodeficient mice. Conversely, EDAG knockdown
reduced erythroid differentiation in EPO-treated CD34(+) cells. Detailed
mechanistic analysis suggested that EDAG forms complex with GATA1 and p300 and
increases GATA1 acetylation and transcriptional activity by facilitating the
interaction between GATA1 and p300. EDAG deletion mutants lacking the binding
domain with GATA1 or p300 failed to enhance erythroid differentiation, suggesting
that EDAG regulates erythroid differentiation partly through forming
EDAG/GATA1/p300 complex. In the presence of the specific inhibitor of p300
acetyltransferase activity, C646, EDAG was unable to accelerate erythroid
differentiation, indicating an involvement of p300 acetyltransferase activity in 
EDAG-induced erythroid differentiation. ChIP-PCR experiments confirmed that GATA1
and EDAG co-occupy GATA1-targeted genes in primary erythroid cells and in vivo.
ChIP-seq was further performed to examine the global occupancy of EDAG during
erythroid differentiation and a total of 7,133 enrichment peaks corresponding to 
3,847 genes were identified. Merging EDAG ChIP-Seq and GATA1 ChIP-Seq datasets
revealed that 782 genes overlapped. Microarray analysis suggested that EDAG
knockdown selectively inhibits GATA1-activated target genes. These data provide
novel insights into EDAG in regulation of erythroid differentiation.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24740910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Genome Res. 2014 Aug;24(8):1271-84. doi: 10.1101/gr.168781.113. Epub 2014 Apr 14.

Vascular histone deacetylation by pharmacological HDAC inhibition.

Rafehi H(1), Balcerczyk A(2), Lunke S(2), Kaspi A(2), Ziemann M(2), Kn H(2),
Okabe J(3), Khurana I(2), Ooi J(2), Khan AW(2), Du XJ(4), Chang L(2), Haviv I(2),
Keating ST(2), Karagiannis TC(2), El-Osta A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia;
Department of Pathology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia; (2)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria 3004,
Australia; (3)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria 3004,
Australia; Faculty of Medicine, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia.
(4)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia;
Faculty of Medicine, Monash University, Victoria 3800, Australia
assam.el-osta@bakeridi.edu.au. (5)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute,
Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia; Department of Pathology, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; Faculty of Medicine, Monash
University, Victoria 3800, Australia assam.el-osta@bakeridi.edu.au.

HDAC inhibitors can regulate gene expression by post-translational modification
of histone as well as nonhistone proteins. Often studied at single loci,
increased histone acetylation is the paradigmatic mechanism of action. However,
little is known of the extent of genome-wide changes in cells stimulated by the
hydroxamic acids, TSA and SAHA. In this article, we map vascular chromatin
modifications including histone H3 acetylation of lysine 9 and 14 (H3K9/14ac)
using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with massive parallel
sequencing (ChIP-seq). Since acetylation-mediated gene expression is often
associated with modification of other lysine residues, we also examined H3K4me3
and H3K9me3 as well as changes in CpG methylation (CpG-seq). RNA sequencing
indicates the differential expression of ~30% of genes, with almost equal numbers
being up- and down-regulated. We observed broad deacetylation and gene expression
changes conferred by TSA and SAHA mediated by the loss of EP300/CREBBP binding at
multiple gene promoters. This study provides an important framework for HDAC
inhibitor function in vascular biology and a comprehensive description of
genome-wide deacetylation by pharmacological HDAC inhibition.

© 2014 Rafehi et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4120081
PMID: 24732587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Curr Mol Pharmacol. 2013 Nov;6(3):204-10.

Hypoxia selects for a quiescent, CML stem/leukemia initiating-like population
dependent on CBP/catenin transcription.

Kida A, Kahn M(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Southern California, 1450 Biggy Street, NRT 4501, Los Angeles,
CA 90033, USA. kahnm@usc.edu.

Hypoxia has been reported to regulate both stem cell maintenance and
differentiation. Wnt signaling is also a key regulator in stem cells. The recent 
discovery of functional cross-regulation between the Wnt pathway and
HIF-1a/HIF-2a signaling further highlights the complexity of the role of hypoxia 
in the regulation of stem cells. In this report we reveal that human CML cell
lines treated under hypoxic conditions increase the percentage of leukemia
stem/initiating-like cells, as judged by surface marker expression, colony
forming ability and quiescence. We demonstrate that differential usage of the
Kat3 coactivators, CREBBP/Creb Binding Protein (CBP) and EP300 (p300) by catenin,
with increased CBP/catenin signaling at the expense of p300/catenin signaling, is
mechanistically correlated with the increase in the leukemia stem/initiating-like
population. A specific small molecule inhibitor of CBP/catenin dependent
transcription, ICG-001, can reverse these effects further demonstrating the
critical involvement of CBP/catenin signaling in enhancing and maintaining the
leukemia stem/initiating-like cell population under hypoxic conditions.

PMID: 24720539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Org Lett. 2014 Apr 18;16(8):2224-7. doi: 10.1021/ol5007345. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

New steroids with a rearranged skeleton as (h)P300 inhibitors from the sponge
Theonella swinhoei.

Gong J(1), Sun P, Jiang N, Riccio R, Lauro G, Bifulco G, Li TJ, Gerwick WH, Zhang
W.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Marine Drugs, and Department of Pharmacology, School of
Pharmacy, Second Military Medical University , 325 Guo-He Road, Shanghai 200433, 
P. R. China.

Swinhoeisterols A (1) and B (2), two novel sterols with an unprecedented 6/6/5/7 
ring system, were isolated from the sponge Theonella swinhoei. The structures and
absolute configurations were elucidated by spectroscopic analysis, X-ray
single-crystal diffraction, modified Mosher's method, and TDDFT/ECD calculations.
The cytotoxicity of these compounds toward A549 and MG-63 cells encourages
studies on their potential target using an inverse virtual screening approach.
The predicted inhibitor of h(p300) was corroborated by an in vitro biological
test.

PMID: 24694058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nature. 2014 May 1;509(7498):91-5. doi: 10.1038/nature13176. Epub 2014 Mar 16.

Identification of genomic alterations in oesophageal squamous cell cancer.

Song Y(1), Li L(2), Ou Y(3), Gao Z(2), Li E(4), Li X(2), Zhang W(5), Wang J(6),
Xu L(7), Zhou Y(6), Ma X(5), Liu L(5), Zhao Z(5), Huang X(6), Fan J(5), Dong
L(5), Chen G(6), Ma L(5), Yang J(6), Chen L(6), He M(6), Li M(6), Zhuang X(6),
Huang K(6), Qiu K(6), Yin G(6), Guo G(6), Feng Q(6), Chen P(6), Wu Z(8), Wu J(9),
Ma L(5), Zhao J(6), Luo L(6), Fu M(5), Xu B(10), Chen B(7), Li Y(6), Tong T(5),
Wang M(5), Liu Z(5), Lin D(5), Zhang X(6), Yang H(6), Wang J(6), Zhan Q(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and Cancer
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100021, China [2]. (2)1] BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, Guangdong 518083,
China [2]. (3)1] State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and
Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing 100021, China [2] Department of Neurosurgery, Chinese PLA
General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China [3]. (4)1] Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for High Cancer
Incidence Coastal Chaoshan Area, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou
515041, Guangdong, China [2]. (5)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology,
Cancer Institute and Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China. (6)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen
518083, Guangdong 518083, China. (7)Institute of Oncologic Pathology, Shantou
University Medical College, Shantou 515041, Guangdong, China. (8)Department of
Tumor Surgery, Shantou Central Hospital, Affiliated Shantou Hospital of Sun
Yat-sen University, Shantou 515041, Guangdong, China. (9)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for
High Cancer Incidence Coastal Chaoshan Area, Shantou University Medical College, 
Shantou 515041, Guangdong, China. (10)Department of Neurosurgery, Chinese PLA
General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

Oesophageal cancer is one of the most aggressive cancers and is the sixth leading
cause of cancer death worldwide. Approximately 70% of global oesophageal cancer
cases occur in China, with oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) being the
histopathological form in the vast majority of cases (>90%). Currently, there are
limited clinical approaches for the early diagnosis and treatment of ESCC,
resulting in a 10% five-year survival rate for patients. However, the full
repertoire of genomic events leading to the pathogenesis of ESCC remains unclear.
Here we describe a comprehensive genomic analysis of 158 ESCC cases, as part of
the International Cancer Genome Consortium research project. We conducted
whole-genome sequencing in 17 ESCC cases and whole-exome sequencing in 71 cases, 
of which 53 cases, plus an additional 70 ESCC cases not used in the whole-genome 
and whole-exome sequencing, were subjected to array comparative genomic
hybridization analysis. We identified eight significantly mutated genes, of which
six are well known tumour-associated genes (TP53, RB1, CDKN2A, PIK3CA, NOTCH1,
NFE2L2), and two have not previously been described in ESCC (ADAM29 and FAM135B).
Notably, FAM135B is identified as a novel cancer-implicated gene as assayed for
its ability to promote malignancy of ESCC cells. Additionally, MIR548K, a
microRNA encoded in the amplified 11q13.3-13.4 region, is characterized as a
novel oncogene, and functional assays demonstrate that MIR548K enhances malignant
phenotypes of ESCC cells. Moreover, we have found that several important histone 
regulator genes (MLL2 (also called KMT2D), ASH1L, MLL3 (KMT2C), SETD1B, CREBBP
and EP300) are frequently altered in ESCC. Pathway assessment reveals that
somatic aberrations are mainly involved in the Wnt, cell cycle and Notch
pathways. Genomic analyses suggest that ESCC and head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma share some common pathogenic mechanisms, and ESCC development is
associated with alcohol drinking. This study has explored novel biological
markers and tumorigenic pathways that would greatly improve therapeutic
strategies for ESCC.

PMID: 24670651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. BMC Genomics. 2014 Mar 26;15:232. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-232.

From SNP co-association to RNA co-expression: novel insights into gene networks
for intramuscular fatty acid composition in porcine.

Ramayo-Caldas Y(1), Ballester M, Fortes MR, Esteve-Codina A, Castelló A, Noguera 
JL, Fernández AI, Pérez-Enciso M, Reverter A, Folch JM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recerca en Agrigenòmica (CRAG), Consorci CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB, Campus
UAB, Bellaterra 08193, Spain. yuliaxis@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Fatty acids (FA) play a critical role in energy homeostasis and
metabolic diseases; in the context of livestock species, their profile also
impacts on meat quality for healthy human consumption. Molecular pathways
controlling lipid metabolism are highly interconnected and are not fully
understood. Elucidating these molecular processes will aid technological
development towards improvement of pork meat quality and increased knowledge of
FA metabolism, underpinning metabolic diseases in humans.
RESULTS: The results from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) across 15
phenotypes were subjected to an Association Weight Matrix (AWM) approach to
predict a network of 1,096 genes related to intramuscular FA composition in pigs.
To identify the key regulators of FA metabolism, we focused on the minimal set of
transcription factors (TF) that the explored the majority of the network
topology. Pathway and network analyses pointed towards a trio of TF as key
regulators of FA metabolism: NCOA2, FHL2 and EP300. Promoter sequence analyses
confirmed that these TF have binding sites for some well-know regulators of lipid
and carbohydrate metabolism. For the first time in a non-model species, some of
the co-associations observed at the genetic level were validated through
co-expression at the transcriptomic level based on real-time PCR of 40 genes in
adipose tissue, and a further 55 genes in liver. In particular, liver expression 
of NCOA2 and EP300 differed between pig breeds (Iberian and Landrace) extreme in 
terms of fat deposition. Highly clustered co-expression networks in both liver
and adipose tissues were observed. EP300 and NCOA2 showed centrality parameters
above average in the both networks. Over all genes, co-expression analyses
confirmed 28.9% of the AWM predicted gene-gene interactions in liver and 33.0% in
adipose tissue. The magnitude of this validation varied across genes, with up to 
60.8% of the connections of NCOA2 in adipose tissue being validated via
co-expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results recapitulate the known transcriptional regulation of FA 
metabolism, predict gene interactions that can be experimentally validated, and
suggest that genetic variants mapped to EP300, FHL2, and NCOA2 modulate lipid
metabolism and control energy homeostasis in pigs.

PMCID: PMC3987146
PMID: 24666776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Stem Cells. 2014 Jun;32(6):1437-50. doi: 10.1002/stem.1707.

YB-1 transforms human mammary epithelial cells through chromatin remodeling
leading to the development of basal-like breast cancer.

Davies AH(1), Reipas KM, Pambid MR, Berns R, Stratford AL, Fotovati A, Firmino N,
Astanehe A, Hu K, Maxwell C, Mills GB, Dunn SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Child and Family Research Institute, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Experimental Medicine
Program, Child and Family Research Institute, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

There is growing evidence that cancer-initiation could result from epigenetic
changes. Y-box binding protein-1 (YB-1) is a transcription/translation factor
that promotes the formation of tumors in transgenic mice; however, the underlying
molecular events are not understood. To explore this in a human model system,
YB-1 was expressed in mammary epithelial cells under the control of a
tetracycline-inducible promoter. The induction of YB-1 promoted phenotypes
associated with malignancy in three-dimensional breast acini cultures. This was
attributed to YB-1 enhancing the expression and activity of the histone
acetyltransferase p300 leading to chromatin remodeling. Specifically, this
relaxation of chromatin allowed YB-1 to bind to the BMI1 promoter. The induction 
of BMI1 engaged the Polycomb complex resulting in histone H2A ubiquitylation and 
repression of the CDKN2A locus. These events manifested functionally as enhanced 
self-renewal capacity that occurred in a BMI1-dependent manner. Conversely, p300 
inhibition with anacardic acid prevented YB-1 from binding to the BMI1 promoter
and thereby subverted self-renewal. Despite these early changes, full malignant
transformation was not achieved until RSK2 became overexpressed concomitant with 
elevated human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) activity. The
YB-1/RSK2/hTERT expressing cells formed tumors in mice that were molecularly
subtyped as basal-like breast cancer. We conclude that YB-1 cooperates with p300 
to allow BMI1 to over-ride p16(INK4a) -mediated cell cycle arrest enabling
self-renewal and the development of aggressive breast tumors.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4321723
PMID: 24648416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 May;1839(5):364-73. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.03.004.
Epub 2014 Mar 15.

p300 cooperates with c-Jun and PARP-1 at the p300 binding site to activate RhoB
transcription in NSC126188-mediated apoptosis.

Kim BK(1), Im JY(1), Han G(2), Lee WJ(1), Won KJ(3), Chung KS(1), Lee K(4), Ban
HS(1), Song K(5), Won M(6).

Author information: 
(1)BioMedical Genomics Research Center, KRIBB, Daejeon 305-806, Korea. (2)Dept.
of Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul 129-749, Korea. (3)BioMedical Genomics
Research Center, KRIBB, Daejeon 305-806, Korea; Functional Genomics, University
of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-350, Korea. (4)School of Pharmacy, Dongguk
University-Seoul, Seoul 100-715, Korea. (5)Dept. of Food Science and Technology, 
Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Korea. (6)BioMedical Genomics
Research Center, KRIBB, Daejeon 305-806, Korea; Functional Genomics, University
of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-350, Korea. Electronic address:
misun@kribb.re.kr.

The anti-cancer agent NSC126188 induces apoptosis of stomach carcinoma NUGC-3
cells by inducing RhoB expression. Here, we present that the p300 binding site in
the RhoB promoter is crucial for the binding of p300 and its partner
transcription factors to activate RhoB transcription in NSC126188-mediated
apoptosis. NSC126188 increased expression of p300 and c-Jun. Conversely,
knockdown of p300 decreased RhoB expression in the presence of NSC126188. We
found that poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) was associated with the p300
binding site and that PARP-1 knockdown inhibited NSC126188-mediated RhoB
expression. In the cells treated with NSC126188, p300, PARP-1, and c-Jun
interacted and bound the p300 binding site. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis revealed strong p300 binding and weak c-Jun
binding at the p300 binding site of RhoB promoter in cells treated with
NSC126188. We also demonstrated that c-Jun played a crucial role in p300 binding.
However, PARP-1 did not directly bind the p300 binding site, suggesting a
bridging role between p300 and c-Jun. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
demonstrated a complex comprising p300/c-Jun/PARP-1 that bound wild type, but not
a mutated, p300 binding site. In addition, overexpression of p300, PARP-1, or
c-Jun dramatically enhanced RhoB promoter activity when it contained the wild
type sequence but not mutated sequences, indicating the crucial role of the p300 
binding site in NSC126188-induced transcription of RhoB. Taken together, these
data suggest that p300 is recruited and cooperates with c-Jun and PARP-1 at the
p300 binding site to activate RhoB transcription during NSC126188-mediated
apoptosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24636898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Phytother Res. 2014 Sep;28(9):1383-91. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5141. Epub 2014 Mar 12.

Luteolin inhibits hyperglycemia-induced proinflammatory cytokine production and
its epigenetic mechanism in human monocytes.

Kim HJ(1), Lee W, Yun JM.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology,
Daejeon, 305-600, South Korea.

Hyperglycemia is a key feature in diabetes. Hyperglycemia has been implicated as 
a major contributor to several complications of diabetes. High glucose levels
induce the release of proinflammatory cytokines. Luteolin is a flavone isolated
from celery, green pepper, perilla leaf, and chamomile tea. Luteolin has been
reported to possess antimutagenic, antitumorigenic, antioxidant, and
anti-inflammatory properties. In this study, we investigated the effects of
luteolin on proinflammatory cytokine secretion and its underlying epigenetic
regulation in high-glucose-induced human monocytes. Human monocytic (THP-1) cells
were cultured under controlled (14.5<U+2009>mM mannitol), normoglycemic (NG, 5.5<U+2009>mM
glucose), or hyperglycemic (HG, 20<U+2009>mM glucose) conditions, in the absence or
presence of luteolin. Luteolin (3-10<U+2009>µM) was added for 48<U+2009>h. While hyperglycemic 
conditions significantly induced histone acetylation, NF-<U+03BA>B activation, and
proinflammatory cytokine (IL-6 and TNF-a) release from THP-1 cells, luteolin
suppressed NF-<U+03BA>B activity and cytokine release. Luteolin also significantly
reduced CREB-binding protein/p300 (CBP/p300) gene expression, as well as the
levels of acetylation and histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity of the
CBP/p300 protein, which is a known NF-<U+03BA>B coactivator. These results suggest that 
luteolin inhibits HG-induced cytokine production in monocytes, through epigenetic
changes involving NF-<U+03BA>B. We therefore suggest that luteolin may be a potential
candidate for the treatment and prevention of diabetes and its complications.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24623679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Protein Cell. 2014 Apr;5(4):265-96. doi: 10.1007/s13238-014-0031-6. Epub 2014 Mar
14.

Driver mutations of cancer epigenomes.

Roy DM(1), Walsh LA, Chan TA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, 10065, USA.

Epigenetic alterations are associated with all aspects of cancer, from tumor
initiation to cancer progression and metastasis. It is now well understood that
both losses and gains of DNA methylation as well as altered chromatin
organization contribute significantly to cancer-associated phenotypes. More
recently, new sequencing technologies have allowed the identification of driver
mutations in epigenetic regulators, providing a mechanistic link between the
cancer epigenome and genetic alterations. Oncogenic activating mutations are now 
known to occur in a number of epigenetic modifiers (i.e. IDH1/2, EZH2, DNMT3A),
pinpointing epigenetic pathways that are involved in tumorigenesis. Similarly,
investigations into the role of inactivating mutations in chromatin modifiers
(i.e. KDM6A, CREBBP/EP300, SMARCB1) implicate many of these genes as tumor
suppressors. Intriguingly, a number of neoplasms are defined by a plethora of
mutations in epigenetic regulators, including renal, bladder, and adenoid cystic 
carcinomas. Particularly striking is the discovery of frequent histone H3.3
mutations in pediatric glioma, a particularly aggressive neoplasm that has long
remained poorly understood. Cancer epigenetics is a relatively new, promising
frontier with much potential for improving cancer outcomes. Already, therapies
such as 5-azacytidine and decitabine have proven that targeting epigenetic
alterations in cancer can lead to tangible benefits. Understanding how genetic
alterations give rise to the cancer epigenome will offer new possibilities for
developing better prognostic and therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3978161
PMID: 24622842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Apr;6(2):116-27. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mju010. Epub 2014 Mar
11.

Reversible acetylation regulates vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2
activity.

Zecchin A(1), Pattarini L, Gutierrez MI, Mano M, Mai A, Valente S, Myers MP,
Pantano S, Giacca M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Trieste, Italy.

The tyrosine kinase receptor vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2
(VEGFR2) is a key regulator of angiogenesis. Here we show that VEGFR2 is
acetylated in endothelial cells both at four lysine residues forming a dense
cluster in the kinase insert domain and at a single lysine located in the
receptor activation loop. These modifications are under dynamic control of the
acetyltransferase p300 and two deacetylases HDAC5 and HDAC6. We demonstrate that 
VEGFR2 acetylation essentially regulates receptor phosphorylation. In particular,
VEGFR2 acetylation significantly alters the kinetics of receptor phosphorylation 
after ligand binding, allowing receptor phosphorylation and intracellular
signaling upon prolonged stimulation with VEGF. Molecular dynamics simulations
indicate that acetylation of the lysine in the activation loop contributes to the
transition to an open active state, in which tyrosine phosphorylation is favored 
by better exposure of the kinase target residues. These findings indicate that
post-translational modification by acetylation is a critical mechanism that
directly affects VEGFR2 function.

PMID: 24620033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Jun;139(2):371-80. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu044. Epub 2014 Mar
10.

Dose- and time-dependent epigenetic changes in the livers of Fisher 344 rats
exposed to furan.

Conti Ad(1), Kobets T, Escudero-Lourdes C, Montgomery B, Tryndyak V, Beland FA,
Doerge DR, Pogribny IP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemical Toxicology, National Center for Toxicological
Research, Jefferson, Arkansas, 72079 USA.

The presence of furan in common cooked foods along with evidence from
experimental studies that lifetime exposure to furan causes liver tumors in rats 
and mice has caused concern to regulatory public health agencies worldwide;
however, the mechanisms of the furan-induced hepatocarcinogenicity remain
unclear. The goal of the present study was to investigate whether or not
long-term exposure to furan causes epigenetic alterations in rat liver. Treating 
of male Fisher 344 rats by gavage 5 days per week with 0, 0.92, 2.0, or 4.4 mg
furan/kg body weight (bw)/day resulted in dose- and time-dependent epigenetic
changes consisting of alterations in DNA methylation and histone lysine
methylation and acetylation, altered expression of chromatin modifying genes, and
gene-specific methylation. Specifically, exposure to furan at doses 0.92, 2.0, or
4.4 mg furan/kg bw/day caused global DNA demethylation after 360 days of
treatment. There was also a sustained decrease in the levels of histone H3 lysine
9 and H4 lysine 20 trimethylation after 180 and 360 days of furan exposure, and a
marked reduction of histone H3 lysine 9 and H3 lysine 56 acetylation after 360
days at 4.4 mg/kg bw/day. These histone modification changes were accompanied by 
a reduced expression of Suv39h1, Prdm2, and Suv4-20h2 histone methyltransferases 
and Ep300 and Kat2a histone acetyltransferases. Additionally, furan at 2.0 and
4.4 mg/kg bw/day induced hypermethylation-dependent down-regulation of the
Rassf1a gene in the livers after 180 and 360 days. These findings indicate
possible involvement of dose- and time-dependent epigenetic modifications in the 
furan hepatotoxicity and carcinogenicity.

PMCID: PMC4064012
PMID: 24614236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 10;9(3):e90885. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090885. eCollection
2014.

Efficient and simple production of insulin-producing cells from embryonal
carcinoma stem cells using mouse neonate pancreas extract, as a natural inducer.

Ebrahimie M(1), Esmaeili F(2), Cheraghi S(3), Houshmand F(4), Shabani L(5),
Ebrahimie E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, Shahrekord University,
Shahrekord, Iran. (2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, University
of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran; Research Institute of Biotechnology, Shahrekord
University, Shahrekord, Iran. (3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic
Sciences, Azad Islamic University of Shahrekord, Shahrekord, Iran. (4)Department 
of Physiology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord University of Medical
Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran. (5)Department of Biology, Faculty of Basic Sciences, 
Shahrekord University, Shahrekord, Iran; Research Institute of Biotechnology,
Shahrekord University, Shahrekord, Iran. (6)Institute of Biotechnology, Shiraz
University, Shiraz, Iran; School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, The
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.

An attractive approach to replace the destroyed insulin-producing cells (IPCs) is
the generation of functional ß cells from stem cells. Embryonal carcinoma (EC)
stem cells are pluripotent cells which can differentiate into all cell types. The
present study was carried out to establish a simple nonselective inductive
culture system for generation of IPCs from P19 EC cells by 1-2 weeks old mouse
pancreas extract (MPE). Since, mouse pancreatic islets undergo further remodeling
and maturation for 2-3 weeks after birth, we hypothesized that the mouse neonatal
MPE contains essential factors to induce in vitro differentiation of pancreatic
lineages. Pluripotency of P19 cells were first confirmed by expression analysis
of stem cell markers, Oct3/4, Sox-2 and Nanog. In order to induce
differentiation, the cells were cultured in a medium supplemented by different
concentrations of MPE (50, 100, 200 and 300 µg/ml). The results showed that P19
cells could differentiate into IPCs and form dithizone-positive cell clusters.
The generated P19-derived IPCs were immunoreactive to proinsulin, insulin and
insulin receptor beta. The expression of pancreatic ß cell genes including,
PDX-1, INS1 and INS2 were also confirmed. The peak response at the 100 µg/ml MPE 
used for investigation of EP300 and CREB1 gene expression. When stimulated with
glucose, these cells synthesized and secreted insulin. Network analysis of the
key transcription factors (PDX-1, EP300, CREB1) during the generation of IPCs
resulted in introduction of novel regulatory candidates such as MIR17, and VEZF1 
transcription factors, as well as MORN1, DKFZp761P0212, and WAC proteins.
Altogether, we demonstrated the possibility of generating IPCs from
undifferentiated EC cells, with the characteristics of pancreatic ß cells. The
derivation of pancreatic cells from EC cells which are ES cell siblings would
provide a valuable experimental tool in study of pancreatic development and
function as well as rapid production of IPCs for transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3948699
PMID: 24614166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Carcinog. 2014 Nov;53(11):926-37. doi: 10.1002/mc.22144. Epub 2014 Mar 9.

PPARd deficiency disrupts hypoxia-mediated tumorigenic potential of colon cancer 
cells.

Jeong E(1), Koo JE, Yeon SH, Kwak MK, Hwang DH, Lee JY.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy,
The Catholic University of Korea, Bucheon, Korea.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) d is highly expressed in colon 
epithelial cells and closely linked to colon carcinogenesis. However, the role of
PPARd in colon cancer cells in a hypoxic tumor microenvironment is not fully
understood. We found that expression of the tumor-promoting cytokines, IL-8 and
VEGF, induced by hypoxia (<1% O2) and deferoxamine (a hypoxia mimetic) was
significantly attenuated in PPARd-deficient HCT116 colon cancer cells.
Consequently, PPARd-knockout colon cancer cells exposed to hypoxia and
deferoxamine failed to stimulate endothelial cell vascularization and macrophage 
migration/proliferation, whereas wild-type cells were able to induce angiogenesis
and macrophage activation in response to hypoxic stress. Hypoxic stress induced
transcriptional activation of PPARd, but not its protein expression, in HCT116
cells. Exogenous expression of p300 potentiated deferoxamine-induced PPARd
transactivation, while siRNA knockdown of p300 abolished hypoxia- and
deferoxamine-induced PPARd transactivation. PPARd associated with p300 upon
hypoxic stress as demonstrated by coimmunoprecipitation studies. PI3K inhibitors 
or siRNA knockdown of Akt suppressed the PPARd transactivation induced by hypoxia
and deferoxamine in HCT116 cells, leading to decreased expression of IL-8 and
VEGF. Collectively, these results reveal that PPARd is required for hypoxic
stress-mediated cytokine expression in colon cancer cells, resulting in promotion
of angiogenesis, macrophage recruitment, and macrophage proliferation in the
tumor microenvironment. p300 and the PI3K/Akt pathway play a role in the
regulation of PPARd transactivation induced by hypoxic stress. Our results
demonstrate the positive crosstalk between PPARd in tumor cells and the hypoxic
tumor microenvironment and provide potential therapeutic targets for colon
cancer.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24610641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 28;446(1):79-84. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.066. Epub 2014 Mar 4.

Carbamylated erythropoietin promotes neurite outgrowth and neuronal spine
formation in association with CBP/p300.

Choi M(1), Ko SY(2), Lee IY(2), Wang SE(2), Lee SH(2), Oh DH(3), Kim YS(4), Son
H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, 17 Haengdang-dong, Sungdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea.
(2)Graduate School of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Hanyang University, 17 
Haengdang-dong, Sungdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Psychiatry, College of Medicine and Institute of Mental Health, Hanyang
University, 17 Haengdang-dong, Sungdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, 17 Haengdang-dong, Sungdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea;
Graduate School of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Hanyang University, 17
Haengdang-dong, Sungdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, 17
Haengdang-dong, Sungdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea; Graduate School of
Biomedical Science and Engineering, Hanyang University, 17 Haengdang-dong,
Sungdong-gu, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
hyeonson@hanyang.ac.kr.

Both erythropoietin (EPO) and carbamylated EPO (cEPO) have been shown to increase
the length of neurites and spine density in neurons. However, the molecular
mechanism underlying the EPO- and cEPO-induced neuronal differentiation has yet
to be investigated. To address this issue, we investigated epigenetic
modifications that regulate gene expression in neurons. Neurons treated with EPO 
or cEPO display an upregulation of E1A-binding protein (p300) and p300-mediated
p53 acetylation, possibly increasing the transactivation activity of p53 on
growth-associated protein 43 (GAP43). Treatment of cells with cEPO markedly
increases spine formation and potentiates p300-mediated transactivation of PSD95,
Shank2 and 3 compared to EPO. These results demonstrate that cEPO controls
neuronal differentiation via acetylation of transcription factors and subsequent 
transactivation of target genes. These findings have important medical
implications because cEPO is of interest in the development of therapeutic agents
against neuropsychiatric disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24607903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Mar 6;14(3):357-69. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.01.005.

Osteopontin-CD44 signaling in the glioma perivascular niche enhances cancer stem 
cell phenotypes and promotes aggressive tumor growth.

Pietras A(1), Katz AM(2), Ekström EJ(3), Wee B(2), Halliday JJ(2), Pitter KL(2), 
Werbeck JL(2), Amankulor NM(4), Huse JT(5), Holland EC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA; Alvord Brain Tumor Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98104, USA; Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, NY 10021, USA; Brain Tumor Center, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA. (2)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA; Brain Tumor
Center, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA. (3)Cell 
Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.
(4)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15213, USA. (5)Brain Tumor Center, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10021, USA; Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Department of
Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.
(6)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA; Alvord Brain Tumor Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98104, USA. Electronic address: eholland@fhcrc.org.

Stem-like glioma cells reside within a perivascular niche and display hallmark
radiation resistance. An understanding of the mechanisms underlying these
properties will be vital for the development of effective therapies. Here, we
show that the stem cell marker CD44 promotes cancer stem cell phenotypes and
radiation resistance. In a mouse model of glioma, Cd44(-/-) and Cd44(+/-) animals
showed improved survival compared to controls. The CD44 ligand osteopontin shared
a perivascular expression pattern with CD44 and promoted glioma stem cell-like
phenotypes. These effects were mediated via the <U+03B3>-secretase-regulated
intracellular domain of CD44, which promoted aggressive glioma growth in vivo and
stem cell-like phenotypes via CBP/p300-dependent enhancement of HIF-2a activity. 
In human glioblastoma multiforme, expression of CD44 correlated with
hypoxia-induced gene signatures and poor survival. Altogether, these data suggest
that in the glioma perivascular niche, osteopontin promotes stem cell-like
properties and radiation resistance in adjacent tumor cells via activation of
CD44 signaling.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3999042
PMID: 24607407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 18;111(11):4115-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1313618111. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

BAT3 modulates p300-dependent acetylation of p53 and autophagy-related protein 7 
(ATG7) during autophagy.

Sebti S(1), Prébois C, Pérez-Gracia E, Bauvy C, Desmots F, Pirot N, Gongora C,
Bach AS, Hubberstey AV, Palissot V, Berchem G, Codogno P, Linares LK,
Liaudet-Coopman E, Pattingre S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Cancérologie de Montpellier, F-34298 Montpellier,
France.

Autophagy is regulated by posttranslational modifications, including acetylation.
Here we show that HLA-B-associated transcript 3 (BAT3) is essential for basal and
starvation-induced autophagy in embryonic day 18.5 BAT3(-/-) mouse embryos and in
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) through the modulation of p300-dependent
acetylation of p53 and ATG7. Specifically, BAT3 increases p53 acetylation and
proautophagic p53 target gene expression, while limiting p300-dependent
acetylation of ATG7, a mechanism known to inhibit autophagy. In the absence of
BAT3 or when BAT3 is located exclusively in the cytosol, autophagy is abrogated, 
ATG7 is hyperacetylated, p53 acetylation is abolished, and p300 accumulates in
the cytosol, indicating that BAT3 regulates the nuclear localization of p300. In 
addition, the interaction between BAT3 and p300 is stronger in the cytosol than
in the nucleus and, during starvation, the level of p300 decreases in the cytosol
but increases in the nucleus only in the presence of BAT3. We conclude that BAT3 
tightly controls autophagy by modulating p300 intracellular localization,
affecting the accessibility of p300 to its substrates, p53 and ATG7.

PMCID: PMC3964035
PMID: 24591579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cell. 2014 Feb 27;156(5):975-85. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.055.

Interplay of acetyltransferase EP300 and the proteasome system in regulating heat
shock transcription factor 1.

Raychaudhuri S(1), Loew C(1), Körner R(1), Pinkert S(1), Theis M(2), Hayer-Hartl 
M(1), Buchholz F(2), Hartl FU(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am 
Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany. (2)Medical Systems Biology,
University Hospital and Medical Faculty, Carl Gustav Carus University of
Technology, Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307 Dresden, Germany. (3)Department of Cellular
Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152
Martinsried, Germany. Electronic address: uhartl@biochem.mpg.de.

When exposed to proteotoxic environmental conditions, mammalian cells activate
the cytosolic stress response in order to restore protein homeostasis. A key
feature of this response is the heat shock transcription factor 1
(HSF1)-dependent expression of molecular chaperones. Here, we describe the
results of an RNA interference screen in HeLa cells to identify modulators of
stress response induction and attenuation. The modulator proteins are localized
in multiple cellular compartments, with chromatin modifiers and nuclear protein
quality control playing a central regulatory role. We find that the
acetyltransferase, EP300, controls the cellular level of activatable HSF1. This
involves acetylation of HSF1 at multiple lysines not required for function and
results in stabilization of HSF1 against proteasomal turnover. Acetylation of
functionally critical lysines during stress serves to fine-tune HSF1 activation. 
Finally, the nuclear proteasome system functions in attenuating the stress
response by degrading activated HSF1 in a manner linked with the clearance of
misfolded proteins.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24581496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cell. 2014 Mar 6;53(5):710-25. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.01.016. Epub 2014
Feb 20.

Regulation of autophagy by cytosolic acetyl-coenzyme A.

Mariño G(1), Pietrocola F(1), Eisenberg T(2), Kong Y(3), Malik SA(1),
Andryushkova A(2), Schroeder S(2), Pendl T(2), Harger A(4), Niso-Santano M(1),
Zamzami N(1), Scoazec M(5), Durand S(5), Enot DP(5), Fernández ÁF(6), Martins
I(1), Kepp O(1), Senovilla L(1), Bauvy C(7), Morselli E(1), Vacchelli E(1),
Bennetzen M(8), Magnes C(4), Sinner F(4), Pieber T(9), López-Otín C(6), Maiuri
MC(1), Codogno P(7), Andersen JS(8), Hill JA(3), Madeo F(10), Kroemer G(11).

Author information: 
(1)Equipe 11 Labelisée par la Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, INSERM U1138,
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, 75006 Paris, France; Metabolomics and
Molecular Cell Biology Platforms, Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France;
Université Paris Descartes/Paris 5, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75006 Paris, France.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, University of Graz, 8036 Graz, Austria.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine (Cardiology), University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (4)Institute of Medical Technologies and
Health Management, Joanneum Research, 8036 Graz, Austria. (5)Equipe 11 Labelisée 
par la Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, INSERM U1138, Centre de Recherche des
Cordeliers, 75006 Paris, France; Metabolomics and Molecular Cell Biology
Platforms, Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France. (6)Departamento de Bioquímica
y Biología Molecular, Instituto Universitario de Oncología, Universidad de
Oviedo, Oviedo 33006, Spain. (7)Université Paris Descartes/Paris 5, Sorbonne
Paris Cité, 75006 Paris, France; INSERM U845, 75014 Paris, France. (8)Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, 5230
Odense, Denmark. (9)Institute of Medical Technologies and Health Management,
Joanneum Research, 8036 Graz, Austria; Medical University of Graz, Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 8036 Graz,
Austria. (10)Institute of Molecular Biosciences, University of Graz, 8036 Graz,
Austria. Electronic address: frank.madeo@uni-graz.at. (11)Equipe 11 Labelisée par
la Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, INSERM U1138, Centre de Recherche des
Cordeliers, 75006 Paris, France; Metabolomics and Molecular Cell Biology
Platforms, Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France; Université Paris
Descartes/Paris 5, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75006 Paris, France; Pôle de Biologie,
Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, 75015 Paris, France. Electronic
address: kroemer@orange.fr.

Acetyl-coenzyme A (AcCoA) is a major integrator of the nutritional status at the 
crossroads of fat, sugar, and protein catabolism. Here we show that nutrient
starvation causes rapid depletion of AcCoA. AcCoA depletion entailed the
commensurate reduction in the overall acetylation of cytoplasmic proteins, as
well as the induction of autophagy, a homeostatic process of self-digestion.
Multiple distinct manipulations designed to increase or reduce cytosolic AcCoA
led to the suppression or induction of autophagy, respectively, both in cultured 
human cells and in mice. Moreover, maintenance of high AcCoA levels inhibited
maladaptive autophagy in a model of cardiac pressure overload. Depletion of AcCoA
reduced the activity of the acetyltransferase EP300, and EP300 was required for
the suppression of autophagy by high AcCoA levels. Altogether, our results
indicate that cytosolic AcCoA functions as a central metabolic regulator of
autophagy, thus delineating AcCoA-centered pharmacological strategies that allow 
for the therapeutic manipulation of autophagy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24560926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Jan 15;7(2):760-7. eCollection 2014.

Expression of p300 and CBP is associated with poor prognosis in small cell lung
cancer.

Gao Y(1), Geng J(2), Hong X(1), Qi J(3), Teng Y(1), Yang Y(1), Qu D(4), Chen
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University 150 Hapin Avenue, Nangang, Harbin, China. (2)Department of
Pathology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University 150 Hapin
Avenue, Nangang, Harbin, China. (3)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Harbin Medincal University Harbin, China. (4)Department of Pulmonary 
Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University 150 Hapin
Avenue, Nangang, Harbin, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the correlation among p300, CBP and MLL expression and
the clinicopathological characteristics in resected SCLC patients.
METHODS: Two hundred and twenty-two resected SCLC patients were included in this 
study. We evaluated p300, CBP and MLL expression by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Patients with high p300 expression had shorter OS and DFS than those
with low p300 expression (p = 0.01; p = 0.009, respectively). The patients with
CBP-positive tumors had significantly lower OS and DFS than those with
CBP-negative tumors (p = 0.005 and p = 0.007, respectively). Moreover, the p300- 
and CBP-positive (+) group had a significantly poor OS and DFS. The multivariate 
Cox regression analysis showed that high p300 and CBP expression are independent 
markers of poor overall survival (p = 0.006; p = 0.017, respectively) in operable
SCLC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: High p300 and CBP expression are independent prognostic markers of
poor overall survival for resected SCLC patients. The combination of p300 and CBP
expression may be useful in identifying patients with increased risks of cancer
recurrence of SCLC.

PMCID: PMC3925924
PMID: 24551300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. BMC Genomics. 2014 Feb 18;15:137. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-137.

MicroRNAs in bovine adipogenesis: genomic context, expression and function.

Romao JM, Jin W, He M, McAllister T, Guan le L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. lguan@ualberta.ca.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs found to regulate
several biological processes including adipogenesis. Understanding adipose tissue
regulation is critical for beef cattle as fat is an important determinant of beef
quality and nutrient value. This study analyzed the association between genomic
context characteristics of miRNAs with their expression and function in bovine
adipose tissue. Twenty-four subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsies were obtained
from eight British-continental crossbred steers at 3 different time points. Total
RNA was extracted and miRNAs were profiled using a miRNA microarray with
expression further validated by qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: A total of 224 miRNAs were detected of which 155 were expressed in all
steers (n = 8), and defined as the core miRNAs of bovine subcutaneous adipose
tissue. Core adipose miRNAs varied in terms of genomic location (59.5%
intergenic, 38.7% intronic, 1.2% exonic, and 0.6% mirtron), organization (55.5%
non-clustered and 44.5% clustered), and conservation (49% highly conserved, 14%
conserved and 37% poorly conserved). Clustered miRNAs and highly conserved miRNAs
were more highly expressed (p < 0.05) and had more predicted targets than
non-clustered or less conserved miRNAs (p < 0.001). A total of 34 miRNAs were
coordinately expressed, being part of six identified relevant networks. Two
intronic miRNAs (miR-33a and miR-1281) were confirmed to have coordinated
expression with their host genes, transcriptional factor SREBF2 and EP300 (a
transcriptional co-activator of transcriptional factor C/EBPa), respectively
which are involved in lipid metabolism, suggesting these miRNAs may also play a
role in regulation of bovine lipid metabolism/adipogenesis. Furthermore, a total 
of 17 bovine specific miRNAs were predicted to be involved in the regulation of
energy balance in adipose tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings improve our understanding on the behavior of miRNAs
in the regulation of bovine adipogenesis and fat metabolism as it reveals that
miRNA expression patterns and functions are associated with miRNA genomic
location, organization and conservation.

PMCID: PMC3930007
PMID: 24548287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jun;1843(6):1135-49. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2014.02.001. Epub 2014 Feb 11.

Phosphorylation of p300 increases its protein degradation to enhance the lung
cancer progression.

Wang SA(1), Hung CY(2), Chuang JY(3), Chang WC(4), Hsu TI(5), Hung JJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, College of Bioscience 
and Biotechnology, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng-Kung 
University, Tainan 701, Taiwan. (3)Neural Regenerative Medicine, College of
Medical Sciences and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, College of Bioscience 
and Biotechnology, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan; Department
of Pharmacology, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan; Institute of
Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng-Kung University,
Tainan 701, Taiwan; Center for Infectious Disease and Signal Transduction,
National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, College of Bioscience 
and Biotechnology, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan; Center for
Infectious Disease and Signal Transduction, National Cheng-Kung University,
Tainan 701, Taiwan. (6)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction,
College of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan
701, Taiwan; Department of Pharmacology, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan
701, Taiwan; Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National
Cheng-Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan; Center for Infectious Disease and
Signal Transduction, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan; Graduate
Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei 11031, Taiwan. Electronic address: petehung@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

p300 is a transcription cofactor for a number of nuclear proteins. Most studies
of p300 have focused on the regulation of its function, which primarily includes 
its role as a transcription co-factor for a number of nuclear proteins. In this
study, we found that p300 was highly phosphorylated and its level was decreased
during mitosis and tumorigenesis. In vitro and in vivo experiments aimed showed
that cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) and ERK1/2 phosphorylated p300 on Ser1038
and Ser2039. Mutations of Ser1038 and Ser2039 increased p300 protein stability
and levels. Inhibition of p300 degradation by blocking its phosphorylation
decreased the proliferation and metastasis activity of lung cancer cells,
indicating that p300 acts as a tumor suppressor in lung cancer tumorigenesis.
Investigation of the molecular mechanism showed that blocking p300
phosphorylation disrupted chromatin condensation and the increased the
acetylation of histone H3. Analysis of cell cycle progression in
HA-p300-S2A-expressing cells by flow cytometry showed that the p300 mutants
arrested the cells at S-phase or delayed the mitotic entry and exit. The
expression of several important oncogenes, MMP-9, vimentin, ß-catenin, N-cadherin
and c-myc, was negatively regulated by p300. In conclusion, during lung
tumorigenesis, a phosphorylation-mediated decrease in p300 level enhanced
oncogene expression during interphase and decreased histone H3 acetylation during
mitosis, which promoted lung cancer progression.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24530506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Clin Sci (Lond). 2014 Aug;127(3):171-83. doi: 10.1042/CS20130676.

Thrombin induces ICAM-1 expression in human lung epithelial cells via
c-Src/PDGFR/PI3K/Akt-dependent NF-<U+03BA>B/p300 activation.

Cheng SE(1), Lee IT(2), Lin CC(1), Hsiao LD(2), Yang CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Anesthetics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Lin-Kou and
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology and Health Ageing Research Center, 
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Up-regulation of ICAM-1 (intercellular adhesion molecule-1) is frequently
implicated in lung inflammation and lung diseases, such as IPF (idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis). Thrombin has been shown to play a key role in inflammation
via the induction of adhesion molecules, which then causes lung injury. However, 
the mechanisms underlying thrombin-induced ICAM-1 expression in HPAEpiCs (human
pulmonary alveolar epithelial cells) remain unclear. In the present study, we
have shown that thrombin induced ICAM-1 expression in HPAEpiCs. Pre-treatment
with the inhibitor of thrombin [PPACK (D-Phe-Pro-Arg-chloromethyl ketone)], c-Src
(PP1), PDGFR (platelet-derived growth factor receptor) (AG1296), PI3K
(phosohinositide 3-kinase) (LY294002), NF-<U+03BA>B (nuclear factor <U+03BA>B) (Bay11-7082) or 
p300 (GR343) and transfection with siRNAs of c-Src, PDGFR, Akt, p65 and p300
markedly reduced thrombin-induced ICAM-1 expression and monocyte adherence to
HPAEpiCs challenged with thrombin. In addition, we established that thrombin
stimulated the phosphorylation of c-Src, PDGFR, Akt and p65, which were inhibited
by pre-treatment with their respective inhibitors PP1, AG1296, LY294002 or
Bay11-7082. In addition, thrombin also enhanced Akt and NF-<U+03BA>B translocation from 
the cytosol to the nucleus, which was reduced by PP1, AG1296 or LY294002.
Thrombin induced NF-<U+03BA>B promoter activity and the formation of the p65-Akt-p300
complex, which were inhibited by AG1296, LY294002 or PP1. Finally, we have shown 
that thrombin stimulated in vivo binding of p300, Akt and p65 to the ICAM-1
promoter, which was reduced by AG1296, LY294002, SH-5 or PP1. These results show 
that thrombin induced ICAM-1 expression and monocyte adherence via a
c-Src/PDGFR/PI3K/Akt/NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent pathway in HPAEpiCs. Increased understanding
of the signalling mechanisms underlying ICAM-1 gene regulation will create
opportunities for the development of anti-inflammatory therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 24506791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Age (Dordr). 2014 Jun;36(3):9618. doi: 10.1007/s11357-014-9618-3. Epub 2014 Feb
1.

The effects of aging on the expression of Wnt pathway genes in mouse tissues.

Hofmann JW(1), McBryan T, Adams PD, Sedivy JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Laboratories
for Molecular Medicine, Brown University, Providence, RI, 02903, USA.

The Wnt signaling pathway is involved in the regulation of tissue patterning and 
organ development during embryogenesis and continues to contribute to the
maintenance of tissue homeostasis in adulthood. Recently, Wnt signaling has also 
been implicated in the establishment and progression of replicative cellular
senescence. Given the known roles of tissue homeostasis and cellular senescence
in aging, we sought to determine whether Wnt signaling changes with age. We
examined the expression of 84 Wnt pathway-related genes in the liver, lung,
skeletal muscle, and brain tissue from young and old mice. Expression changes
were compared with those seen in cellular senescence, and transcription factors
that might mediate these changes were predicted bioinformatically. In aggregate, 
our data are indicative of a general decrease in Wnt signaling with age,
especially in the lung and brain. Furthermore, the set of genes that are
differentially expressed with age is distinct from the genes differentially
expressed in cellular senescence. The transcription factors predicted to regulate
these changes, Nf-<U+03BA>B, Myb, Nkx2-1, Nr5a2, and Ep300, are known to regulate
inflammation, differentiation, lipid metabolism, and chromatin remodeling, all of
which have previously been implicated in aging. Although our study does not
address whether altered Wnt signaling is a cause or an effect of aging, the
presence of a relationship between the two provides a starting point for further 
investigation.

PMCID: PMC4082588
PMID: 24488586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Pediatr Surg Int. 2014 Apr;30(4):431-5. doi: 10.1007/s00383-014-3466-1.

Downregulation of p300 gene expression in airway mesenchyme of nitrofen-induced
hypoplastic lungs.

Takahashi H(1), Friedmacher F, Fujiwara N, Hofmann A, Takahashi T, Puri P.

Author information: 
(1)National Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin, 
Dublin 12, Ireland.

PURPOSE: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a relatively common
developmental abnormality causing life-threatening respiratory distress at birth.
The nitrofen model has been widely used to investigate the pathogenesis of
hypoplastic lungs associated with CDH. Embryos lacking p300 and CBP genes are
significantly smaller in lung formation. We hypothesized that pulmonary gene
expression of p300 and CBP is downregulated during late gestation in the
nitrofen-induced CDH model.
METHODS: Time-pregnant rats were treated with either nitrofen or vehicle on
gestational day 9 (D9). Fetal lungs were harvested on D18 and D21 (n = 8 at each 
time point). Pulmonary gene expression of p300 and CBP was analyzed by
quantitative real-time PCR. Immunohistochemistry was performed to investigate
expression and localization of pulmonary p300 and CBP proteins.
RESULTS: Relative mRNA expression levels of p300 were significantly decreased in 
nitrofen-induced hypoplastic lungs on D18 compared to controls (3.00 ± 0.20 vs.
3.76 ± 0.14; p = 0.0039), while CBP levels were not altered. p300
immunoreactivity was markedly diminished in surrounding mesenchymal compartments 
and nuclei of proximal and distal airway cells, while CBP expression was not
altered.
CONCLUSION: Downregulation of p300 gene expression during the early canalicular
stage may disrupt epithelial-mesenchymal signaling interactions, contributing to 
the development of hypoplastic lungs in the nitrofen-induced CDH model.

PMID: 24488106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Clin Genet. 2015 Feb;87(2):148-54. doi: 10.1111/cge.12348. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Clinical and molecular characterization of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome patients
carrying distinct novel mutations of the EP300 gene.

Negri G(1), Milani D, Colapietro P, Forzano F, Della Monica M, Rusconi D,
Consonni L, Caffi LG, Finelli P, Scarano G, Magnani C, Selicorni A, Spena S,
Larizza L, Gervasini C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milano, Italy.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a rare congenital neurodevelopmental disorder
characterized by postnatal growth deficiency, skeletal abnormalities, dysmorphic 
features and cognitive deficit. Mutations in two genes, CREBBP and EP300,
encoding two homologous transcriptional co-activators, have been identified in
55% and 3-5% of affected individuals, respectively. To date, only eight
EP300-mutated RSTS patients have been described and 12 additional mutations are
reported in the database LOVD. In this study, EP300 analysis was performed on 33 
CREBBP-negative RSTS patients leading to the identification of six unreported
germline EP300 alterations comprising one deletion and five point mutations. All 
six patients showed a convincing, albeit mild, RSTS phenotype with minor skeletal
anomalies, slight cognitive impairment and few major malformations. Beyond the
expansion of the RSTS-EP300-mutated cohort, this study indicates that
EP300-related RSTS cases occur more frequently than previously thought (8% vs
3-5%); furthermore, the characterization of novel EP300 mutations in RSTS
patients will enhance the clinical practice and genotype-phenotype correlations.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24476420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 14;289(11):7702-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.486522. Epub 2014
Jan 27.

Naphthoquinone-mediated inhibition of lysine acetyltransferase KAT3B/p300, basis 
for non-toxic inhibitor synthesis.

Vasudevarao MD(1), Mizar P, Kumari S, Mandal S, Siddhanta S, Swamy MM, Kaypee S, 
Kodihalli RC, Banerjee A, Naryana C, Dasgupta D, Kundu TK.

Author information: 
(1)From the Transcription and Disease Laboratory and.

Hydroxynaphthoquinone-based inhibitors of the lysine acetyltransferase KAT3B
(p300), such as plumbagin, are relatively toxic. Here, we report that free thiol 
reactivity and redox cycling properties greatly contribute to the toxicity of
plumbagin. A reactive 3rd position in the naphthoquinone derivatives is essential
for thiol reactivity and enhances redox cycling. Using this clue, we synthesized 
PTK1, harboring a methyl substitution at the 3rd position of plumbagin. This
molecule loses its thiol reactivity completely and its redox cycling ability to a
lesser extent. Mechanistically, non-competitive, reversible binding of the
inhibitor to the lysine acetyltransferase (KAT) domain of p300 is largely
responsible for the acetyltransferase inhibition. Remarkably, the modified
inhibitor PTK1 was a nearly non-toxic inhibitor of p300. The present report
elucidates the mechanism of acetyltransferase activity inhibition by
1,4-naphthoquinones, which involves redox cycling and nucleophilic adduct
formation, and it suggests possible routes of synthesis of the non-toxic
inhibitor.

PMCID: PMC3953281
PMID: 24469461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Feb 14;444(3):387-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.01.062. Epub 2014 Jan 24.

P300 binds to and acetylates MTA2 to promote colorectal cancer cells growth.

Zhou J(1), Zhan S(2), Tan W(1), Cheng R(1), Gong H(1), Zhu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Shu Guang Hospital, Shanghai University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 200021, China. (2)Department of Radiology,
Shu Guang Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai
200021, China. Electronic address: songhuazhan.sg@gmail.com.

MTA2 is a member of metastasis associated family, which is highly expressed in
several solid tumors and associated with tumor cells migration and invasion.
Here, we report that MTA2 is acetylated at K152 and histone acetyltransferase
p300 binds to and acetylates MTA2. Furthermore, mutation of the MTA2 acetylation 
site inhibits the growth of colorectal cancer cells and migration and invasion of
Rat1 fibroblasts. These results reveal a novel post-translational regulation of
MTA2 by the way of p300-dependent acetylation, which is important for tumor cells
growth and migration and provides a potential target for clinical cancer
research.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24468085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 23;9(1):e86102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086102. eCollection
2014.

The role of factor inhibiting HIF (FIH-1) in inhibiting HIF-1 transcriptional
activity in glioblastoma multiforme.

Wang E(1), Zhang C(2), Polavaram N(3), Liu F(4), Wu G(1), Schroeder MA(5), Lau
JS(1), Mukhopadhyay D(1), Jiang SW(6), O'Neill BP(1), Datta K(3), Li J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic Cancer Center,
Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America. (2)Department of Neuro-Surgery,
the First Affiliated Hospital of Baotou Medical College, Baotou, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Eppley Cancer Center,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America.
(4)Department of Research and Development, Guangxi Medicinal Botanical Institute,
Nanning, Guangxi, China. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic Cancer 
Center, Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America. (6)Department of
Biomedical Science, Mercer University School of Medicine, Savannah, Georgia,
United States of America ; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Memorial
Health Hospital, Savannah, Georgia, United States of America.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) accounts for about 38% of primary brain tumors in
the United States. GBM is characterized by extensive angiogenesis induced by
vascular growth factors and cytokines. The transcription of these growth factors 
and cytokines is regulated by the Hypoxia-Inducible-Factor-1(HIF-1), which is a
key regulator mediating the cellular response to hypoxia. It is known that Factor
Inhibiting HIF-1, or FIH-1, is also involved in the cellular response to hypoxia 
and has the capability to physically interact with HIF-1 and block its
transcriptional activity under normoxic conditions. Delineation of the regulatory
role of FIH-1 will help us to better understand the molecular mechanism
responsible for tumor growth and progression and may lead to the design of new
therapies targeting cellular pathways in response to hypoxia. Previous studies
have shown that the chromosomal region of 10q24 containing the FIH-1 gene is
often deleted in GBM, suggesting a role for the FIH-1 in GBM tumorigenesis and
progression. In the current study, we found that FIH-1 is able to inhibit
HIF-mediated transcription of GLUT1 and VEGF-A, even under hypoxic conditions in 
human glioblastoma cells. FIH-1 has been found to be more potent in inhibiting
HIF function than PTEN. This observation points to the possibility that deletion 
of 10q23-24 and loss or decreased expression of FIH-1 gene may lead to a
constitutive activation of HIF-1 activity, an alteration of HIF-1 targets such as
GLUT-1 and VEGF-A, and may contribute to the survival of cancer cells in hypoxia 
and the development of hypervascularization observed in GBM. Therefore FIH-1 can 
be potential therapeutic target for the treatment of GBM patients with poor
prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3900478
PMID: 24465898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2014 Mar 15;306(6):L543-51. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00320.2013. Epub 2014 Jan 17.

TNF-a induces cytosolic phospholipase A2 expression via Jak2/PDGFR-dependent
Elk-1/p300 activation in human lung epithelial cells.

Yang CM(1), Lee IT, Chi PL, Cheng SE, Hsiao LD, Hsu CK.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pharmacology, Chang Gung Univ., College of Medicine, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st 
Road, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. chuenmao@mail.cgu.edu.tw).

Cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) plays a pivotal role in mediating
agonist-induced arachidonic acid release for prostaglandin (PG) synthesis during 
inflammation triggered by tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a). However, the
mechanisms underlying TNF-a-induced cPLA2 expression in human lung epithelial
cells (HPAEpiCs) were not completely understood. Here, we demonstrated that TNF-a
induced cPLA2 mRNA and protein expression, promoter activity, and PGE2 secretion 
in HPAEpiCs. These responses induced by TNF-a were inhibited by pretreatment with
the inhibitor of Jak2 (AG490), platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)
(AG1296), phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K) (LY294002), or MEK1/2 (PD98059) and
transfection with siRNA of Jak2, PDGFR, Akt, or p42. We showed that TNF-a
markedly stimulated Jak2, PDGFR, Akt, and p42/p44 MAPK phosphorylation, which
were attenuated by their respective inhibitors. Moreover, TNF-a stimulated Akt
activation via a Jak2/PDGFR pathway in HPAEpiCs. In addition, TNF-a-induced
p42/p44 MAPK phosphorylation was reduced by AG1296 or LY294002. On the other
hand, TNF-a could induce Akt and p42/p44 MAPK translocation from the cytosol into
the nucleus, which was inhibited by AG490, AG1296, or LY294002. Finally, we
showed that TNF-a stimulated Elk-1 phosphorylation, which was reduced by LY294002
or PD98059. We also observed that TNF-a time dependently induced p300/Elk-1 and
p300/Akt complex formation in HPAEpiCs, which was reduced by AG490, AG1296, or
LY294002. The activity of cPLA2 protein upregulated by TNF-a was reflected on the
PGE2 release, which was reduced by AG490, AG1296, LY294002, or PD98059. Taken
together, these results demonstrated that TNF-a-induced cPLA2 expression and PGE2
release were mediated through a Jak2/PDGFR/PI3K/Akt/p42/p44 MAPK/Elk-1 pathway in
HPAEpiCs.

PMID: 24441870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Mar;18(3):415-21. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12218. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Cardiac miR-133a overexpression prevents early cardiac fibrosis in diabetes.

Chen S(1), Puthanveetil P, Feng B, Matkovich SJ, Dorn GW 2nd, Chakrabarti S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western
University, London, ON, Canada.

Diabetic cardiomyopathy is a cascade of complex events leading to eventual
failure of the heart and cardiac fibrosis being considered as one of its major
causes. miR-133a is one of the most abundantly expressed microRNAs in the heart. 
We investigated the role of miR-133a during severe hyperglycaemia. And, our aim
was to find out what role miR-133a plays during diabetes-induced cardiac
fibrosis. We saw a drastic decrease in miR-133a expression in the hearts of
streptozotocin-induced diabetic animals, as measured by RT-qPCR. This decrease
was accompanied by an increase in the transcriptional co-activator EP300 mRNA and
major markers of fibrosis [transforming growth factor-ß1, connective tissue
growth factor, fibronectin (FN1) and COL4A1]; in addition, focal cardiac fibrosis
assessed by Masson's trichome stain was increased. Interestingly, in diabetic
mice with cardiac-specific miR-133aa overexpression, cardiac fibrosis was
significantly decreased, as observed by RT-qPCR and immunoblotting of COL4A1,
ELISA for FN1 and microscopic examination. Furthermore, Cardiac miR-133a
overexpression prevented ERK1/2 and SMAD-2 phosphorylation. These findings show
that miR-133a could be a potential therapeutic target for diabetes-induced
cardiac fibrosis and related cardiac dysfunction.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3955148
PMID: 24428157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 28;289(9):5914-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.531384. Epub 2014 
Jan 8.

Kruppel-like factor 15 is a critical regulator of cardiac lipid metabolism.

Prosdocimo DA(1), Anand P, Liao X, Zhu H, Shelkay S, Artero-Calderon P, Zhang L, 
Kirsh J, Moore D, Rosca MG, Vazquez E, Kerner J, Akat KM, Williams Z, Zhao J,
Fujioka H, Tuschl T, Bai X, Schulze PC, Hoppel CL, Jain MK, Haldar SM.

Author information: 
(1)From the Case Cardiovascular Research Institute and Harrington Heart and
Vascular Institute.

The mammalian heart, the body's largest energy consumer, has evolved robust
mechanisms to tightly couple fuel supply with energy demand across a wide range
of physiologic and pathophysiologic states, yet, when compared with other organs,
relatively little is known about the molecular machinery that directly governs
metabolic plasticity in the heart. Although previous studies have defined
Kruppel-like factor 15 (KLF15) as a transcriptional repressor of pathologic
cardiac hypertrophy, a direct role for the KLF family in cardiac metabolism has
not been previously established. We show in human heart samples that KLF15 is
induced after birth and reduced in heart failure, a myocardial expression pattern
that parallels reliance on lipid oxidation. Isolated working heart studies and
unbiased transcriptomic profiling in Klf15-deficient hearts demonstrate that
KLF15 is an essential regulator of lipid flux and metabolic homeostasis in the
adult myocardium. An important mechanism by which KLF15 regulates its direct
transcriptional targets is via interaction with p300 and recruitment of this
critical co-activator to promoters. This study establishes KLF15 as a key
regulator of myocardial lipid utilization and is the first to implicate the KLF
transcription factor family in cardiac metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3937660
PMID: 24407292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nature. 2014 Feb 20;506(7488):371-5. doi: 10.1038/nature12881. Epub 2013 Dec 25.

Landscape of genomic alterations in cervical carcinomas.

Ojesina AI(1), Lichtenstein L(2), Freeman SS(3), Pedamallu CS(4),
Imaz-Rosshandler I(5), Pugh TJ(4), Cherniack AD(3), Ambrogio L(3), Cibulskis
K(3), Bertelsen B(6), Romero-Cordoba S(5), Treviño V(7), Vazquez-Santillan K(5), 
Guadarrama AS(5), Wright AA(8), Rosenberg MW(3), Duke F(9), Kaplan B(4), Wang
R(10), Nickerson E(3), Walline HM(11), Lawrence MS(3), Stewart C(3), Carter
SL(3), McKenna A(3), Rodriguez-Sanchez IP(12), Espinosa-Castilla M(5), Woie
K(13), Bjorge L(14), Wik E(14), Halle MK(14), Hoivik EA(14), Krakstad C(14),
Gabiño NB(5), Gómez-Macías GS(12), Valdez-Chapa LD(12), Garza-Rodríguez ML(12),
Maytorena G(15), Vazquez J(15), Rodea C(15), Cravioto A(15), Cortes ML(3),
Greulich H(16), Crum CP(17), Neuberg DS(18), Hidalgo-Miranda A(5), Escareno
CR(19), Akslen LA(20), Carey TE(21), Vintermyr OK(20), Gabriel SB(3),
Barrera-Saldaña HA(12), Melendez-Zajgla J(5), Getz G(22), Salvesen HB(23),
Meyerson M(24).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA [2] The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA [3]. (2)1] The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA [2]. (3)The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA. (4)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA [2] The Eli and Edythe L.
Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA. (5)Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genomica, 
Mexico City 14610, Mexico. (6)Department of Pathology, Haukeland University
Hospital, N5021 Bergen, Norway. (7)Tecnológico de Monterrey, Monterrey 64849,
Mexico. (8)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA [2] Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (9)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. (10)1] Department
of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215,
USA [2] Department of Thoracic Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, 
Shanghai 200032, China. (11)Cancer Biology Program, Program in the Biomedical
Sciences, Rackham Graduate School, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109, USA. (12)Facultad de Medicina y Hospital Universitario 'Dr. José Eluterio 
González' de la Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo León 64460, 
México. (13)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Haukeland University
Hospital, N5021 Bergen, Norway. (14)1] Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Haukeland University Hospital, N5021 Bergen, Norway [2] Department of Clinical
Science, Centre for Cancer Biomarkers, University of Bergen, N5020 Bergen,
Norway. (15)Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Mexico City 06720, Mexico.
(16)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA [2] The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA [3] Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (17)Department of Pathology, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (18)Department of
Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA. (19)1] Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genomica, Mexico 
City 14610, Mexico [2] Claremont Graduate University, Claremont, California
91711, USA. (20)1] Department of Pathology, Haukeland University Hospital, N5021 
Bergen, Norway [2] Centre for Cancer Biomarkers, Department of Clinical Medicine,
University of Bergen, N5020 Bergen, Norway. (21)Head and Neck Oncology Program
and Department of Otolaryngology, University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan 38109, USA. (22)1] The Eli and Edythe L. Broad
Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [2] Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center and Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. (23)1] Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Haukeland University Hospital, N5021 Bergen, Norway [2]
Department of Clinical Science, Centre for Cancer Biomarkers, University of
Bergen, N5020 Bergen, Norway [3]. (24)1] Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA [2] The Eli and
Edythe L. Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA [3] Department of Pathology,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [4].

Cervical cancer is responsible for 10-15% of cancer-related deaths in women
worldwide. The aetiological role of infection with high-risk human papilloma
viruses (HPVs) in cervical carcinomas is well established. Previous studies have 
also implicated somatic mutations in PIK3CA, PTEN, TP53, STK11 and KRAS as well
as several copy-number alterations in the pathogenesis of cervical carcinomas.
Here we report whole-exome sequencing analysis of 115 cervical carcinoma-normal
paired samples, transcriptome sequencing of 79 cases and whole-genome sequencing 
of 14 tumour-normal pairs. Previously unknown somatic mutations in 79 primary
squamous cell carcinomas include recurrent E322K substitutions in the MAPK1 gene 
(8%), inactivating mutations in the HLA-B gene (9%), and mutations in EP300
(16%), FBXW7 (15%), NFE2L2 (4%), TP53 (5%) and ERBB2 (6%). We also observe
somatic ELF3 (13%) and CBFB (8%) mutations in 24 adenocarcinomas. Squamous cell
carcinomas have higher frequencies of somatic nucleotide substitutions occurring 
at cytosines preceded by thymines (Tp*C sites) than adenocarcinomas. Gene
expression levels at HPV integration sites were statistically significantly
higher in tumours with HPV integration compared with expression of the same genes
in tumours without viral integration at the same site. These data demonstrate
several recurrent genomic alterations in cervical carcinomas that suggest new
strategies to combat this disease.

PMCID: PMC4161954
PMID: 24390348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 21;289(8):4928-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.474049. Epub 2013 
Dec 27.

The nucleolar protein Myb-binding protein 1A (MYBBP1A) enhances p53
tetramerization and acetylation in response to nucleolar disruption.

Ono W(1), Hayashi Y, Yokoyama W, Kuroda T, Kishimoto H, Ito I, Kimura K, Akaogi
K, Waku T, Yanagisawa J.

Author information: 
(1)From the Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba Science City, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan.

Tetramerization of p53 is crucial to exert its biological activity, and nucleolar
disruption is sufficient to activate p53. We previously demonstrated that
nucleolar stress induces translocation of the nucleolar protein MYBBP1A from the 
nucleolus to the nucleoplasm and enhances p53 activity. However, whether and how 
MYBBP1A regulates p53 tetramerization in response to nucleolar stress remain
unclear. In this study, we demonstrated that MYBBP1A enhances p53
tetramerization, followed by acetylation under nucleolar stress. We found that
MYBBP1A has two regions that directly bind to lysine residues of the p53
C-terminal regulatory domain. MYBBP1A formed a self-assembled complex that
provided a molecular platform for p53 tetramerization and enhanced p300-mediated 
acetylation of the p53 tetramer. Moreover, our results show that MYBBP1A
functions to enhance p53 tetramerization that is necessary for p53 activation,
followed by cell death with actinomycin D treatment. Thus, we suggest that
MYBBP1A plays a pivotal role in the cellular stress response.

PMCID: PMC3931054
PMID: 24375404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 17;8(12):e83787. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083787.
eCollection 2013.

ERK2-mediated phosphorylation of transcriptional coactivator binding protein
PIMT/NCoA6IP at Ser298 augments hepatic gluconeogenesis.

Kapadia B(1), Viswakarma N(1), Parsa KV(1), Kain V(1), Behera S(1), Suraj SK(2), 
Babu PP(2), Kar A(3), Panda S(3), Zhu YJ(4), Jia Y(4), Thimmapaya B(5), Reddy
JK(4), Misra P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Dr Reddy's Institute of Life Sciences, An Associate
Institute of University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad,
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India. (3)Department of Life Sciences, Devi Ahilya
University, Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India. (4)Department of Pathology, Feinberg
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of 
America. (5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

PRIP-Interacting protein with methyl transferase domain (PIMT) serves as a
molecular bridge between CREB-binding protein (CBP)/ E1A binding protein p300
(Ep300) -anchored histone acetyl transferase and the Mediator complex sub-unit1
(Med1) and modulates nuclear receptor transcription. Here, we report that ERK2
phosphorylates PIMT at Ser(298) and enhances its ability to activate PEPCK
promoter. We observed that PIMT is recruited to PEPCK promoter and
adenoviral-mediated over-expression of PIMT in rat primary hepatocytes
up-regulated expression of gluconeogenic genes including PEPCK. Reporter
experiments with phosphomimetic PIMT mutant (PIMT(S298D)) suggested that
conformational change may play an important role in PIMT-dependent PEPCK promoter
activity. Overexpression of PIMT and Med1 together augmented hepatic glucose
output in an additive manner. Importantly, expression of gluconeogenic genes and 
hepatic glucose output were suppressed in isolated liver specific PIMT knockout
mouse hepatocytes. Furthermore, consistent with reporter experiments, PIMT(S298D)
but not PIMT(S298A) augmented hepatic glucose output via up-regulating the
expression of gluconeogenic genes. Pharmacological blockade of MAPK/ERK pathway
using U0126, abolished PIMT/Med1-dependent gluconeogenic program leading to
reduced hepatic glucose output. Further, systemic administration of T4 hormone to
rats activated ERK1/2 resulting in enhanced PIMT ser(298) phosphorylation.
Phosphorylation of PIMT led to its increased binding to the PEPCK promoter,
increased PEPCK expression and induction of gluconeogenesis in liver. Thus,
ERK2-mediated phosphorylation of PIMT at Ser(298) is essential in hepatic
gluconeogenesis, demonstrating an important role of PIMT in the pathogenesis of
hyperglycemia.

PMCID: PMC3866170
PMID: 24358311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Clin Exp Allergy. 2014 Jan;44(1):47-57. doi: 10.1111/cea.12168.

Activity and expression of histone acetylases and deacetylases in inflammatory
phenotypes of asthma.

Gunawardhana LP(1), Gibson PG, Simpson JL, Powell H, Baines KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Priority Research Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Disease, Hunter Medical
Research Institute, The University of Newcastle, Newcastle, NSW, Australia;
Department of Respiratory & Sleep Medicine, HMRI, John Hunter Hospital, New
Lambton, NSW, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs)
regulate gene expression, yet differences in the activity of these enzymes in the
inflammatory phenotypes of asthma are unknown. We hypothesized that neutrophilic 
asthma (NA) would be associated with increased HAT and decreased HDAC activity.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate total HAT/HDAC activity and gene expression in isolated
blood monocytes and sputum macrophages from healthy and patients with asthma.
METHODS: Peripheral blood and induced sputum were collected from adults with
asthma (n = 52) and healthy controls (n = 9). Sputum inflammatory cell counts
were performed and asthma inflammatory phenotypes were classified according to
sputum eosinophil and neutrophil cut-off's of > 3% and > 61% respectively.
Peripheral blood monocytes were isolated (n = 61) and sputum macrophages were
isolated from a subgroup of patients with asthma (n = 14), using immunomagnetic
cell separation. RNA and nuclear proteins were extracted and quantified. Enzyme
activity was assessed using fluorescent assays and gene expression of EP300,
KAT2B, CREBBP, and HDACs 1, 2 and 3 were measured by qPCR.
RESULTS: There was a significant inverse association between blood monocyte HAT
and HDAC activity (r = -0.58, P < 0.001). NA was associated with increased blood 
monocyte HAT enzyme activity (P = 0.02), decreased HDAC activity (P = 0.03), and 
increased HAT: HDAC ratio (P < 0.01) compared with eosinophilic asthma. There
were no differences in gene expression of EP300, KAT2B, CREBBP, or HDACs 1, 2 and
3 in blood monocytes from subjects with asthma or inflammatory phenotypes of
asthma. There was no effect of inhaled corticosteroid use, poor asthma control,
or asthma severity on HAT/HDAC activities. Sputum macrophages had increased
expression of KAT2B in eosinophilic compared with paucigranulocytic asthma.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Neutrophilic airway inflammation is
associated with increased HAT and reduced HDAC activity in blood monocytes,
demonstrating further systemic manifestations relating to the altered
inflammatory gene transcription profile of neutrophilic asthma.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24355018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jan;164A(1):251-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36237. Epub 2013
Oct 29.

Exome sequencing identifies a novel EP300 frame shift mutation in a patient with 
features that overlap Cornelia de Lange syndrome.

Woods SA(1), Robinson HB, Kohler LJ, Agamanolis D, Sterbenz G, Khalifa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Akron Children's Hospital, Akron, Ohio.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) and Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) are
genetically heterogeneous multiple anomalies syndromes, each having a distinctive
facial gestalt. Two genes (CREBBP and EP300) are known to cause RTS, and five
(NIPBL, SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21, and HDAC8) have been associated with CdLS. A
diagnosis of RTS or CdLS is molecularly confirmed in only 65% of clinically
identified cases, suggesting that additional causative genes exist for both
conditions. In addition, although EP300 and CREBBP encode homologous proteins and
perform similar functions, only eight EP300 positive RTS patients have been
reported, suggesting that patients with EP300 mutations might be escaping
clinical recognition. We report on a child with multiple congenital abnormalities
and intellectual disability whose facial features and complex phenotype resemble 
CdLS. However, no mutations in CdLS-related genes were identified. Rather, a
novel EP300 mutation was found on whole exome sequencing. Possible links between 
EP300 and genes causing CdLS are evident in the literature. Both EP300 and HDAC8 
are involved in the regulation of TP53 transcriptional activity. In addition,
p300 and other chromatin associated proteins, including NIPBL, SMCA1, and SMC3,
have been found at enhancer regions in different cell types. It is therefore
possible that EP300 and CdLS-related genes are involved in additional shared
pathways, producing overlapping phenotypes. As whole exome sequencing becomes
more widely utilized, the diverse phenotypes associated with EP300 mutations
should be better understood. In the meantime, testing for EP300 mutations in
those with features of CdLS may be warranted.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24352918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Blood. 2014 Feb 27;123(9):1293-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-531509. Epub 2013
Dec 17.

A targeted mutational landscape of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma.

Odejide O(1), Weigert O, Lane AA, Toscano D, Lunning MA, Kopp N, Kim S, van
Bodegom D, Bolla S, Schatz JH, Teruya-Feldstein J, Hochberg E, Louissaint A,
Dorfman D, Stevenson K, Rodig SJ, Piccaluga PP, Jacobsen E, Pileri SA, Harris NL,
Ferrero S, Inghirami G, Horwitz SM, Weinstock DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA;

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Feb 27;123(9):1285-6.

The genetics of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) are very poorly
understood. We defined the mutational landscape of AITL across 219 genes in 85
cases from the United States and Europe. We identified =2 mutations in 34 genes, 
nearly all of which were not previously implicated in AITL. These included
loss-of-function mutations in TP53 (n = 4), ETV6 (n = 3), CCND3 (n = 2), and
EP300 (n = 5), as well as gain-of-function mutations in JAK2 (n = 2) and STAT3 (n
= 4). TET2 was mutated in 65 (76%) AITLs, including 43 that harbored 2 or 3 TET2 
mutations. DNMT3A mutations occurred in 28 (33%) AITLs; 100% of these also
harbored TET2 mutations (P < .0001). Seventeen AITLs harbored IDH2 R172
substitutions, including 15 with TET2 mutations. In summary, AITL is
characterized by high frequencies of overlapping mutations in epigenetic
modifiers and targetable mutations in a subset of cases.

PMCID: PMC4260974
PMID: 24345752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 10;8(12):e82684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082684.
eCollection 2013.

Genetic interaction between mutations in c-Myb and the KIX domains of CBP and
p300 affects multiple blood cell lineages and influences both gene activation and
repression.

Kasper LH(1), Fukuyama T, Lerach S, Chang Y, Xu W, Wu S, Boyd KL, Brindle PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, United States of America.

Adult blood cell production or definitive hematopoiesis requires the
transcription factor c-Myb. The closely related KAT3 histone acetyltransferases
CBP (CREBBP) and p300 (EP300) bind c-Myb through their KIX domains and mice
homozygous for a p300 KIX domain mutation exhibit multiple blood defects.
Perplexingly, mice homozygous for the same KIX domain mutation in CBP have normal
blood. Here we test the hypothesis that the CBP KIX domain contributes
subordinately to hematopoiesis via a genetic interaction with c-Myb. We assessed 
hematopoiesis in mice bearing compound mutations of c-Myb and/or the KIX domains 
of CBP and p300, and measured the effect of KIX domain mutations on
c-Myb-dependent gene expression. We found that in the context of a p300 KIX
mutation, the CBP KIX domain mutation affects platelets, B cells, T cells, and
red cells. Gene interaction (epistasis) analysis provides mechanistic evidence
that blood defects in KIX mutant mice are consistent with reduced c-Myb and KIX
interaction. Lastly, we demonstrated that the CBP and p300 KIX domains contribute
to both c-Myb-dependent gene activation and repression. Together these results
suggest that the KIX domains of CBP, and especially p300, are principal mediators
of c-Myb-dependent gene activation and repression that is required for definitive
hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3858336
PMID: 24340053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 5;8(12):e81110. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081110. eCollection
2013.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib induces an inhibitory chromatin environment
at a distal enhancer of the estrogen receptor-a gene.

Powers GL(1), Rajbhandari P, Solodin NM, Bickford B, Alarid ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McArdle Laboratories for Cancer Research and
University of Wisconsin Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Expression of the estrogen receptor-a (ERa) gene, ESR1, is a clinical biomarker
used to predict therapeutic outcome of breast cancer. Hence, there is significant
interest in understanding the mechanisms regulating ESR1 gene expression.
Proteasome activity is increased in cancer and we previously showed that
proteasome inhibition leads to loss of ESR1 gene expression in breast cancer
cells. Expression of ESR1 mRNA in breast cancer cells is controlled predominantly
through a proximal promoter within ~400 base pair (bp) of the transcription start
site (TSS). Here, we show that loss of ESR1 gene expression induced by the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib is associated with inactivation of a distal
enhancer located 150 kilobases (kb) from the TSS. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays reveal several bortezomib-induced changes at the distal site including
decreased occupancy of three critical transcription factors, GATA3, FOXA1, and
AP2<U+03B3>. Bortezomib treatment also resulted in decreased histone H3 and H4
acetylation and decreased occupancy of histone acetyltransferase, p300. These
data suggest a mechanism to explain proteasome inhibitor-induced loss of ESR1
mRNA expression that highlights the importance of the chromatin environment at
the -150 kb distal enhancer in regulation of basal expression of ESR1 in breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3855213
PMID: 24339902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 31;289(5):2711-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.525501. Epub 2013 
Dec 12.

NF-<U+03BA>B and enhancer-binding CREB protein scaffolded by CREB-binding protein
(CBP)/p300 proteins regulate CD59 protein expression to protect cells from
complement attack.

Du Y(1), Teng X, Wang N, Zhang X, Chen J, Ding P, Qiao Q, Wang Q, Zhang L, Yang
C, Yang Z, Chu Y, Du X, Zhou X, Hu W.

Author information: 
(1)From the Cancer Institute, Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer Medicine,
Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center and Department of Oncology, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

The complement system can be activated spontaneously for immune surveillance or
induced to clear invading pathogens, in which the membrane attack complex (MAC,
C5b-9) plays a critical role. CD59 is the sole membrane complement regulatory
protein (mCRP) that restricts MAC assembly. CD59, therefore, protects innocent
host cells from attacks by the complement system, and host cells require the
constitutive and inducible expression of CD59 to protect themselves from
deleterious destruction by complement. However, the mechanisms that underlie CD59
regulation remain largely unknown. In this study we demonstrate that the widely
expressed transcription factor Sp1 may regulate the constitutive expression of
CD59, whereas CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300 bridge NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB, which
surprisingly functions as an enhancer-binding protein to induce the up-regulation
of CD59 during in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-triggered complement activation, thus 
conferring host defense against further MAC-mediated destruction. Moreover,
individual treatment with LPS, TNF-a, and the complement activation products
(sublytic MAC (SC5b-9) and C5a) could increase the expression of CD59 mainly by
activating NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB signaling pathways. Together, our findings identify a
novel gene regulation mechanism involving CBP/p300, NF-<U+03BA>B, and CREB; this
mechanism suggests potential drug targets for controlling various
complement-related human diseases.

PMCID: PMC3908404
PMID: 24338025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 24;289(4):2072-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.526905. Epub 2013 
Dec 9.

Zinc finger protein 451 is a novel Smad corepressor in transforming growth
factor-ß signaling.

Feng Y(1), Wu H, Xu Y, Zhang Z, Liu T, Lin X, Feng XH.

Author information: 
(1)From the Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310058, China and.

ZNF451 is a transcriptional cofactor localized to promyelocytic leukemia bodies. 
Here, we present evidence demonstrating that ZNF451 physically interacts with
Smad3/4 and functionally inhibits TGF-ß signaling. Increased expression of ZNF451
attenuates TGF-ß-induced growth inhibitory and gene transcriptional responses,
whereas depletion of ZNF451 enhances TGF-ß responses. Mechanistically, ZNF451
blocks the ability of Smad3/4 to recruit p300 in response to TGF-ß, which causes 
reduction of histone H3K9 acetylation on the promoters of TGF-ß target genes.
Taken together, ZNF451 acts as a transcriptional corepressor for Smad3/4 and
negatively regulates TGF-ß signaling.

PMCID: PMC3900955
PMID: 24324267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Stem Cells. 2014 Jun;32(6):1602-15. doi: 10.1002/stem.1613.

A growth-promoting signaling component cyclin D1 in neural stem cells has
antiastrogliogenic function to execute self-renewal.

Bizen N(1), Inoue T, Shimizu T, Tabu K, Kagawa T, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Regulation, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University (TMDU), Tokyo, Japan.

Self-renewing proliferation of neural stem cells (NSCs) is intimately linked to
the inhibition of neuronal and glial differentiation, however, their molecular
linkage has been poorly understood. We have proposed a model previously
explaining partly this linkage, in which fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) and
Wnt signals cooperate to promote NSC self-renewal via ß-catenin accumulation,
which leads to the promotion of proliferation by lymphoid enhancer factor
(LEF)/T-cell factor (TCF)-mediated cyclin D1 expression and at the same time to
the inhibition of neuronal differentiation by ß-catenin-mediated potentiation of 
Notch signaling. To fully understand the mechanisms underlying NSC self-renewal, 
it needs to be clarified how these growth factor signals inhibit glial
differentiation as well. Here, we demonstrate that cyclin D1, a NSC growth
promoting signaling component and also a common component of FGF2 and Wnt
signaling pathways, inhibits astroglial differentiation of NSCs. Interestingly,
this effect of cyclin D1 is mediated even though its cell cycle progression
activity is blocked. Forced downregulation of cyclin D1 enhances astrogliogenesis
of NSCs in culture and in vivo. We further demonstrate that cyclin D1 binds to
STAT3, a transcription factor downstream of astrogliogenic cytokines, and
suppresses its transcriptional activity on the glial fibrillary acidic protein
(Gfap) gene. Taken together with our previous finding, we provide a novel
molecular mechanism for NSC self-renewal in which growth promoting signaling
components activated by FGF2 and Wnts inhibit neuronal and glial differentiation.

© 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24302516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Mar;21(3):462-74. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.167. Epub 2013
Nov 22.

The miR-106b~25 cluster promotes bypass of doxorubicin-induced senescence and
increase in motility and invasion by targeting the E-cadherin transcriptional
activator EP300.

Zhou Y(1), Hu Y(2), Yang M(3), Jat P(4), Li K(5), Lombardo Y(5), Xiong D(3),
Coombes RC(5), Raguz S(6), Yagüe E(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology
and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Tianjin, China [2] Division of Cancer, Imperial College London, 
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, UK. (2)1] State Key Laboratory of
Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin,
China [2] Division of Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital
Campus, London, UK [3] Department of Breast Cancer, China Tianjin Breast Cancer
Prevention, Treatment and Research Center, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Experimental
Hematology, Institute of Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin, China. (4)MRC
Prion Unit, University College London, London, UK. (5)Division of Cancer,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, UK. (6)Institute of
Clinical Sciences, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, 
UK.

Resistance to chemotherapeutic treatment, which is indirectly responsible for
many cancer deaths, is normally associated with an aggressive phenotype including
increased cell motility and acquisition of invasive properties. Here we describe 
how breast cancer cells overcome doxorubicin-induced senescence and become drug
resistant by overexpression of the microRNA (miR)-106b~25 cluster. Although all
three miRs in the cluster contribute to the generation of doxorubicin resistance,
miR-25 is the major contributor to this phenotype. All three miRs in this cluster
target EP300, a transcriptional activator of E-cadherin, resulting in cells
acquiring a phenotype characteristic of cells undergoing
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), including an increase in both cell
motility and invasion, as well as the ability to proliferate after treatment with
doxorubicin. These findings provide a novel drug resistance/EMT regulatory
pathway controlled by the miR-106b~25 cluster by targeting a transcriptional
activator of E-cadherin.

PMCID: PMC3921594
PMID: 24270410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Mar;21(3):438-50. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.164. Epub 2013
Nov 22.

Cyclophilin B is involved in p300-mediated degradation of CHOP in tumor cell
adaptation to hypoxia.

Jeong K(1), Kim H(1), Kim K(1), Kim SJ(2), Hahn BS(3), Jahng GH(4), Yoon KS(1),
Kim SS(1), Ha J(1), Kang I(1), Choe W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (BK21 project), Medical
Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and Biomedical Science
Institute, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, Korea.
(2)Neurodegeneration Control Research Center, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul 130-701, Korea. (3)Department of Genetic Engineering, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Radiology, Kyung Hee University
Hospital-Gangdong, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 134-727,
Korea.

The regulation of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein-homologous protein (CHOP), an
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-response factor, is key to cellular survival.
Hypoxia is a physiologically important stress that induces cell death in the
context of the ER, especially in solid tumors. Although our previous studies have
suggested that Cyclophilin B (CypB), a molecular chaperone, has a role in ER
stress, currently, there is no direct information supporting its mechanism under 
hypoxia. Here, we demonstrate for the first time that CypB is associated with
p300 E4 ligase, induces ubiquitination and regulates the proteasomal turnover of 
CHOP, one of the well-known pro-apoptotic molecules under hypoxia. Our findings
show that CypB physically interacts with the N-terminal a-helix domain of CHOP
under hypoxia and cooperates with p300 to modulate the ubiquitination of CHOP. We
also show that CypB is transcriptionally induced through ATF6 under hypoxia.
Collectively, these findings demonstrate that CypB prevents hypoxia-induced cell 
death through modulation of ubiquitin-mediated CHOP protein degradation,
suggesting that CypB may have an important role in the tight regulation of CHOP
under hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC3921592
PMID: 24270407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 3;110(49):19938-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1320171110. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

Inositol polyphosphate multikinase is a coactivator for serum response
factor-dependent induction of immediate early genes.

Kim E(1), Tyagi R, Lee JY, Park J, Kim YR, Beon J, Chen PY, Cha JY, Snyder SH,
Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and KAIST Institute for the BioCentury,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Korea.

Inositol polyphosphate multikinase (IPMK) is a notably pleiotropic protein. It
displays both inositol phosphate kinase and phosphatidylinositol kinase catalytic
activities. Noncatalytically, IPMK stabilizes the mammalian target of rapamycin
complex 1 and acts as a transcriptional coactivator for CREB-binding protein/E1A 
binding protein p300 and tumor suppressor protein p53. Serum response factor
(SRF) is a major transcription factor for a wide range of immediate early genes. 
We report that IPMK, in a noncatalytic role, is a transcriptional coactivator for
SRF mediating the transcription of immediate early genes. Stimulation by serum of
many immediate early genes is greatly reduced by IPMK deletion. IPMK stimulates
expression of these genes, an influence also displayed by catalytically inactive 
IPMK. IPMK acts by binding directly to SRF and thereby enhancing interactions of 
SRF with the serum response element of diverse genes.

PMCID: PMC3856792
PMID: 24248338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 13;8(11):e79133. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079133.
eCollection 2013.

MicroRNA-20a constrains p300-driven myocardial angiogenic transcription by direct
targeting of p300.

Shehadeh LA(1), Sharma S, Pessanha M, Wei JQ, Liu J, Yuan H, Rodrigues CO, Scherr
M, Tsinoremas NF, Bishopric NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize downstream effectors of p300 acetyltransferase in the 
myocardium.
BACKGROUND: Acetyltransferase p300 is a central driver of the hypertrophic
response to increased workload, but its biological targets and downstream
effectors are incompletely known.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Mice expressing a myocyte-restricted transgene encoding
acetyltransferase p300, previously shown to develop spontaneous hypertrophy, were
observed to undergo robust compensatory blood vessel growth together with
increased angiogenic gene expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated 
binding of p300 to the enhancers of the angiogenic regulators Angpt1 and Egln3.
Interestingly, p300 overexpression in vivo was also associated with relative
upregulation of several members of the anti-angiogenic miR-17~92 cluster in vivo.
Confirming this finding, both miR-17-3p and miR-20a were upregulated in neonatal 
rat ventricular myocytes following adenoviral transduction of p300. Relative
expression of most members of the 17~92 cluster was similar in all 4 cardiac
chambers and in other organs, however, significant downregulation of miR-17-3p
and miR-20a occurred between 1 and 8 months of age in both wt and tg mice. The
decline in expression of these microRNAs was associated with increased expression
of VEGFA, a validated miR-20a target. In addition, miR-20a was demonstrated to
directly repress p300 expression through a consensus binding site in the p300
3'UTR. In vivo transduction of p300 resulted in repression both of p300 and of
p300-induced angiogenic transcripts.
CONCLUSION: p300 drives an angiogenic transcription program during hypertrophy
that is fine-tuned in part through direct repression of p300 by miR-20a.

PMCID: PMC3827282
PMID: 24236097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2013 Sep;42(5):777-82.

[Profile of P66SHC expression and histone modifications in replicative cell
senescence and oxidative-stress induced premature senescence].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu W(1), Zhuang Z, Yang J, Yang L, Xu Y, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Sichuan Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Chengdu 610041, China.
freefresh2000@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the profile of P66SHc expression and histone modifications in
replicatively senescenct cells and oxidative-stress inducing premature senescenct
cells.
METHODS: HPF cells were continuously cultured and subcultured in vitro to build
replicative cellular model. HPF cells were treated with 200 pmol/L H2 O2 four
times to build oxidative-stress inducing premature senescenct model. Comparative 
Q-PCR was utilized to investigate target gene (P66SHC, EP300, HDAC1) expressions 
respectively in H2O2 treated groups and normal cell groups. Then CHIP-QPCR was
conducted to analyze histone modifications of P66SHC between young cells and
aging cells.
RESULTS: P66SHC expression was positive correlation with H2O2 doses and
population doubling level (PDL) (R = 0.909, P = 0.000; R = 0.743, P = 0.006),
while EP300 was negative correlation with H2O2 (R = - 0.922, P = 0.000) and both 
EP300 and HDAC1 were negative with PDL (R = -0.709, P = 0.010, R = -0.599, P =
0.040). H3 histone modifications were declined in P66SHc gene regulating region. 
H3-Ac, H3K9-Ac and H3K4-tri-Me were dominant in the upstream region of
transcriptional site (-3.0 kb) and alternative promotor (+3.8 kb).
CONCLUSION: P66SHC, EP300 and HDAC1 probably play a role in cellular replicative 
senescence and oxidative-stress inducing premature senescence. Besides, histone
modification could regulate P66SHC gene expression.

PMID: 24218884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;34(3):315-24. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00956-13. Epub 2013 Nov
11.

p300-dependent acetylation of activating transcription factor 5 enhances C/EBPß
transactivation of C/EBPa during 3T3-L1 differentiation.

Zhao Y(1), Zhang YD, Zhang YY, Qian SW, Zhang ZC, Li SF, Guo L, Liu Y, Wen B, Lei
QY, Tang QQ, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical College,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Adipogenesis is a multistep process by which 3T3-L1 preadipocytes differentiate
into mature adipocytes through mitotic clonal expansion (MCE) and terminal
differentiation. The CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) is an important
transcription factor that takes part in both of these processes. C/EBPß not only 
transactivates C/EBPa and the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
(PPAR<U+03B3>), which cause 3T3-L1 preadipocytes to enter terminal adipocyte
differentiation, but also is required to activate cell cycle genes necessary for 
MCE. The identification of potential cofactors of C/EBPß will help to explain how
C/EBPß undertakes these specialized roles during the different stages of
adipogenesis. In this study, we found that activating transcription factor 5
(ATF5) can bind to the promoter of C/EBPa via its direct interaction with C/EBPß 
(which is mediated via the p300-dependent acetylation of ATF5), leading to
enhanced C/EBPß transactivation of C/EBPa. We also show that p300 is important
for the interaction of ATF5 with C/EBPß as well as for the binding activity of
this complex on the C/EBPa promoter. Consistent with these findings,
overexpression of ATF5 and an acetylated ATF5 mimic both promoted 3T3-L1
adipocyte differentiation, whereas short interfering RNA-mediated ATF5
downregulation inhibited this process. Furthermore, we show that the elevated
expression of ATF5 is correlated with an obese phenotype in both mice and humans.
In summary, we have identified ATF5 as a new cofactor of C/EBPß and examined how 
C/EBPß and ATF5 (acetylated by a p300-dependent mechanism) regulate the
transcription of C/EBPa.

PMCID: PMC3911509
PMID: 24216764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Genome Res. 2013 Dec;23(12):2136-48. doi: 10.1101/gr.158261.113. Epub 2013 Oct
29.

Integrating and mining the chromatin landscape of cell-type specificity using
self-organizing maps.

Mortazavi A(1), Pepke S, Jansen C, Marinov GK, Ernst J, Kellis M, Hardison RC,
Myers RM, Wold BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, California 92697, USA;

We tested whether self-organizing maps (SOMs) could be used to effectively
integrate, visualize, and mine diverse genomics data types, including complex
chromatin signatures. A fine-grained SOM was trained on 72 ChIP-seq histone
modifications and DNase-seq data sets from six biologically diverse cell lines
studied by The ENCODE Project Consortium. We mined the resulting SOM to identify 
chromatin signatures related to sequence-specific transcription factor occupancy,
sequence motif enrichment, and biological functions. To highlight clusters
enriched for specific functions such as transcriptional promoters or enhancers,
we overlaid onto the map additional data sets not used during training, such as
ChIP-seq, RNA-seq, CAGE, and information on cis-acting regulatory modules from
the literature. We used the SOM to parse known transcriptional enhancers
according to the cell-type-specific chromatin signature, and we further
corroborated this pattern on the map by EP300 (also known as p300) occupancy. New
candidate cell-type-specific enhancers were identified for multiple ENCODE cell
types in this way, along with new candidates for ubiquitous enhancer activity. An
interactive web interface was developed to allow users to visualize and
custom-mine the ENCODE SOM. We conclude that large SOMs trained on chromatin data
from multiple cell types provide a powerful way to identify complex relationships
in genomic data at user-selected levels of granularity.

PMCID: PMC3847782
PMID: 24170599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2667. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3667.

Differential regulation of the REG<U+03B3>-proteasome pathway by p53/TGF-ß signalling
and mutant p53 in cancer cells.

Ali A(1), Wang Z, Fu J, Ji L, Liu J, Li L, Wang H, Chen J, Caulin C, Myers JN,
Zhang P, Xiao J, Zhang B, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)1] Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, 500 Dongchuan
Road, Shanghai 200241, China [2] Guangxi Collaborative Innovation Center for
Biomedicine and Drug Discovery, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning 530021, China
[3] Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [4].

Proteasome activity is frequently enhanced in cancer to accelerate metastasis and
tumorigenesis. REG<U+03B3>, a proteasome activator known to promote p53/p21/p16
degradation, is often overexpressed in cancer cells. Here we show that p53/TGF-ß 
signalling inhibits the REG<U+03B3>-20S proteasome pathway by repressing REG<U+03B3>
expression. Smad3 and p53 interact on the REG<U+03B3> promoter via the p53RE/SBE region.
Conversely, mutant p53 binds to the REG<U+03B3> promoter and recruits p300. Importantly,
mutant p53 prevents Smad3/N-CoR complex formation on the REG<U+03B3> promoter, which
enhances the activity of the REG<U+03B3>-20S proteasome pathway and contributes to
mutant p53 gain of function. Depletion of REG<U+03B3> alters the cellular response to
p53/TGF-ß signalling in drug resistance, proliferation, cell cycle progression
and proteasome activity. Moreover, p53 mutations show a positive correlation with
REG<U+03B3> expression in cancer samples. These findings suggest that targeting REG<U+03B3>-20S
proteasome for cancer therapy may be applicable to human tumours with abnormal
p53/Smad protein status. Furthermore, this study demonstrates a link between
p53/TGF-ß signalling and the REG<U+03B3>-20S proteasome pathway, and provides insight
into the REG<U+03B3>/p53 feedback loop.

PMCID: PMC3876931
PMID: 24157709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Surg Oncol. 2013 Nov;108(6):374-7. doi: 10.1002/jso.23405. Epub 2013 Sep 23.

Prognostic impact of p300 expression in patients with colorectal cancer.

Huh JW(1), Kim HC, Kim SH, Park YA, Cho YB, Yun SH, Lee WY, Chun HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the expression of p300 in colorectal cancer, its
relationship with clinicopathological characteristics, and its potential
prognostic significance.
METHODS: The expression of p300 was measured using immunohistochemistry in tumors
and surrounding normal mucosa from 199 patients with primary colorectal cancer.
The patients were followed for a median period of 83 months.
RESULTS: Nuclear p300 expression was significantly associated with histology
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.031) and lymph node involvement (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.019). When the low and high p300
groups were subdivided according to tumor location, the disease-free survival
rate differed only for the patients with colon cancer (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008). In addition,
the disease-free survival significantly differed with p300 expression for stage
II disease (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.038), but not for stage III disease. Multivariate analysis
revealed that lymph node involvement (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014) and p300 expression (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.032) 
were independent predictors of overall survival in adenocarcinomas.
CONCLUSION: The overexpression of p300 may be an independent favorable prognostic
factor for disease-free survival in patients with colorectal cancer.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24142575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Oct;15(10):817-21.

[Histone acetylation and expression of acetylation-related enzymes in children
with tetralogy of Fallot].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu J(1), Lin YX, Gu RY, Wang HJ, Ma XJ, Ma D, Huang GY.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China.
gyhuang@shmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and
histone deacetylases (HDACs) in children with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), and to
investigate the role of histone acetylation and acetylation-related enzymes in
the pathogenesis of TOF.
METHODS: Myocardial tissue samples in the TOF group were obtained from 46
children with TOF who underwent radical operation, and myocardial tissue samples 
in the control group were obtained from 16 children who suffered accidental
deaths and had no cardiac anomalies as shown by autopsy. The acetylation of H3K9,
H3K18 and H3K27 was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. The mRNA expression of
HATs and HDACs in the myocardium was measured by real-time PCR. The correlation
between mRNA expression of HATs and HDACs and histone acetylation was analyzed.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, the TOF group showed significantly
increased acetylation of H3K9 (P=0.0165) and significantly decreased acetylation 
of H3K18 (P=0.0048) and H3K27 (P=0.0084). As to 4 HATs and 6 HDACs, the mRNA
expression of EP300 and CBP was significantly higher in the TOF group than in the
control group (P=0.025; P=0.017), and there was no significant difference in the 
mRNA expression of other HATs and HDACs between the two groups. The correlation
analysis revealed a positive correlation between H3K9 acetylation and mRNA
expression of EP300 (r=0.71, P<0.01) and CBP (r=0.72, P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Upregulated mRNA expression of EP300 and CBP may be associated with 
increased H3K9 acetylation, suggesting that EP300 and CBP might affect cardiac
development by regulating H3K9 acetylation.

PMID: 24131830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Virol. 2013 Dec;87(24):13499-509. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02658-13. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Two independent regions of simian virus 40 T antigen increase CBP/p300 levels,
alter patterns of cellular histone acetylation, and immortalize primary cells.

Sáenz Robles MT(1), Shivalila C, Wano J, Sorrells S, Roos A, Pipas JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen (SVT) interferes with normal cell
regulation and thus has been used to identify cellular components controlling
proliferation and homeostasis. We have previously shown that SVT-mediated
transformation requires interaction with the histone acetyltransferases (HATs)
CBP/p300 and now report that the ectopic expression of SVT in several cell types 
in vivo and in vitro results in a significant increase in the steady-state levels
of CBP/p300. Furthermore, SVT-expressing cells contain higher levels of
acetylated CBP/p300, a modification that has been linked to increased HAT
activity. Concomitantly, the acetylation levels of histone residues H3K56 and
H4K12 are markedly increased in SVT-expressing cells. Other polyomavirus-encoded 
large T antigens also increase the levels of CBP/p300 and sustain a rise in the
acetylation levels of H3K56 and H4K12. SVT does not affect the transcription of
CBP/p300, but rather, alters their overall levels through increasing the loading 
of CBP/p300 mRNAs onto polysomes. Two distinct regions within SVT, one located in
the amino terminus and one in the carboxy terminus, can independently alter both 
the levels of CBP/p300 and the loading of CBP/p300 transcripts onto polysomes.
Within the amino-terminal fragment, a functional J domain is necessary for
increasing CBP/p300 and specific histone acetylation levels, as well as for
immortalizing primary cells. These studies uncover the action of polyomavirus T
antigens on cellular CBP/p300 and suggest that additional mechanisms are used by 
T antigens to induce cell immortalization and transformation.

PMCID: PMC3838271
PMID: 24089570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(8):4621-5.

Mining proteins associated with oral squamous cell carcinoma in complex networks.

Liu Y(1), Liu CX, Wu ZT, Ge L, Zhou HM.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China E-mail : acomnet@126.com, v1i2c3@163.com.

The purpose of this study was to construct a protein-protein interaction (PPI)
network related to oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). Each protein was ranked
and those most associated with OSCC were mined within the network. First,
OSCC-related genes were retrieved from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
(OMIM) database. Then they were mapped to their protein identifiers and a seed
set of proteins was built. The seed proteins were expanded using the nearest
neighbor expansion method to construct a PPI network through the Online
Predicated Human Interaction Database (OPHID). The network was verified to be
statistically significant, the score of each protein was evaluated by algorithm, 
then the OSCC-related proteins were ranked. 38 OSCC related seed proteins were
expanded to 750 protein pairs. A protein-protein interaction nerwork was then
constructed and the 30 top-ranked proteins listed. The four highest-scoring seed 
proteins were SMAD4, CTNNB1, HRAS, NOTCH1, and four non-seed proteins P53, EP300,
SMAD3, SRC were mined using the nearest neighbor expansion method. The methods
shown here may facilitate the discovery of important OSCC proteins and guide
medical researchers in further pertinent studies.

PMID: 24083714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Genome Biol. 2013;14(9):r106.

The mutational landscape of chromatin regulatory factors across 4,623 tumor
samples.

Gonzalez-Perez A, Jene-Sanz A, Lopez-Bigas N.

BACKGROUND: Chromatin regulatory factors are emerging as important genes in
cancer development and are regarded as interesting candidates for novel targets
for cancer treatment. However, we lack a comprehensive understanding of the role 
of this group of genes in different cancer types.
RESULTS: We have analyzed 4,623 tumor samples from thirteen anatomical sites to
determine which chromatin regulatory factors are candidate drivers in these
different sites. We identify 34 chromatin regulatory factors that are likely
drivers in tumors from at least one site, all with relatively low mutational
frequency. We also analyze the relative importance of mutations in this group of 
genes for the development of tumorigenesis in each site, and indifferent tumor
types from the same site.
CONCLUSIONS: We find that, although tumors from all thirteen sites show mutations
in likely driver chromatin regulatory factors, these are more prevalent in tumors
arising from certain tissues. With the exception of hematopoietic, liver and
kidney tumors, as a median, the mutated factors are less than one fifth of all
mutated drivers across all sites analyzed. We also show that mutations in two of 
these genes, MLL and EP300, correlate with broad expression changes across cancer
cell lines, thus presenting at least one mechanism through which these mutations 
could contribute to tumorigenesis in cells of the corresponding tissues.

PMCID: PMC4054018
PMID: 24063517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Feb 1;23(3):219-29. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0328. Epub 2013
Nov 7.

Transcriptional reprogramming and chromatin remodeling accompanies Oct4 and Nanog
silencing in mouse trophoblast lineage.

Carey TS(1), Choi I, Wilson CA, Floer M, Knott JG.

Author information: 
(1)1 Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University , East Lansing, Michigan.

In mouse blastocysts, CDX2 plays a key role in silencing Oct4 and Nanog
expression in the trophectoderm (TE) lineage. However, the underlying
transcriptional and chromatin-based changes that are associated with
CDX2-mediated repression are poorly understood. To address this, a Cdx2-inducible
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cell line was utilized as a model system. Induction of 
Cdx2 expression resulted in a decrease in Oct4/Nanog expression, an increase in
TE markers, and differentiation into trophoblast-like stem (TS-like) cells within
48 to 120<U+2009>h. Consistent with the down-regulation of Oct4 and Nanog transcripts, a
time-dependent increase in CDX2 binding and a decrease in RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII) and OCT4 binding was observed within 48 h (P<0.05). To test whether
transcriptionally active epigenetic marks were erased during differentiation,
histone H3K9/14 acetylation and two of its epigenetic modifiers were evaluated.
Accordingly, a significant decrease in histone H3K9/14 acetylation and loss of
p300 and HDAC1 binding at the Oct4 and Nanog regulatory elements was observed by 
48 h. Accompanying these changes, there was a significant increase in total
histone H3 and a loss of chromatin accessibility at both the Oct4 and Nanog
regulatory elements (P<0.05), indicative of chromatin remodeling. Lastly, DNA
methylation analysis revealed that methylation did not occur at Oct4 and Nanog
until 96 to 120 h after induction of CDX2. In conclusion, our results show that
silencing of Oct4 and Nanog is facilitated by sequential changes in transcription
factor binding, histone acetylation, chromatin remodeling, and DNA methylation at
core regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC3904517
PMID: 24059348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 13;8(9):e74930. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074930. eCollection
2013.

Fli1 represses transcription of the human a2(I) collagen gene by recruitment of
the HDAC1/p300 complex.

Asano Y(1), Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Fli1, a member of the Ets transcription factor family, is a key repressor of the 
human a2(I) collagen (COL1A2) gene. Although our previous studies have delineated
that TGF-ß induces displacement of Fli1 from the COL1A2 promoter through
sequential post-translational modifications, the detailed mechanism by which Fli1
functions as a potent transcriptional repressor of the COL1A2 gene has not been
fully investigated. To address this issue, we carried out a series of experiments
especially focusing on protein-protein interaction and epigenetic transcriptional
regulation. The combination of tandem affinity purification and mass spectrometry
identified HDAC1 as a Fli1 interacting protein. Under quiescent conditions, HDAC1
induced deacetylation of Fli1 resulting in an increase of Fli1 DNA binding
ability and p300 enhanced this process by promoting the formation of a
Fli1-HDAC1-p300 complex. TGF-ß-induced phosphorylation of Fli1 at threonine 312
led to disassembly of this protein complex. In quiescent dermal fibroblasts Fli1,
HDAC1, and p300 occupied the -404 to -237 region, including the Fli1 binding
site, of the COL1A2 promoter. TGF-ß induced Fli1 and HDAC1 dissociation from the 
COL1A2 promoter, while promoting Ets1 and p300 recruitment. Furthermore,
acetylation levels of histone H3 around the Fli1 binding site in the COL1A2
promoter inversely correlated with the DNA occupancy of Fli1 and HDAC1, while
positively correlating with that of Ets1 and p300. In the functional studies,
HDAC1 overexpression magnified the inhibitory effect of Fli1 on the COL1A2
promoter. Moreover, pharmacological blockade of HDAC1 by entinostat enhanced
collagen production in dermal fibroblasts. Collectively, these results indicate
that under quiescent conditions Fli1 recruits HDAC1/p300 to the COL1A2 promoter
and suppresses the expression of the COL1A2 gene by chromatin remodeling through 
histone deacetylation. TGF-ß-dependent phosphorylation of Fli1 at threonine 312
is a critical step regulating the remodeling of the Fli1 transcription repressor 
complex, leading to transcriptional activation of the COL1A2 gene.

PMCID: PMC3772867
PMID: 24058639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Lab Invest. 2013 Nov;93(11):1184-93. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2013.111. Epub 2013
Sep 16.

Transcriptional upregulation of HIF-1a by NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 and its associations with
ß-catenin/p300 complexes in endometrial carcinoma cells.

Yoshida T(1), Hashimura M, Mastumoto T, Tazo Y, Inoue H, Kuwata T, Saegusa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Japan.

The hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a, which has a major role in cell adaptation 
to hypoxia, is mainly regulated at post-translational levels. Recently, HIF-1a
mRNA was also shown to be upregulated by several signal pathways under normoxic
conditions. Here we focused on relationships of HIF-1a with NF-<U+03BA>B and ß-catenin
signaling in endometrial carcinomas (Em Cas). Long-term exposure of Ishikawa
cells to cobalt chloride (CoCl2), which is known to mimic the effect of hypoxia, 
caused a decrease in the growth, along with increased HIF-1a protein but not mRNA
expression. In contrast, short-term exposure resulted in a rapid and transient
increase in HIF-1a mRNA expression along with stabilization of nuclear NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 
(p65). Transfection of p65 increased HIF-1a expression through activation of the 
promoter, whereas overexpression of HIF-1a also activated NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
transcription, indicating the existence of a positive feedback loop. In addition,
HIF-1a was indirectly associated with nuclear ß-catenin through interactions with
p300, leading to slight enhancement of both HIF-1a- and ß-catenin-mediated
transcriptional activity. In clinical samples, biphasic upregulation of HIF-1a
expression was observed in normal endometrial glandular components during the
menstrual cycle, with the labeling indices showing significantly higher values in
the early secretory stage. Significantly higher values for phosphorylated p65 and
nuclear ß-catenin were also observed in HIF-1a-positive than -negative lesions of
Em Cas, in contrast to significantly lower Ki-67 status. These data therefore
suggest that transcriptional associations with HIF-1a and NF-<U+03BA>B, as well as
ß-catenin/p300 complexes, may contribute to modulation of changes in tumor cell
kinetics in response to a hypoxic condition in Em Cas.

PMID: 24042437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Dec;41(22):10199-214. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt824. Epub 2013 
Sep 12.

Histone posttranslational modifications and cell fate determination: lens
induction requires the lysine acetyltransferases CBP and p300.

Wolf L(1), Harrison W, Huang J, Xie Q, Xiao N, Sun J, Kong L, Lachke SA, Kuracha 
MR, Govindarajan V, Brindle PK, Ashery-Padan R, Beebe DC, Overbeek PA, Cvekl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY10461, USA, Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY10461, USA, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA, Departments of Ophthalmology 
and Visual Sciences, Washington University Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO 63110,
USA, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716,
USA, Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Delaware,
Newark, DE 19716, USA, Department of Surgery, Creighton University, Omaha, NE
68178, USA, Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA and Department of Human Molecular Genetics and
Biochemistry, Sackler School of Medicine and Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel
Aviv University, Israel 69978.

Lens induction is a classical embryologic model to study cell fate determination.
It has been proposed earlier that specific changes in core histone modifications 
accompany the process of cell fate specification and determination. The lysine
acetyltransferases CBP and p300 function as principal enzymes that modify core
histones to facilitate specific gene expression. Herein, we performed conditional
inactivation of both CBP and p300 in the ectodermal cells that give rise to the
lens placode. Inactivation of both CBP and p300 resulted in the dramatic
discontinuation of all aspects of lens specification and organogenesis, resulting
in aphakia. The CBP/p300(-/-) ectodermal cells are viable and not prone to
apoptosis. These cells showed reduced expression of Six3 and Sox2, while
expression of Pax6 was not upregulated, indicating discontinuation of lens
induction. Consequently, expression of aB- and aA-crystallins was not initiated. 
Mutant ectoderm exhibited markedly reduced levels of histone H3 K18 and K27
acetylation, subtly increased H3 K27me3 and unaltered overall levels of H3 K9ac
and H3 K4me3. Our data demonstrate that CBP and p300 are required to establish
lens cell-type identity during lens induction, and suggest that posttranslational
histone modifications are integral to normal cell fate determination in the
mammalian lens.

PMCID: PMC3905850
PMID: 24038357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Redox Biol. 2013 Apr 17;1:218-25. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2013.03.001. eCollection
2013.

Redox-control of the alarmin, Interleukin-1a.

McCarthy DA(1), Ranganathan A, Subbaram S, Flaherty NL, Patel N, Trebak M, Hempel
N, Melendez JA.

Author information: 
(1)College of Nanoscale Sciences and Engineering, University at Albany, SUNY,
Albany, NY 12203, USA.

The pro-inflammatory cytokine Interleukin-1a (IL-1a) has recently emerged as a
susceptibility marker for a wide array of inflammatory diseases associated with
oxidative stress including Alzheimer's, arthritis, atherosclerosis, diabetes and 
cancer. In the present study, we establish that expression and nuclear
localization of IL-1a are redox-dependent. Shifts in steady-state H2O2
concentrations (SS-[H2O2]) resulting from enforced expression of manganese
superoxide dismutase (SOD2) drive IL-1a mRNA and protein expression. The
redox-dependent expression of IL-1a is accompanied by its increased nuclear
localization. Both IL-1a expression and its nuclear residency are abrogated by
catalase co-expression. Sub-lethal doses of H2O2 also cause IL-1a nuclear
localization. Mutagenesis revealed IL-1a nuclear localization does not involve
oxidation of cysteines within its N terminal domain. Inhibition of the processing
enzyme calpain prevents IL-1a nuclear localization even in the presence of H2O2. 
H2O2 treatment caused extracellular Ca(2+) influx suggesting oxidants may
influence calpain activity indirectly through extracellular Ca(2+) mobilization. 
Functionally, as a result of its nuclear activity, IL-1a overexpression promotes 
NF-kB activity, but also interacts with the histone acetyl transferase (HAT)
p300. Together, these findings demonstrate a mechanism by which oxidants impact
inflammation through IL-1a and suggest that antioxidant-based therapies may prove
useful in limiting inflammatory disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3757693
PMID: 24024155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS Biol. 2013 Sep;11(9):e1001647. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001647. Epub 2013 
Sep 3.

Analysis of the RelA:CBP/p300 interaction reveals its involvement in NF-<U+03BA>B-driven
transcription.

Mukherjee SP(1), Behar M, Birnbaum HA, Hoffmann A, Wright PE, Ghosh G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla, California, United States of America ; Department of Molecular Biology 
and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La
Jolla, California, United States of America.

NF-<U+03BA>B plays a vital role in cellular immune and inflammatory response, survival, 
and proliferation by regulating the transcription of various genes involved in
these processes. To activate transcription, RelA (a prominent NF-<U+03BA>B family
member) interacts with transcriptional co-activators like CREB-binding protein
(CBP) and its paralog p300 in addition to its cognate <U+03BA>B sites on the
promoter/enhancer regions of DNA. The RelA:CBP/p300 complex is comprised of two
components--first, DNA binding domain of RelA interacts with the KIX domain of
CBP/p300, and second, the transcriptional activation domain (TAD) of RelA binds
to the TAZ1 domain of CBP/p300. A phosphorylation event of a well-conserved
RelA(Ser276) is prerequisite for the former interaction to occur and is
considered a decisive factor for the overall RelA:CBP/p300 interaction. The role 
of the latter interaction in the transcription of RelA-activated genes remains
unclear. Here we provide the solution structure of the latter component of the
RelA:CBP complex by NMR spectroscopy. The structure reveals the folding of
RelA-TA2 (a section of TAD) upon binding to TAZ1 through its well-conserved
hydrophobic sites in a series of grooves on the TAZ1 surface. The structural
analysis coupled with the mechanistic studies by mutational and isothermal
calorimetric analyses allowed the design of RelA-mutants that selectively
abrogated the two distinct components of the RelA:CBP/p300 interaction. Detailed 
studies of these RelA mutants using cell-based techniques, mathematical modeling,
and genome-wide gene expression analysis showed that a major set of the
RelA-activated genes, larger than previously believed, is affected by this
interaction. We further show how the RelA:CBP/p300 interaction controls the
nuclear response of NF-<U+03BA>B through the negative feedback loop of NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.
Additionally, chromatin analyses of RelA target gene promoters showed
constitutive recruitment of CBP/p300, thus indicating a possible role of CBP/p300
in recruitment of RelA to its target promoter sites.

PMCID: PMC3760798
PMID: 24019758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 23;8(8):e73409. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073409. eCollection
2013.

NF-kappaB mediated transcriptional repression of acid modifying hormone gastrin.

Datta De D(1), Datta A, Bhattacharjya S, Roychoudhury S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Inflammatory Disorder Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of
Chemical Biology, Kolkata, India.

Helicobacter pylori is a major pathogen associated with the development of
gastroduodenal diseases. It has been reported that H. pylori induced
pro-inflammatory cytokine IL1B is one of the various modulators of acid secretion
in the gut. Earlier we reported that IL1B-activated NFkB down-regulates gastrin, 
the major hormonal regulator of acid secretion. In this study, the probable
pathway by which IL1B induces NFkB and affects gastrin expression has been
elucidated. IL1B-treated AGS cells showed nine-fold activation of MyD88 followed 
by phosphorylation of TAK1 within 15 min of IL1B treatment. Furthermore, it was
observed that activated TAK1 significantly up-regulates the NFkB subunits p50 and
p65. Ectopic expression of NFkB p65 in AGS cells resulted in about nine-fold
transcriptional repression of gastrin both in the presence and absence of IL1B.
The S536A mutant of NFkB p65 is significantly less effective in repressing
gastrin. These observations show that a functional NFkB p65 is important for
IL1B-mediated repression of gastrin. ChIP assays revealed the presence of HDAC1
and NFkB p65 along with NCoR on the gastrin promoter. Thus, the study provides
mechanistic insight into the IL1B-mediated gastrin repression via NFkB.

PMCID: PMC3751843
PMID: 24009751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):770-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.257. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

CBFB-MYH11/RUNX1 together with a compendium of hematopoietic regulators,
chromatin modifiers and basal transcription factors occupies self-renewal genes
in inv(16) acute myeloid leukemia.

Mandoli A(1), Singh AA(1), Jansen PW(2), Wierenga AT(3), Riahi H(1), Franci G(4),
Prange K(1), Saeed S(1), Vellenga E(5), Vermeulen M(2), Stunnenberg HG(1),
Martens JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Cancer Research, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (3)1] Department of Hematology, University of Groningen and
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands [2] Department of
Laboratory Medicine University of Groningen and University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e
Patologia Generale, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy.
(5)Department of Hematology, University of Groningen and University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Different mechanisms for CBFß-MYH11 function in acute myeloid leukemia with
inv(16) have been proposed such as tethering of RUNX1 outside the nucleus,
interference with transcription factor complex assembly and recruitment of
histone deacetylases, all resulting in transcriptional repression of RUNX1 target
genes. Here, through genome-wide CBFß-MYH11-binding site analysis and
quantitative interaction proteomics, we found that CBFß-MYH11 localizes to RUNX1 
occupied promoters, where it interacts with TAL1, FLI1 and TBP-associated factors
(TAFs) in the context of the hematopoietic transcription factors ERG, GATA2 and
PU.1/SPI1 and the coregulators EP300 and HDAC1. Transcriptional analysis revealed
that upon fusion protein knockdown, a small subset of the CBFß-MYH11 target genes
show increased expression, confirming a role in transcriptional repression.
However, the majority of CBFß-MYH11 target genes, including genes implicated in
hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal such as ID1, LMO1 and JAG1, are actively
transcribed and repressed upon fusion protein knockdown. Together these results
suggest an essential role for CBFß-MYH11 in regulating the expression of genes
involved in maintaining a stem cell phenotype.

PMID: 24002588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Genome Res. 2013 Dec;23(12):2053-65. doi: 10.1101/gr.155028.113. Epub 2013 Aug
29.

H4K16 acetylation marks active genes and enhancers of embryonic stem cells, but
does not alter chromatin compaction.

Taylor GC(1), Eskeland R, Hekimoglu-Balkan B, Pradeepa MM, Bickmore WA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine at
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, United Kingdom.

Compared with histone H3, acetylation of H4 tails has not been well studied,
especially in mammalian cells. Yet, H4K16 acetylation is of particular interest
because of its ability to decompact nucleosomes in vitro and its involvement in
dosage compensation in flies. Here we show that, surprisingly, loss of H4K16
acetylation does not alter higher-order chromatin compaction in vivo in mouse
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). As well as peaks of acetylated H4K16 and KAT8
histone acetyltransferase at the transcription start sites of expressed genes, we
report that acetylation of H4K16 is a new marker of active enhancers in ESCs and 
that some enhancers are marked by H3K4me1, KAT8, and H4K16ac, but not by
acetylated H3K27 or EP300, suggesting that they are novel EP300 independent
regulatory elements. Our data suggest a broad role for different histone
acetylation marks and for different histone acetyltransferases in long-range gene
regulation.

PMCID: PMC3847775
PMID: 23990607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Cytogenet. 2013 Aug 28;6(1):34. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-6-34.

Characterization of a case of follicular lymphoma transformed into
B-lymphoblastic leukemia.

Ning Y(1), Foss A, Kimball AS, Neill N, Matz T, Schultz R.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories/Perkin Elmer, 2820 N Astor, Spokane, WA, 99207,
USA. roger.schultz@perkinelmer.com.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a common form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma with an ability
to transform into a more aggressive disease, albeit infrequently to
B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma. While t(14;18)(q32;q21) has been associated
with approximately 90% cases of FL, that alteration alone is insufficient to
cause FL and associated mutations are still being elucidated. The transformation 
of FL to B-lymphoblastic leukemia generally includes the dysregulation of MYC
gene expression, typically through IGH rearrangement. Such cases of "double-hit" 
leukemia/lymphoma with both BCL2 and MYC translocations warrant further study as 
they are often not identified early, are associated with a poor prognosis, and
are incompletely understood in molecular terms. Here we describe a patient with a
diagnosis of FL that transformed to B-lymphoblastic leukemia. Detailed
cytogenetic characterization of the transformed specimen using karyotype,
fluorescence in situ hybridization, microarray and gene rearrangement analyses
revealed a complex karyotype comprised principally of whole chromosome or whole
arm copy number gains or losses. Smaller, single-gene copy number alterations
identified by microarray were limited in number, but included amplification of a 
truncated EP300 gene and alterations in NEIL1 and GPHN. Analyses defined the
presence of an IGH/BCL2 fusion due to a translocation as well as a MYC/IGH fusion
due to an insertion, with both rearrangements involving the same IGH allele. The 
data illustrate the value in characterizing double-hit lymphoma cases with both
traditional and novel technologies in the detailed cytogenetic workup.

PMCID: PMC3846067
PMID: 23985173  [PubMed]


214. J Cell Biochem. 2014 Feb;115(2):271-80. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24659.

Visualization of hypoxia-inducible factor 1a-p300 interactions in live cells by
fluorescence resonance energy transfer.

Kim SY(1), Lee MJ, Na YR, Kim SY, Yang EG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Theragnosis, Biomedical Research Institute, Korea Institute of
Science and Technology, Seoul, 136-791, Republic of Korea.

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a mediates the hypoxia response signaling pathway
essential for maintaining cellular homeostasis in low oxygen environments through
its complex formation with CBP/p300 in the nucleus. Employing fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET), we devised a live-cell interaction assay based 
on reporter proteins by tagging fluorescent proteins onto the carboxy termini of 
HIF-1a and p300. The nature of the constructed reporter protein was verified by
observing localized distribution, degradation, and stabilization kinetics in
cells transfected with the HIF-1a containing plasmid. A mutant HIF-1a incapable
of binding to p300 was then utilized to demonstrate insignificant FRET
efficiency, thereby confirming that our constructs could effectively probe the
direct interaction between HIF-1a and p300. We further examined the effects of
small molecules known to modulate the HIF-1a-p300 interaction and transcriptional
activity on FRET. Finally, by inhibiting activities of two HIF-specific
hydroxylases, HIF-specific prolyl hydroxylase (PHD) 2 and factor inhibiting HIF-1
(FIH-1) with their specific siRNAs, we explored how these HIF-specific
hydroxylases contribute to the HIF-1a-p300 interaction by FRET measurements along
with HIF-1 mediated transcriptional activation. Therefore, this technique would
provide a way to study selective inhibition of either PHD2 or FIH-1 within living
cells, and to screen specific inhibitors of HIF-mediated transcription activity
for therapeutic applications.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23966271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Nat Med. 2013 Sep;19(9):1173-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.3286. Epub 2013 Aug 18.

Inhibition of p300 impairs Foxp3<U+207A> T regulatory cell function and promotes
antitumor immunity.

Liu Y(1), Wang L, Predina J, Han R, Beier UH, Wang LC, Kapoor V, Bhatti TR,
Akimova T, Singhal S, Brindle PK, Cole PA, Albelda SM, Hancock WW.

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Transplant Immunology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine and Biesecker Center for Study of Pediatric Liver Diseases, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia and Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. [2].

Forkhead box P3 (Foxp3)(+) T regulatory (T(reg)) cells maintain immune
homeostasis and limit autoimmunity but can also curtail host immune responses to 
various types of tumors. Foxp3(+) T(reg) cells are therefore considered promising
targets to enhance antitumor immunity, and approaches for their therapeutic
modulation are being developed. However, although studies showing that
experimentally depleting Foxp3(+) T(reg) cells can enhance antitumor responses
provide proof of principle, these studies lack clear translational potential and 
have various shortcomings. Histone/protein acetyltransferases (HATs) promote
chromatin accessibility, gene transcription and the function of multiple
transcription factors and nonhistone proteins. We now report that conditional
deletion or pharmacologic inhibition of one HAT, p300 (also known as Ep300 or
KAT3B), in Foxp3(+) T(reg) cells increased T cell receptor-induced apoptosis in
T(reg) cells, impaired T(reg) cell suppressive function and peripheral T(reg)
cell induction, and limited tumor growth in immunocompetent but not in
immunodeficient mice. Our data thereby demonstrate that p300 is important for
Foxp3(+) T(reg) cell function and homeostasis in vivo and in vitro, and identify 
mechanisms by which appropriate small-molecule inhibitors can diminish T(reg)
cell function without overtly impairing T effector cell responses or inducing
autoimmunity. Collectively, these data suggest a new approach for cancer
immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3793393
PMID: 23955711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Nov;41(20):9230-42. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt712. Epub 2013
Aug 14.

Discovery of cell-type specific regulatory elements in the human genome using
differential chromatin modification analysis.

Chen C(1), Zhang S, Zhang XS.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences, Academy of
Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190,
China.

Chromatin modifications have been comprehensively illustrated to play important
roles in gene regulation and cell diversity in recent years. Given the rapid
accumulation of genome-wide chromatin modification maps across multiple cell
types, there is an urgent need for computational methods to analyze multiple maps
to reveal combinatorial modification patterns and define functional DNA elements,
especially those are specific to cell types or tissues. In this current study, we
developed a computational method using differential chromatin modification
analysis (dCMA) to identify cell-type-specific genomic regions with distinctive
chromatin modifications. We then apply this method to a public data set with
modification profiles of nine marks for nine cell types to evaluate its
effectiveness. We found cell-type-specific elements unique to each cell type
investigated. These unique features show significant cell-type-specific
biological relevance and tend to be located within functional regulatory
elements. These results demonstrate the power of a differential comparative
epigenomic strategy in deciphering the human genome and characterizing cell
specificity.

PMCID: PMC3814353
PMID: 23945931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 26;8(7):e69721. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069721. Print 2013.

Transcription coactivators p300 and CBP are necessary for photoreceptor-specific 
chromatin organization and gene expression.

Hennig AK(1), Peng GH, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Rod and cone photoreceptor neurons in the mammalian retina possess specialized
cellular architecture and functional features for converting light to a neuronal 
signal. Establishing and maintaining these characteristics requires appropriate
expression of a specific set of genes, which is tightly regulated by a network of
photoreceptor transcription factors centered on the cone-rod homeobox protein
CRX. CRX recruits transcription coactivators p300 and CBP to acetylate
promoter-bound histones and activate transcription of target genes. To further
elucidate the role of these two coactivators, we conditionally knocked out Ep300 
and/or CrebBP in differentiating rods or cones, using opsin-driven Cre
recombinase. Knockout of either factor alone exerted minimal effects, but loss of
both factors severely disrupted target cell morphology and function: the unique
nuclear chromatin organization seen in mouse rods was reversed, accompanied by
redistribution of nuclear territories associated with repressive and active
histone marks. Transcription of many genes including CRX targets was severely
impaired, correlating with reduced histone H3/H4 acetylation (the products of
p300/CBP) on target gene promoters. Interestingly, the presence of a single
wild-type allele of either coactivator prevented many of these defects, with
Ep300 more effective than Cbp. These results suggest that p300 and CBP play
essential roles in maintaining photoreceptor-specific structure, function and
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3724885
PMID: 23922782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1832(12):2145-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.07.013. Epub 2013 Jul 27.

Down-regulation of EBAF in the heart with ventricular septal defects and its
regulation by histone acetyltransferase p300 and transcription factors smad2 and 
cited2.

Su D(1), Li Q, Guan L, Gao X, Zhang H, Dandan E, Zhang L, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, National Research Institute for Family Planning,
China.

As a NODAL pathway inhibitor, EBAF plays a critical role during mammalian cardiac
development. As recent tests that have been conducted on gene-targeted mice
indicate, its expression is frequently altered where cardiac defects are present.
We aimed to explore the EBAF expression pattern and molecular mechanism of EBAF
gene for VSD genesis. In this report, we show that the average expression of EBAF
in the disease tissues of VSD patients was lower than the expression in normal
fetuses without VSD. Further study showed that the expression pattern of EBAF was
potentially involved in cardiomyocyte apoptosis by Annexin-V and RT-PCR assays.
We also found that abnormal activation of NODAL-PITX2C pathway was associated
with down-regulation of EBAF. By luciferase reporter assays, we find that EBAF
expression is mediated by transcriptional factors smad2 and cited2. In addition, 
ChIP assays showed that histone acetyltransferase p300 is involved in the
activation of EBAF through inducing hyperacetylation of histone H4 at the EBAF
promoter. Co-immunoprecipitation also indicates that the expression of EBAF is
regulated by a transcriptional complex including p300, smad2, and cited2. This
study revealed a novel regulator mechanism of EBAF, which may be a potential
molecular target for halting the onset of VSDs. They also indicate that smad2,
cited2, and p300 may play important roles in modulating the confirmation of
ventricular septal defects.

© 2013.

PMID: 23899608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Cell. 2013 Jul 18;154(2):297-310. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.027.

SET1 and p300 act synergistically, through coupled histone modifications, in
transcriptional activation by p53.

Tang Z(1), Chen WY, Shimada M, Nguyen UT, Kim J, Sun XJ, Sengoku T, McGinty RK,
Fernandez JP, Muir TW, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10065, USA.

The H3K4me3 mark in chromatin is closely correlated with actively transcribed
genes, although the mechanisms involved in its generation and function are not
fully understood. In vitro studies with recombinant chromatin and purified human 
factors demonstrate a robust SET1 complex (SET1C)-mediated H3K4 trimethylation
that is dependent upon p53- and p300-mediated H3 acetylation, a corresponding
SET1C-mediated enhancement of p53- and p300-dependent transcription that reflects
a primary effect of SET1C through H3K4 trimethylation, and direct SET1C-p53 and
SET1C-p300 interactions indicative of a targeted recruitment mechanism.
Complementary cell-based assays demonstrate a DNA-damage-induced p53-SET1C
interaction, a corresponding enrichment of SET1C and H3K4me3 on a p53 target gene
(p21/WAF1), and a corresponding codependency of H3K4 trimethylation and
transcription upon p300 and SET1C. These results establish a mechanism in which
SET1C and p300 act cooperatively, through direct interactions and coupled histone
modifications, to facilitate the function of p53.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4023349
PMID: 23870121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Biochemistry. 2013 Aug 27;52(34):5746-59. doi: 10.1021/bi400684q. Epub 2013 Aug
12.

Differences in specificity and selectivity between CBP and p300 acetylation of
histone H3 and H3/H4.

Henry RA(1), Kuo YM, Andrews AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States.

Although p300 and CBP lysine acetyltransferases are often treated
interchangeably, the inability of one enzyme to compensate for the loss of the
other suggests unique roles for each. As these deficiencies coincide with
aberrant levels of histone acetylation, we hypothesized that the key difference
between p300 and CBP activity is differences in their specificity/selectivity for
lysines within the histones. Utilizing a label-free, quantitative mass
spectrometry based technique, we determined the kinetic parameters of both CBP
and p300 at each lysine of H3 and H4, under conditions we would expect to
encounter in the cell (either limiting acetyl-CoA or histone). Our results show
that while p300 and CBP acetylate many common residues on H3 and H4, they do in
fact possess very different specificities, and these specificities are dependent 
on whether histone or acetyl-CoA is limiting. Steady-state experiments with
limiting H3 demonstrate that both CBP and p300 acetylate H3K14, H3K18, H3K23,
with p300 having specificities up to 10¹°-fold higher than CBP. Utilizing
tetramer as a substrate, both enzymes also acetylate H4K5, H4K8, H4K12, and
H4K16. With limiting tetramer, CBP displays higher specificities, especially at
H3K18, where CBP specificity is 10³²-fold higher than p300. With limiting
acetyl-CoA, p300 has the highest specificity at H4K16, where specificity is
10¹8-fold higher than CBP. This discovery of unique specificity for targets of
CBP- vs p300-mediated acetylation of histone lysine residues presents a new model
for understanding their respective biological roles and possibly an opportunity
for selective therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3756530
PMID: 23862699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24809-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.468579. Epub
2013 Jul 12.

Proto-oncogene activity of melanoma antigen-A11 (MAGE-A11) regulates
retinoblastoma-related p107 and E2F1 proteins.

Su S(1), Minges JT, Grossman G, Blackwelder AJ, Mohler JL, Wilson EM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories for Reproductive Biology, Department of Pediatrics, Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA.

Melanoma antigen-A11 (MAGE-A11) is a low-abundance, primate-specific steroid
receptor coregulator in normal tissues of the human reproductive tract that is
expressed at higher levels in prostate cancer. Increased expression of MAGE-A11
enhances androgen receptor transcriptional activity and promotes prostate cancer 
cell growth. Further investigation into the mechanisms of MAGE-A11 function in
prostate cancer demonstrated interactions with the retinoblastoma-related protein
p107 and Rb tumor suppressor but no interaction with p130 of the Rb family.
MAGE-A11 interaction with p107 was associated with transcriptional repression in 
cells with low MAGE-A11 and transcriptional activation in cells with higher
MAGE-A11. Selective interaction of MAGE-A11 with retinoblastoma family members
suggested the regulation of E2F transcription factors. MAGE-A11 stabilized p107
by inhibition of ubiquitination and linked p107 to hypophosphorylated E2F1 in
association with the stabilization and activation of E2F1. The androgen receptor 
and MAGE-A11 modulated endogenous expression of the E2F1-regulated
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1). The ability of MAGE-A11 to increase 
E2F1 transcriptional activity was similar to the activity of adenovirus early
oncoprotein E1A and depended on MAGE-A11 interactions with p107 and p300. The
immunoreactivity of p107 and MAGE-A11 was greater in advanced prostate cancer
than in benign prostate, and knockdown with small inhibitory RNA showed that p107
is a transcriptional activator in prostate cancer cells. These results suggest
that MAGE-A11 is a proto-oncogene whose increased expression in prostate cancer
reverses retinoblastoma-related protein p107 from a transcriptional repressor to 
a transcriptional activator of the androgen receptor and E2F1.

PMCID: PMC3750176
PMID: 23853093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mol Cell. 2013 Jul 25;51(2):185-99. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.06.007. Epub 2013 
Jul 11.

Proteomic analysis of coregulators bound to ERa on DNA and nucleosomes reveals
coregulator dynamics.

Foulds CE(1), Feng Q, Ding C, Bailey S, Hunsaker TL, Malovannaya A, Hamilton RA, 
Gates LA, Zhang Z, Li C, Chan D, Bajaj A, Callaway CG, Edwards DP, Lonard DM,
Tsai SY, Tsai MJ, Qin J, O'Malley BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies have mapped protein occupancies at many
genomic loci. However, a detailed picture of the complexity of coregulators
(CoRs) bound to a defined enhancer along with a transcription factor is missing. 
To address this, we used biotin-DNA pull-down assays coupled with mass
spectrometry-immunoblotting to identify at least 17 CoRs from nuclear extracts
bound to 17ß-estradiol (E2)-liganded estrogen receptor-a on estrogen response
elements (EREs). Unexpectedly, these complexes initially are biochemically stable
and contain certain atypical corepressors. Addition of ATP dynamically converts
these complexes to an "activated" state by phosphorylation events, primarily
mediated by DNA-dependent protein kinase. Importantly, a "natural" ERE-containing
enhancer and nucleosomal EREs recruit similar complexes. We further discovered
the mechanism whereby H3K4me3 stimulates ERa-mediated transcription as compared
with unmodified nucleosomes. H3K4me3 templates promote specific CoR dynamics in
the presence of ATP and AcCoA, as manifested by CBP/p300 and SRC-3 dismissal and 
SAGA and TFIID stabilization/recruitment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3900250
PMID: 23850489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Neuroscience. 2013 Sep 17;248:681-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.06.030.
Epub 2013 Jun 27.

Role of p300 in regulating neuronal nitric oxide synthase gene expression through
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B-mediated way in neuronal cells.

Li Y(1), Li C, Sun L, Chu G, Li J, Chen F, Li G, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, College of Basic Medical Science, China
Medical University, Shenyang 110001, PR China. yhli@mail.cmu.edu.cn

Nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B acetylation has been shown to participate in a number of
neurological processes by regulating the expression of certain genes. We have
previously demonstrated the neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) expression and 
nitric oxide (NO) production may be regulated by NF-<U+03BA>B acetylation via an NF-<U+03BA>B
responsive element within the nNOS promoter in neuronal cells. p300 is a
ubiquitous transcription coactivator with intrinsic histone acetyltransferase
(HAT) activity, which is important in the nervous system. In the present study,
we aimed at probing if p300 participated in regulating the nNOS expression
through the NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated way. As a result, we found p300 enhanced the nNOS
protein and mRNA levels in human neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cells by enhancing the
binding of NF-<U+03BA>B to the nNOS promoter and NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated nNOS transcription.
Meanwhile, p300 was shown to directly acetylate NF-<U+03BA>B p65 and p50 subunits,
interact with NF-<U+03BA>B and bind to the NF-<U+03BA>B responsive element region within the
nNOS promoter. Taken together, our results indicate p300 acts as both an HAT and 
a coactivator in regulating NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated nNOS expression, which provide some
correlations between p300 and nNOS in neuronal cell, and suggest that some
p300-related neurological disorders may be partially based on its effect on the
nNOS expression.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23811396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Int J Oncol. 2013 Sep;43(3):755-64. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1991. Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Whole-exome sequencing to identify novel somatic mutations in squamous cell lung 
cancers.

Zheng CX(1), Gu ZH, Han B, Zhang RX, Pan CM, Xiang Y, Rong XJ, Chen X, Li QY, Wan
HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiration, Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, P.R. China.

Squamous cell lung cancer is a major histotype of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) that is distinct from lung adenocarcinoma. We used whole-exome sequencing
to identify novel non-synonymous somatic mutations in squamous cell lung cancer. 
We identified 101 single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) including 77 non-synonymous
SNVs (67 missense and 10 nonsense mutations) and 11 INDELs causing frameshifts.
We also found four SNVs located within splicing sites. We verified 62 of the SNVs
(51 missense, 10 nonsense and 1 splicing-site mutation) and 10 of the INDELs as
somatic mutations in lung cancer tissue. Sixteen of the mutated genes were also
mutated in at least one patient with a different type of lung cancer in the
Catalogue of Somatic Mutation in Cancer (COSMIC) database. Four genes (LPHN2,
TP53, MYH2 and TGM2) were mutated in approximately 10% of the samples in the
COSMIC database. We identified two missense mutations in C10orf137 and MS4A3 that
also occurred in other solid-tumor tissues in the COSMIC database. We found
another somatic mutation in EP300 that was mutated in 4.2% of the 2,020
solid-tumor samples in the COSMIC database. Taken together, our results implicate
TP53, EP300, LPHN2, C10orf137, MYH2, TGM2 and MS4A3 as potential driver genes of 
squamous cell lung cancer.

PMID: 23799614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Mol Biol. 2013 Sep 23;425(18):3488-94. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.06.007. Epub
2013 Jun 22.

S100A6 competes with the TAZ2 domain of p300 for binding to p53 and attenuates
p53 acetylation.

Graczyk A(1), Slomnicki LP, Lesniak W.

Author information: 
(1)Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, 3 Pasteur Street, 02-093 Warsaw,
Poland.

S100A6 is a calcium binding protein that, like some other members of the S100
protein family, is able to bind p53. This interaction may be physiologically
relevant considering the numerous connotations of S100 proteins and of S100A6, in
particular, with cancer and metastasis. In this work, we show that the
interaction with S100A6 is limited to unmodified or phosphorylated p53 and is
inhibited by p53 acetylation. Using in vitro acetylation assay, we show that the 
presence of S100A6 attenuates p53 acetylation by p300. Furthermore, using ELISA, 
we show that S100A6 and the TAZ2 domain of p300 bind p53 with similar affinities 
and that S100A6 effectively competes with TAZ2 for binding to p53. Our results
add another element to the complicated scheme of p53 activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23796514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2013 Aug 15;305(4):H484-93. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00642.2012. Epub 2013 Jun 21.

Laminar shear stress upregulates endothelial Ca²<U+207A>-activated K<U+207A> channels KCa2.3
and KCa3.1 via a Ca²<U+207A>/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase kinase/Akt/p300
cascade.

Takai J(1), Santu A, Zheng H, Koh SD, Ohta M, Filimban LM, Lemaître V, Teraoka R,
Jo H, Miura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, University of Nevada School of
Medicine, Reno, Nevada;

In endothelial cells (ECs), Ca²<U+207A>-activated K<U+207A> channels KCa2.3 and KCa3.1 play a
crucial role in the regulation of arterial tone via producing NO and
endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factors. Since a rise in intracellular Ca²<U+207A>
levels and activation of p300 histone acetyltransferase are early EC responses to
laminar shear stress (LS) for the transcriptional activation of genes, we
examined the role of Ca²<U+207A>/calmodulin-dependent kinase kinase (CaMKK), the most
upstream element of a Ca²<U+207A>/calmodulin-kinase cascade, and p300 in LS-dependent
regulation of KCa2.3 and KCa3.1 in ECs. Exposure to LS (15 dyn/cm²) for 24 h
markedly increased KCa2.3 and KCa3.1 mRNA expression in cultured human coronary
artery ECs (3.2 ± 0.4 and 45 ± 10 fold increase, respectively; P < 0.05 vs.
static condition; n = 8-30), whereas oscillatory shear (OS; ± 5 dyn/cm² × 1 Hz)
moderately increased KCa3.1 but did not affect KCa2.3. Expression of KCa2.1 and
KCa2.2 was suppressed under both LS and OS conditions, whereas KCa1.1 was
slightly elevated in LS and unchanged in OS. Inhibition of CaMKK attenuated
LS-induced increases in the expression and channel activity of KCa2.3 and KCa3.1,
and in phosphorylation of Akt (Ser473) and p300 (Ser1834). Inhibition of Akt
abolished the upregulation of these channels by diminishing p300 phosphorylation.
Consistently, disruption of the interaction of p300 with transcription factors
eliminated the induction of these channels. Thus a CaMKK/Akt/p300 cascade plays
an important role in LS-dependent induction of KCa2.3 and KCa3.1 expression,
thereby regulating EC function and adaptation to hemodynamic changes.

PMCID: PMC3891244
PMID: 23792675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Aug 25;376(1-2):107-13. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.06.015.
Epub 2013 Jun 19.

Identification of daidzein as a ligand of retinoic acid receptor that suppresses 
expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 in HaCaT cells.

Oh HJ(1), Kang YG, Na TY, Kim HJ, Park JS, Cho WJ, Lee MO.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Bio-MAX Institute, Research Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of
Korea.

Retinoids have been used as therapeutics for diverse skin diseases, but their
side effects limit clinical usage. Here, we report that extracts of two soybeans,
Glycine max and Rhynchosia nulubilis, and their ethyl acetate fractions increased
the transcriptional activity of retinoic acid receptors (RARs), and that daidzin 
and genistin were the major constituents of the active fractions. Daidzin and its
aglycone, daidzein, induced transcriptional activity of RAR and RAR<U+03B3>. FRET
analysis demonstrated that daidzein, but not daidzin, bound both RAR and RAR<U+03B3>
with EC50 values of 28µM and 40µM, respectively. Daidzein increased expression of
mRNA of RAR<U+03B3> through direct binding of RAR and recruitment of p300 to the RAR<U+03B3>2
promoter. Further, mRNA and gelatinolytic activity of matrix metalloproteinase-9 
were decreased by daidzein in HaCaT cells. Together, these results indicate that 
daidzein functions as a ligand of RAR that could be a candidate therapeutic for
skin diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23791815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Nov;34(11):2664-72. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt221. Epub 2013
Jun 19.

HTLV-1 bZIP factor impedes the menin tumor suppressor and upregulates
JunD-mediated transcription of the hTERT gene.

Borowiak M(1), Kuhlmann AS, Girard S, Gazzolo L, Mesnard JM, Jalinot P, Dodon MD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la Cellule, Unité Mixte de Recherche
5239, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Ecole Normale Supérieure,
69364 Lyon Cedex 07, France.

Telomerase activity in cancer cells is dependent on the transcriptional
regulation of the human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) gene, encoding
the catalytic subunit of human telomerase. We have shown previously that HTLV-1
basic leucine zipper (HBZ), a viral regulatory protein encoded by the human
retrovirus, human T-cell leukemia virus, type 1 (HTLV-1) cooperates with JunD to 
enhance hTERT transcription in adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) cells. Menin, the
product of the tumor-suppressor MEN-1 gene, also interacts with JunD, represses
its transcriptional activity and downregulates telomerase expression. The main
objective of this study was to examine how menin and HBZ get involved in the
regulation of hTERT transcription. In this study, we report that JunD and menin
form a repressor complex of hTERT transcription in HBZ-negative cells.
Conversely, in HBZ-positive cells, the formation of a JunD/HBZ/menin ternary
complex and the recruitment of p300 histone acetyl transferase activity by HBZ
lead to a decreased activity of the JunD-menin suppressor unit that correlates
with the activation of hTERT transcription. Silencing HBZ or menin expression in 
ATL cells confirms that these proteins are differentially involved in telomerase 
regulation. These results propose that HBZ, by impeding the tumor-suppressor
activity of menin, functions as a leukemogenic cofactor to upregulate gene
transcription and promote JunD-mediated leukemogenesis.

PMID: 23784080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Theor Biol. 2013 Oct 21;335:119-29. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2013.06.001. Epub 2013 
Jun 13.

Charge density distribution and the electrostatic moments of CTPB in the active
site of p300 enzyme: a DFT and charge density study.

Devipriya B(1), Kumaradhas P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biocrystallography and Computational Molecular Biology,
Department of Physics, Periyar University, Salem 636011, India.

A molecular docking and charge density analysis have been carried out to
understand the conformational change, charge distribution and electrostatic
properties of
N-(4-chloro-3-trifluoromethyl-phenyl)-2-ethoxy-6-pentadecyl-benzamide (CTPB) in
the active site of p300. The nearest neighbors, shortest intermolecular contacts 
between CTPB-p300 and the lowest binding energy of CTPB have been analyzed from
the docking analysis. Further, a charge density analysis has been carried out for
the molecule in gas phase and for the corresponding molecule lifted from the
active site of p300. Due to the intermolecular interaction between CTPB and the
amino acids of active site, the conformation of the CTPB has been significantly
altered (particularly the pentadecyl chain). CTPB forms strong interaction with
the amino acid residues Tyr1397 and Trp1436 at the distance 2.12 and 2.72Å,
respectively. However, the long pentadecyl alkyl chain of CTPB produces a barrier
and reducing the chance of forming hydrogen bonding with p300. The electron
density <U+03C1>bcp(r) of the polar bonds (C-O, C-N, C-F and C-Cl) of CTPB are increased
when it present in the active site. The dipole moment of CTPB in the active site 
is significantly less (5.73D) when compared with the gas phase (8.16D) form. In
the gas phase structure, a large region of negative electrostatic potential (ESP)
is found at the vicinity of O(2) and CF3 group, which is less around the O(1)
atom. Whereas, in the active site, the negative ESP around the CF3 group is
decreased and increased at the O(1) and O(2)-atoms. The ESP modifications of CTPB
in the active site are mainly attributed to the effect of intermolecular
interaction. The gas phase and active site study insights the molecular
flexibility and the electrostatic properties of CTPB in the active site.

© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23770402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Hum Pathol. 2013 Oct;44(10):2064-70. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.11.027. Epub
2013 Jun 4.

Frameshift mutations of tumor suppressor gene EP300 in gastric and colorectal
cancers with high microsatellite instability.

Kim MS(1), Lee SH, Yoo NJ, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul 137-701, Korea.

Several lines of evidence show that chromatin remodeling is involved in the
pathogenesis of disease, including cancer. The E1A-binding protein p300 functions
as a histone acetyltransferase and is considered an important modulator of
chromatin remodeling. The aim of this study was to explore whether E1A-binding
protein p300 is somatically mutated and expressionally altered in gastric and
colorectal cancers. By analyzing a public database, we found that E1A-binding
protein p300 had mononucleotide repeats in exons 27 and 31 that could be mutation
targets in cancers with microsatellite instability. We analyzed mutations in the 
mononucleotide repeats in 91 gastric and 101 colorectal cancers with high
microsatellite instability or stable microsatellite instability by single-strand 
conformation polymorphism analysis and DNA sequencing. We also analyzed
E1A-binding protein p300 expression in gastric and colorectal cancers by
immunohistochemistry staining. We found E1A-binding protein p300 frameshift
mutations (4 in exon 27 and 3 in exon 31) in 3 gastric and 4 colorectal cancers
that were detected exclusively in cancers with high microsatellite instability
(7/80). In the immunohistochemistry study, loss of E1A-binding protein p300
expression was identified in 12% and 24% of the gastric and colorectal cancers,
respectively, irrespective of microsatellite instability status. Loss was more
common in tumors with E1A-binding protein p300 frameshift mutations. Frameshift
mutations of E1A-binding protein p300 and its expressional loss may be a feature 
of gastric and colorectal cancers with high microsatellite instability. These
alterations could contribute to cancer pathogenesis by deregulating E1A-binding
protein p300-mediated functions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23759652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2013 May 30;8(5):e63872. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063872. Print 2013.

Ursolic acid simultaneously targets multiple signaling pathways to suppress
proliferation and induce apoptosis in colon cancer cells.

Wang J(1), Liu L, Qiu H, Zhang X, Guo W, Chen W, Tian Y, Fu L, Shi D, Cheng J,
Huang W, Deng W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer
Center, Guangzhou, China.

Ursolic acid (UA), a natural pentacyclic triterpenoid carboxylic acid distributed
in medical herbs, exerts antitumor effects and is emerging as a promising
compound for cancer prevention and therapy, but its excise mechanisms of action
in colon cancer cells remains largely unknown. Here, we identified the molecular 
mechanisms by which UA inhibited cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in
human colon cancer SW480 and LoVo cells. Treatment with UA led to significant
inhibitions in cell viability and clone formation and changes in cell morphology 
and spreading. UA also suppressed colon cancer cell migration by inhibiting MMP9 
and upregulating CDH1 expression. Further studies showed that UA inhibited the
phosphorylation of Akt and ERK proteins. Pretreatment with an Akt or ERK-specific
inhibitor considerably abrogated the proliferation inhibition by UA. UA also
significantly inhibited colon cancer cell COX-2 expression and PGE2 production.
Pretreatment with a COX-2 inhibitor (celecoxib) abrogated the UA-induced cell
proliferation. Moreover, we found that UA effectively promoted NF-<U+03BA>B and p300
translocation from cell nuclei to cytoplasm, and attenuated the p300-mediated
acetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B and CREB2. Pretreatment with a p300 inhibitor (roscovitine) 
abrogated the UA-induced cell proliferation, which is reversed by p300
overexpression. Furthermore, UA treatment induced colon cancer cell apoptosis,
increased the cleavage of PARP, caspase-3 and 9, and trigged the release of
cytochrome c from mitochondrial inter-membrane space into cytosol. These results 
indicate that UA inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in colon
cancer cells through simultaneous modulation of the multiple signaling pathways
such as MMP9/CDH1, Akt/ERK, COX-2/PGE2, p300/NF-<U+03BA>B/CREB2, and cytochrome
c/caspase pathways.

PMCID: PMC3667855
PMID: 23737956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Oncogene. 2014 Apr 24;33(17):2169-78. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.169. Epub 2013 Jun 3.

Small-molecule inhibition of CBP/catenin interactions eliminates drug-resistant
clones in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Gang EJ(1), Hsieh YT(1), Pham J(1), Zhao Y(2), Nguyen C(2), Huantes S(1), Park
E(1), Naing K(1), Klemm L(3), Swaminathan S(3), Conway EM(4), Pelus LM(5),
Crispino J(6), Mullighan CG(7), McMillan M(2), Müschen M(3), Kahn M(2), Kim
YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Division of Hematology and Oncology,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Southern California, Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology, Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Center for Molecular Pathways and Drug Discovery,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, USA. (4)Centre for Blood Research (CBR), Faculty of Medicine,
Division of Hematology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. (5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (6)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. (7)Department of 
Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.

Drug resistance in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) remains a major problem
warranting new treatment strategies. Wnt/catenin signaling is critical for the
self-renewal of normal hematopoietic progenitor cells. Deregulated Wnt signaling 
is evident in chronic and acute myeloid leukemia; however, little is known about 
ALL. Differential interaction of catenin with either the Kat3 coactivator CREBBP 
(CREB-binding protein (CBP)) or the highly homologous EP300 (p300) is critical to
determine divergent cellular responses and provides a rationale for the
regulation of both proliferation and differentiation by the Wnt signaling
pathway. Usage of the coactivator CBP by catenin leads to transcriptional
activation of cassettes of genes that are involved in maintenance of progenitor
cell self-renewal. However, the use of the coactivator p300 leads to activation
of genes involved in the initiation of differentiation. ICG-001 is a novel
small-molecule modulator of Wnt/catenin signaling, which specifically binds to
the N-terminus of CBP and not p300, within amino acids 1-110, thereby disrupting 
the interaction between CBP and catenin. Here, we report that selective
disruption of the CBP/ß- and <U+03B3>-catenin interactions using ICG-001 leads to
differentiation of pre-B ALL cells and loss of self-renewal capacity. Survivin,
an inhibitor-of-apoptosis protein, was also downregulated in primary ALL after
treatment with ICG-001. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we demonstrate
occupancy of the survivin promoter by CBP that is decreased by ICG-001 in primary
ALL. CBP mutations have been recently identified in a significant percentage of
ALL patients, however, almost all of the identified mutations reported occur
C-terminal to the binding site for ICG-001. Importantly, ICG-001, regardless of
CBP mutational status and chromosomal aberration, leads to eradication of
drug-resistant primary leukemia in combination with conventional therapy in vitro
and significantly prolongs the survival of NOD/SCID mice engrafted with primary
ALL. Therefore, specifically inhibiting CBP/catenin transcription represents a
novel approach to overcome relapse in ALL.

PMCID: PMC3994178
PMID: 23728349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Oncogene. 2014 Apr 24;33(17):2225-35. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.170. Epub 2013 Jun 3.

The ribosomal protein S26 regulates p53 activity in response to DNA damage.

Cui D(1), Li L(1), Lou H(2), Sun H(1), Ngai SM(3), Shao G(4), Tang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, China [2] Department of Basic Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary
Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China. (2)1] State Key
Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China
[2] College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing,
China. (3)Department of Biology and State (China) Key Laboratory of
Agrobiotechnology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(4)Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

Ribosomal proteins have emerged as novel regulators of the Mdm2-p53 feedback
loop, especially in the context of ribosomal stress. RPS26 is a recently
identified Diamond-Blackfan Anemia-related ribosomal protein and its role in p53 
activation has not been previously explored. In this study we found knockdown of 
RPS26 induced p53 stabilization and activation via a RPL11-dependent mechanism,
resulting in p53-dependent cell growth inhibition. Moreover, RPS26 has the
ability to interact with Mdm2 and inhibits Mdm2-mediated p53 ubiquitination that 
leads to p53 stabilization upon overexpression. Importantly, we discovered that
RPS26 knockdown impaired p53's ability to transcriptionally activate its target
genes in response to DNA damage, without affecting its stability. Accordingly,
the cells lost the ability to induce G2/M cell cycle arrest. We further found
that upon RPS26 knockdown, the DNA damage induced recruitment of p53 to the
promoters of its target genes and p53 acetylation were both greatly reduced. In
addition, RPS26 can interact with p53 independent of Mdm2 and coexist in a
complex with p53 and p300. These data establish a role of RPS26 in DNA damage
response by directly influencing p53 transcriptional activity, and suggest that
RPS26 acts distinctively in different scenarios of p53 activation. Our finding
also implicates p53 transcriptional activity control as an important mechanism of
p53 regulation by ribosomal proteins.

PMID: 23728348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2013 Jul;32(4):406-15. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e31826739b1.

Competing-risks regression models in analysis of biomarkers as predictors of
high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) infection outcomes and incident CIN in the
LAMS cohort.

Syrjänen S(1), Longhato-Filho A, Sarian LO, Naud P, Derchain S, Rottelli-Martins 
C, Tatti S, Branca M, Eren M, Hammes LS, Matos J, Gontijo R, Bragança J, Arlindo
FC, Maeda MY, Costa S, Syrjänen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Institute of Dentistry, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland.

To assess the prediction potential of a 5-biomarker panel for detecting high-risk
human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) infections and/or cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN) progression. Five biomarkers, lipocalin, plasminogen activator
inhibitor-2, p300, interleukin-10, and stratifin, were assessed in cervical
biopsies from 225 women of the Latin American Screening Study. Competing-risks
regression models were constructed to assess their predictive power for (i)
HR-HPV outcomes (negative, transient, or persistent infection) and (ii) CIN
outcomes (no progression, incident CIN1, CIN2, or CIN3). p300, LCN2, stratifin
were significantly associated with prevalent HR-HPV but lost their significance
in multivariate analysis. In the multivariate model, only p300 was an independent
predictor of CIN3 (odds ratio=2.63; 95% confidence interval, 1.05-6.61; P=0.039).
In univariate competing-risks regression, lipocalin predicted permanent
HR-HPV-negative status, but in the multivariate model, IL-10 emerged as a
independent predictor of HPV-negative status (subhazard ratio=4.04; 95%
confidence interval, 1.81-9.01; P=0.001). The clinical value of the panel in
predicting longitudinal outcomes of HR-HPV infection and/or incident CIN is
limited.

PMID: 23722514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. OMICS. 2013 Jun;17(6):302-17. doi: 10.1089/omi.2012.0115.

Identification of key nodes of type 2 diabetes mellitus protein interactome and
study of their interactions with phloridzin.

Randhawa V(1), Sharma P, Bhushan S, Bagler G.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Division, Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR-IHBT), Palampur, India.

Network biology-inspired approaches could be used effectively in probing
regulatory processes by which small molecules intervene with disease mechanisms. 
The present study aims at identification of key targets of type 2 diabetes
mellitus (T2DM) by network analysis of the underlying protein interactome, and
probing for mechanisms by which phloridzin could be critical at altering the
disease phenotype. Towards this goal, we constructed a protein-protein
interaction network associated with T2DM, starting from candidate genes and
systems-level interactions data available. The relevance of the network
constructed was verified with the help of gene ontology, node deletion, and
biological essentiality studies. Using a network analysis method, MAPK1, EP300,
and SMAD2 were identified as the most central proteins of potential therapeutic
value. Phloridzin, a known antidiabetic agent, potentially interacts with
proteins central to T2DM mechanisms. The structural understanding of interaction 
of phloridzin with these proteins of relevance to T2DM could provide better
insight into its regulatory mechanisms and help in developing better therapeutic 
agents. The molecular docking results suggest that phloridzin is potentially
involved in making critical interactions with MAPK1. These results could further 
be validated by experimental studies and could be used to design therapeutic
agents for T2DM intervention.

PMID: 23692363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Chem Biol Interact. 2013 Aug 25;204(3):153-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2013.05.002.
Epub 2013 May 14.

Molecular flexibility and the electrostatic moments of curcumin and its
derivatives in the active site of p300: a theoretical charge density study.

Devipriya B(1), Kumaradhas P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biocrystallography and Computational Molecular Biology,
Department of Physics, Periyar University, Salem 636 011, India.

A molecular docking analysis and quantum chemical calculation coupled with the
charge density analysis have been carried out to understand the conformational
change, charge density distribution and the electrostatic properties of HAT
inhibitors curcumin and its derivatives (cinnamoyl compounds) in the active site 
of p300. The nearest neighbours, the shortest intermolecular contacts between the
inhibitors and receptor p300; their binding energies were calculated from
molecular docking analysis. A high level quantum chemical calculations were
performed using density functional theory (DFT-B3LYP) with the basis set
6-311G(**) combined with the theory of atoms in molecules (AIM) for the
inhibitors in gas phase and in the active site of p300. It is observed that, when
the molecules present in the active site of p300, relatively, their geometrical, 
bond topological and the electrostatic properties are significantly altered. The 
comparative study on the geometrical and electrostatic properties of these three 
inhibitors in gas phase and amino acid environment gives an insight on the
molecular flexibility and the exact modification of electrostatic interaction of 
the inhibitor in the active site of p300. These fine details at electronic level 
allow to understand the exact drug-receptor interaction.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23684744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Med Oncol. 2013;30(3):599. doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0599-3. Epub 2013 May 16.

Oligonucleotide suppression of bcl-2 in LNCaP cells is compensated by increased
androgen sensitivity, p53 and oncogene activity, and suppressed caspase-3.

Rubenstein M(1), Hollowell CM, Guinan P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Biology, Hektoen Institute for Medical Research, 2240
West Ogden Avenue, 2'nd floor, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. DrMarv@Prodigy.net

Antisense oligonucleotides (oligos) have been employed against prostate cancer
models in both in vivo and in vitro systems. While most target growth factors or 
their receptors, other oligos are directed against inhibitors of apoptosis or
mediators of androgen action. Those which suppress bcl-2 activity (in prostate
cancer patients) have even reached clinical trials. We evaluated a set of oligos 
which targeted and comparably suppressed the expression of bcl-2, an apoptosis
inhibitory protein. Our first study reported that LNCaP cells were adapted by
suppression of caspase-3 (a promoter of apoptosis). In this study we evaluated
additional proteins associated with tumor progression and found the expression of
the androgen receptor, its p300 and IL-6 co-activators, as well as v-myc
(oncogenic) and (unexpectedly) tumor suppressor p53 genes to be enhanced. We
conclude that oligo treatment directed against bcl-2, intended to stimulate
apoptosis, can be evaded through compensatory changes in gene activity associated
with additional regulators of apoptosis, androgen sensitivity and oncogenesis.
This suggests that therapeutic suppression of bcl-2 can promote tumor resistance 
and transformation to a more aggressive (androgen and oncogene driven) phenotype.

PMID: 23677569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. PLoS One. 2013 May 6;8(5):e62014. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062014. Print 2013.

A novel function of novobiocin: disrupting the interaction of HIF 1a and p300/CBP
through direct binding to the HIF1a C-terminal activation domain.

Wu D(1), Zhang R, Zhao R, Chen G, Cai Y, Jin J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF1a) is an important cellular survival protein
under hypoxic conditions, regulating the cellular response to low oxygen tension 
via recruitment of a transcriptional co-activator, p300/CBP. p300/CBP induces
expression of multiple genes involved in cell survival, proliferation,
angiogenesis, and tumor development. Thus, a strategy to inhibit hypoxic
responses in tumors may be to target the protein-protein interaction between
HIF1a and p300/CBP. Here, we document, for the first time, that the aminocoumarin
antibiotic, novobiocin, directly blocks the protein-protein interaction between
the HIF1a C-terminal activation domain (CTAD) and the cysteine-histidine rich
(CH1) region of p300/CBP. Also, novobiocin down-regulated HIF1a-controlled gene
expression, specifically CA9, which is related to tumorigenesis. In a monolayer
cell culture, novobiocin inhibited cell proliferation and colony formation in the
MCF-7 human breast adenocarcinoma cell line and the A549 human lung cancer cell
line. Rescue experiments revealed that the recombinant CTAD fragment of HIF1a
partially reversed novobiocin's inhibitory effects on cell proliferation and
colony formation in MCF-7 cells. These findings suggest a novel mechanism of
action for novobiocin which has the potential for innovative therapeutic use in
tumor treatment.

PMCID: PMC3646014
PMID: 23671581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jun 1;12(11):1688-95. doi: 10.4161/cc.24758. Epub 2013 May 1.

Acetylation dynamics of human nuclear proteins during the ionizing
radiation-induced DNA damage response.

Bennetzen MV(1), Larsen DH, Dinant C, Watanabe S, Bartek J, Lukas J, Andersen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental BioInformatics, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 1;12(13):1993.

Genotoxic insults, such as ionizing radiation (IR), cause DNA damage that evokes 
a multifaceted cellular DNA damage response (DDR). DNA damage signaling events
that control protein activity, subcellular localization, DNA binding,
protein-protein interactions, etc. rely heavily on time-dependent
posttranslational modifications (PTMs). To complement our previous analysis of
IR-induced temporal dynamics of nuclear phosphoproteome, we now identify a range 
of human nuclear proteins that are dynamically regulated by acetylation, and
predominantly deacetylation, during IR-induced DDR by using mass
spectrometry-based proteomic approaches. Apart from cataloging acetylation sites 
through SILAC proteomic analyses before IR and at 5 and 60 min after IR exposure 
of U2OS cells, we report that: (1) key components of the transcriptional
machinery, such as EP300 and CREBBP, are dynamically acetylated; (2) that nuclear
acetyltransferases themselves are regulated, not on the protein abundance level, 
but by (de)acetylation; and (3) that the recently reported p53 co-activator and
methyltransferase MLL3 is acetylated on five lysines during the DDR. For selected
examples, protein immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting were used to assess
lysine acetylation status and thereby validate the mass spectrometry data. We
thus present evidence that nuclear proteins, including those known to regulate
cellular functions via epigenetic modifications of histones, are regulated by
(de)acetylation in a timely manner upon cell's exposure to genotoxic insults.
Overall, these results present a resource of temporal profiles of a spectrum of
protein acetylation sites during DDR and provide further insights into the highly
dynamic nature of regulatory PTMs that help orchestrate the maintenance of genome
integrity.

PMCID: PMC3713127
PMID: 23656789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Case Rep Oncol Med. 2013;2013:270362. doi: 10.1155/2013/270362. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

A case report and genetic characterization of a massive acinic cell carcinoma of 
the parotid with delayed distant metastases.

Nichols AC(1), Chan-Seng-Yue M, Yoo J, Agrawal SK, Starmans MH, Waggott D,
Harding NJ, Dowthwaite SA, Palma DA, Fung K, Wehrli B, Macneil SD, Lambin P,
Winquist E, Koropatnick J, Mymryk JS, Boutros PC, Barrett JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Western 
Ontario, Victoria Hospital, London Health Science Centre, Room B3-431A, 800
Commissioners Road East, London, ON, Canada.

We describe the presentation, management, and clinical outcome of a massive
acinic cell carcinoma of the parotid gland. The primary tumor and blood underwent
exome sequencing which revealed deletions in CDKN2A as well as PPP1R13B, which
induces p53. A damaging nonsynonymous mutation was noted in EP300, a histone
acetylase which plays a role in cellular proliferation. This study provides the
first insights into the genetic underpinnings of this cancer. Future large-scale 
efforts will be necessary to define the mutational landscape of salivary gland
malignancies to identify therapeutic targets and biomarkers of treatment failure.

PMCID: PMC3638544
PMID: 23653877  [PubMed]


241. Transl Psychiatry. 2013 May 7;3:e255. doi: 10.1038/tp.2013.31.

Allele-specific programming of Npy and epigenetic effects of physical activity in
a genetic model of depression.

Melas PA(1), Lennartsson A, Vakifahmetoglu-Norberg H, Wei Y, Åberg E, Werme M,
Rogdaki M, Mannervik M, Wegener G, Brené S, Mathé AA, Lavebratt C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Neurogenetics Unit, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
philippe.melas@ki.se

Neuropeptide Y (NPY) has been implicated in depression, emotional processing and 
stress response. Part of this evidence originates from human single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) studies. In the present study, we report that a SNP in the rat
Npy promoter (C/T; rs105431668) affects in vitro transcription and DNA-protein
interactions. Genotyping studies showed that the C-allele of rs105431668 is
present in a genetic rat model of depression (Flinders sensitive line; FSL),
while the SNP's T-allele is present in its controls (Flinders resistant line;
FRL). In vivo experiments revealed binding of a transcription factor (CREB2) and 
a histone acetyltransferase (Ep300) only at the SNP locus of the FRL.
Accordingly, the FRL had increased hippocampal levels of Npy mRNA and H3K18
acetylation; a gene-activating histone modification maintained by Ep300. Next,
based on previous studies showing antidepressant-like effects of physical
activity in the FSL, we hypothesized that physical activity may affect Npy's
epigenetic status. In line with this assumption, physical activity was associated
with increased levels of Npy mRNA and H3K18 acetylation. Physical activity was
also associated with reduced mRNA levels of a histone deacetylase (Hdac5).
Conclusively, the rat rs105431668 appears to be a functional Npy SNP that may
underlie depression-like characteristics. In addition, the achieved epigenetic
reprogramming of Npy provides molecular support for the putative effectiveness of
physical activity as a non-pharmacological antidepressant.

PMCID: PMC3669918
PMID: 23652932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Exp Mol Pathol. 2013 Aug;95(1):38-45. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2013.04.003. Epub 2013
May 2.

Lysosome-dependent p300/FOXP3 degradation and limits Treg cell functions and
enhances targeted therapy against cancers.

Du T(1), Nagai Y, Xiao Y, Greene MI, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6082, USA.

p300 is one of several acetyltransferases that regulate FOXP3 acetylation and
functions. Our recent studies have defined a complex set of histone
acetyltransferase interactions which can lead to enhanced or repressed changes in
FOXP3 function. We have explored the use of a natural p300 inhibitor, Garcinol,
as a tool to understand mechanisms by which p300 regulates FOXP3 acetylation. In 
the presence of Garcinol, p300 appears to become disassociated from the FOXP3
complex and undergoes lysosome-dependent degradation. As a consequence of p300's 
physical absence, FOXP3 becomes less acetylated and eventually degraded, a
process that cannot be rescued by the proteasome inhibitor MG132. p300 plays a
complex role in FOXP3 acetylation, as it could also acetylate a subset of four
Lys residues that repressively regulate total FOXP3 acetylation. Garcinol acts as
a degradation device to reduce the suppressive activity of regulatory T cells
(Treg) and to enhance the in vivo anti-tumor activity of a targeted therapeutic
anti-p185(her2/neu) (ERBB2) antibody in MMTV-neu transgenics implanted with neu
transformed breast tumor cells. Our studies provide the rationale for molecules
that disrupt p300 stability to limit Treg functions in targeted therapies for
cancers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3963828
PMID: 23644046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Apr;29(4):354-8.

[Expressions of reactive oxygen species and fibronectin are regulated by
transcriptional co-activator p300 in human mesangial cells exposed to high
glucose and methylglyoxal advanced glycation end products].

[Article in Chinese]

Su H(1), Zhou B, Duan Y, Du C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical
University, China. houq1225@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the roles and interrelationship of transcriptional
co-activator p300 and protein kinase Cß2(PKCß2) in the production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and the expression of fibronectin in human mesangial cells
(HMCs) under the stimulation of high glucose and methylglyoxal-derived advanced
glycation end products (AGEs).
METHODS: The HMCs were divided into the following groups: 1 normal glucose group 
(NG), high glucose group (HG), osmotic control group (LG), normal glucose+bovine 
serum albumin group (BSA), normal glucose+AGEs group (AGEs); 2 high glucose+empty
vector group (HN), high glucose+PKCß2 group (PO), high glucose+PKCß2 inhibitor
CGP53353 group (PI), AGEs+empty vector group (AN), AGEs+PKCß2 group (APO),
AGEs+PKCß2 inhibitor CGP53353 group (API); 3 normal glucose+p300 inhibitor
garcinol group (NG+Gar), high glucose+garcinol group (HG+Gar), BSA+garcinol group
(BSA+Gar), and AGEs+garcinol group (AGEs+Gar). All cells in each group were
cultured for 2 d. ROS levels were measured by fluorescence microscope and
fluorescence microplate reader. The protein expressions of p300, PKCß2 and
fibronectin were detected by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Levels of p300, PKCß2 and ROS in HG and AGEs groups were elevated by
1.04, 1.26, 0.78 and 1.45, 1.07, 0.71 folds of those in NG group and BSA control 
group, respectively (P<0.05). However, ROS levels in HG+Gar and AGEs+Gar groups
decreased significantly to 0.43 and 0.39 folds of those in HG and AGEs groups,
respectively (P<0.05). p300 and PKCß2 protein expressions in PO and APO groups
were up-regulated by 1.19, 1.73 and 1.23, 1.69 folds compared with HG and AGEs
groups, respectively (P<0.05). However, in the present of CGP53353, both p300 and
PKCß2 decreased significantly (P<0.05); the two factors stayed stable in HN and
AN groups as compared with HG and AGEs groups. Expressions of p300 and FN
proteins decreased in HG+Gar and AGEs+Gar groups, being 31%, 43% and 37%, 29% of 
those in HG and AGEs groups, respectively (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: High glucose and AGEs can up-regulate the expressions of ROS and
fibronectin in human mesangial cells by activating transcriptional co-activator
p300.

PMID: 23643164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Genome Res. 2013 Aug;23(8):1210-23. doi: 10.1101/gr.152306.112. Epub 2013 May 1.

Enhancer transcripts mark active estrogen receptor binding sites.

Hah N(1), Murakami S, Nagari A, Danko CG, Kraus WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York 14853, USA.

We have integrated and analyzed a large number of data sets from a variety of
genomic assays using a novel computational pipeline to provide a global view of
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1; a.k.a. ERa) enhancers in MCF-7 human breast cancer
cells. Using this approach, we have defined a class of primary transcripts
(eRNAs) that are transcribed uni- or bidirectionally from estrogen receptor
binding sites (ERBSs) with an average transcription unit length of ~3-5 kb. The
majority are up-regulated by short treatments with estradiol (i.e., 10, 25, or 40
min) with kinetics that precede or match the induction of the target genes. The
production of eRNAs at ERBSs is strongly correlated with the enrichment of a
number of genomic features that are associated with enhancers (e.g., H3K4me1,
H3K27ac, EP300/CREBBP, RNA polymerase II, open chromatin architecture), as well
as enhancer looping to target gene promoters. In the absence of eRNA production, 
strong enrichment of these features is not observed, even though ESR1 binding is 
evident. We find that flavopiridol, a CDK9 inhibitor that blocks transcription
elongation, inhibits eRNA production but does not affect other molecular
indicators of enhancer activity, suggesting that eRNA production occurs after the
assembly of active enhancers. Finally, we show that an enhancer transcription
"signature" based on GRO-seq data can be used for de novo enhancer prediction
across cell types. Together, our studies shed new light on the activity of ESR1
at its enhancer sites and provide new insights about enhancer function.

PMCID: PMC3730096
PMID: 23636943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2013 Dec;13(4):316-22. doi: 10.1007/s12012-013-9212-4.

p300-mediated histone acetylation is essential for the regulation of GATA4 and
MEF2C by BMP2 in H9c2 cells.

Zheng M(1), Zhu J, Lu T, Liu L, Sun H, Liu Z, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
136 Zhongshan 2nd Road, Yu Zhong District, Chongqing, 400014, People's Republic
of China, zhengmin626@126.com.

Histone acetylase (HAT) p300 plays an important role in the regulation of cardiac
gene expression. During cardiac development, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2
induces the expression of cardiac transcription factors. However, the underlying 
molecular mechanism(s) is not clear. In the present study, we tested the
hypothesis that p300-mediated histone acetylation was essential for the
regulation of cardiac transcription factors by BMP2. Cultured rat H9c2 embryonic 
cardiac myocytes (H9c2 cells) were transfected with recombinant adenoviruses
expressing human BMP2 (AdBMP2) with or without curcumin, a specific p300-HAT
inhibitor. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis showed that curcumin
substantially inhibited both AdBMP2-induced and basal expression levels of
cardiac transcription factors GATA4 and MEF2C, but not Tbx5. Similarly, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis showed that curcumin inhibited both
AdBMP2-induced and basal histone H3 acetylation levels in the promoter regions of
GATA4 and MEF2C, but not of Tbx5. In addition, curcumin selectively suppressed
AdBMP2-induced expression of HAT p300, but not HAT GCN5 in H9c2 cells. The data
indicated that inhibition of histone H3 acetylation with curcumin diminished
BMP2-induced expression of GATA4 and MEF2C, suggesting that p300-mediated histone
acetylation was essential for the regulation of GATA4 and MEF2C by BMP2 in H9c2
cells.

PMID: 23632743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 May 17;434(4):879-84. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.04.044. Epub 2013 Apr 22.

Menadione and ethacrynic acid inhibit the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathway 
by disrupting HIF-1a interaction with p300.

Na YR(1), Han KC, Park H, Yang EG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Theragnosis, Biomedical Research Institute, Korea Institute of
Science and Technology, Hwarangno 14-gil 5, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-791, Republic 
of Korea.

Hypoxia is a general characteristic of most solid malignancies and intimately
related to neoplastic diseases and cancer progression. Homeostatic response to
hypoxia is primarily mediated by hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-1a that elicits
transcriptional activity through recruitment of the CREB binding protein
(CBP)/p300 coactivator. Targeted blockade of HIF-1a binding to CBP/p300 would
thus constitute a novel approach for cancer treatment by suppressing tumor
angiogenesis and metastasis. Here, we identified inhibitors against the
interaction between HIF-1a and p300 by a fluorescence polarization-based assay
employing a fluorescently-labeled peptide containing the C-terminal activation
domain of HIF-1a. Two small molecule inhibitors, menadione (MD) and ethacrynic
acid (EA), were found to decrease expression of luciferase under the control of
hypoxia-responsive elements in hypoxic cells as well as to efficiently block the 
interaction between the full-length HIF-1a and p300. While these compounds did
not alter the expression level of HIF-1a, they down-regulated expression of a
HIF-1a target vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene. Considering
hypoxia-induced VEGF expression leading to highly aggressive tumor growth, MD and
EA may provide new scaffolds for development of tumor therapeutic reagents as
well as tools for a better understanding of HIF-1a-mediated hypoxic regulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23618863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Invest Dermatol. 2013 May;133(5):e4. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.123.

JID VisualDx Quiz: May 2013.

Amini S(1), Kirsner RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA.

PMID: 23594541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 21;288(25):18184-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.466540. Epub
2013 Apr 15.

I<U+03BA>B kinase ß (IKKß) inhibits p63 isoform <U+03B3> (TAp63<U+03B3>) transcriptional activity.

Liao JM(1), Zhang Y, Liao W, Zeng SX, Su X, Flores ER, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Tulane Cancer Center,
Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA.

Previously, we reported that I<U+03BA>B kinase-ß(IKKß) phosphorylates and stabilizes
TAp63<U+03B3>. However, the effect of this phosphorylation on TAp63<U+03B3> transcriptional
activity remains unclear. In this study, we showed that overexpression of IKKß,
but not its kinase dead mutant and IKKa, can surprisingly inhibit TAp63<U+03B3>
transcriptional activity as measured by luciferase assays and real-time PCR
analyses of p63 target genes. This inhibition was impaired by ACHP, an IKKß
inhibitor, and enhanced by TNFa that activates IKKß. Consistently, IKKß inhibited
the binding between TAp63<U+03B3> and p300, a co-activator of TAp63<U+03B3>, and consequently
counteracted the positive effect of p300 on TAp63<U+03B3> transcriptional activity.
Through phosphorylation site prediction and mass spectrometry, we identified that
Ser-4 and Ser-12 of p63 are IKKß-targeting residues. As expected, IKKß fails to
suppress the transcriptional activity of the S4A/S12A double mutant p63. These
results indicate that IKKß can suppress TAp63<U+03B3> activity by interfering with the
interaction between TAp63<U+03B3> and p300.

PMCID: PMC3689961
PMID: 23589370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2013 May 3;52(19):5171-4. doi: 10.1002/anie.201207325.
Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Discovery and characterization of protein-modifying natural products by MALDI
mass spectrometry reveal potent SIRT1 and p300 inhibitors.

Holzhauser S(1), Freiwald A, Weise C, Multhaup G, Han CT, Sauer S.

Author information: 
(1)Otto Warburg Laboratory, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Ihnestrasse 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

PMID: 23568553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Apr 4;4:e573. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.107.

TTC5 is required to prevent apoptosis of acute myeloid leukemia stem cells.

Lynch JT(1), Somerville TD, Spencer GJ, Huang X, Somervaille TC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Leukaemia Biology Laboratory, Paterson Institute for Cancer
Research, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Using a screening strategy, we identified the tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR)
motif protein, Tetratricopeptide repeat domain 5 (TTC5, also known as stress
responsive activator of p300 or Strap) as required for the survival of human
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. TTC5 is a stress-inducible transcription
cofactor known to interact directly with the histone acetyltransferase EP300 to
augment the TP53 response. Knockdown (KD) of TTC5 induced apoptosis of both
murine and human AML cells, with concomitant loss of clonogenic and
leukemia-initiating potential; KD of EP300 elicited a similar phenotype.
Consistent with the physical interaction of TTC5 and EP300, the onset of
apoptosis following KD of either gene was preceded by reduced expression of BCL2 
and increased expression of pro-apoptotic genes. Forced expression of BCL2
blocked apoptosis and partially rescued the clonogenic potential of AML cells
following TTC5 KD. KD of both genes also led to the accumulation of MYC, an
acetylation target of EP300, and the form of MYC that accumulated exhibited
relative hypoacetylation at K148 and K157, residues targeted by EP300. In view of
the ability of excess cellular MYC to sensitize cells to apoptosis, our data
suggest a model whereby TTC5 and EP300 cooperate to prevent excessive
accumulation of MYC in AML cells and their sensitization to cell death. They
further reveal a hitherto unappreciated role for TTC5 in leukemic hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3641330
PMID: 23559008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58929. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058929. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Genistein up-regulates tumor suppressor microRNA-574-3p in prostate cancer.

Chiyomaru T(1), Yamamura S, Fukuhara S, Hidaka H, Majid S, Saini S, Arora S, Deng
G, Shahryari V, Chang I, Tanaka Y, Tabatabai ZL, Enokida H, Seki N, Nakagawa M,
Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.

Genistein has been shown to inhibit cancers both in vitro and in vivo, by
altering the expression of several microRNAs (miRNAs). In this study, we focused 
on tumor suppressor miRNAs regulated by genistein and investigated their function
in prostate cancer (PCa) and target pathways. Using miRNA microarray analysis and
real-time RT-PCR we observed that miR-574-3p was significantly up-regulated in
PCa cells treated with genistein compared with vehicle control. The expression of
miR-574-3p was significantly lower in PCa cell lines and clinical PCa tissues
compared with normal prostate cells (RWPE-1) and adjacent normal tissues. Low
expression level of miR-574-3p was correlated with advanced tumor stage and
higher Gleason score in PCa specimens. Re-expression of miR-574-3p in PCa cells
significantly inhibited cell proliferation, migration and invasion in vitro and
in vivo. miR-574-3p restoration induced apoptosis through reducing Bcl-xL and
activating caspase-9 and caspase-3. Using GeneCodis software analysis, several
pathways affected by miR-574-3p were identified, such as 'Pathways in cancer',
'Jak-STAT signaling pathway', and 'Wnt signaling pathway'. Luciferase reporter
assays demonstrated that miR-574-3p directly binds to the 3' UTR of several
target genes (such as RAC1, EGFR and EP300) that are components of 'Pathways in
cancer'. Quantitative real-time PCR and Western analysis showed that the mRNA and
protein expression levels of the three target genes in PCa cells were markedly
down-regulated with miR-574-3p. Loss-of-function studies demonstrated that the
three target genes significantly affect cell proliferation, migration and
invasion in PCa cell lines. Our results show that genistein up-regulates tumor
suppressor miR-574-3p expression targeting several cell signaling pathways. These
findings enhance understanding of how genistein regulates with miRNA in PCa.

PMCID: PMC3595226
PMID: 23554959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Genome Res. 2013 Jun;23(6):917-27. doi: 10.1101/gr.149674.112. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

A dynamic H3K27ac signature identifies VEGFA-stimulated endothelial enhancers and
requires EP300 activity.

Zhang B(1), Day DS, Ho JW, Song L, Cao J, Christodoulou D, Seidman JG, Crawford
GE, Park PJ, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Histone modifications are now well-established mediators of transcriptional
programs that distinguish cell states. However, the kinetics of histone
modification and their role in mediating rapid, signal-responsive gene expression
changes has been little studied on a genome-wide scale. Vascular endothelial
growth factor A (VEGFA), a major regulator of angiogenesis, triggers changes in
transcriptional activity of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs).
Here, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput
sequencing (ChIP-seq) to measure genome-wide changes in histone H3 acetylation at
lysine 27 (H3K27ac), a marker of active enhancers, in unstimulated HUVECs and
HUVECs stimulated with VEGFA for 1, 4, and 12 h. We show that sites with the
greatest H3K27ac change upon stimulation were associated tightly with EP300, a
histone acetyltransferase. Using the variation of H3K27ac as a novel epigenetic
signature, we identified transcriptional regulatory elements that are
functionally linked to angiogenesis, participate in rapid VEGFA-stimulated
changes in chromatin conformation, and mediate VEGFA-induced transcriptional
responses. Dynamic H3K27ac deposition and associated changes in chromatin
conformation required EP300 activity instead of altered nucleosome occupancy or
changes in DNase I hypersensitivity. EP300 activity was also required for a
subset of dynamic H3K27ac sites to loop into proximity of promoters. Our study
identified thousands of endothelial, VEGFA-responsive enhancers, demonstrating
that an epigenetic signature based on the variation of a chromatin feature is a
productive approach to define signal-responsive genomic elements. Further, our
study implicates global epigenetic modifications in rapid, signal-responsive
transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC3668360
PMID: 23547170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. FEBS Lett. 2013 May 2;587(9):1373-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.03.010. Epub
2013 Mar 20.

cAMP signalling decreases p300 protein levels by promoting its
ubiquitin/proteasome dependent degradation via Epac and p38 MAPK in lung cancer
cells.

Jeong MJ(1), Kim EJ, Cho EA, Ye SK, Kang GH, Juhnn YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Republic of Korea.

The transcriptional coactivator p300 functions as a histone acetyltransferase and
a scaffold for transcription factors. We investigated the effect of cAMP
signalling on p300 expression. The activation of cAMP signalling by the
expression of constitutively active Gas or by treatment with isoproterenol
decreased the p300 protein expression in lung cancer cells. Isoproterenol
promoted the ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation of p300 in an 
Epac-dependent manner. Epac promoted p300 degradation by inhibiting the activity 
of p38 MAPK. It is concluded that cAMP signalling decreases the level of the p300
protein by promoting its ubiquitin-proteasome dependent degradation, which is
mediated by Epac and p38 MAPK, in lung cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23523631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Cell Rep. 2013 Mar 28;3(3):831-43. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.02.009. Epub 2013
Mar 14.

Increased expression of enzymes of triglyceride synthesis is essential for the
development of hepatic steatosis.

Jin J(1), Iakova P, Breaux M, Sullivan E, Jawanmardi N, Chen D, Jiang Y, Medrano 
EM, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Molecular mechanisms underpinning nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) are
not well understood. The earliest step of NAFLD is hepatic steatosis, which is
one of the main characteristics of aging liver. Here, we present a molecular
scenario of age-related liver steatosis. We show that C/EBPa-S193D knockin mice
have age-associated epigenetic changes and develop hepatic steatosis at 2 months 
of age. The underlying mechanism of the hepatic steatosis in old wild-type (WT)
mice and in young S193D mice includes increased amounts of tripartite
p300-C/EBPa/ß complexes that activate promoters of five genes that drive
triglyceride synthesis. Knockdown of p300 in old WT mice inhibits hepatic
steatosis. Indeed, transgenic mice expressing dominant-negative p300 have fewer
C/EBPa/ß-p300 complexes and do not develop age-dependent hepatic steatosis.
Notably, the p300-C/EBPa/ß pathway is activated in the livers of patients with
NAFLD. Thus, our results show that p300 and C/EBP proteins are essential
participants in hepatic steatosis.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3615099
PMID: 23499441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e52736. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052736. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

The dynamics of stress p53-Mdm2 network regulated by p300 and HDAC1.

Arora A(1), Gera S, Maheshwari T, Raghav D, Alam MJ, Singh RK, Agarwal SM.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Division, Institute of Cytology and Preventive Oncology, Noida,
India.

We construct a stress p53-Mdm2-p300-HDAC1 regulatory network that is activated
and stabilised by two regulatory proteins, p300 and HDAC1. Different activation
levels of [Formula: see text] observed due to these regulators during stress
condition have been investigated using a deterministic as well as a stochastic
approach to understand how the cell responds during stress conditions. We found
that these regulators help in adjusting p53 to different conditions as identified
by various oscillatory states, namely fixed point oscillations, damped
oscillations and sustain oscillations. On assessing the impact of p300 on
p53-Mdm2 network we identified three states: first stabilised or normal condition
where the impact of p300 is negligible, second an interim region where p53 is
activated due to interaction between p53 and p300, and finally the third regime
where excess of p300 leads to cell stress condition. Similarly evaluation of
HDAC1 on our model led to identification of the above three distinct states. Also
we observe that noise in stochastic cellular system helps to reach each
oscillatory state quicker than those in deterministic case. The constructed model
validated different experimental findings qualitatively.

PMCID: PMC3577848
PMID: 23437037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Feb 23;14:28. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-28.

Novel cAMP binding protein-BP (CREBBP) mutation in a girl with Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome, GH deficiency, Arnold Chiari malformation and pituitary hypoplasia.

Marzuillo P(1), Grandone A, Coppola R, Cozzolino D, Festa A, Messa F, Luongo C,
Del Giudice EM, Perrone L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics "F, Fede", Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, 
Via Luigi De Crecchio 2, 80138, Napoli, Italy. pierluigimarzuillo@libero.it

BACKGROUND: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder
(prevalence 1:125,000) characterised by broad thumbs and halluces, facial
dysmorphism, psychomotor development delay, skeletal defects, abnormalities in
the posterior fossa and short stature. The known genetic causes are point
mutations or deletions of the cAMP-response element binding protein-BP (CREBBP)
(50-60% of the cases) and of the homologous gene E1A-binding protein (EP300)
(5%).
CASE PRESENTATION: We describe, for the first time in literature, a RTS Caucasian
girl, 14-year-old, with growth hormone (GH) deficiency, pituitary hypoplasia,
Arnold Chiari malformation type 1, double syringomyelic cavity and a novel CREBBP
mutation (c.3546insCC).
CONCLUSION: We hypothesize that CREBBP mutation we have identified in this
patient could be responsible also for RTS atypical features as GH deficiency and 
pituitary hypoplasia.

PMCID: PMC3598247
PMID: 23432975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Feb 6;14(2):3376-94. doi: 10.3390/ijms14023376.

Differential mRNA expression levels of human histone-modifying enzymes in normal 
karyotype B cell pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Tao YF(1), Pang L, Du XJ, Sun LC, Hu SY, Lu J, Cao L, Zhao WL, Feng X, Wang J, Wu
D, Wang N, Ni J, Pan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Children's Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou 215003, Jiangsu, China. panjian2008@163.com.

Histone modification enzymes regulate gene expression by altering the
accessibility of promoters to transcription factors. We sought to determine
whether the genes encoding histone modification enzymes are dysregulated in
pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). A real-time PCR array was designed,
tested and used to profile the expression of 85 genes encoding histone
modification enzymes in bone marrow mononuclear cells from 30 pediatric ALL
patients and 20 normal controls. The expression profile of histone-modifying
genes was significantly different between normal karyotype B cell pediatric ALL
and normal controls. Eleven genes were upregulated in pediatric ALL, including
the histone deacetylases HDAC2 and PAK1, and seven genes were downregulated,
including PRMT2 and the putative tumor suppressor EP300. Future studies will seek
to determine whether these genes serve as biomarkers of pediatric ALL. Ingenuity 
Pathway Analysis revealed that Gene Expression and Organ Morphology was the
highest rated network, with 13 focus molecules (significance score = 35).
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis also indicated that curcumin and miR-34 are upstream
regulators of histone-modifying enzymes; future studies will seek to validate
these results and examine the role of curcumin and miR-34 in leukemia. This study
provides new clues into the molecular mechanisms of pediatric ALL.

PMCID: PMC3588049
PMID: 23389039  [PubMed]


258. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 May;1833(5):1028-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.01.029. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

p300/CBP dependent hyperacetylation of histone potentiates anticancer activity of
gefitinib nanoparticles.

Kaur J(1), Tikoo K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, National Institute of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Punjab, India.

Gefitinib is an Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, approved for patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In this
report we demonstrate that gefitinib loaded PLGA nanoparticles (GNPs), in
comparison to gefitinib, exhibited higher anti-cancer activity on A549 lung
carcinoma cells and A431 skin carcinoma cells. Increased inhibition of pEGFR in
both the cell types explains its higher anti-cancer activity. Interestingly,
gefitinib resistant, H1975 (T790M EGFR mutant) lung carcinoma cells was also
found to be sensitive to GNPs. Our data shows that GNPs hyperacetylate histone H3
in these cells, either directly or indirectly, which may account for the
augmented cell death. GNPs were proficient in activating histone
acetyltransferases (p300/CBP), which in turn induces the expression of p21 and
cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, inhibition of histone acetyltransferases by
garcinol results in alleviation of cell death caused by GNPs. In addition to
this, nuclear intrusion of GNPs results in the inhibition of NO production in
nucleus, possibly through nuclear EGFR, which might be responsible for preventing
cell proliferation in resistant cells. To best of our knowledge, we provide first
evidence that GNPs potentiate cell death by activating p300/CBP histone
acetyltransferases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23384777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2013 Mar;45(3):179-87. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmt001. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

Nrf2 is associated with the regulation of basal transcription activity of the
BRCA1 gene.

Wang Q(1), Li J, Yang X, Sun H, Gao S, Zhu H, Wu J, Jin W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Department of Breast Surgery, Breast Cancer Institute,
Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China.

BRCA1 is closely related to the pathogenesis of breast cancer. The activity of
BRCA1 promoter is regulated by transcriptional factors. The transcription factor 
Nrf2 (Nuclear factor-erythroid-2p45-related factor 2) is a potent transcriptional
activator and plays a central role in inducible expression of many cytoprotective
genes. In this report, we found that over-expression of Nrf2 stimulated BRCA1
expression, knockdown of Nrf2 attenuated BRCA1 expression. Nrf2 also interacted
with CBP and p300 to form an active transcription complex, which could bind to
the ARE (antioxidant response element) site on the BRCA1 promoter and activate
its transcription by inducing histone acetylation. Our finding could lead to a
better understanding of the development of breast cancer.

PMID: 23353771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cancer Med. 2012 Oct;1(2):141-55. doi: 10.1002/cam4.29. Epub 2012 Sep 18.

MicroRNA-142 is mutated in about 20% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Kwanhian W(1), Lenze D, Alles J, Motsch N, Barth S, Döll C, Imig J, Hummel M,
Tinguely M, Trivedi P, Lulitanond V, Meister G, Renner C, Grässer FA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Saarland University Medical School 66421, Homburg,
Germany; Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University
40002, Khon Kaen, Thailand.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short 18-23 nucleotide long noncoding RNAs that
posttranscriptionally regulate gene expression by binding to mRNA. Our previous
miRNA profiling of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) revealed a mutation in
the seed sequence of miR-142-3p. Further analysis now showed that miR-142 was
mutated in 11 (19.64%) of the 56 DLBCL cases. Of these, one case had a mutation
in both alleles, with the remainder being heterozygous. Four mutations were found
in the mature miR-142-5p, four in the mature miR-142-3p, and three mutations
affected the miR-142 precursor. Two mutations in the seed sequence redirected
miR-142-3p to the mRNA of the transcriptional repressor ZEB2 and one of them also
targeted the ZEB1 mRNA. However, the other mutations in the mature miR-142-3p did
not influence either the ZEB1 or ZEB2 3' untranslated region (3' UTR). On the
other hand, the mutations affecting the seed sequence of miR-142-3p resulted in a
loss of responsiveness in the 3' UTR of the known miR-142-3p targets RAC1 and
ADCY9. In contrast to the mouse p300 gene, the human p300 gene was not found to
be a target for miR-142-5p. In one case with a mutation of the precursor, we
observed aberrant processing of the miR-142-5p. Our data suggest that the
mutations in miR-142 probably lead to a loss rather than a gain of function. This
is the first report describing mutations of a miRNA gene in a large percentage of
a distinct lymphoma subtype.

PMCID: PMC3544448
PMID: 23342264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 22;288(12):8433-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.413260. Epub 2013
Jan 22.

Identification of biologically relevant enhancers in human erythroid cells.

Su MY(1), Steiner LA, Bogardus H, Mishra T, Schulz VP, Hardison RC, Gallagher PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

Identification of cell type-specific enhancers is important for understanding the
regulation of programs controlling cellular development and differentiation.
Enhancers are typically marked by the co-transcriptional activator protein p300
or by groups of cell-expressed transcription factors. We hypothesized that a
unique set of enhancers regulates gene expression in human erythroid cells, a
highly specialized cell type evolved to provide adequate amounts of oxygen
throughout the body. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massively
parallel sequencing, genome-wide maps of candidate enhancers were constructed for
p300 and four transcription factors, GATA1, NF-E2, KLF1, and SCL, using primary
human erythroid cells. These data were combined with gene expression analyses,
and candidate enhancers were identified. Consistent with their predicted function
as candidate enhancers, there was statistically significant enrichment of p300
and combinations of co-localizing erythroid transcription factors within 1-50 kb 
of the transcriptional start site (TSS) of genes highly expressed in erythroid
cells. Candidate enhancers were also enriched near genes with known erythroid
cell function or phenotype. Candidate enhancers exhibited moderate conservation
with mouse and minimal conservation with nonplacental vertebrates. Candidate
enhancers were mapped to a set of erythroid-associated, biologically relevant,
SNPs from the genome-wide association studies (GWAS) catalogue of NHGRI, National
Institutes of Health. Fourteen candidate enhancers, representing 10 genetic loci,
mapped to sites associated with biologically relevant erythroid traits. Fragments
from these loci directed statistically significant expression in reporter gene
assays. Identification of enhancers in human erythroid cells will allow a better 
understanding of erythroid cell development, differentiation, structure, and
function and provide insights into inherited and acquired hematologic disease.

PMCID: PMC3605659
PMID: 23341446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Genome Res. 2013 Mar;23(3):555-67. doi: 10.1101/gr.147942.112. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Dynamic DNA methylation across diverse human cell lines and tissues.

Varley KE(1), Gertz J, Bowling KM, Parker SL, Reddy TE, Pauli-Behn F, Cross MK,
Williams BA, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Crawford GE, Absher DM, Wold BJ, Myers RM.

Author information: 
(1)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL 35806, USA.

As studies of DNA methylation increase in scope, it has become evident that
methylation has a complex relationship with gene expression, plays an important
role in defining cell types, and is disrupted in many diseases. We describe
large-scale single-base resolution DNA methylation profiling on a diverse
collection of 82 human cell lines and tissues using reduced representation
bisulfite sequencing (RRBS). Analysis integrating RNA-seq and ChIP-seq data
illuminates the functional role of this dynamic mark. Loci that are
hypermethylated across cancer types are enriched for sites bound by NANOG in
embryonic stem cells, which supports and expands the model of a stem/progenitor
cell signature in cancer. CpGs that are hypomethylated across cancer types are
concentrated in megabase-scale domains that occur near the telomeres and
centromeres of chromosomes, are depleted of genes, and are enriched for
cancer-specific EZH2 binding and H3K27me3 (repressive chromatin). In noncancer
samples, there are cell-type specific methylation signatures preserved in primary
cell lines and tissues as well as methylation differences induced by cell
culture. The relationship between methylation and expression is
context-dependent, and we find that CpG-rich enhancers bound by EP300 in the
bodies of expressed genes are unmethylated despite the dense gene-body
methylation surrounding them. Non-CpG cytosine methylation occurs in human
somatic tissue, is particularly prevalent in brain tissue, and is reproducible
across many individuals. This study provides an atlas of DNA methylation across
diverse and well-characterized samples and enables new discoveries about DNA
methylation and its role in gene regulation and disease.

PMCID: PMC3589544
PMID: 23325432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Oncogene. 2013 Nov 7;32(45):5261-71. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.621. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Dual regulation of Myc by Abl.

Sanchez-Arévalo Lobo VJ(1), Doni M, Verrecchia A, Sanulli S, Fagà G, Piontini A, 
Bianchi M, Conacci-Sorrell M, Mazzarol G, Peg V, Losa JH, Ronchi P, Ponzoni M,
Eisenman RN, Doglioni C, Amati B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology (IEO),
Milan, Italy.

The tyrosine kinase c-Abl (or Abl) and the prolyl-isomerase Pin1 cooperatively
activate the transcription factor p73 by enhancing recruitment of the
acetyltransferase p300. As the transcription factor c-Myc (or Myc) is a known
target of Pin1 and p300, we hypothesized that it might be regulated in a similar 
manner. Consistent with this hypothesis, overexpression of Pin1 augmented the
interaction of Myc with p300 and transcriptional activity. The action of Abl,
however, was more complex than predicted. On one hand, Abl indirectly enhanced
phosphorylation of Myc on Ser 62 and Thr 58, its association with Pin1 and p300
and its acetylation by p300. These effects of Abl were exerted through
phosphorylation of substrate(s) other than Myc itself. On the other hand, Abl
interacted with the C-terminal domain of Myc and phosphorylated up to five
tyrosine residues in its N-terminus, the principal of which was Y74. Indirect
immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical staining suggested that the
Y74-phosphorylated form of Myc (Myc-pY74) localized to the cytoplasm and
coexisted either with active Abl in a subset of mammary carcinomas or with
Bcr-Abl in chronic myeloid leukemia. In all instances, Myc-pY74 constituted a
minor fraction of the cellular Myc protein. Thus, our data unravel two potential 
effects of Abl on Myc: first, Abl signaling can indirectly augment acetylation of
Myc by p300, and most likely also its transcriptional activity in the nucleus;
second, Abl can directly phosphorylate Myc on tyrosine: the resulting form of Myc
appears to be cytoplasmic, and its presence correlates with Abl activation in
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3914638
PMID: 23318434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013 Mar 15;304(6):L415-27. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00180.2012. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Role of ß-catenin-regulated CCN matricellular proteins in epithelial repair after
inflammatory lung injury.

Zemans RL(1), McClendon J, Aschner Y, Briones N, Young SK, Lau LF, Kahn M, Downey
GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO 80206, USA. zemansr@njhealth.org

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013 May 1;304(9):L579-81.

Repair of the lung epithelium after injury is integral to the pathogenesis and
outcomes of diverse inflammatory lung diseases. We previously reported that
ß-catenin signaling promotes epithelial repair after inflammatory injury, but the
ß-catenin target genes that mediate this effect are unknown. Herein, we examined 
which ß-catenin transcriptional coactivators and target genes promote epithelial 
repair after inflammatory injury. Transmigration of human neutrophils across
cultured monolayers of human lung epithelial cells resulted in a fall in
transepithelial resistance and the formation of discrete areas of epithelial
denudation ("microinjury"), which repaired via cell spreading by 96 h. In mice
treated with intratracheal (i.t.) LPS or keratinocyte chemokine, neutrophil
emigration was associated with increased permeability of the lung epithelium, as 
determined by increased bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid albumin concentration,
which decreased over 3-6 days. Activation of ß-catenin/p300-dependent gene
expression using the compound ICG-001 accelerated epithelial repair in vitro and 
in murine models. Neutrophil transmigration induced epithelial expression of the 
ß-catenin/p300 target genes Wnt-induced secreted protein (WISP) 1 and
cysteine-rich (Cyr) 61, as determined by real-time PCR (qPCR) and immunostaining.
Purified neutrophil elastase induced WISP1 upregulation in lung epithelial cells,
as determined by qPCR. WISP1 expression increased in murine lungs after i.t. LPS,
as determined by ELISA of the BAL fluid and qPCR of whole lung extracts. Finally,
recombinant WISP1 and Cyr61 accelerated repair, and Cyr61-neutralizing antibodies
delayed repair of the injured epithelium in vitro. We conclude that
ß-catenin/p300-dependent expression of WISP1 and Cyr61 is critical for epithelial
repair and represents a potential therapeutic target to promote epithelial repair
after inflammatory injury.

PMCID: PMC3602744
PMID: 23316072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 Nov;70(21):3989-4008. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-1254-4.
Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Transcriptional/epigenetic regulator CBP/p300 in tumorigenesis: structural and
functional versatility in target recognition.

Wang F(1), Marshall CB, Ikura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5G 2M9,
Canada.

In eukaryotic cells, gene transcription is regulated by sequence-specific
DNA-binding transcription factors that recognize promoter and enhancer elements
near the transcriptional start site. Some coactivators promote transcription by
connecting transcription factors to the basal transcriptional machinery. The
highly conserved coactivators CREB-binding protein (CBP) and its paralog,
E1A-binding protein (p300), each have four separate transactivation domains
(TADs) that interact with the TADs of a number of DNA-binding transcription
activators as well as general transcription factors (GTFs), thus mediating
recruitment of basal transcription machinery to the promoter. Most promoters
comprise multiple activator-binding sites, and many activators contain tandem
TADs, thus multivalent interactions may stabilize CBP/p300 at the promoter, and
intrinsically disordered regions in CBP/p300 and many activators may confer
adaptability to these multivalent complexes. CBP/p300 contains a catalytic
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain, which remodels chromatin to 'relax' its
superstructure and enables transcription of proximal genes. The HAT activity of
CBP/p300 also acetylates some transcription factors (e.g., p53), hence modulating
the function of key transcriptional regulators. Through these numerous
interactions, CBP/p300 has been implicated in complex physiological and
pathological processes, and, in response to different signals, can drive cells
towards proliferation or apoptosis. Dysregulation of the transcriptional and
epigenetic functions of CBP/p300 is associated with leukemia and other types of
cancer, thus it has been recognized as a potential anti-cancer drug target. In
this review, we focus on recent exciting findings in the structural mechanisms of
CBP/p300 involving multivalent and dynamic interactions with binding partners,
which may pave new avenues for anti-cancer drug development.

PMID: 23307074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52906. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052906. Epub 2012 Dec 31.

Interaction of the transactivation domain of B-Myb with the TAZ2 domain of the
coactivator p300: molecular features and properties of the complex.

Oka O(1), Waters LC, Strong SL, Dosanjh NS, Veverka V, Muskett FW, Renshaw PS,
Klempnauer KH, Carr MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Henry Wellcome Building, 
Leicester, United Kingdom.

The transcription factor B-Myb is a key regulator of the cell cycle in
vertebrates, with activation of transcription involving the recognition of
specific DNA target sites and the recruitment of functional partner proteins,
including the coactivators p300 and CBP. Here we report the results of detailed
studies of the interaction between the transactivation domain of B-Myb (B-Myb
TAD) and the TAZ2 domain of p300. The B-Myb TAD was characterized using circular 
dichroism, fluorescence and NMR spectroscopy, which revealed that the isolated
domain exists as a random coil polypeptide. Pull-down and spectroscopic
experiments clearly showed that the B-Myb TAD binds to p300 TAZ2 to form a
moderately tight (K(d) ~1.0-10 µM) complex, which results in at least partial
folding of the B-Myb TAD. Significant changes in NMR spectra of p300 TAZ2 suggest
that the B-Myb TAD binds to a relatively large patch on the surface of the domain
(~1200 Å(2)). The apparent B-Myb TAD binding site on p300 TAZ2 shows striking
similarity to the surface of CBP TAZ2 involved in binding to the transactivation 
domain of the transcription factor signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 (STAT1), which suggests that the structure of the B-Myb TAD-p300 
TAZ2 complex may share many features with that reported for STAT1 TAD-p300 TAZ2.

PMCID: PMC3534135
PMID: 23300815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 22;288(8):5963-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.392050. Epub 2013 
Jan 6.

Resveratrol improves cardiomyopathy in dystrophin-deficient mice through SIRT1
protein-mediated modulation of p300 protein.

Kuno A(1), Hori YS, Hosoda R, Tanno M, Miura T, Shimamoto K, Horio Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.

Cardiomyopathy is the main cause of death in Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Here,
we show that oral administration of resveratrol, which leads to activation of an 
NAD(+)-dependent protein deacetylase SIRT1, suppresses cardiac hypertrophy and
fibrosis and restores cardiac diastolic function in dystrophin-deficient mdx
mice. The pro-hypertrophic co-activator p300 protein but not p300 mRNA was
up-regulated in the mdx heart, and resveratrol administration down-regulated the 
p300 protein level. In cultured cardiomyocytes, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced
by the a(1)-agonist phenylephrine was inhibited by the overexpression of SIRT1 as
well as resveratrol, both of which down-regulated p300 protein levels but not
p300 mRNA levels. In addition, activation of atrial natriuretic peptide promoter 
by p300 was inhibited by SIRT1. We found that SIRT1 induced p300 down-regulation 
via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway by deacetylation of lysine residues for
ubiquitination. These findings indicate the pathological significance of p300
up-regulation in the dystrophic heart and indicate that SIRT1 activation has
therapeutic potential for dystrophic cardiomyopathy.

PMCID: PMC3581415
PMID: 23297412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51639. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051639. Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Ras/MAPK signaling modulates VEGFR-3 expression through Ets-mediated p300
recruitment and histone acetylation on the Vegfr3 gene in lymphatic endothelial
cells.

Ichise T(1), Yoshida N, Ichise H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, Center for Experimental Medicine and
Systems Biology, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

Modulation of VEGFR-3 expression is important for altering lymphatic endothelial 
cell (LEC) characteristics during the lymphangiogenic processes that occur under 
developmental, physiological, and pathological conditions. However, the
mechanisms underlying the modulation of Vegfr3 gene expression remain largely
unknown. Using genetically engineered mice and LECs, we demonstrated previously
that Ras signaling is involved not only in VEGFR-3-induced signal transduction
but also in Vegfr3 gene expression. Here, we investigated the roles of the
transcription factor Ets and the histone acetyltransferase p300 in LECs in
Ras-mediated transcriptional regulation of Vegfr3. Ras activates Ets proteins via
MAPK-induced phosphorylation. Ets knockdown, similar to Ras knockdown, resulted
in a decrease in both Vegfr3 transcript levels and acetylated histone H3 on the
Vegfr3 gene. Vegfr3 knockdown results in altered LEC phenotypes, such as aberrant
cell proliferation and network formation, and Ets knockdown led to milder but
similar phenotypic changes. We identified evolutionarily conserved, non-coding
regulatory elements within the Vegfr3 gene that harbor Ets-binding motifs and
have enhancer activities in LECs. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
revealed that acetylated histone H3 on the regulatory elements of the Vegfr3 gene
was decreased following Ras and Ets knockdown, and that activated Ets proteins,
together with p300, were associated with these regulatory elements, consistent
with a reduction in Vegfr3 gene expression in p300-knockdown LECs. Our findings
demonstrate a link between Ras signaling and Ets- and p300-mediated
transcriptional regulation of Vegfr3, and provide a potential mechanism by which 
VEGFR-3 expression levels may be modulated during lymphangiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3524184
PMID: 23284731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Cell. 2013 Feb 7;49(3):474-86. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.11.022. Epub 2012
Dec 27.

Glucose-induced ß-catenin acetylation enhances Wnt signaling in cancer.

Chocarro-Calvo A(1), García-Martínez JM, Ardila-González S, De la Vieja A,
García-Jiménez C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiología y Bioquímica, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud,
Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, 28922 Alcorcon, Madrid, Spain.

Nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin, a widely recognized marker of poor cancer
prognosis, drives cancer cell proliferation and senescence bypass and regulates
incretins, critical regulators of fat and glucose metabolism. Diabetes,
characterized by elevated blood glucose levels, is associated with increased
cancer risk, partly because of increased insulin growth factor 1 signaling, but
whether elevated glucose directly impacts cancer-associated signal-transduction
pathways is unknown. Here, we show that high glucose is essential for nuclear
localization of ß-catenin in response to Wnt signaling. Glucose-dependent
ß-catenin nuclear retention requires lysine 354 and is mediated by alteration of 
the balance between p300 and sirtuins that trigger ß-catenin acetylation.
Consequently ß-catenin accumulates in the nucleus and activates target promoters 
under combined glucose and Wnt stimulation, but not with either stimulus alone.
Our results reveal a mechanism by which high glucose enhances signaling through
the cancer-associated Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and may explain the increased
frequency of cancer associated with obesity and diabetes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23273980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052556. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

The EP300, KDM5A, KDM6A and KDM6B chromatin regulators cooperate with KLF4 in the
transcriptional activation of POU5F1.

Wang WP(1), Tzeng TY, Wang JY, Lee DC, Lin YH, Wu PC, Chen YP, Chiu IM, Chi YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular and System Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan.

POU5F1 is essential for maintaining pluripotency in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). 
It has been reported that the constitutive activation of POU5F1 is sustained by
the core transcriptional regulatory circuitry in ESCs; however, the means by
which POU5F1 is epigenetically regulated remains enigmatic. In this study a
fluorescence-based reporter system was used to monitor the interplay of 5
reprogramming-associated TFs and 17 chromatin regulators in the transcription of 
POU5F1. We show the existence of a stoichiometric effect for SOX2, POU5F1, NANOG,
MYC and KLF4, in regulating POU5F1 transcription. Chromatin regulators EP300,
KDM5A, KDM6A and KDM6B cooperate with KLF4 in promoting the transcription of
POU5F1. Moreover, inhibiting HDAC activities induced the expression of Pou5f1 in 
mouse neural stem cells (NSCs) in a spatial- and temporal- dependent manner.
Quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR (ChIP-qPCR) shows that treatment
with valproic acid (VPA) increases the recruitment of Kdm5a and Kdm6a to proximal
promoter (PP) and proximal enhancer (PE) of Pou5f1 whereas enrichment of Ep300
and Kdm6b was seen in PP but not PE of Pou5f1 promoter. These findings reveal the
interplay between the chromatin regulators and histone modifications in the
expression of POU5F1.

PMCID: PMC3525641
PMID: 23272250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cancer Res. 2013 Feb 15;73(4):1308-17. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2489. Epub
2012 Dec 26.

BRMS1 suppresses lung cancer metastases through an E3 ligase function on histone 
acetyltransferase p300.

Liu Y(1), Mayo MW, Nagji AS, Hall EH, Shock LS, Xiao A, Stelow EB, Jones DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

The mechanisms through which the metastasis suppressor gene BRMS1 functions are
poorly understood. Herein, we report the identification of a previously
undescribed E3 ligase function of BRMS1 on the histone acetyltransferase p300.
BRMS1 induces polyubiquitination of p300, resulting in its proteasome-mediated
degradation. We identify BRMS1 as the first eukaryote structural mimic of the
bacterial IpaH E3 ligase family and establish that the evolutionarily conserved
CXD motif located in BRMS1 is responsible for its E3 ligase function. Mutation of
this E3 ligase motif not only abolishes BRMS1-induced p300 polyubiquitination and
degradation, but importantly, dramatically reduces the metastasis suppressor
function of BRMS1 in both in vitro and in vivo models of lung cancer metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3578176
PMID: 23269275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 2;110(1):E79-88. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1213000110.
Epub 2012 Dec 10.

Nonreceptor tyrosine phosphatase Shp2 promotes adipogenesis through inhibition of
p38 MAP kinase.

He Z(1), Zhu HH, Bauler TJ, Wang J, Ciaraldi T, Alderson N, Li S, Raquil MA, Ji
K, Wang S, Shao J, Henry RR, King PD, Feng GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Division of Biological Sciences, University of
California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0864, USA.

The molecular mechanism underlying adipogenesis and the physiological functions
of adipose tissue are not fully understood. We describe here a unique mouse model
of severe lipodystrophy. Ablation of Ptpn11/Shp2 in adipocytes, mediated by
aP2-Cre, led to premature death, lack of white fat, low blood pressure,
compensatory erythrocytosis, and hepatic steatosis in Shp2(fat-/-) mice. Fat
transplantation partially rescued the lifespan and blood pressure in Shp2(fat-/-)
mice, and administration of leptin also restored partially the blood pressure of 
mutant animals with endogenous leptin deficiency. Consistently, homozygous
deletion of Shp2 inhibited adipocyte differentiation from embryonic stem (ES)
cells. Biochemical analyses suggest a Shp2-TAO2-p38-p300-PPAR<U+03B3> pathway in
adipogenesis, in which Shp2 suppresses p38 activation, leading to stabilization
of p300 and enhanced PPAR<U+03B3> expression. Inhibition of p38 restored adipocyte
differentiation from Shp2(-/-) ES cells, and p38 signaling is also suppressed in 
obese patients and obese animals. These results illustrate an essential role of
adipose tissue in mammalian survival and physiology and also suggest a common
signaling mechanism involved in adipogenesis and obesity development.

PMCID: PMC3538237
PMID: 23236157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 Jan;20(1):119-26. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2448. Epub 2012 Dec
9.

Multilayered chromatin analysis reveals E2f, Smad and Zfx as transcriptional
regulators of histones.

Gokhman D(1), Livyatan I, Sailaja BS, Melcer S, Meshorer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciences,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

Histones, the building blocks of eukaryotic chromatin, are essential for genome
packaging, function and regulation. However, little is known about their
transcriptional regulation. Here we conducted a comprehensive computational
analysis, based on chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing and -microarray
analysis (ChIP-seq and ChIP-chip) data of over 50 transcription factors and
histone modifications in mouse embryonic stem cells. Enrichment scores supported 
by gene expression data from gene knockout studies identified E2f1 and E2f4 as
master regulators of histone genes, CTCF and Zfx as repressors of core and linker
histones, respectively, and Smad1, Smad2, YY1 and Ep300 as restricted or cell
type-specific regulators. We propose that histone gene regulation is
substantially more complex than previously thought, and that a combination of
factors orchestrate histone gene regulation, from strict synchronization with S
phase to targeted regulation of specific histone subtypes.

PMID: 23222641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Retrovirology. 2012 Dec 7;9:102. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-9-102.

Ubiquitination and sumoylation of the HTLV-2 Tax-2B protein regulate its NF-<U+03BA>B
activity: a comparative study with the HTLV-1 Tax-1 protein.

Turci M(1), Lodewick J, Di Gennaro G, Rinaldi AS, Marin O, Diani E, Sampaio C,
Bex F, Bertazzoni U, Romanelli MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Reproduction Sciences, Section of Biology and Genetics,
University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 8, 37134, Verona, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Retroviruses HTLV-1 and HTLV-2 have homologous genomic structures but
differ significantly in pathogenicity. HTLV-1 is associated with Adult T cell
Leukemia (ATL), whereas infection by HTLV-2 has no association with neoplasia.
Transformation of T lymphocytes by HTLV-1 is linked to the capacity of its
oncoprotein Tax-1 to alter cell survival and cell cycle control mechanisms. Among
these functions, Tax-1-mediated activation of cellular gene expression via the
NF-<U+03BA>B pathway depends on Tax-1 post-translational modifications by ubiquitination
and sumoylation. The Tax-2 protein of HTLV-2B (Tax-2B) is also modified by
ubiquitination and sumoylation and activates the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway to a level similar
to that of Tax-1. The present study aims to understand whether ubiquitination and
sumoylation modifications are involved in Tax-2B-mediated activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B
pathway.
RESULTS: The comparison of Tax-1 and Tax-2B lysine to arginine substitution
mutants revealed conserved patterns and levels of ubiquitination with notable
difference in the lysine usage for sumoylation. Neither Tax-1 nor Tax-2B
ubiquitination and sumoylation deficient mutants could activate the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway
and fusion of ubiquitin or SUMO-1 to the C-terminus of the ubiquitination and
sumoylation deficient Tax-2B mutant strikingly restored transcriptional activity.
In addition, ubiquitinated forms of Tax-2B colocalized with RelA and IKK<U+03B3> in
prominent cytoplasmic structures associated with the Golgi apparatus, whereas
colocalization of Tax-2B with the RelA subunit of NF-<U+03BA>B and the transcriptional
coactivator p300 in punctate nuclear structures was dependent on Tax-2B
sumoylation, as previously observed for Tax-1.
CONCLUSIONS: Both Tax-1 and Tax-2 activate the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway via similar
mechanisms involving ubiquitination and sumoylation. Therefore, the different
transforming potential of HTLV-1 and HTLV-2 is unlikely to be related to
different modes of activation of the canonical NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.

PMCID: PMC3543174
PMID: 23217160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2013 Mar;270(3):1009-17. doi:
10.1007/s00405-012-2275-1. Epub 2012 Nov 24.

High expression levels of COX-2 and P300 are associated with unfavorable survival
in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Chen YF(1), Luo RZ, Li Y, Cui BK, Song M, Yang AK, Chen WK.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Department of Head and Neck
Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's
Republic of China. chenyf@sysucc.org.cn

In order to provide a basis for clinical treatment decisions, we explored whether
there was a correlation between the expression of COX-2 and P300 and clinical
factors in a group of patients with laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC). A
retrospective analysis of clinicopathological data was conducted in 80 patients
with LSCC who presented between January 1997 and December 1998. An
immunohistochemistry tissue microarray was conducted of 80 surgically resected
LSCC and 20 adjacent normal tissue specimens. Survival analysis and Kaplan-Meier 
curves were used to compare the effects of clinicopathological factors on
survival. The Cox model was applied for multivariate analysis. The expression
level of COX-2/P300 in LSCC tissues and adjacent normal tissues were 47.5/50.0
versus 0.0/15.0 %. The expression of COX-2 and P300 was correlated with higher T 
category, N category, clinical staging, histological grade and recurrence (P <
0.05). P300 expression was correlated with COX-2 expression (P < 0.05).
Univariate survival analysis showed that P300, COX-2, N category, clinical
staging and recurrence factors were closely correlated with unfavorable survival 
(P < 0.05). Multivariate analysis showed that COX-2 expression, histological
grade and recurrence were independent prognostic factors for LSCC. High
expression levels of COX-2 and P300 indicated poor survival outcomes for patients
with LSCC.

PMCID: PMC3580132
PMID: 23179937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49045. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049045. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Human ALKBH4 interacts with proteins associated with transcription.

Bjørnstad LG(1), Meza TJ, Otterlei M, Olafsrud SM, Meza-Zepeda LA, Falnes PØ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

The Fe(II)- and 2-oxoglutarate (2OG)-dependent dioxygenase AlkB from E. coli is a
demethylase which repairs alkyl lesions in DNA, as well as RNA, through a direct 
reversal mechanism. Humans possess nine AlkB homologs (ALKBH1-8 and FTO). ALKBH2 
and ALKBH3 display demethylase activities corresponding to that of AlkB, and both
ALKBH8 and FTO are RNA modification enzymes. The biochemical functions of the
rest of the homologs are still unknown. To increase our knowledge on the
functions of ALKBH4 and ALKBH7 we have here performed yeast two-hybrid screens to
identify interaction partners of the two proteins. While no high-confidence hits 
were detected in the case of ALKBH7, several proteins associated with chromatin
and/or involved in transcription were found to interact with ALKBH4. For all
interaction partners, the regions mediating binding to ALKBH4 comprised domains
previously reported to be involved in interaction with DNA or chromatin.
Furthermore, some of these partners showed nuclear co-localization with ALKBH4.
However, the global gene expression pattern was only marginally altered upon
ALKBH4 over-expression, and larger effects were observed in the case of ALKBH7.
Although the molecular function of both proteins remains to be revealed, our
findings suggest a role for ALKBH4 in regulation of gene expression or chromatin 
state.

PMCID: PMC3493508
PMID: 23145062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2013 Mar;33(2):197-204. doi: 10.1007/s10571-012-9885-4. Epub 
2012 Nov 6.

Temporal distribution of p300/CBP immunoreactivity in the adult rat spinal dorsal
horn following chronic constriction injury (CCI).

Zhu XY(1), Huang CS, Li Q, Guo QL, Wang Y, He X, Liao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Xiangya Hospital of Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, China.

p300 and its homolog cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CBP) are
coactivators that were identified to participate in many biological processes
including neural development and cognition. Their roles within the rodent spinal 
cord have not been reported systematically; in this study, their spatiotemporal
distribution in the spinal cord of adult rat following chronic constriction
injury (CCI) was studied. p300 and CBP expressed predominantly in nuclei in the
gray matter of rat spinal cord. Rats undergoing CCI surgery showed increased
p300/CBP immunoreactivity (IR) compared with normal control and sham-operated
rats. The number of IR cells reached the peak at day 14 following CCI compared
with those on day 3, 7, and 21, accompanied with significant behavioral changes
of neuropathic pain. Cell-type determination by immunofluorescence at day 14
following CCI revealed that p300 and CBP expressed in neurons, but not in
astrocytes or microglial cells. These results suggest that p300 and CBP are
probably involved in the maintenance of neuropathic pain on spinal cord level.
Furthermore, p300 and CBP may serve as a sensor only in neurons but not in
astrocytes or microglia cells in the adult rat spinal cord.

PMID: 23129231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Endocrinology. 2012 Dec;153(12):5993-6002. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1531. Epub 2012
Nov 2.

Involvement of GR and p300 in the induction of H6PD by cortisol in human amnion
fibroblasts.

Wang W(1), Guo C, Li W, Li J, Wang W, Myatt L, Sun K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, People's Republic 
of China.

Human fetal membranes express 11ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11ß-HSD1),
which reduces biologically inert cortisone to active cortisol and may provide an 
extraadrenal source of cortisol mediating fetal development and parturition. The 
reductase activity of 11ß-HSD1 depends on the availability of the cofactor
reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) derived from 
the enzymatic activity of hexose-6-phosphodehydrogenase (H6PD). Based on the
feed-forward induction of 11ß-HSD1 by glucocorticoids in human fetal membranes,
we hypothesize that glucocorticoids simultaneously induce H6PD in the fetal
membranes. We found a parallel distribution of H6PD and 11ß-HSD1 in the amnion,
chorion, and decidua. In cultured human amnion fibroblasts, small interfering
RNA-mediated knockdown of H6PD expression significantly attenuated the conversion
of cortisone to cortisol. Cortisol (0.01-1 µm) induced H6PD expression in a
concentration-dependent manner, which was attenuated by glucocorticoid receptor
(GR) antagonist RU486. Cortisol induced the expression of p300, a histone
acetyltransferase, whereas C646, an inhibitor of p300, attenuated the induction
of H6PD by cortisol. Coimmunoprecipitation revealed GR and p300 in the same
nuclear protein complex upon cortisol stimulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
showed that cortisol increased the binding of p300 and GR to H6PD promoter and
the acetylation of histone 3 lysine 9 on the promoters. In conclusion, the
induction of H6PD by cortisol requires the participation of GR and p300 as well
as the acetylation of H3K9 by p300. This may be a prerequisite for the parallel
induction of reductase activity of 11ß-HSD1 in human amnion fibroblasts in a
feed-forward loop that may influence fetal development and the onset of
parturition.

PMCID: PMC3512073
PMID: 23125313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Biochemistry. 2012 Nov 27;51(47):9524-34. doi: 10.1021/bi3011863. Epub 2012 Nov
12.

Different regions of the HPV-E7 and Ad-E1A viral oncoproteins bind competitively 
but through distinct mechanisms to the CH1 transactivation domain of p300.

Fera D(1), Marmorstein R.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Expression and Regulation, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

p300 is a transcriptional coactivator that participates in many important
processes in the cell, including proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis.
The viral oncoproteins, adenovirus (Ad) E1A and human papillomavirus (HPV) E7,
have been implicated in binding to p300. The Ad-E1A-p300 interaction has been
shown to result in the induction of cellular proliferation, epigenetic
reprogramming, and cellular transformation and cancer. The HPV-E7-p300
interaction, on the other hand, is not well understood. p300 contains three
zinc-binding domains, CH1-CH3, and studies have shown that Ad-E1A can bind to the
p300 CH1 and CH3 domains whereas E7 can bind to the CH1 domain and to a lesser
extent to the CH2 and CH3 domains. Here we address how high-risk HPV16-E7 and
Ad5-E1A, which have different structures, can both bind the p300 CH1 domain.
Using pull-down, gel filtration, and analytical ultracentrifugation studies, we
show that the N-terminus and CR1 domains of Ad5-E1A and the CR1 and CR2 domains
of HPV16-E7 bind to the p300 CH1 domain competitively and with midnanomolar and
low micromolar dissociation constants, respectively. We also show that Ad5-E1A
can form a ternary complex with the p300 CH1 domain and the retinoblastoma pRb
transcriptional repressor, whereas HPV16-E7 cannot. These studies suggest that
the HPV16-E7 and Ad5-E1A viral oncoproteins bind to the same p300 CH1 domain to
disrupt p300 function by distinct mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3521592
PMID: 23121466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Nat Genet. 2012 Dec;44(12):1310-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.2455. Epub 2012 Oct 28.

Exome sequencing of serous endometrial tumors identifies recurrent somatic
mutations in chromatin-remodeling and ubiquitin ligase complex genes.

Le Gallo M(1), O'Hara AJ, Rudd ML, Urick ME, Hansen NF, O'Neil NJ, Price JC,
Zhang S, England BM, Godwin AK, Sgroi DC; NIH Intramural Sequencing Center (NISC)
Comparative Sequencing Program, Hieter P, Mullikin JC, Merino MJ, Bell DW.

Collaborators: Benjamin B, Blakesley R, Bouffard G, Brooks S, Coleman H, Dekhtyar
M, Gregory M, Guan X, Gupta J, Han J, Hargrove A, Ho SL, Johnson T, Legaspi R,
Lovett S, Maduro Q, Masiello C, Maskeri B, McDowell J, Montemayor C, Mullikin J, 
Novotny B, Park M, Riebow N, Schandler K, Schmidt B, Sison C, Stantripop M,
Thomas J, Vemulapalli M, Young A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, US National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.

Endometrial cancer is the sixth most commonly diagnosed cancer in women
worldwide, causing ~74,000 deaths annually. Serous endometrial cancers are a
clinically aggressive subtype with a poorly defined genetic etiology. We used
whole-exome sequencing to comprehensively search for somatic mutations within
~22,000 protein-encoding genes in 13 primary serous endometrial tumors. We
subsequently resequenced 18 genes, which were mutated in more than 1 tumor and/or
were components of an enriched functional grouping, from 40 additional serous
tumors. We identified high frequencies of somatic mutations in CHD4 (17%), EP300 
(8%), ARID1A (6%), TSPYL2 (6%), FBXW7 (29%), SPOP (8%), MAP3K4 (6%) and ABCC9
(6%). Overall, 36.5% of serous tumors had a mutated chromatin-remodeling gene,
and 35% had a mutated ubiquitin ligase complex gene, implicating frequent
mutational disruption of these processes in the molecular pathogenesis of one of 
the deadliest forms of endometrial cancer.

PMCID: PMC3515204
PMID: 23104009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46174. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046174. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

In vitro phosphorylation and acetylation of the murine pocket protein Rb2/p130.

Saeed M(1), Schwarze F, Loidl A, Meraner J, Lechner M, Loidl P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Biocenter, Innsbruck Medical University,
Innsbruck, Austria.

The retinoblastoma protein (pRb) and the related proteins Rb2/p130 and 107
represent the "pocket protein" family of cell cycle regulators. A key function of
these proteins is the cell cycle dependent modulation of E2F-regulated genes. The
biological activity of these proteins is controlled by acetylation and
phosphorylation in a cell cycle dependent manner. In this study we attempted to
investigate the interdependence of acetylation and phosphorylation of Rb2/p130 in
vitro. After having identified the acetyltransferase p300 among several
acetyltransferases to be associated with Rb2/p130 during S-phase in NIH3T3 cells 
in vivo, we used this enzyme and the CDK4 protein kinase for in vitro
modification of a variety of full length Rb2/p130 and truncated versions with
mutations in the acetylatable lysine residues 1079, 128 and 130. Mutation of
these residues results in the complete loss of Rb2/p130 acetylation. Replacement 
of lysines by arginines strongly inhibits phosphorylation of Rb2/p130 by CDK4;
the inhibitory effect of replacement by glutamines is less pronounced.
Preacetylation of Rb2/p130 strongly enhances CDK4-catalyzed phosphorylation,
whereas deacetylation completely abolishes in vitro phosphorylation. In contrast,
phosphorylation completely inhibits acetylation of Rb2/p130 by p300. These
results suggest a mutual interdependence of modifications in a way that
acetylation primes Rb2/p130 for phosphorylation and only dephosphorylated
Rb2/p130 can be subject to acetylation. Human papillomavirus 16-E7 protein, which
increases acetylation of Rb2/p130 by p300 strongly reduces phosphorylation of
this protein by CDK4. This suggests that the balance between phosphorylation and 
acetylation of Rb2/p130 is essential for its biological function in cell cycle
control.

PMCID: PMC3454344
PMID: 23029429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Genome Res. 2012 Nov;22(11):2290-301. doi: 10.1101/gr.139360.112. Epub 2012 Sep
27.

Integration of ChIP-seq and machine learning reveals enhancers and a predictive
regulatory sequence vocabulary in melanocytes.

Gorkin DU(1), Lee D, Reed X, Fletez-Brant C, Bessling SL, Loftus SK, Beer MA,
Pavan WJ, McCallion AS.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

We take a comprehensive approach to the study of regulatory control of gene
expression in melanocytes that proceeds from large-scale enhancer discovery
facilitated by ChIP-seq; to rigorous validation in silico, in vitro, and in vivo;
and finally to the use of machine learning to elucidate a regulatory vocabulary
with genome-wide predictive power. We identify 2489 putative melanocyte enhancer 
loci in the mouse genome by ChIP-seq for EP300 and H3K4me1. We demonstrate that
these putative enhancers are evolutionarily constrained, enriched for sequence
motifs predicted to bind key melanocyte transcription factors, located near genes
relevant to melanocyte biology, and capable of driving reporter gene expression
in melanocytes in culture (86%; 43/50) and in transgenic zebrafish (70%; 7/10).
Next, using the sequences of these putative enhancers as a training set for a
supervised machine learning algorithm, we develop a vocabulary of 6-mers
predictive of melanocyte enhancer function. Lastly, we demonstrate that this
vocabulary has genome-wide predictive power in both the mouse and human genomes. 
This study provides deep insight into the regulation of gene expression in
melanocytes and demonstrates a powerful approach to the investigation of
regulatory sequences that can be applied to other cell types.

PMCID: PMC3483558
PMID: 23019145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Int J Hematol. 2012 Oct;96(4):413-27. doi: 10.1007/s12185-012-1181-z. Epub 2012
Sep 27.

Epigenetic alterations in hematopoietic malignancies.

Chung YR(1), Schatoff E, Abdel-Wahab O.

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Leukemia Service, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Gene discovery efforts in patients with hematopoietic malignancies have brought
to the forefront a series of mutations in genes thought to be involved in the
epigenetic regulation of gene transcription. These mutations occur in genes
known, or suspected, to play a role in modifying cytosine nucleotides on DNA
and/or altering the state of histone modifications. Genes such as ASXL1, DNMT3A, 
EZH2, IDH1/2, MLL1, and TET2 all have been shown to be mutated and/or
translocated in patients with myeloid malignancies. Intriguingly, many of the
alterations affecting DNA cytosine modifications in myeloid malignancies
(mutations in DNMT3A, IDH1/2, and TET2) have also been found in patients with
T-cell lymphomas, and EZH2 mutations appear to be critical in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia development as well. In addition, the discovery of
frequent mutations in CREBBP, EP300, EZH2, and MLL2 in B-cell lymphomas suggests 
that epigenetic alterations play a critical role in lymphomagenesis. The purpose 
of this review is to present functional evidence of how alterations in these
epigenetic modifiers promote hematopoietic transformation. The conclusions drawn 
from these data are valuable in understanding biological mechanisms and potential
therapeutic targets.

PMID: 23015417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Genome Res. 2012 Sep;22(9):1798-812. doi: 10.1101/gr.139105.112.

Sequence features and chromatin structure around the genomic regions bound by 119
human transcription factors.

Wang J(1), Zhuang J, Iyer S, Lin X, Whitfield TW, Greven MC, Pierce BG, Dong X,
Kundaje A, Cheng Y, Rando OJ, Birney E, Myers RM, Noble WS, Snyder M, Weng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) 
has become the dominant technique for mapping transcription factor (TF) binding
regions genome-wide. We performed an integrative analysis centered around 457
ChIP-seq data sets on 119 human TFs generated by the ENCODE Consortium. We
identified highly enriched sequence motifs in most data sets, revealing new
motifs and validating known ones. The motif sites (TF binding sites) are highly
conserved evolutionarily and show distinct footprints upon DNase I digestion. We 
frequently detected secondary motifs in addition to the canonical motifs of the
TFs, indicating tethered binding and cobinding between multiple TFs. We observed 
significant position and orientation preferences between many cobinding TFs.
Genes specifically expressed in a cell line are often associated with a greater
occurrence of nearby TF binding in that cell line. We observed cell-line-specific
secondary motifs that mediate the binding of the histone deacetylase HDAC2 and
the enhancer-binding protein EP300. TF binding sites are located in GC-rich,
nucleosome-depleted, and DNase I sensitive regions, flanked by well-positioned
nucleosomes, and many of these features show cell type specificity. The
GC-richness may be beneficial for regulating TF binding because, when unoccupied 
by a TF, these regions are occupied by nucleosomes in vivo. We present the
results of our analysis in a TF-centric web repository Factorbook
(http://factorbook.org) and will continually update this repository as more
ENCODE data are generated.

PMCID: PMC3431495
PMID: 22955990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Nat Genet. 2012 Oct;44(10):1104-10. doi: 10.1038/ng.2396. Epub 2012 Sep 2.

Integrative genome analyses identify key somatic driver mutations of small-cell
lung cancer.

Peifer M(1), Fernández-Cuesta L, Sos ML, George J, Seidel D, Kasper LH, Plenker
D, Leenders F, Sun R, Zander T, Menon R, Koker M, Dahmen I, Müller C, Di Cerbo V,
Schildhaus HU, Altmüller J, Baessmann I, Becker C, de Wilde B, Vandesompele J,
Böhm D, Ansén S, Gabler F, Wilkening I, Heynck S, Heuckmann JM, Lu X, Carter SL, 
Cibulskis K, Banerji S, Getz G, Park KS, Rauh D, Grütter C, Fischer M,
Pasqualucci L, Wright G, Wainer Z, Russell P, Petersen I, Chen Y, Stoelben E,
Ludwig C, Schnabel P, Hoffmann H, Muley T, Brockmann M, Engel-Riedel W,
Muscarella LA, Fazio VM, Groen H, Timens W, Sietsma H, Thunnissen E, Smit E,
Heideman DA, Snijders PJ, Cappuzzo F, Ligorio C, Damiani S, Field J, Solberg S,
Brustugun OT, Lund-Iversen M, Sänger J, Clement JH, Soltermann A, Moch H, Weder
W, Solomon B, Soria JC, Validire P, Besse B, Brambilla E, Brambilla C, Lantuejoul
S, Lorimier P, Schneider PM, Hallek M, Pao W, Meyerson M, Sage J, Shendure J,
Schneider R, Büttner R, Wolf J, Nürnberg P, Perner S, Heukamp LC, Brindle PK,
Haas S, Thomas RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2012 Oct;44(10):1074-5.

Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive lung tumor subtype with poor
prognosis. We sequenced 29 SCLC exomes, 2 genomes and 15 transcriptomes and found
an extremely high mutation rate of 7.4±1 protein-changing mutations per million
base pairs. Therefore, we conducted integrated analyses of the various data sets 
to identify pathogenetically relevant mutated genes. In all cases, we found
evidence for inactivation of TP53 and RB1 and identified recurrent mutations in
the CREBBP, EP300 and MLL genes that encode histone modifiers. Furthermore, we
observed mutations in PTEN, SLIT2 and EPHA7, as well as focal amplifications of
the FGFR1 tyrosine kinase gene. Finally, we detected many of the alterations
found in humans in SCLC tumors from Tp53 and Rb1 double knockout mice. Our study 
implicates histone modification as a major feature of SCLC, reveals potentially
therapeutically tractable genomic alterations and provides a generalizable
framework for the identification of biologically relevant genes in the context of
high mutational background.

PMID: 22941188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Gut. 2013 Oct;62(10):1440-5. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2012-302865. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

A genome-wide association study on a southern European population identifies a
new Crohn's disease susceptibility locus at RBX1-EP300.

Julià A(1), Domènech E, Ricart E, Tortosa R, García-Sánchez V, Gisbert JP, Nos
Mateu P, Gutiérrez A, Gomollón F, Mendoza JL, Garcia-Planella E, Barreiro-de
Acosta M, Muñoz F, Vera M, Saro C, Esteve M, Andreu M, Alonso A, López-Lasanta M,
Codó L, Gelpí JL, García-Montero AC, Bertranpetit J, Absher D, Panés J, Marsal S.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Research Group, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute, Barcelona,
Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified multiple risk
loci for Crohn's disease (CD). However, the cumulative risk exerted by these loci
is low, and the likelihood that additional, as-yet undiscovered loci contribute
to the risk of CD is very high. We performed a GWAS on a southern European
population to identify new CD risk loci.
DESIGN: We genotyped 620 901 genome markers on 1341 CD patients and 1518 controls
from Spain. The top association signals representing new candidate risk loci were
subsequently analysed in an independent replication cohort of 1365 CD patients
and 1396 controls.
RESULTS: We identified a genome-wide significant association on chromosome
22q13.2 in the intergenic region between the RBX1 and EP300 genes (single
nucleotide polymorphism rs4820425, OR 1.27, 95% CI 1.17 to 1.38, p=3.42E-8). We
also found suggestive evidence for the association of the IFNGR2 (21q22.11),
FOXP2 (7q31), MACROD2 (20p12.1) and AIF1 (6p21.3) loci with CD risk.
CONCLUSIONS: In this GWAS performed on a southern European cohort, we have
identified a new risk locus for CD between RBX1 and EP300. This study
demonstrates that using populations of different ancestry is a useful strategy to
identify new risk loci for CD.

PMID: 22936669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Blood. 2012 Oct 11;120(15):3058-68. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-386086. Epub 2012 
Aug 24.

Chromatin accessibility, p300, and histone acetylation define PML-RARa and
AML1-ETO binding sites in acute myeloid leukemia.

Saeed S(1), Logie C, Francoijs KJ, Frigè G, Romanenghi M, Nielsen FG, Raats L,
Shahhoseini M, Huynen M, Altucci L, Minucci S, Martens JH, Stunnenberg HG.

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University, Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science,
Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Chromatin accessibility plays a key role in regulating cell type specific gene
expression during hematopoiesis but has also been suggested to be aberrantly
regulated during leukemogenesis. To understand the leukemogenic chromatin
signature, we analyzed acute promyelocytic leukemia, a subtype of leukemia
characterized by the expression of RARa-fusion proteins, such as PML-RARa. We
used nuclease accessibility sequencing in cell lines as well as patient blasts to
identify accessible DNA elements and identified > 100 000 accessible regions in
each case. Using ChIP-seq, we identified H2A.Z as a histone modification
generally associated with these accessible regions, whereas unsupervised
clustering analysis of other chromatin features, including DNA methylation,
H2A.Zac, H3ac, H3K9me3, H3K27me3, and the regulatory factor p300, distinguished 6
distinct clusters of accessible sites, each with a characteristic functional
makeup. Of these, PML-RARa binding was found specifically at accessible chromatin
regions characterized by p300 binding and hypoacetylated histones. Identifying
regions with a similar epigenetic make up in t(8;21) acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
cells, another subtype of AMLs, revealed that these regions are occupied by the
oncofusion protein AML1-ETO. Together, our results suggest that oncofusion
proteins localize to accessible regions and that chromatin accessibility together
with p300 binding and histone acetylation characterize AML1-ETO and PML-RARa
binding sites.

PMID: 22923494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Dec 15;18(24):6623-33. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0861. 
Epub 2012 Aug 24.

Arylsulfonamide KCN1 inhibits in vivo glioma growth and interferes with HIF
signaling by disrupting HIF-1a interaction with cofactors p300/CBP.

Yin S(1), Kaluz S, Devi NS, Jabbar AA, de Noronha RG, Mun J, Zhang Z, Boreddy PR,
Wang W, Wang Z, Abbruscato T, Chen Z, Olson JJ, Zhang R, Goodman MM, Nicolaou KC,
Van Meir EG.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurosurgery, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, 30322, USA.

PURPOSE: The hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) plays a critical role in tumor
adaptation to hypoxia, and its elevated expression correlates with poor prognosis
and treatment failure in patients with cancer. In this study, we determined
whether
3,4-dimethoxy-N-[(2,2-dimethyl-2H-chromen-6-yl)methyl]-N-phenylbenzenesulfonamide
, KCN1, the lead inhibitor in a novel class of arylsulfonamide inhibitors of the 
HIF-1 pathway, had antitumorigenic properties in vivo and further defined its
mechanism of action.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We studied the inhibitory effect of systemic KCN1 delivery
on the growth of human brain tumors in mice. To define mechanisms of KCN1
anti-HIF activities, we examined its influence on the assembly of a functional
HIF-1a/HIF-1ß/p300 transcription complex.
RESULTS: KCN1 specifically inhibited HIF reporter gene activity in several glioma
cell lines at the nanomolar level. KCN1 also downregulated transcription of
endogenous HIF-1 target genes, such as VEGF, Glut-1, and carbonic anhydrase 9, in
a hypoxia-responsive element (HRE)-dependent manner. KCN1 potently inhibited the 
growth of subcutaneous malignant glioma tumor xenografts with minimal adverse
effects on the host. It also induced a temporary survival benefit in an
intracranial model of glioma but had no effect in a model of melanoma metastasis 
to the brain. Mechanistically, KCN1 did not downregulate the levels of HIF-1a or 
other components of the HIF transcriptional complex; rather, it antagonized
hypoxia-inducible transcription by disrupting the interaction of HIF-1a with
transcriptional coactivators p300/CBP.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the new HIF pathway inhibitor KCN1 has
antitumor activity in mouse models, supporting its further translation for the
treatment of human tumors displaying hypoxia or HIF overexpression.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3518680
PMID: 22923450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42445. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042445. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Genetic variants in ER cofactor genes and endometrial cancer risk.

Li Y(1), Low HQ, Foo JN, Darabi H, Einarsd<U+03CC>ttir K, Humphreys K, Spurdle A; ANECS 
Group, Easton DF, Thompson DJ, Dunning AM, Pharoah PD, Czene K, Chia KS, Hall P, 
Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Given that the transcriptional regulatory activity of estrogen receptor (ER) is
modulated by its biochemical cofactors, genetic variation within the ER cofactor 
genes may alter cellular response to estrogen exposure and consequently modify
the risk for endometrial cancer. We genotyped 685 tagging SNPs within 60 ER
cofactor genes in 564 endometrial cancer cases and 1,510 controls from Sweden,
and tested their associations with the risk of endometrial cancer. We
investigated the associations of individual SNPs by using a trend test as well as
multiple SNPs within a gene or gene complex by using multi-variant association
analysis. No significant association was observed for any individual SNPs or
genes, but a marginal association of the cumulative genetic variation of the
NCOA2 complex as a whole (NCOA2, CARM1, CREBBP, PRMT1 and EP300) with endometrial
cancer risk was observed (P(adjusted) = 0.033). However, the association failed
to be replicated in an independent European dataset of 1265 cases and 5190
controls (P = 0.71). The results indicate that common genetic variants within ER 
cofactor genes are unlikely to play a significant role in endometrial cancer risk
in European population.

PMCID: PMC3411617
PMID: 22876322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Genome Res. 2012 Dec;22(12):2385-98. doi: 10.1101/gr.135707.111. Epub 2012 Jul
26.

Novel roles for KLF1 in erythropoiesis revealed by mRNA-seq.

Tallack MR(1), Magor GW, Dartigues B, Sun L, Huang S, Fittock JM, Fry SV, Glazov 
EA, Bailey TL, Perkins AC.

Author information: 
(1)Mater Medical Research Institute, Mater Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland 4101,
Australia.

KLF1 (formerly known as EKLF) regulates the development of erythroid cells from
bi-potent progenitor cells via the transcriptional activation of a diverse set of
genes. Mice lacking Klf1 die in utero prior to E15 from severe anemia due to the 
inadequate expression of genes controlling hemoglobin production, cell membrane
and cytoskeletal integrity, and the cell cycle. We have recently described the
full repertoire of KLF1 binding sites in vivo by performing KLF1 ChIP-seq in
primary erythroid tissue (E14.5 fetal liver). Here we describe the KLF1-dependent
erythroid transcriptome by comparing mRNA-seq from Klf1(+/+) and Klf1(-/-)
erythroid tissue. This has revealed novel target genes not previously obtainable 
by traditional microarray technology, and provided novel insights into the
function of KLF1 as a transcriptional activator. We define a cis-regulatory
module bound by KLF1, GATA1, TAL1, and EP300 that coordinates a core set of
erythroid genes. We also describe a novel set of erythroid-specific promoters
that drive high-level expression of otherwise ubiquitously expressed genes in
erythroid cells. Our study has identified two novel lncRNAs that are dynamically 
expressed during erythroid differentiation, and discovered a role for KLF1 in
directing apoptotic gene expression to drive the terminal stages of erythroid
maturation.

PMCID: PMC3514668
PMID: 22835905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Nov 5;363(1-2):20-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.07.003.
Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Human Krüppel-like factor 11 differentially regulates human insulin promoter
activity in ß-cells and non-ß-cells via p300 and PDX1 through the regulatory
sites A3 and CACCC box.

Perakakis N(1), Danassi D, Alt M, Tsaroucha E, Mehana AE, Rimmer N, Laubner K,
Wang H, Wollheim CB, Seufert J, Päth G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Department of Internal Medicine II,
University Hospital of Freiburg, Hugstetter Strasse 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Human Krüppel-like factor 11 (hKLF11) has been characterised to both activate and
inhibit human insulin promoter (hInsP) activity. Since KLF11 is capable to
differentially regulate genes dependent on recruited cofactors, we investigated
the effects of hKLF11 on cotransfected hInsP in both ß-cells and non-ß-cells.
hKLF11 protein interacts with hp300 but not with hPDX1. Overexpressed hKLF11
stimulates PDX1-transactivation of hInsP in HEK293 non-ß-cells, but confers
inhibition in INS-1E ß-cells. Both hKLF11 functions can be neutralised by the
p300 inhibitor E1A, increased hp300 levels (INS-1E), dominant negative (DN)-PDX1 
and by mutation of the PDX1 binding site A3 or the CACCC box. In summary, hKLF11 
differentially regulates hInsP activity depending on the molecular context via
modulation of p300:PDX1 interactions with the A3 element and CACCC box. We
postulate that KLF11 has a role in fine-tuning insulin transcription in certain
cellular situations rather than representing a major transcriptional activator or
repressor of the insulin gene.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22801105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2012 Aug 15;22(16):5249-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.06.054. Epub 2012 Jun 23.

Inhibition of VEGF transcription through blockade of the hypoxia inducible
factor-1a-p300 interaction by a small molecule.

Kwon HS(1), Kim DR, Yang EG, Park YK, Ahn HC, Min SJ, Ahn DR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Theragnosis, Biomedical Research Institute, Korea Institute of
Science and Technology, Hwarangno 14-gil, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-791, Republic of
Korea.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays a pro-angiogenic role in tumor
progression. Stabilization of a key regulator termed the hypoxia inducible factor
(HIF)-1a under oxygen deficient environment around tumor is known to elicit
expression of VEGF through binding to p300. Thus, inhibition of the HIF-1a-p300
interaction would lead to down-regulation of VEGF expression, thereby providing
potential cancer therapeutics. Here, we have screened a chemical library against 
the interaction of the HIF-1a-derived peptide with p300 employing a fluorescence 
polarization-based assay. We have identified a compound as the most prominent
inhibitor against the protein-protein interaction. Further, we have observed
suppression of the mRNA level of VEGF upon treatment of HeLa cells with the
compound, demonstrating its inhibitory effect at the cellular level.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22789427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Protein Expr Purif. 2012 Sep;85(1):86-93. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2012.06.018. Epub
2012 Jul 7.

Expression and purification of full length mouse metal response element binding
transcription factor-1 using Pichia pastoris.

Huyck RW(1), Keightley A, Laity JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology and Biophysics, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO 64110-2499, United States.
rwhuyck@mail.umkc.edu

The metal response element binding transcription factor-1 (MTF-1) is an important
stress response, heavy metal detoxification, and zinc homeostasis factor in
eukaryotic organisms from Drosophila to humans. MTF-1 transcriptional regulation 
is primarily mediated by elevated levels of labile zinc, which direct MTF-1 to
bind the metal response element (MRE). This process involves direct zinc binding 
to the MTF-1 zinc fingers, and zinc dependent interaction of the MTF-1 acidic
region with the p300 coactivator protein. Here, the first recombinant expression 
system for mutant and wild type (WT) mouse MTF-1 (mMTF-1) suitable for
biochemical and biophysical studies in vitro is reported. Using the methyltropic 
yeast Pichia pastoris, nearly half-milligram recombinant WT and mutant mMTF-1
were produced per liter of P. pastoris cell culture, and purified by a FLAG-tag
epitope. Using a first pass ammonium sulfate purification, followed by anti-FLAG 
affinity resin, mMTF-1 was purified to >95% purity. This recombinant mMTF-1 was
then assayed for direct protein-protein interactions with p300 by
co-immunoprecipitation. Surface plasmon resonance studies on mMTF-1 provided the 
first quantitative DNA binding affinity measurements to the MRE promotor element 
(K(d)=5±3 nM). Both assays demonstrated the functional activity of the
recombinant mMTF-1, while elucidating the molecular basis for mMTF-1-p300
functional synergy, and provided new insights into the mMTF-1 domain specific
roles in DNA binding. Overall, this production system provides accessibility for 
the first time to a multitude of in vitro studies using recombinant mutant and WT
mMTF-1, which greatly facilitates new approaches to understanding the complex and
varied functions of this protein.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22780964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. BMC Mol Biol. 2012 Jun 25;13:20. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-13-20.

SPRR2A enhances p53 deacetylation through HDAC1 and down regulates p21 promoter
activity.

Mizuguchi Y(1), Specht S, Lunz JG 3rd, Isse K, Corbitt N, Takizawa T, Demetris
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Thomas E, Starzl Transplantation Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.

BACKGROUND: Small proline rich protein (SPRR) 2A is one of 14 SPRR genes that
encodes for a skin cross-linking protein, which confers structural integrity to
the cornified keratinocyte cell envelope. New evidence, however, shows that
SPRR2A is also a critical stress and wound repair modulator: it enables a variety
of barrier epithelia to transiently acquire mesenchymal characteristics (EMT) and
simultaneously quench reactive oxygen species during wound repair responses. p53 
is also widely recognized as the node in cellular stress responses that inhibits 
EMT and triggers cell-cycle arrest, apoptosis, and cellular senescence. Since
some p53-directed processes would seem to impede wound repair of barrier
epithelia, we hypothesized that SPRR2A up regulation might counteract these
effects and enable/promote wound repair under stressful environmental conditions.
RESULTS: Using a well characterized cholangiocarcinoma cell line we show that
levels of SPRR2A expression, similar to that seen during stressful biliary wound 
repair responses, disrupts acetylation and subsequent p53 transcriptional
activity. p53 deacetylation is accomplished via two distinct, but possibly
related, mechanisms: 1) a reduction of p300 acetylation, thereby interfering with
p300-p53 binding and subsequent p300 acetylation of K382 in p53; and 2) an
increase in histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) mRNA and protein expression. The p300
CH3 domain is essential for both the autoacetylation of p300 and transference of 
the acetyl group to p53 and HDAC1 is a component of several non-p300 complexes
that enhance p53 deacetylation, ubiquitination, and proteosomal degradation.
HDAC1 can also bind the p300-CH3 domain, regulating p300 acetylation and
interfering with p300 mediated p53 acetylation. The importance of this pathway is
illustrated by showing complete restoration of p53 acetylation and partial
restoration of p300 acetylation by treating SPRR2A expressing cells with HDAC1
siRNA.
CONCLUSION: Up-regulation of SPRR2A, similar to that seen during barrier
epithelia wound repair responses reduces p53 acetylation by interfering with
p300-p53 interactions and by increasing HDAC1 expression. SPRR2A, therefore,
functions as a suppressor of p53-dependent transcriptional activity, which
otherwise might impede cellular processes needed for epithelial wound repair
responses such as EMT.

PMCID: PMC3495018
PMID: 22731250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Cancer Epidemiol. 2012 Oct;36(5):e300-5. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2012.05.011. Epub
2012 Jun 17.

Associations of genetic variants in the transcriptional coactivators EP300 and
PCAF with hepatocellular carcinoma.

Akil A(1), Ezzikouri S, El Feydi AE, Benazzouz M, Afifi R, Diagne AG, Benjouad A,
Dejean A, Pineau P, Benjelloun S.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Hepatitis Laboratory, Institut Pasteur du Maroc, Casablanca, Morocco.
abdellah.akil@u-psud.fr

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a common cause of death by
cancer worldwide. In Morocco, HCC is characterized by few mutations and a mild
chromosome instability suggesting that epigenetic changes may represent the
driving force of tumorigenesis in the region. Recently, three studies looked for 
an association between EP300 or PCAF polymorphisms and cancer but there is a
conspicuous lack of data regarding these histone acetyltransferase (HAT) variants
and HCC development. The aim of the current study was to assess the impact of the
Ile997Val in EP300 and Asn386Ser in PCAF polymorphisms on the risk of HCC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a case-control study comparing 94 cases with 
HCC and 220 matching controls. Sequencing methods were used to determine the
genotype at the Ile997Val and Asn386Ser on EP300 and PCAF.
RESULTS: We found an overall association between genotypes Val/Val in EP300 and
HCC risk (OR, 3.03; 95% CI, 1.08-8.47; P=0.028). Population stratifications
revealed a trend or significantly higher risks of HCC development for women and
HCV-negative patients carrying the EP300 Val/Val genotype (OR, 4.06; 95% CI,
0.71-23.36; P=0.09 and OR, 4.48; 95% CI, 1.04-19.14; P=0.02, respectively). The
PCAF Ser/Ser genotype at codon 386 was more frequent in HCC cases than in control
group (P=0.03). We observed trends for higher risk of HCC among men and/or
HCV-negative patients carrying Ser/Ser genotype when compared with controls (OR, 
10.62; 95% CI, 0.50-225.13 and OR, 11.78; 95% CI, 0.47-295.56, respectively).
CONCLUSION: It appears that variants of the transcriptional coactivator genes
(EP300 and PCAF) may influence HCC risk in populations with low mutations or
chromosomal instability rates. Additional surveys are warranted to confirm this
first report.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22709982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jun 15;11(12):2380-90. doi: 10.4161/cc.20858. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Induction of ASAP (MAP9) contributes to p53 stabilization in response to DNA
damage.

Basbous J(1), Knani D, Bonneaud N, Giorgi D, Brondello JM, Rouquier S.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe Microtubules et Cycle Cellulaire, Institut de Génétique Humaine, CNRS
UPR 1142, Montpellier, France.

p53 is a key tumor suppressor that controls DNA damage response and genomic
integrity. In response to genotoxic stress, p53 is stabilized and activated,
resulting in controlled activation of genes involved in cell cycle arrest, DNA
repair and/or apoptosis. ASAP is a centrosome- and spindle-associated protein,
the deregulation of which induces severe mitotic defects. We show here that
following double-strand break DNA formation, ASAP directly interacts with and
stabilizes p53 by enhancing its p300-mediated acetylation and blocking its
MDM2-mediated ubiquitination and degradation, leading to an increase of p53
transcriptional activity. Upon DNA damage, ASAP is transiently accumulated before
being degraded upon persistent damage. This work links the p53 response with the 
cytoskeleton and confirms that the DNA-damaging signaling pathway is coordinated 
by centrosomal proteins. We reveal the existence of a new pathway through which
ASAP signals the DNA damage response by regulating the p300-MDM2-p53 loop. These 
results point out ASAP as a possible target for the design of drugs to sensitize 
radio-resistant tumors.

PMID: 22672907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e38212. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038212. Epub 2012 May 29.

Mdm2 RING mutation enhances p53 transcriptional activity and p53-p300
interaction.

Clegg HV(1), Itahana Y, Itahana K, Ramalingam S, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of
America.

The p53 transcription factor and tumor suppressor is regulated primarily by the
E3 ubiquitin ligase Mdm2, which ubiquitinates p53 to target it for proteasomal
degradation. Aside from its ubiquitin ligase function, Mdm2 has been believed to 
be capable of suppressing p53's transcriptional activity by binding with and
masking the transactivation domain of p53. The ability of Mdm2 to restrain p53
activity by binding alone, without ubiquitination, was challenged by a 2007 study
using a knockin mouse harboring a single cysteine-to-alanine point mutation
(C462A) in Mdm2's RING domain. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts with this mutation,
which abrogates Mdm2's E3 ubiquitin ligase activity without affecting its ability
to bind with p53, were unable to suppress p53 activity. In this study, we
utilized the Mdm2(C462A) mouse model to characterize in further detail the role
of Mdm2's RING domain in the control of p53. Here, we show in vivo that the
Mdm2(C462A) protein not only fails to suppress p53, but compared to the complete 
absence of Mdm2, Mdm2(C462A) actually enhances p53 transcriptional activity
toward p53 target genes p21/CDKN1A, MDM2, BAX, NOXA, and 14-3-3s. In addition, we
found that Mdm2(C462A) facilitates the interaction between p53 and the
acetyltransferase CBP/p300, and it fails to heterodimerize with its homolog and
sister regulator of p53, Mdmx, suggesting that a fully intact RING domain is
required for Mdm2's inhibition of the p300-p53 interaction and for its
interaction with Mdmx. These findings help us to better understand the complex
regulation of the Mdm2-p53 pathway and have important implications for
chemotherapeutic agents targeting Mdm2, as they suggest that inhibition of Mdm2's
E3 ubiquitin ligase activity may be sufficient for increasing p53 activity in
vivo, without the need to block Mdm2-p53 binding.

PMCID: PMC3362553
PMID: 22666487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2012 Jul;19(7):1054-64. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00237-12. Epub
2012 May 16.

Fell Pony syndrome: characterization of developmental hematopoiesis failure and
associated gene expression profiles.

Tallmadge RL(1), Stokol T, Gould-Earley MJ, Earley E, Secor EJ, Matychak MB,
Felippe MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York, USA.

Fell Pony syndrome (FPS) is a fatal immunodeficiency that occurs in foals of the 
Fell Pony breed. Affected foals present with severe anemia, B cell lymphopenia,
and opportunistic infections. Our objective was to conduct a prospective study of
potential FPS-affected Fell Pony foals to establish clinical, immunological, and 
molecular parameters at birth and in the first few weeks of life. Complete blood 
counts, peripheral blood lymphocyte phenotyping, and serum immunoglobulin
concentrations were determined for 3 FPS-affected foals, 49 unaffected foals, and
6 adult horses. In addition, cytology of bone marrow aspirates was performed
sequentially in a subset of foals. At birth, the FPS-affected foals were not
noticeably ill and had hematocrit and circulating B cell counts comparable to
those of unaffected foals; however, over 6 weeks, values for both parameters
steadily declined. A bone marrow aspirate from a 3-week-old FPS-affected foal
revealed erythroid hyperplasia and concurrent erythroid and myeloid dysplasia,
which progressed to a severe erythroid hypoplasia at 5 weeks of life.
Immunohistochemical staining confirmed the paucity of B cells in primary and
secondary lymphoid tissues. The mRNA expression of genes involved in B cell
development, signaling, and maturation was investigated using qualitative and
quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR). Several genes, including CREB1, 
EP300, MYB, PAX5, and SPI1/PU.1, were sequenced from FPS-affected and unaffected 
foals. Our study presents evidence of fetal erythrocyte and B cell hematopoiesis 
with rapid postnatal development of anemia and B lymphopenia in FPS-affected
foals. The transition between fetal/neonatal and adult-like hematopoiesis may be 
an important aspect of the pathogenesis of FPS.

PMCID: PMC3393361
PMID: 22593239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Cancer Discov. 2012 Jan;2(1):47-55. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0208. Epub 2011 
Dec 12.

Molecular ontogeny of donor-derived follicular lymphomas occurring after
hematopoietic cell transplantation.

Weigert O(1), Kopp N, Lane AA, Yoda A, Dahlberg SE, Neuberg D, Bahar AY, Chapuy
B, Kutok JL, Longtine JA, Kuo FC, Haley T, Salois M, Sullivan TJ, Fisher DC, Fox 
EA, Rodig SJ, Antin JH, Weinstock DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The relative timing of genetic alterations that contribute to follicular lymphoma
remains unknown. We analyzed a donor-recipient pair who both developed grade 2/3A
follicular lymphoma 7 years after allogeneic transplantation and donor lymphocyte
infusions. Both patients harbored identical BCL2/IGH rearrangements also present 
in 1 in 2,000 cells in the donor lymphocyte infusion, and the same V(D)J
rearrangement, which underwent somatic hypermutation both before and after clonal
divergence. Exome sequencing of both follicular lymphomas identified 15 shared
mutations, of which 14 (including alterations in EP300 and KLHL6) were recovered 
from the donor lymphocyte infusion by ultra-deep sequencing (average read
coverage, 361,723), indicating acquisition at least 7 years before clinical
presentation. Six additional mutations were present in only one follicular
lymphoma and not the donor lymphocyte infusion, including an ARID1A premature
stop, indicating later acquisition during clonal divergence. Thus, ultrasensitive
sequencing can map clonal evolution within rare subpopulations during human
lymphomagenesis in vivo.SIGNIFICANCE: For the first time, we define the molecular
ontogeny of follicular lymphoma during clonal evolution in vivo. By using
ultrasensitive mutation detection, we mapped the time-course of somatic
alterations after passage of a malignant ancestor by hematopoietic cell
transplantation.

PMCID: PMC4530787
PMID: 22585168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;44(7):1174-83. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.04.007. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Mechanisms elevating ORMDL3 expression in recurrent wheeze patients: role of
Ets-1, p300 and CREB.

Jin R(1), Xu HG, Yuan WX, Zhuang LL, Liu LF, Jiang L, Zhu LH, Liu JY, Zhou GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guang Zhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China.

Erratum in
    Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;44(11):2094.

The first genetic factor identified for childhood asthma by genome-wide
association study (GWAS) is the locus on chromosome 17q21, harboring the
Orosomucoid 1-like 3 (ORMDL3) gene. ORMDL3 is implicated in facilitation of
endoplasmic reticulum-mediated inflammatory responses, believed to underlie its
association with asthma. In the present study, we demonstrated that mRNA
expression of ORMDL3 is significantly increased in the peripheral blood of
recurrent wheeze patients compared with normal control subjects by real-time
RT-PCR. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved in human ORMDL3
regulation, we cloned and characterized the promoter region of ORMDL3. Applying
5'-rapid amplification of cDNA end analysis (RACE), we revealed that ORMDL3 gene 
used multiple transcriptional start sites (TSSs). Using a series of 5' deletion
promoter plasmids in luciferase reporter assays, we identified that the proximal 
minimal promoter of ORMDL3 was located within the region -84/+58 relative to the 
TSS. Mutational analysis, RNA interference experiments and sequential chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay demonstrated that transcriptional activity of
the ORMDL3 gene was cooperatively regulated by multiple transcription factors,
including Ets-1, p300 and CREB. The expression levels of Ets-1, p300 and CREB
were increased in the peripheral blood of recurrent wheeze patients compared with
normal control subjects and showed a strong linear correlation with the
expression of ORMDL3. Our findings indicate that Ets-1, p300 and CREB binding to 
the promoter region drive the ORMDL3 transcription.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22546552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Theriogenology. 2012 Sep 1;78(4):784-92. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2012.03.026. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Changes in histone acetylation during oocyte meiotic maturation in the diabetic
mouse.

Ding L(1), Pan R, Huang X, Wang JX, Shen YT, Xu L, Zhang Y, Liu Y, He XQ, Yang
XJ, Qi ZQ, Wang HL.

Author information: 
(1)Organ Transplantation Institute, Xiamen University, Xiamen City, Fujian
Province, China.

Although there is considerable evidence that diabetes can adversely affect
meiosis in mammalian oocytes, acetylation status of oocytes in a diabetic
environment remains unclear. The objective was to determine acetylation or
deacetylation patterns (based on immunostaining) of H3K9, H3K14, H4K5, H4K8,
H4K12, and H4K16 sites at various stages during meiosis in murine oocytes from
control and diabetic mice. According to quantitative real time polymerase chain
reaction (qPCR), mean ± SEM relative expression of Gcn5 (1.70 ± 0.14 at metaphase
[M]I and 1.27 ± 0.01 at MII, respectively), Ep300 (1.74 ± 0.04 at MI and 1.80 ±
0.001 at MII), and Pcaf (2.01 ± 0.03 at MI and 1.41 ± 0.18 at MII) mRNA in
oocytes from diabetic mice were higher than those from controls (P < 0.05),
whereas there was no difference (P > 0.05) during the germinal vesicle (GV) stage
between the two groups (1.23 ± 0.04 for Gcn5, 0.82 ± 0.06 for Ep300, and 0.80 ±
0.07 for Pcaf). Conversely, relative mRNA expression concentrations of Hdac1,
Hdac2, Hdac3, Sirt1 and Sirt2 during the germinal vesicle stage were lower in
oocytes of diabetic mice (0.24 ± 0.03 for Hdac1, 0.11 ± 0.001 for Hdac2, 0.31 ±
0.03 for Hdac3, 0.28 ± 0.02 for Sirt1, and 0.55 ± 0.02 for Sirt2; P < 0.05).
Similarly, the expression concentrations of these genes at the MI stage were
lower in oocytes from diabetic mice (0.79 ± 0.12 for Hdac1, 0.72 ± 0.001 for
Hdac2, 0.02 ± 0.001 for Sirt1, and 0.84 ± 0.08 for Sirt2; P < 0.05). Their
expression concentrations at the MII stage were also lower in oocytes from
diabetic mice (0.46 ± 0.03 for Hdac1, 0.93 ± 0.01 for Hdac2, 0.56 ± 0.01 for
Hdac3, 0.01 ± 0.002 for Sirt1, and 0.84 ± 0.04 for Sirt2; P < 0.05). At the MI
stage, however, there was no difference in the expression of Hdac3 between the
two groups of oocytes (0.96 ± 0.03; P > 0.05). Taken together, diabetes altered
the intracellular histone modification system, which may have contributed to
changes in histone acetylation, and may be involved in the compromised maturation
rate of oocytes in diabetic humans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22541329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. BMC Genomics. 2012 Apr 26;13:152. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-152.

Enhancer identification in mouse embryonic stem cells using integrative modeling 
of chromatin and genomic features.

Chen CY(1), Morris Q, Mitchell JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic modifications, transcription factor (TF) availability and 
differences in chromatin folding influence how the genome is interpreted by the
transcriptional machinery responsible for gene expression. Enhancers buried in
non-coding regions are found to be associated with significant differences in
histone marks between different cell types. In contrast, gene promoters show more
uniform modifications across cell types. Here we used histone modification and
chromatin-associated protein ChIP-Seq data sets in mouse embryonic stem (ES)
cells as well as genomic features to identify functional enhancer regions. Using 
co-bound sites of OCT4, SOX2 and NANOG (co-OSN, validated enhancers) and co-bound
sites of MYC and MYCN (limited enhancer activity) as enhancer positive and
negative training sets, we performed multinomial logistic regression with LASSO
regularization to identify key features.
RESULTS: Cross validations reveal that a combination of p300, H3K4me1, MED12 and 
NIPBL features to be top signatures of co-OSN regions. Using a model from 10
signatures, 83% of top 1277 putative 1 kb enhancer regions (probability greater
than or equal to 0.8) overlapped with at least one TF peak from 7 mouse ES cell
ChIP-Seq data sets. These putative enhancers are associated with increased gene
expression of neighbouring genes and significantly enriched in multiple TF bound 
loci in agreement with combinatorial models of TF binding. Furthermore, we
identified several motifs of known TFs significantly enriched in putative
enhancer regions compared to random promoter regions and background. Comparison
with an active H3K27ac mark in various cell types confirmed cell type-specificity
of these enhancers.
CONCLUSIONS: The top enhancer signatures we identified (p300, H3K4me1, MED12 and 
NIPBL) will allow for the identification of cell type-specific enhancer regions
in diverse cell types.

PMCID: PMC3406964
PMID: 22537144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Aging (Albany NY). 2012 Apr;4(4):247-55.

Is histone acetylation the most important physiological function for CBP and
p300?

Bedford DC(1), Brindle PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105, USA.

Protein lysine acetyltransferases (HATs or PATs) acetylate histones and other
proteins, and are principally modeled as transcriptional coactivators. CREB
binding protein (CBP, CREBBP) and its paralog p300 (EP300) constitute the KAT3
family of HATs in mammals, which has mostly unique sequence identity compared to 
other HAT families. Although studies in yeast show that many histone mutations
cause modest or specific phenotypes, similar studies are impractical in mammals
and it remains uncertain if histone acetylation is the primary physiological
function for CBP/p300. Nonetheless, CBP and p300 mutations in humans and mice
show that these coactivators have important roles in development, physiology, and
disease, possibly because CBP and p300 act as network "hubs" with more than 400
described protein interaction partners. Analysis of CBP and p300 mutant mouse
fibroblasts reveals CBP/p300 are together chiefly responsible for the global
acetylation of histone H3 residues K18 and K27, and contribute to other
locus-specific histone acetylation events. CBP/p300 can also be important for
transcription, but the recruitment of CBP/p300 and their associated histone
acetylation marks do not absolutely correlate with a requirement for gene
activation. Rather, it appears that target gene context (e.g. DNA sequence)
influences the extent to which CBP and p300 are necessary for transcription.

PMCID: PMC3371760
PMID: 22511639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Jun;13(2):156-62. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2012.03.026.
Epub 2012 Apr 11.

Hepatocyte growth factor-induced BMP-2 expression is mediated by c-Met receptor, 
FAK, JNK, Runx2, and p300 pathways in human osteoblasts.

Tsai SY(1), Huang YL, Yang WH, Tang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Nutrition Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung,
Taiwan.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) has been demonstrated to stimulate osteoblast
proliferation and participated bone remodeling. Bone morphogenetic protein-2
(BMP-2) is a crucial mediator in bone formation during fracture healing. However,
the effects of HGF in BMP-2 expression in human osteoblasts are large unknown.
Here we found that HGF induced BMP-2 expression in human osteoblasts
dose-dependently. HGF-mediated BMP-2 production was attenuated by c-Met inhibitor
or siRNA. Pretreatment with FAK inhibitor or JNK inhibitor (SP600125) also
blocked the potentiating action of HGF. Stimulation of osteoblasts with HGF
enhanced FAK phosphorylation, JNK phosphorylation, and RunX2 translocation from
cytosol to the nucleus. HGF-mediated Runx2 binding to BMP-2 promoter was
inhibited by c-Met inhibitor, FAK inhibitor, and SP600125. The binding of Runx2
to the BMP-2 promoter, as well as the recruitment of p300 and the enhancement of 
histones H3 and H4 acetylation on the BMP-2 promoter was enhanced by HGF. Our
results suggest that HGF increased BMP-2 production in human osteoblasts via the 
c-Met receptor/FAK/JNK/Runx2 and p300 signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22504529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Proteomics. 2012 May 17;75(9):2601-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.03.009. Epub
2012 Mar 19.

Targeted functional analysis of p300 coactivator in Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway using phosphoproteomic and biochemical approaches.

Ma H(1), Guo M, Shan B, Xia Z.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Los Angeles, University of Southern California, CA 90033, 
USA.

Both p300 and ß-catenin are transcriptional activators and phosphoproteins, and
play a central role in Wnt/ß-catenin-dependent transcriptional regulation. The
minimum ß-catenin binding domain of p300 has been mapped to the N-terminus 1-111 
amino acids. Here, we performed phosphoproteomic analysis for the critical
binding region using LC-MS/MS approach to investigate potential phosphosites that
may affect the binding affinity. By implementing TiO(2)-based phosphopeptide
affinity purification followed by LC-MS/MS analysis with both collision-induced
dissociation (CID) and electron transfer dissociation (ETD) methods, two unique
phosphosites Ser12 and Ser89 were identified, of which, phosphorylation at Ser12 
is novel. Functional studies aided by site-directed mutagenesis,
co-immunoprecipitation and mammalian two-hybrid assay have concluded that
phosphorylation at Ser12 critically mediates the binding ability of p300 with
ß-catenin. Further studies utilizing specific MAPK inhibitors suggest that the
p38 MAPK activation is the upstream signal required for Ser12 phosphorylation.
The transcriptional roles of p300/ß-catenin complex in myoblast differentiation
are discussed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22465714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. FASEB J. 2012 Jul;26(7):3032-41. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-201855. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

MicroRNA-224 is up-regulated in hepatocellular carcinoma through epigenetic
mechanisms.

Wang Y(1), Toh HC, Chow P, Chung AY, Meyers DJ, Cole PA, Ooi LL, Lee CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore.

MicroRNA-224 (miR-224) is one of the most commonly up-regulated microRNAs in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which affects crucial cellular processes such as 
apoptosis and cell proliferation. In this study, we aim to elucidate the
molecular mechanism that leads to the overexpression of miR-224 in HCC. We
examined the transcript expression of miR-224 and neighboring miR-452 and genes
on chromosome Xq28 in tumor and paired adjacent nontumorous tissues from 100
patients with HCC and found that miR-224 is coordinately up-regulated with its
neighboring microRNA (miRNA) and genes. This coordinated up-regulation of miRNAs 
and genes at the Xq28 locus can be mimicked in nontransformed immortalized human 
liver cells by the introduction of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, which
resulted in a corresponding increase in histone H3 acetylation in this region.
This miR-224-residing locus in Xq28 is reciprocally regulated by HDAC1, HDAC3,
and histone acetylase protein, E1A binding protein p300 (EP300). Notably, in HCC 
tumors that significantly overexpress microRNA-224, EP300 is also overexpressed
and displays increased binding to the Xq28 locus. In transformed HCC cells, high 
miR-224 expression can be attenuated through the inhibition of EP300, using
either siRNA or the specific drug C646. In summary, overexpression of EP300 may
account, in part, for the up-regulation of miR-224 expression in patients with
HCC.

PMCID: PMC3382089
PMID: 22459148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Genome Res. 2012 Jun;22(6):1059-68. doi: 10.1101/gr.133546.111. Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Coding exons function as tissue-specific enhancers of nearby genes.

Birnbaum RY(1), Clowney EJ, Agamy O, Kim MJ, Zhao J, Yamanaka T, Pappalardo Z,
Clarke SL, Wenger AM, Nguyen L, Gurrieri F, Everman DB, Schwartz CE, Birk OS,
Bejerano G, Lomvardas S, Ahituv N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of
California-San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Enhancers are essential gene regulatory elements whose alteration can lead to
morphological differences between species, developmental abnormalities, and human
disease. Current strategies to identify enhancers focus primarily on noncoding
sequences and tend to exclude protein coding sequences. Here, we analyzed 25
available ChIP-seq data sets that identify enhancers in an unbiased manner
(H3K4me1, H3K27ac, and EP300) for peaks that overlap exons. We find that, on
average, 7% of all ChIP-seq peaks overlap coding exons (after excluding for peaks
that overlap with first exons). By using mouse and zebrafish enhancer assays, we 
demonstrate that several of these exonic enhancer (eExons) candidates can
function as enhancers of their neighboring genes and that the exonic sequence is 
necessary for enhancer activity. Using ChIP, 3C, and DNA FISH, we further show
that one of these exonic limb enhancers, Dync1i1 exon 15, has active enhancer
marks and physically interacts with Dlx5/6 promoter regions 900 kb away. In
addition, its removal by chromosomal abnormalities in humans could cause split
hand and foot malformation 1 (SHFM1), a disorder associated with DLX5/6. These
results demonstrate that DNA sequences can have a dual function, operating as
coding exons in one tissue and enhancers of nearby gene(s) in another tissue,
suggesting that phenotypes resulting from coding mutations could be caused not
only by protein alteration but also by disrupting the regulation of another gene.

PMCID: PMC3371700
PMID: 22442009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2012 Jun;38(6):523-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2012.02.180. Epub
2012 Mar 21.

High expression of the transcriptional co-activator p300 predicts poor survival
in resectable non-small cell lung cancers.

Hou X(1), Li Y, Luo RZ, Fu JH, He JH, Zhang LJ, Yang HX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, 651
Dongfeng East Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, PR China. houxue@sysucc.org.cn

PURPOSE: To investigate the correlation between p300 (a transcriptional
co-activator) expression and clinical/prognostic characteristics in surgically
resected NSCLC patients for the purpose of identifying patients with increased
risk of cancer recurrence and providing them with tailored therapy.
METHODS: One hundred and sixty-nine completely resected NSCLC patients were
included in this study. Paraffin-embedded primary tumour tissues of patients were
supplied to produce a tissue microarray, and immunohistochemistry was used for
the evaluation of p300 expression. The clinical/prognostic significance of p300
expression was analysed for statistical significance. Survival was calculated by 
the Kaplan-Meier method, and the log-rank test was used to assess differences in 
survival between the groups. The prognostic impact of clinicopathologic variables
and p300 expression was evaluated using a Cox proportional hazards model.
RESULTS: High expression of p300 was associated with poor disease-free survival
(p = 0.027) and overall survival (p = 0.006) in NSCLC patients. Further analysis 
suggested that this difference in overall survival also existed in patients with 
T2 (p = 0.040), positive lymph nodes (p = 0.023), stage IIIA (p = 0.003),
adenocarcinoma (p = 0.021), and a well-differentiated histological grade score (p
= 0.011). The multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that low p300
expression is an independent marker of better disease-free survival (relative
risk = 0.628, p = 0.047) and overall survival (relative risk = 0.545, p = 0.024) 
in operable NSCLC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Low p300 expression is an independent prognostic marker of better
survival in operable NSCLC patients. The combination of clinicopathological TNM
staging classification with p300 expression may be useful in identifying patients
with increased risk of cancer recurrence to provide them with tailored therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22440742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Genome Res. 2012 Jun;22(6):1069-80. doi: 10.1101/gr.129817.111. Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Chromatin state signatures associated with tissue-specific gene expression and
enhancer activity in the embryonic limb.

Cotney J(1), Leng J, Oh S, DeMare LE, Reilly SK, Gerstein MB, Noonan JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

The regulatory elements that direct tissue-specific gene expression in the
developing mammalian embryo remain largely unknown. Although chromatin profiling 
has proven to be a powerful method for mapping regulatory sequences in cultured
cells, chromatin states characteristic of active developmental enhancers have not
been directly identified in embryonic tissues. Here we use whole-transcriptome
analysis coupled with genome-wide profiling of H3K27ac and H3K27me3 to map
chromatin states and enhancers in mouse embryonic forelimb and hindlimb. We show 
that gene-expression differences between forelimb and hindlimb, and between limb 
and other embryonic cell types, are correlated with tissue-specific H3K27ac
signatures at promoters and distal sites. Using H3K27ac profiles, we identified
28,377 putative enhancers, many of which are likely to be limb specific based on 
strong enrichment near genes highly expressed in the limb and comparisons with
tissue-specific EP300 sites and known enhancers. We describe a chromatin state
signature associated with active developmental enhancers, defined by high levels 
of H3K27ac marking, nucleosome displacement, hypersensitivity to sonication, and 
strong depletion of H3K27me3. We also find that some developmental enhancers
exhibit components of this signature, including hypersensitivity, H3K27ac
enrichment, and H3K27me3 depletion, at lower levels in tissues in which they are 
not active. Our results establish histone modification profiling as a tool for
developmental enhancer discovery, and suggest that enhancers maintain an open
chromatin state in multiple embryonic tissues independent of their activity
level.

PMCID: PMC3371702
PMID: 22421546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Exp Cell Res. 2012 May 1;318(8):867-76. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.02.022. Epub
2012 Mar 3.

p53 and MDM2 are involved in the regulation of osteocalcin gene expression.

Chen H(1), Kolman K, Lanciloti N, Nerney M, Hays E, Robson C, Chandar N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chicago College of Osteopathic Medicine,
Midwestern University, Downers Grove, IL 60515, USA.

Erratum in
    Exp Cell Res. 2012 Oct 1;318(16):2153.

Osteocalcin (OC) is a major noncollagenous bone matrix protein and an osteoblast 
marker whose expression is limited to mature osteoblasts during the late
differentiation stage. In previous studies we have shown osteosarcomas to lose
p53 function with a corresponding loss of osteocalcin gene expression.
Introduction of wild type p53 resulted in re expression of the osteocalcin gene. 
Using gel shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we have identified a
putative p53 binding site within the rat OC promoter region and observed an
increase in OC promoter activity when p53 accumulates using a CAT assay. The p53 
inducible gene Mdm2 is a well-known downstream regulator of p53 levels. Our
results showed a synergistic increase in the OC promoter activity when both p53
and MDM2 were transiently overexpressed. We further demonstrate that p53 is not
degraded during overexpression of MDM2 protein. Increased OC expression was
observed with concomitantly increased p53, VDR, and MDM2 levels in ROS17/2.8
cells during treatment with differentiation promoting (DP) media, but was
significantly decreased when co-treated with DP media and the small molecule
inhibitor of MDM2-p53 interaction, Nutlin-3. We have also observed a dramatic
increase of the OC promoter activity in the presence of p53 and Mdm2 with
inclusion of Cbfa-1 and p300 factors. Our results suggest that under some
physiological conditions the oncoprotein MDM2 may cooperate with p53 to regulate 
the osteocalcin gene during osteoblastic differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3319696
PMID: 22405968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Blood. 2012 May 31;119(22):5071-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-406116. Epub 2012
Feb 27.

Sequential gain of mutations in severe congenital neutropenia progressing to
acute myeloid leukemia.

Beekman R(1), Valkhof MG, Sanders MA, van Strien PM, Haanstra JR, Broeders L,
Geertsma-Kleinekoort WM, Veerman AJ, Valk PJ, Verhaak RG, Löwenberg B, Touw IP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 May 31;119(22):5063-4.

Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is a BM failure syndrome with a high risk of 
progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The underlying genetic changes
involved in SCN evolution to AML are largely unknown. We obtained serial
hematopoietic samples from an SCN patient who developed AML 17 years after the
initiation of G-CSF treatment. Next- generation sequencing was performed to
identify mutations during disease progression. In the AML phase, we found 12
acquired nonsynonymous mutations. Three of these, in CSF3R, LLGL2, and ZC3H18,
co-occurred in a subpopulation of progenitor cells already in the early SCN
phase. This population expanded over time, whereas clones harboring only CSF3R
mutations disappeared from the BM. The other 9 mutations were only apparent in
the AML cells and affected known AML-associated genes (RUNX1 and ASXL1) and
chromatin remodelers (SUZ12 and EP300). In addition, a novel CSF3R mutation that 
conferred autonomous proliferation to myeloid progenitors was found. We conclude 
that progression from SCN to AML is a multistep process, with distinct mutations 
arising early during the SCN phase and others later in AML development. The
sequential gain of 2 CSF3R mutations implicates abnormal G-CSF signaling as a
driver of leukemic transformation in this case of SCN.

PMID: 22371884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. EMBO Mol Med. 2012 Jul;4(7):617-32. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201200234. Epub 2012 Apr
24.

Repression of miR-142 by p300 and MAPK is required for survival signalling via
gp130 during adaptive hypertrophy.

Sharma S(1), Liu J, Wei J, Yuan H, Zhang T, Bishopric NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami Leonard
M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

An increase in cardiac workload, ultimately resulting in hypertrophy, generates
oxidative stress and therefore requires the activation of both survival and
growth signal pathways. Here, we wanted to characterize the regulators, targets
and mechanistic roles of miR-142, a microRNA (miRNA) negatively regulated during 
hypertrophy. We show that both miRNA-142-3p and -5p are repressed by
serum-derived growth factors in cultured cardiac myocytes, in models of cardiac
hypertrophy in vivo and in human cardiomyopathic hearts. Levels of miR-142 are
inversely related to levels of acetyltransferase p300 and MAPK activity. When
present, miR-142 inhibits both survival and growth pathways by directly targeting
nodal regulators p300 and gp130. MiR-142 also potently represses multiple
components of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway, preventing cytokine-mediated NO production and
blocks translation of a-actinin. Forced expression of miR-142 during hypertrophic
growth induced extensive apoptosis and cardiac dysfunction; conversely, loss of
miR-142 fully rescued cardiac function in a murine heart failure model.
Downregulation of miR-142 is required to enable cytokine-mediated survival
signalling during cardiac growth in response to haemodynamic stress and is a
critical element of adaptive hypertrophy.

Copyright © 2012 EMBO Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3407949
PMID: 22367739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Mar 6;109(10):3778-83. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1113731109. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

The p53 cofactor Strap exhibits an unexpected TPR motif and
oligonucleotide-binding (OB)-fold structure.

Adams CJ(1), Pike AC, Maniam S, Sharpe TD, Coutts AS, Knapp S, La Thangue NB,
Bullock AN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Oncology, Medical Sciences
Division, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, United Kingdom.

Activation of p53 target genes for tumor suppression depends on the
stress-specific regulation of transcriptional coactivator complexes. Strap
(stress-responsive activator of p300) is activated upon DNA damage by ataxia
telangiectasia mutated (ATM) and Chk2 kinases and is a key regulator of the p53
response. In addition to antagonizing Mdm2, Strap facilitates the recruitment of 
p53 coactivators, including JMY and p300. Strap is a predicted TPR-repeat
protein, but shows only limited sequence identity with any protein of known
structure. To address this and to elucidate the molecular mechanism of Strap
activity we determined the crystal structure of the full-length protein at 2.05 Å
resolution. The structure of Strap reveals an atypical six tetratricopeptide
repeat (TPR) protein that also contains an unexpected
oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding (OB)-fold domain. This previously unseen 
domain organization provides an extended superhelical scaffold allowing for
protein-protein as well as protein-DNA interaction. We show that both of the TPR 
and OB-fold domains localize to the chromatin of p53 target genes and exhibit
intrinsic regulatory activity necessary for the Strap-dependent p53 response.

PMCID: PMC3309724
PMID: 22362889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Pineal Res. 2012 Sep;53(2):154-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2012.00982.x. Epub 
2012 Feb 21.

Melatonin suppresses proinflammatory mediators in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated
CRL1999 cells via targeting MAPK, NF-<U+03BA>B, c/EBPß, and p300 signaling.

Shi D(1), Xiao X, Wang J, Liu L, Chen W, Fu L, Xie F, Huang W, Deng W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer
Center, Guangzhou, China.

Melatonin is an indoleamine secreted by the pineal gland as well as a
plant-derived product that exerts potential anti-inflammatory properties, but the
mechanisms of action remain unclear. Here, we investigated the roles of melatonin
in regulation of proinflammatory mediators and identified the underlying
mechanisms in human vascular smooth muscle (VSM) cell line CRL1999 stimulated by 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). We found that treatment with melatonin significantly
inhibited the production and expression of TNF-a and interleukin (IL)-1ß,
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), inducible nitric oxide synthase, prostaglandin E(2)
(PGE2), and nitric oxide (NO) in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, we also found
that the suppression of proinflammatory mediators by melatonin was mediated
through inhibition of MAPK, NF-<U+03BA>B, c/EBPß, and p300 signaling in LPS-stimulated
CRL1999 cells. Treatment with melatonin markedly inhibited phosphorylation of
ERK1/2, JNK, p38 MAPK, I<U+03BA>B-a, and c/EBPß, blocked binding of NF-<U+03BA>B and c/EBPß to 
promoters, and suppressed p300 histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity and p300 
HAT-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B acetylation. Transfection with an ERK-, I<U+03BA>B-, or
c/EBPß-specific siRNA or pretreatment with an ERK-, p38 MAPK-, or p300-selective 
inhibitor considerably abrogated the melatonin-mediated inhibition of
proinflammatory mediators. Conversely, exogenous overexpression of a
constitutively active p300, but not its HAT mutant, effectively reversed the
melatonin-mediated inhibitions. Collectively, these results indicate that
melatonin suppresses proinflammatory mediators by simultaneously targeting the
multiple signaling such as ERK/p38 MAPK, c/EBPß, NF-<U+03BA>B, and p300, in
LPS-stimulated VSM cell line CRL1999, and suggest that melatonin is a potential
candidate compound for the treatment of proinflammatory disorders.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22348531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 30;287(14):10905-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.336081. Epub
2012 Feb 13.

Androgen receptor exon 1 mutation causes androgen insensitivity by creating
phosphorylation site and inhibiting melanoma antigen-A11 activation of NH2- and
carboxyl-terminal interaction-dependent transactivation.

Lagarde WH(1), Blackwelder AJ, Minges JT, Hnat AT, French FS, Wilson EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599-7500, USA.

Naturally occurring germ line mutations in the X-linked human androgen receptor
(AR) gene cause incomplete masculinization of the external genitalia by
disrupting AR function in males with androgen insensitivity syndrome. Almost all 
AR missense mutations that cause androgen insensitivity syndrome are located in
the highly structured DNA and ligand binding domains. In this report we
investigate the functional defect associated with an AR exon 1 missense mutation,
R405S, that caused partial androgen insensitivity. The 46,XX heterozygous
maternal carrier had a wild-type Arg-405 CGC allele but transmitted an AGC mutant
allele coding for Ser-405. At birth, the 46,XY proband had a bifid scrotum,
hypospadias, and micropenis consistent with clinical stage 3 partial androgen
insensitivity. Androgen-dependent transcriptional activity of AR-R405S expressed 
in CV1 cells was less than wild-type AR and refractory in androgen-dependent AR
NH(2)- and carboxyl interaction transcription assays that depend on the
coregulator effects of melanoma antigen-A11. This mutation created a Ser-405
phosphorylation site evident by the gel migration of an AR-R405S NH(2)-terminal
fragment as a double band that converted to the wild-type single band after
treatment with <U+03BB>-phosphatase. Detrimental effects of the R405S mutation were
related to the proximity of the AR WXXLF motif (433)WHTLF(437) required for
melanoma antigen-A11 and p300 to stimulate transcriptional activity associated
with the AR NH(2)- and carboxyl-terminal interaction. We conclude that the
coregulator effects of melanoma antigen-A11 on the AR NH(2)- and
carboxyl-terminal interaction amplify the androgen-dependent transcriptional
response to p300 required for normal human male sex development in utero.

PMCID: PMC3322816
PMID: 22334658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Genet Couns. 2011;22(4):341-6.

A boy with classical Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome but no detectable mutation in the 
CREBBP and EP300 genes.

Caglayan AO(1), Lechno S, Gumus H, Bartsch O, Fryns JP.

Author information: 
(1)Kayseri Education and Research Hospital Department of Medical Genetics,
Kayseri, Turkey.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare autosomal dominant genetic disorder and
is characterized by mental retardation, distinctive facial features, broad and
often angulated thumbs and great toes. We report on a 7 year old boy with
classical Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. His facial and clinical features were very
typical, including broad thumbs with radial angulation and broad great toes.
Rigorous genetic analysis of the CREBBP and EP300 genes using DNA sequencing and 
multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) revealed no causative
mutation in this boy, only a hitherto unreported but paternally inherited
heterozygous sequence alteration, c.506 1+9C>T in IVS 30-31, which most likely
represents a normal variant (NetGene 2 splice prediction software). We question
if this boy could have a hitherto undetectable mutation type.

PMID: 22303793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Genome Res. 2012 May;22(5):860-9. doi: 10.1101/gr.131201.111. Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Effects of sequence variation on differential allelic transcription factor
occupancy and gene expression.

Reddy TE(1), Gertz J, Pauli F, Kucera KS, Varley KE, Newberry KM, Marinov GK,
Mortazavi A, Williams BA, Song L, Crawford GE, Wold B, Willard HF, Myers RM.

Author information: 
(1)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL 35806, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 May;13(5):297.

A complex interplay between transcription factors (TFs) and the genome regulates 
transcription. However, connecting variation in genome sequence with variation in
TF binding and gene expression is challenging due to environmental differences
between individuals and cell types. To address this problem, we measured
genome-wide differential allelic occupancy of 24 TFs and EP300 in a human
lymphoblastoid cell line GM12878. Overall, 5% of human TF binding sites have an
allelic imbalance in occupancy. At many sites, TFs clustered in TF-binding hubs
on the same homolog in especially open chromatin. While genetic variation in core
TF binding motifs generally resulted in large allelic differences in TF
occupancy, most allelic differences in occupancy were subtle and associated with 
disruption of weak or noncanonical motifs. We also measured genome-wide
differential allelic expression of genes with and without heterozygous exonic
variants in the same cells. We found that genes with differential allelic
expression were overall less expressed both in GM12878 cells and in unrelated
human cell lines. Comparing TF occupancy with expression, we found strong
association between allelic occupancy and expression within 100 bp of
transcription start sites (TSSs), and weak association up to 100 kb from TSSs.
Sites of differential allelic occupancy were significantly enriched for variants 
associated with disease, particularly autoimmune disease, suggesting that allelic
differences in TF occupancy give functional insights into intergenic variants
associated with disease. Our results have the potential to increase the power and
interpretability of association studies by targeting functional intergenic
variants in addition to protein coding sequences.

PMCID: PMC3337432
PMID: 22300769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Oncotarget. 2012 Jan;3(1):3-4.

Histone modification defects in developmental disorders and cancer.

Cross NC.

Comment on
    Oncotarget. 2011 Dec;2(12):1127-33.

Clinically, Weaver syndrome is closely related to Sotos syndrome, which is
frequently caused by mutations in NSD1. This gene also encodes a histone
methyltransferase, in this case with activity against histone H3 lysine 36. NSD1 
is mutated in carcinoma of the upper aerodigestive tract
(www.sanger.ac.uk/genetics/CGP/cosmic/) and also fuses to NUP98 in acute myeloid 
leukemia. Looking more widely, whole exome screens in lymphoma, multiple myeloma,
renal carcinoma and other malignancies have identified genes encoding diverse
histone modifiers as targets of somatic mutation. Strikingly, several of these
(e.g. MLL2, EP300, CREBBP, ASXL1) are also mutated in human developmental
disorders thus pointing towards a remarkable and unexpected convergence between
somatic and germline genetics.

PMCID: PMC3292885
PMID: 22287508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Gene. 2012 Mar 15;496(1):8-16. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.01.012. Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Long non-coding RNA UCA1 regulated cell cycle distribution via CREB through PI3-K
dependent pathway in bladder carcinoma cells.

Yang C(1), Li X, Wang Y, Zhao L, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 76 West Yanta Road, 710061 Xi'an, China.

Long non-coding RNA urothelial carcinoma associated 1 (UCA1) promotes human
bladder cancer cell proliferation, but the underlying mechanism remains unknown. 
After knocking down of UCA1 in BLZ-211 cells, several cell cycle-related genes
(CDKN2B, EP300 and TGFß-2) were screened by microarray assay and validated by
real-time PCR. Interestingly, in western blot analysis, p300 (encoded by EP300)
and its coactivator cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) level were
significantly down-regulated. Both suppression of UCA1 expression by shRNA in
BLZ-211 cells and ectopic expression of UCA1 in UMUC-2 cells showed that UCA1
alteration paralleled to the expression and phosphorylation of CREB, and UCA1
obviously influenced AKT expression and activity. Furthermore, in BLZ-211 cells, 
cell cycle progression was greatly reduced after PI3-K pathway was blocked by
LY294002, indicating that UCA1 affected cell cycle progression through CREB.
Taken together, we concluded that UCA1 regulated cell cycle through CREB via
PI3K-AKT dependent pathway in bladder cancer.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22285928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Hum Mutat. 2012 Apr;33(4):651-4. doi: 10.1002/humu.22027. Epub 2012 Feb 14.

A p.D116G mutation in CREB1 leads to novel multiple malformation syndrome
resembling CrebA knockout mouse.

Kitazawa S(1), Kondo T, Mori K, Yokoyama N, Matsuo M, Kitazawa R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diagnostic Molecular Pathology, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

We evaluated an autopsy case with severe neonatal respiratory distress,
hypoplasia of thymus, thyroid gland and cerebellum, and agenesis of the corpus
callosum displaying striking phenotypic similarity to the CrebA knockout mouse.
On the assumption that comparable genetic alterations must be present, we checked
the whole genomic DNA sequence of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response 
element binding protein 1 (CREB1), the human counterpart of mouse CrebA, and
found a missense c.347A>G mutation corresponding to p.D116G within the
kinase-inducible domain (KID) of CREB1. When transcribed in vitro, while Ser-133 
phosphorylation of KID was maintained upon forskolin treatment, mutated CREB1
protein failed to associate with the KIX domain of co-activator CREBBP/EP300, and
thereby, interrupted cAMP-dependent protein kinase A signal transduction as the
dominant-negative form. This is the first report of a sporadic CREB1-related
multiple malformation syndrome that, in light of accumulated knowledge of
phenotypic features in gene-targeted animals, clearly emphasizes the importance
of cross-species translational research.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22267179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cancer Lett. 2012 Jul 1;320(1):14-22. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.01.018. Epub
2012 Jan 20.

Impairment of p53 acetylation by EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein in Ewing family
tumors.

Li Y(1), Li X, Fan G, Fukushi J, Matsumoto Y, Iwamoto Y, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, China
Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

The chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) yields the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene, 
which contributes to the development of Ewing Family Tumors (EFTs). Previous
studies have shown the ability of EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein to silence p53
activity. Here we demonstrate that the introduction of EWS-Fli1 significantly
inhibited p300-mediated acetylation of p53 at Lys-382 and depletion of EWS-Fli1
protein by small interfering RNAs (siRNA) in EFTs cells facilitated it in
response to DNA damage. Furthermore, the deacetylation of p53 by EWS-Fli1
suppressed its transcriptional activity and enhanced mdm2-mediated p53
degradation. On the other hand, immunoprecipitation study shows that N-terminal
region of EWS-Fli1 associated with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to forms a
complex with p53. Knockdown of HDAC1, but not HDAC2 or HDAC3 protein restored the
expression of p53 Lys-382 in EFTs cells. Overexpression of HDAC1 also
significantly inhibited p53 transcriptional activity. Pharmacologic inhibitor of 
HDAC, trichostatin A (TSA) promoted p53-p300 interaction and recruitment of p53
Lys-382 to promoter regions of its target genes p21 and Puma, consequently
inducing apoptosis and stabilizing the acetylation of p53 at Lys-382 together
with the upregulation of p21 and Puma, which were impaired in EFTs cells after
the knockdown of p53 expression. Our data indicate EWS-Fli1 might deacetylate p53
to inhibit its transcriptional function and protein stability via the recruitment
of HDAC1. These results might elucidate a novel molecular mechanism about the
abrogation of p53 pathway by EWS-Fli1 in EFTs pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22266186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Cell Cycle. 2012 Feb 1;11(3):617-27. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.3.19115. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Brg1 regulates the transcription of human papillomavirus type 18 E6 and E7 genes.

He H(1), Luo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore. hehongpeng@yahoo.com.cn

Integrated high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) DNA was frequently detected in
the genomes of cervical carcinoma cells. The HPV E6 and E7 oncoproteins disrupt
the functions of tumor suppressors p53 and Rb; thus, understanding the mechanism 
by which HPV E6 and E7 gene expression is regulated in cancer cells is highly
relevant to cancer biology. Brg1 is a catalytic subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin 
remodeling complexes that function in the transcriptional regulation of certain
cellular genes. Here, we show that knockdown of Brg1 in HeLa cells leads to cell 
cycle arrest, p53 and Rb protein accumulation and, interestingly, downregulated
expression of HPV18 E6 and E7 genes. Brg1 binds the HPV18 LCR in a JunB- and
p300-dependent manner and is required for efficient recruitment of RNA polymerase
II to the HPV18 LCR. The function of Brg1 in HPV18 gene regulation is unique
given that its homolog Brm does not play a role in this regulatory pathway, and
this may help design target-specific intervention strategies.

PMID: 22262178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Nature. 2012 Jan 11;481(7380):157-63. doi: 10.1038/nature10725.

The genetic basis of early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Zhang J(1), Ding L, Holmfeldt L, Wu G, Heatley SL, Payne-Turner D, Easton J, Chen
X, Wang J, Rusch M, Lu C, Chen SC, Wei L, Collins-Underwood JR, Ma J, Roberts KG,
Pounds SB, Ulyanov A, Becksfort J, Gupta P, Huether R, Kriwacki RW, Parker M,
McGoldrick DJ, Zhao D, Alford D, Espy S, Bobba KC, Song G, Pei D, Cheng C,
Roberts S, Barbato MI, Campana D, Coustan-Smith E, Shurtleff SA, Raimondi SC,
Kleppe M, Cools J, Shimano KA, Hermiston ML, Doulatov S, Eppert K, Laurenti E,
Notta F, Dick JE, Basso G, Hunger SP, Loh ML, Devidas M, Wood B, Winter S,
Dunsmore KP, Fulton RS, Fulton LL, Hong X, Harris CC, Dooling DJ, Ochoa K,
Johnson KJ, Obenauer JC, Evans WE, Pui CH, Naeve CW, Ley TJ, Mardis ER, Wilson
RK, Downing JR, Mullighan CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, St Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ETP ALL) is an aggressive
malignancy of unknown genetic basis. We performed whole-genome sequencing of 12
ETP ALL cases and assessed the frequency of the identified somatic mutations in
94 T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cases. ETP ALL was characterized by
activating mutations in genes regulating cytokine receptor and RAS signalling
(67% of cases; NRAS, KRAS, FLT3, IL7R, JAK3, JAK1, SH2B3 and BRAF), inactivating 
lesions disrupting haematopoietic development (58%; GATA3, ETV6, RUNX1, IKZF1 and
EP300) and histone-modifying genes (48%; EZH2, EED, SUZ12, SETD2 and EP300). We
also identified new targets of recurrent mutation including DNM2, ECT2L and RELN.
The mutational spectrum is similar to myeloid tumours, and moreover, the global
transcriptional profile of ETP ALL was similar to that of normal and myeloid
leukaemia haematopoietic stem cells. These findings suggest that addition of
myeloid-directed therapies might improve the poor outcome of ETP ALL.

PMCID: PMC3267575
PMID: 22237106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2012 Sep;47(9):1206-11. doi: 10.1038/bmt.2011.253. Epub
2012 Jan 9.

A constitutional variant in the transcription factor EP300 strongly influences
the clinical outcome of patients submitted to allo-SCT.

Martín-Antonio B(1), Álvarez-Laderas I, Cardesa R, Márquez-Malaver F, Baez A,
Carmona M, Falantes J, Suarez-Lledo M, Fernández-Avilés F, Martínez C, Rovira M, 
Espigado I, Urbano-Ispizua Á.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hospital Clinic, Universidad Barcelona, IDIBAPS,
Josep Carreras Leukemia Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain.
bmartina@clinic.ub.es

An adequate response of the innate immune system after allo-SCT is crucial for
the clinical outcome of patients submitted to this procedure. EP300 is one of the
key genes of the innate immune system (IIS). We evaluated the influence of gene
variant A>G rs20551 in EP300 in donor and/or recipient on clinical results after 
HLA-identical sibling allo-SCT. Patients with AA gene variant had a lower relapse
incidence (31 vs 48%, P=0.025; odds ratio (OR)=1.6, P=0.05), attained better
disease-free survival (AA: 53% vs AG+GG: 24%, P=0.001; OR=1.8, P=0.01), and
better OS (AA: 53% vs AG+GG: 34%, P=0.001; OR=1.9, P=0.007). This beneficial
association was more evident when AA gene variant was present in both donor and
patient. In healthy individuals, AA gene variant was associated with lower IL2
production after a mitogenic stimuli, higher CD4+ cell response after CMV
infection, and higher expression of innate immune genes (IRF-3 and MIF), cell
cycle genes (AURKB, CCNA2 and CCNB1), lymphocyte survival genes (NFAT5 and
SLC38A2), and with a lower expression of P53 compared with recessive GG gene
variant. These findings suggest a beneficial effect of the AA gene variant in
rs20551 on clinical outcome after allo-SCT.

PMID: 22231458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Genes Dev. 2012 Jan 1;26(1):37-42. doi: 10.1101/gad.173930.111.

PRC2 directly methylates GATA4 and represses its transcriptional activity.

He A(1), Shen X, Ma Q, Cao J, von Gise A, Zhou P, Wang G, Marquez VE, Orkin SH,
Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) promotes tissue-specific differentiation by 
depositing trimethylated histone H3 Lys 27 (H3K27me3) epigenetic marks to silence
ectopic gene expression programs. Here, we show that EZH2, the catalytic subunit 
of PRC2, is required for cardiac morphogenesis. Both in vitro and in fetal
hearts, EZH2 interacted with cardiac transcription factor GATA4 and directly
methylated it at Lys 299. PRC2 methylation of GATA4 attenuated its
transcriptional activity by reducing its interaction with and acetylation by
p300. Our results reveal a new mechanism of PRC2-mediated transcriptional
repression in which PRC2 methylates a transcription factor to inhibit its
transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC3258964
PMID: 22215809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Leuk Res Rep. 2012 Dec 8;2(1):1-3. doi: 10.1016/j.lrr.2012.10.002. eCollection
2012.

Somatic mutations of the CREBBP and EP300 genes affect response to histone
deacetylase inhibition in malignant DLBCL clones.

Andersen CL(1), Asmar F(2), Klausen T(3), Hasselbalch H(4), Grønbæk K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Roskilde University Hospital, Denmark ; Department
of Hematology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Denmark. (2)Department of
Hematology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Denmark. (3)Department of Hematology,
Herlev University Hospital, Denmark. (4)Department of Hematology, Roskilde
University Hospital, Denmark.

Heterogeneous clinical responses to histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) have prompted a need for evaluating the
impact of mutations in the histone acetyl transferases (HAT) CREBBP and EP300 on 
HDACi treatment outcome. We identified four DLBCL cell lines; Toledo, with
mutations in CREBBP and EP300, SUDHL-7 with mutation of CREBBP and wild-type (wt)
EP300, RL with mutation of EP300 and wt CREBBP, and U2932 with wt CREBBP and wt
EP300. Vorinostat treatment induced apoptosis significantly more rapid and
profound in the CREBBP/EP300 double mutant cell line. Our results suggest that
pre-treatment stratification according to HAT defects may be relevant in DLBCL.

PMCID: PMC3850379
PMID: 24371765  [PubMed]


327. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Mar;45(3):902-12. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.12.007. Epub 2011
Dec 11.

Increased EID1 nuclear translocation impairs synaptic plasticity and memory
function associated with pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.

Liu R(1), Lei JX, Luo C, Lan X, Chi L, Deng P, Lei S, Ghribi O, Liu QY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, ND 58202, USA.

Though loss of function in CBP/p300, a family of CREB-binding proteins, has been 
causally associated with a variety of human neurological disorders, such as
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, Huntington's disease and drug addiction, the role of
EP300 interacting inhibitor of differentiation 1 (EID1), a CBP/p300 inhibitory
protein, in modulating neurological functions remains completely unknown. Through
the examination of EID1 expression and cellular distribution, we discovered that 
there is a significant increase of EID1 nuclear translocation in the cortical
neurons of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patient brains compared to that of control
brains. To study the potential effects of EID1 on neurological functions
associated with learning and memory, we generated a transgenic mouse model with a
neuron-specific expression of human EID1 gene in the brain. Overexpression of
EID1 led to an increase in its nuclear localization in neurons mimicking that
seen in human AD brains. The transgenic mice had a disrupted neurofilament
organization and increase of astrogliosis in the cortex and hippocampus.
Furthermore, we demonstrated that overexpression of EID1 reduced hippocampal
long-term potentiation and impaired spatial learning and memory function in the
transgenic mice. Our results indicated that the negative effects of extra nuclear
EID1 in transgenic mouse brains are likely due to its inhibitory function on
CBP/p300 mediated histone and p53 acetylation, thus affecting the expression of
downstream genes involved in the maintenance of neuronal structure and function. 
Together, our data raise the possibility that alteration of EID1 expression,
particularly the increase of EID1 nuclear localization that inhibits CBP/p300
activity in neuronal cells, may play an important role in AD pathogenesis.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3276739
PMID: 22186421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Leuk Res. 2012 Apr;36(4):485-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2011.11.018. Epub 2011 Dec
15.

Lack of somatic mutations in the catalytic domains of CREBBP and EP300 genes
implies a role for histone deacetylase inhibition in myeloproliferative
neoplasms.

Andersen CL(1), Hasselbalch H, Grønbæk K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen,
Denmark. christenla@gmail.com

Somatic mutations of the two genes coding for the histone acetyltransferase
genes, CREEBP and EP300 have been identified as a pathogenetic mechanism shared
by common forms of B-cell non-Hodgkin´s lymphomas. A screening for somatic
mutations in CREEBP and EP300 genes in patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPNs) has not previously been performed. DNA was purified from diagnostic
samples of 56 MPN patients. We designed a mutation screening assay based on
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and direct sequencing. Our results
suggest that CREBBP and EP300 mutations are not major pathogenetic mechanisms of 
MPNs. The rationale for using HDACi in these patients seems reasonable.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22177454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Feb;33(2):320-5. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr292. Epub 2011 Dec
9.

Activation of a Tip60/E2F1/ERCC1 network in human lung adenocarcinoma cells
exposed to cisplatin.

Van Den Broeck A(1), Nissou D, Brambilla E, Eymin B, Gazzeri S.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Bases Moléculaires de la Progression des Cancers du Poumon, Centre de
Recherche INSERM U823, Institut Albert Bonniot BP170, 38042 Grenoble Cedex 09,
France.

The Tip60 and E2F1 proteins are key players of the cellular response induced by
genotoxic stresses. Here, new insights into the involvement of both proteins
during the DNA damage response are provided. We show that Tip60 interacts with
E2F1 and promotes its acetylation. We identify the lysine residues 120/125 of the
E2F1 protein as the prime target sites of Tip60 and show that acetylation at
these sites promotes the accumulation of E2F1. Importantly, we demonstrate that
cisplatin induces the accumulation of E2F1 in a Tip60-dependent manner. However, 
and in contrast to PCAF and p300, Tip60 is not required for the induction of
apoptosis in cisplatin-treated cells. Instead, Tip60 and E2F1 are involved in the
upregulation of the excision repair cross-complementation group 1 protein
expression, an enzyme involved in the repair of cisplatin-induced DNA lesions.
These findings identify Tip60 as a direct regulator of E2F1 and support their
cooperative role in DNA repair.

PMID: 22159227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 15;18(2):442-53. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0510.
Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Bexarotene via CBP/p300 induces suppression of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent cell growth and
invasion in thyroid cancer.

Cras A(1), Politis B, Balitrand N, Darsin-Bettinger D, Boelle PY, Cassinat B,
Toubert ME, Chomienne C.

Author information: 
(1)UMR-S 940, INSERM, Université Denis Diderot, Institut Universitaire
d'Hématologie, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 1 avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75010 Paris,
France.

PURPOSE: Retinoic acid (RA) treatment has been used for redifferentiation of
metastatic thyroid cancer with loss of radioiodine uptake. The aim of this study 
was to improve the understanding of RA resistance and investigate the role of
bexarotene in thyroid cancer cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A model of thyroid cancer cell lines with differential
response to RA was used to evaluate the biological effects of retinoid and
rexinoid and to correlate this with RA receptor levels. Subsequently, thyroid
cancer patients were treated with 13-cis RA and bexarotene and response evaluated
on radioiodine uptake reinduction on posttherapy scan and conventional imaging.
RESULTS: In thyroid cancer patients, 13-cis RA resistance can be bypassed in some
tumors by bexarotene. A decreased tumor growth without differentiation was
observed confirming our in vitro data. Indeed, we show that ligands of RARs or
RXRs exert different effects in thyroid cancer cell lines through either
differentiation or inhibition of cell growth and invasion. These effects are
associated with restoration of RARß and RXR<U+03B3> levels and downregulation of NF-<U+03BA>B
targets genes. We show that bexarotene inhibits the transactivation potential of 
NF-<U+03BA>B in an RXR-dependent manner through decreased promoter permissiveness
without interfering with NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear translocation and binding to its
responsive elements. Inhibition of transcription results from the release of p300
coactivator from NF-<U+03BA>B target gene promoters and subsequent histone
deacetylation.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights dual mechanisms by which retinoids and
rexinoids may target cell tumorigenicity, not only via RARs and RXRs, as
expected, but also via NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 22142826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 15;10(24):4330-40. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.24.18682. Epub 2011
Dec 15.

Mutant p53 oncogenic functions are sustained by Plk2 kinase through an
autoregulatory feedback loop.

Valenti F(1), Fausti F, Biagioni F, Shay T, Fontemaggi G, Domany E, Yaffe MB,
Strano S, Blandino G, Di Agostino S.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Oncogenomics Unit, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Jan 15;11(2):217-8.
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Feb 1;11(3):438.

Aberrant activation of kinases has emerged to be a key event along with tumor
progression, maintenance of tumor phenotype and response to anticancer
treatments. This study documents the existence of an oncogenic auto-regulatory
feedback loop that includes the Polo-like kinase-2 (Snk/Plk2) and mutant p53
proteins. Plk2 protein binds to and phosphorylates mutant p53, thereby
potentiating its oncogenic activities. Phosphorylated mutant p53 binds more
efficiently to p300 consequently strengthening its own transcriptional activity. 
Plk2 gene is regulated at a transcriptional level by both wt- and mutant p53
proteins. This leads to growth suppression or enhanced cell proliferation and
chemo-resistance, respectively. In turn, the siRNA-mediated knock down of either 
mutant p53 or Plk2 proteins significantly curtails the growth properties of tumor
cells and their chemo-resistance to anticancer treatments. Therefore, this paper 
identifies a novel tumor network including Plk2 and mutant p53 proteins whose
triggering in response to DNA damage might disclose important implications for
the treatment of human cancers.

PMID: 22134238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e28011. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028011. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Transcriptional repression of Cdc25B by IER5 inhibits the proliferation of
leukemic progenitor cells through NF-YB and p300 in acute myeloid leukemia.

Nakamura S(1), Nagata Y, Tan L, Takemura T, Shibata K, Fujie M, Fujisawa S,
Tanaka Y, Toda M, Makita R, Tsunekawa K, Yamada M, Yamaoka M, Yamashita J,
Ohnishi K, Yamashita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan. satonaka@hama-med.ac.jp

The immediately-early response gene 5 (IER5) has been reported to be induced by
<U+03B3>-ray irradiation and to play a role in the induction of cell death caused by
radiation. We previously identified IER5 as one of the
2,3,4-tribromo-3-methyl-1-phenylphospholane 1-oxide (TMPP)-induced
transcriptional responses in AML cells, using microarrays that encompassed the
entire human genome. However, the biochemical pathway and mechanisms of IER5
function in regulation of the cell cycle remain unclear. In this study, we
investigated the involvement of IER5 in the cell cycle and in cell proliferation 
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells. We found that the over-expression of IER5 
in AML cell lines and in AML-derived ALDH(hi) (High Aldehyde Dehydrogenase
activity)/CD34(+) cells inhibited their proliferation compared to control cells, 
through induction of G2/M cell cycle arrest and a decrease in Cdc25B expression. 
Moreover, the over-expression of IER5 reduced colony formation of AML-derived
ALDH(hi)/CD34(+) cells due to a decrease in Cdc25B expression. In addition,
over-expression of Cdc25B restored TMPP inhibitory effects on colony formation in
IER5-suppressed AML-derived ALDH(hi)/CD34(+) cells. Furthermore, the IER5 reduced
Cdc25B mRNA expression through direct binding to Cdc25B promoter and mediated its
transcriptional attenuation through NF-YB and p300 transcriptinal factors. In
summary, we found that transcriptional repression mediated by IER5 regulates
Cdc25B expression levels via the release of NF-YB and p300 in AML-derived
ALDH(hi)/CD34(+) cells, resulting in inhibition of AML progenitor cell
proliferation through modulation of cell cycle. Thus, the induction of IER5
expression represents an attractive target for AML therapy.

PMCID: PMC3223216
PMID: 22132193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Dairy Sci. 2011 Dec;94(12):5913-25. doi: 10.3168/jds.2011-4230.

Dietary lipid during the transition period to manipulate subcutaneous adipose
tissue peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> co-regulator and target gene 
expression.

Schmitt E(1), Ballou MA, Correa MN, DePeters EJ, Drackley JK, Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento Clínicas Veterinária, Universidade Federal de Pelotas, NUPEEC,
Campus Universitário, 96010-900 Pelotas, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

Objectives were to determine adipose tissue mRNA expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)<U+03B3> co-regulators, target enzymes and
transcription regulators, inflammation-related genes, and adipokines in response 
to dietary long-chain fatty acids (LCFA). From -21 through 10 d relative to
parturition cows were fed no supplemental LCFA (control), saturated LCFA (SFAT;
mainly 16:0 and 18:0), or fish oil (FO). Lipid was fed at 250 g/d prepartum or
approximately 1.5 to 1.9% of the previous day's dry matter intake postpartum.
Transcript profiling of 35 genes via quantitative PCR was conducted on biopsies
(n=5 cows/diet) collected at -14 and 11 d from parturition. Despite lower dry
matter intake with FO, pre- and postpartal blood nonesterified fatty acids,
ß-hydroxybutyrate, and liver triacylglycerol were unaffected by treatment but
increased after calving regardless of diet. Prepartal expression of
adipogenic/lipogenic transcription regulators [CEBPA, CEBPB, RXRA, KLF5, and
MLXIPL (formerly ChREBP)] and co-regulators (CARM1, EP300, NCOA1, MED1, NCOR2,
and NRIP1) was upregulated by FO and SFAT versus control, whereas most enzymes
involved in lipogenesis/triacylglycerol synthesis (FASN, SCD, DGAT2, and LPIN1)
had greater expression only with FO. Expression of most adipogenic/lipogenic
genes decreased after parturition, but feeding SFAT led to sustained upregulation
of CEBPA, CEBPB, RXRA, several PPAR-co-activators, and DGAT2 and SCD, suggesting 
maintenance of a pro-adipogenic/pro-lipogenic state with SFAT. The co-activator
CREBBP was greater in cows fed lipid and did not decrease after parturition,
suggesting ligand activation of PPAR<U+03B3>. The greater peripartal expression of NFKB1
and TBK1 due to dietary lipid was suggestive of a local inflammatory response. At
amounts fed prepartum, both FO and SFAT were effective in upregulating the
adipose tissue PPAR<U+03B3>-gene network. In contrast, only SFAT led to sustaining that 
response. Overall, the observed expression patterns are suggestive of an
adipogenic regulatory mechanism particularly responsive to SFAT.

Copyright © 2011 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22118082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Feb;8(2):495-503. doi: 10.1039/c1mb05363a. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

Dynamics of Srf, p300 and histone modifications during cardiac maturation in
mouse.

Schueler M(1), Zhang Q, Schlesinger J, Tönjes M, Sperling SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

The adaptation of the cellular network to functional changes, timing and
patterning of gene expression is regulated by binding of transcription factors to
gene regulatory elements, which in turn depends on co-occurring histone
modifications. These two layers influence each other, enabling a further level of
regulatory fine-tuning. We analyzed the interdependencies between histone 3
acetylation, histone 3 lysine 4 dimethylation, the transcription factor Srf and
the histone acetyltransferase p300 in an in vivo model using chromatin
immunoprecipitation in a time-series during cardiac maturation in mouse. We found
a strong correlation between the presence of the two histone modifications and
binding of Srf and p300. Using linear modeling techniques we could show that each
factor contributes individually as well as conjointly to histone 3 acetylation
and gene expression, probably aided by accompanying histone 3 lysine 4
dimethylation. We further demonstrate that changes in gene expression during
cardiac maturation are attended by changes of the analyzed regulators while
revealing a high variability of combinatorial regulation. Finally, we propose a
model of Srf-driven gene expression in cardiomyocytes.

PMID: 22101280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Cell Cycle. 2011 Nov 15;10(22):3920-8. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.22.18096. Epub 2011 Nov
15.

Phosphorylation of von Hippel-Lindau protein by checkpoint kinase 2 regulates p53
transactivation.

Roe JS(1), Kim HR, Hwang IY, Ha NC, Kim ST, Cho EJ, Youn HD.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Metabolic Checkpoint, Departments of
Biomedical Sciences and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cancer Research
Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

von-Hippel Lindau protein (pVHL) suppresses tumorigenesis in the kidney, in part 
through regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor alpha (HIF alpha). However, HIF
has been proposed to be necessary but insufficient for renal tumorigenesis. p53
was implicated as a transcription factor that is regulated by pVHL, but the
molecular mechanism by which pVHL regulates p53 on DNA damage is unknown. We
demonstrated that checkpoint kinase-2 (Chk2) binds to the beta-domain of pVHL and
phosphorylates Ser 111 on DNA damage. Notably, this modification enhances
pVHL-mediated transactivation of p53 by recruiting p300 and Tip60 to the
chromatin of p53 target gene. Further, the naturally occurring pVHL mutants
pVHL-S111R and pVHL-S111C showed diminished binding to coactivators, ultimately
retarding p53-mediated growth arrest and apoptosis. In this study, we determined 
the molecular mechanism by which pVHL transactivates p53 on DNA damage and
demonstrated that p53-related pVHL subtype mutants regulate tumorigenecity in VHL
diseases.

PMID: 22071692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Blood. 2012 Jan 5;119(1):151-60. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-356790. Epub 2011 Nov
4.

Interaction of HTLV-1 Tax with minichromosome maintenance proteins accelerates
the replication timing program.

Boxus M(1), Twizere JC, Legros S, Kettmann R, Willems L.

Author information: 
(1)National Fund for Scientific Research, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, Cellular and
Molecular Biology, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.

The Tax oncoprotein encoded by the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 plays a
pivotal role in viral persistence and pathogenesis. Human T-cell leukemia virus
type 1-infected cells proliferate faster than normal lymphocytes, expand through 
mitotic division, and accumulate genomic lesions. Here, we show that Tax
associates with the minichromosome maintenance MCM2-7 helicase complex and
localizes to origins of replication. Tax modulates the spatiotemporal program of 
origin activation and fires supplementary origins at the onset of S phase.
Thereby, Tax increases the DNA replication rate, accelerates S phase progression,
but also generates a replicative stress characterized by the presence of genomic 
lesions. Mechanistically, Tax favors p300 recruitment and histone
hyperacetylation at late replication domains, advancing their replication timing 
in early S phase.

PMID: 22058115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 9;286(49):42232-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.262295. Epub 2011
Oct 19.

Curcumin enhances the efficacy of chemotherapy by tailoring p65NF<U+03BA>B-p300
cross-talk in favor of p53-p300 in breast cancer.

Sen GS(1), Mohanty S, Hossain DM, Bhattacharyya S, Banerjee S, Chakraborty J,
Saha S, Ray P, Bhattacharjee P, Mandal D, Bhattacharya A, Chattopadhyay S, Das T,
Sa G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Bose Institute, P-1/12, Calcutta Improvement
Trust Scheme VII M, Kolkata 700054, India.

Breast cancer cells often develop multiple mechanisms of drug resistance during
tumor progression, which is the major reason for the failure of breast cancer
therapy. High constitutive activation of NF<U+03BA>B has been found in different
cancers, creating an environment conducive for chemotherapeutic resistance. Here 
we report that doxorubicin-induced SMAR1-dependent transcriptional repression and
SMAR1-independent degradation of IkBa resulted in nuclear translocation of
p65NF<U+03BA>B and its association with p300 histone acetylase and subsequent
transcription of Bcl-2 to impart protective response in drug-resistant cells.
Consistently SMAR1-silenced drug-resistant cells exhibited IkBa-mediated
inhibition of p65NF<U+03BA>B and induction of p53-dependent apoptosis. Interestingly,
curcumin pretreatment of drug-resistant cells alleviated SMAR1-mediated p65NF<U+03BA>B
activation and hence restored doxorubicin sensitivity. Under such anti-survival
condition, induction of p53-p300 cross-talk enhanced the transcriptional activity
of p53 and intrinsic death cascade. Importantly, promyelocyte leukemia-mediated
SMAR1 sequestration that relieved the repression of apoptosis-inducing genes was 
indispensable for such chemo-sensitizing ability of curcumin. A simultaneous
decrease in drug-induced systemic toxicity by curcumin might also have enhanced
the efficacy of doxorubicin by improving the intrinsic defense machineries of the
tumor-bearer. Overall, the findings of this preclinical study clearly demonstrate
the effectiveness of curcumin to combat doxorubicin-resistance. We, therefore,
suggest curcumin as a potent chemo-sensitizer to improve the therapeutic index of
this widely used anti-cancer drug. Taken together, these results suggest that
curcumin can be developed into an adjuvant chemotherapeutic drug.

PMCID: PMC3234918
PMID: 22013068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Med Genet. 2012 Jan;49(1):66-74. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100354. Epub 2011 
Oct 7.

Histone acetylation deficits in lymphoblastoid cell lines from patients with
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.

Lopez-Atalaya JP(1), Gervasini C, Mottadelli F, Spena S, Piccione M, Scarano G,
Selicorni A, Barco A, Larizza L.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias (Universidad Miguel Hernandez-Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas), San Juan de Alicante, Alicante, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a congenital neurodevelopmental
disorder defined by postnatal growth deficiency, characteristic skeletal
abnormalities and mental retardation and caused by mutations in the genes
encoding for the transcriptional co-activators with intrinsic lysine
acetyltransferase (KAT) activity CBP and p300. Previous studies have shown that
neuronal histone acetylation is reduced in mouse models of RSTS.
METHODS: The authors identified different mutations at the CREBBP locus and
generated lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from nine patients with RSTS carrying
distinct CREBBP mutations that illustrate different grades of the clinical
severity in the spectrum of the syndrome. They next assessed whether histone
acetylation levels were altered in these cell lines.
RESULTS: The comparison of CREBBP-mutated RSTS cell lines with cell lines derived
from patients with an unrelated mental retardation syndrome or healthy controls
revealed significant deficits in histone acetylation, affecting primarily histone
H2B and histone H2A. The most severe defects were observed in the lines carrying 
the whole deletion of the CREBBP gene and the truncating mutation, both leading
to a haploinsufficiency state. Interestingly, this deficit was rescued by
treatment with an inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDACi).
CONCLUSIONS: The authors' results extend to humans the seminal observations in
RSTS mouse models and point to histone acetylation defects, mainly involving H2B 
and H2A, as relevant molecular markers of the disease.

PMID: 21984751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Dec;31(12):2897-908. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.237453. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

AMP-activated protein kinase suppresses endothelial cell inflammation through
phosphorylation of transcriptional coactivator p300.

Zhang Y(1), Qiu J, Wang X, Zhang Y, Xia M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, General Hospital of Guangzhou Military 
Command, Guangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: Considerable evidence supports the early involvement of
monocyte/macrophage recruitment to activated endothelial cells by leukocyte
adhesion molecules during atherogenesis. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is
highly expressed in vascular endothelial cells, but its impact on monocyte
adhesion and the related mechanisms are not fully understood. The present study
was designed to evaluate the impact of and gain mechanistic insight into the
signaling coupling AMPK function to the antiinflammatory response.
METHODS AND RESULTS: 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-ß-D-ribonucleotide (AICAR) 
treatment or overexpression of constitutively active AMPK markedly reduced human 
monocytic human acute monocytic leukemia cell line-1 cell adhesion and the
expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 in tumor necrosis
factor-a-activated human aortic endothelial cells. Furthermore, AICAR or
constitutively active AMPK overexpression strongly inhibited the histone
acetyltransferase activity of the transcriptional coactivator p300 by
phosphorylation of Ser89, which in turn decreased tumor necrosis
factor-a-activated p300-mediated acetylation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B p65 on Lys221
and reduced the DNA binding activity of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B by inhibiting its
recruitment to its target gene promoters. AMPK phosphorylates the transcriptional
coactivator p300 via the atypical protein kinase C<U+03B9>/<U+03BB>.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that transcriptional coactivator p300
phosphorylation at Ser89 by AMPK is critical for the therapeutic effect of AMPK
and may be a potential target for pharmaceutical intervention in inflammatory
diseases such as atherosclerosis.

PMID: 21940946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 25;286(47):40974-86. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.290874. Epub
2011 Sep 21.

Binding site specificity and factor redundancy in activator protein-1-driven
human papillomavirus chromatin-dependent transcription.

Wang WM(1), Wu SY, Lee AY, Chiang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Activator protein-1 (AP-1) regulates diverse gene responses triggered by
environmental cues and virus-induced cellular stress. Although many signaling
events leading to AP-1 activation have been described, the fundamental features
underlying binding site selection and factor recruitment of dimeric AP-1
complexes to their target genes remain mostly uncharacterized. Using recombinant 
full-length human AP-1 dimers formed between c-Jun and Fos family members (c-Fos,
FosB, Fra-1, Fra-2) for DNA binding and transcriptional analysis, we found that
each of these AP-1 complex exhibits differential activity for distinct
non-consensus AP-1 sites present in human papillomavirus (HPV), and each AP-1
complex is capable of activating transcription from in vitro-reconstituted HPV
chromatin in a p300- and acetyl-CoA-dependent manner. Transcription from HPV
chromatin requires AP-1-dependent and contact-driven recruitment of p300.
Acetylation of dimeric AP-1 complexes by p300 enhances AP-1 binding to DNA. Using
a human C-33A cervical cancer-derived cell line harboring the episomal HPV type
11 genome, we illustrate binding site selectivity recognized by c-Jun, JunB,
JunD, and various Fos family members in a combinatorial and unique pattern,
highlighting the diversity and importance of non-canonical binding site
recognition by various AP-1 family proteins.

PMCID: PMC3220474
PMID: 21937452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Feb;166(2):226-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10646.x.
Epub 2012 Jan 9.

Abnormal epigenetic modifications in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
patients with alopecia areata.

Zhao M(1), Liang G, Wu X, Wang S, Zhang P, Su Y, Yin H, Tan Y, Zhang J, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, Department of Dermatology, Second
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 139 Renmin Middle Road, Changsha,
Hunan 410011, China.

BACKGROUND: Alopecia areata (AA) is a hair loss disease caused by T-cell-mediated
autoimmune reactions against anagen-stage hair follicles. Although the exact
aetiology is poorly understood, there is evidence to suggest that both genetic
and environmental factors are involved in AA pathogenesis.
OBJECTIVES: To analyse DNA methylation and histone modification patterns in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with AA.
METHODS: PBMC samples were obtained from 25 patients with AA and 20 healthy
controls. Global DNA methylcytosine levels, as well as histone acetylation and
methylation levels, were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. mRNA
expression levels were determined using real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Genomic DNA methylation in PBMCs of patients with AA was increased
relative to controls. DNMT1, MBD1 and MBD4 expression levels were significantly
higher in AA PBMCs than in controls, and DNMT1 transcription levels positively
correlated with global DNA methylation levels in patient samples. Histone H3
acetylation was significantly increased and histone H3 lysine 4 methylation was
significantly decreased in patient PBMCs compared with healthy controls. Histone 
H3 acetylation levels were positively correlated with AA disease severity, and
with RANTES (CCL5) mRNA expression in PBMCs of patients with AA. These changes
were accompanied by increased p300 (EP300), histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1),
myeloid/lymphoid or mixed lineage leukemia (MLL), SET7/9 (SETD7), G9A (EHMT2),
JMJD2C (KDM4C) and JARID1A (KDM5A) expression, as well as reduced HDAC2, HDAC7,
LSD1 (KDM1A), JMJD2A (KDM4A) and JMJD2B (KDM4B) expression.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation and histone modification status are altered in PBMCs
of patients with AA, possibly due to the deregulation of epigenetic regulatory
genes. These changes may contribute to the activation of pathological immune
responses in AA.

© 2011 The Authors. BJD © 2011 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 21936853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Jan;5(1):173-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.593. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

p300 mediates cellular resistance to doxorubicin in bladder cancer.

Takeuchi A(1), Shiota M, Tatsugami K, Yokomizo A, Tanaka S, Kuroiwa K, Eto M,
Naito S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Bladder cancer is one of the most common urogenital malignancies. At the
non-invasive stage, bladder cancer can be completely resected transurethrally.
However, 70% of patients experience intravesical tumor recurrence within 5 years.
Patients with advanced bladder cancer frequently receive a chemotherapy regimen
containing doxorubicin. However, doxorubicin resistance is a major obstacle to
cancer chemotherapy. Previously, we reported that the histone acetyltransferase
p300/CBP-associated factor is involved in doxorubicin resistance in bladder
cancer. However, the role of another histone acetyltransferase, p300, in bladder 
cancer resistance to doxorubicin remains unclear. In this study, we investigated 
the molecular mechanism of doxorubicin resistance in bladder cancer with regard
to p300. The result showed that p300 expression was reduced in
doxorubicin-resistant bladder cancer cells and in response to doxorubicin
exposure. Furthermore, p300 suppression rendered bladder cancer cells resistant
to doxorubicin. Taken together, the results from this study indicate that p300
may be a promising molecular therapeutic target through the modulation of
cellular sensitivity to doxorubicin in bladder cancer.

PMID: 21935574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Nov;31(22):4464-81. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05574-11. Epub 2011 Sep 
19.

TopBP1 mediates mutant p53 gain of function through NF-Y and p63/p73.

Liu K(1), Ling S, Lin WC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Nearly half of human cancers harbor p53 mutations, which can promote cancerous
growth, metastasis, and resistance to therapy. The gain of function of mutant p53
is partly mediated by its ability to form a complex with NF-Y or p63/p73. Here,
we demonstrate that TopBP1 mediates these activities in cancer, and we provide
both in vitro and in vivo evidence to support its role. We show that TopBP1
interacts with p53 hot spot mutants and NF-YA and promotes mutant p53 and p300
recruitment to NF-Y target gene promoters. TopBP1 also facilitates mutant p53
interaction with and inhibition of the transcriptional activities of p63/p73.
Depletion of TopBP1 in mutant p53 cancer cells leads to downregulation of NF-Y
target genes cyclin A and Cdk1 and upregulation of p63/p73 target genes such as
Bax and Noxa. Mutant p53-mediated resistance to chemotherapeutic agents depends
on TopBP1. The growth-promoting activity of mutant p53 in a xenograft model also 
requires TopBP1. Thus, TopBP1 mediates mutant p53 gain of function in cancer.
Since TopBP1 is often overexpressed in cancer cells and is recruited to cooperate
with mutant p53 for tumor progression, TopBP1/mutant p53 interaction may be a new
therapeutic target in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3209258
PMID: 21930790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Dec;1813(12):2008-16. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2011.08.018. Epub 2011 Sep 8.

CITED2 controls the hypoxic signaling by snatching p300 from the two distinct
activation domains of HIF-1a.

Yoon H(1), Lim JH, Cho CH, Huang LE, Park JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Chongno-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

HIF-1a plays a central role in cellular adaptation to hypoxia, and is closely
related to the pathogeneses of life-threatening disorders. HIF-1a induces the
expressions of numerous hypoxia-induced genes through two transactivation
domains; N-terminal TAD (NAD) and C-terminal TAD (CAD). Furthermore, p300 is
known to boost CAD-dependent transactivation, and CBP/p300-interacting
transactivator with an ED-rich tail 2 (CITED2) inhibits HIF-1a-driven gene
expression by interfering with the interaction between CAD and p300. However, few
researches have focused on the role of CITED2 in the regulation of NAD activity, 
and thus, we addressed this point. CITED2 was found to attenuate the hypoxic
activations of NAD-dependent and CAD-dependent genes, suggesting that CITED2
negatively regulates both CAD and NAD. Immunoprecipitation analyses showed that
NAD interacts with the Cystein/Histidine region (CH) 1 and CH3 domains of p300.
Moreover, CH1 and CH3 both were required for NAD-dependent transactivation.
Furthermore, CITED2 was found to inactivate NAD by interfering with NAD binding
to CH1, but not to CH3. These results indicate that CITED2 inactivates HIF-1a by 
blocking p300 recruitment by both NAD and CAD. We also found that pVHL inhibits
NAD activity regardless of NAD degradation by blocking the interaction between
p300 and NAD. Summarizing, NAD was activated by binding to p300, and this was
blocked by either CITED2 or pVHL. We propose that pVHL controls NAD during
normoxia and that CITED2 controls NAD during hypoxia. Our results provide a new
strategy for controlling HIF-1a.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21925214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e24153. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024153. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Inactivation of a single copy of Crebbp selectively alters pre-mRNA processing in
mouse hematopoietic stem cells.

Lemieux ME(1), Cheng Z, Zhou Q, White R, Cornell J, Kung AL, Rebel VI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Global expression analysis of fetal liver hematopoietic stem cells (FL HSCs)
revealed the presence of unspliced pre-mRNA for a number of genes in normal FL
HSCs. In a subset of these genes, Crebbp+/- FL HSCs had less unprocessed pre-mRNA
without a corresponding reduction in total mRNA levels. Among the genes thus
identified were the key regulators of HSC function Itga4, Msi2 and Tcf4. A
similar but much weaker effect was apparent in Ep300+/- FL HSCs, indicating that,
in this context as in others, the two paralogs are not interchangeable. As a
group, the down-regulated intronic probe sets could discriminate adult HSCs from 
more mature cell types, suggesting that the underlying mechanism is regulated
with differentiation stage and is active in both fetal and adult hematopoiesis.
Consistent with increased myelopoiesis in Crebbp hemizygous mice, targeted
reduction of CREBBP abundance by shRNA in the multipotent EML cell line triggered
spontaneous myeloid differentiation in the absence of the normally required
inductive signals. In addition, differences in protein levels between
phenotypically distinct EML subpopulations were better predicted by taking into
account not only the total mRNA signal but also the amount of unspliced message
present. CREBBP thus appears to selectively influence the timing and degree of
pre-mRNA processing of genes essential for HSC regulation and thereby has the
potential to alter subsequent cell fate decisions in HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3162030
PMID: 21901164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Aug;7(8):e1002211. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002211. Epub 2011
Aug 25.

Beta-HPV 5 and 8 E6 promote p300 degradation by blocking AKT/p300 association.

Howie HL(1), Koop JI, Weese J, Robinson K, Wipf G, Kim L, Galloway DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America.

The E6 oncoprotein from high-risk genus alpha human papillomaviruses (a-HPVs),
such as HPV 16, has been well characterized with respect to the host-cell
proteins it interacts with and corresponding signaling pathways that are
disrupted due to these interactions. Less is known regarding the interacting
partners of E6 from the genus beta papillomaviruses (ß-HPVs); however, it is
generally thought that ß-HPV E6 proteins do not interact with many of the
proteins known to bind to a-HPV E6. Here we identify p300 as a protein that
interacts directly with E6 from both a- and ß-HPV types. Importantly, this
association appears much stronger with ß-HPV types 5 and 8-E6 than with a-HPV
type 16-E6 or ß-HPV type 38-E6. We demonstrate that the enhanced association
between 5/8-E6 and p300 leads to p300 degradation in a proteasomal-dependent but 
E6AP-independent manner. Rather, 5/8-E6 inhibit the association of AKT with p300,
an event necessary to ensure p300 stability within the cell. Finally, we
demonstrate that the decreased p300 protein levels concomitantly affect
downstream signaling events, such as the expression of differentiation markers
K1, K10 and Involucrin. Together, these results demonstrate a unique way in which
ß-HPV E6 proteins are able to affect host-cell signaling in a manner distinct
from that of the a-HPVs.

PMCID: PMC3161984
PMID: 21901101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23617. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023617. Epub 2011 Aug 23.

Reverse transcriptase-coupled quantitative real time PCR analysis of cell-free
transcription on the chromatin-assembled p21 promoter.

Park JH(1), Magan N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular BioSciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New
Zealand. J.Park@massey.ac.nz

BACKGROUND: Cell-free eukaryotic transcription assays have contributed
tremendously to the current understanding of the molecular mechanisms that govern
transcription at eukaryotic promoters. Currently, the conventional G-less
cassette transcription assay is one of the simplest and fastest methods for
measuring transcription in vitro. This method requires several components,
including the radioisotope labelling of RNA product during the transcription
reaction followed by visualization of transcripts using autoradiography.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To further simplify and expedite the conventional
G-less cassette transcription assay, we have developed a method to incorporate a 
reverse transcriptase-coupled quantitative real time PCR (RT-qPCR). By using DNA 
template depletion steps that include DNA template immobilization, Trizol
extraction and DNase I treatment, we have successfully enriched p21
promoter-driven transcripts over DNA templates. The quantification results of RNA
transcripts using the RT-qPCR assay were comparable to the results of the
conventional G-less cassette transcription assay both in naked DNA and
chromatin-assembled templates.
CONCLUSIONS: We first report a proof-of-concept demonstration that incorporating 
RT-qPCR in cell-free transcription assays can be a simpler and faster alternative
method to the conventional radioisotope-mediated transcription assays. This
method will be useful for developing high throughput in vitro transcription
assays and provide quantitative data for RNA transcripts generated in a defined
cell-free transcription reaction.

PMCID: PMC3160311
PMID: 21886803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Genome Res. 2011 Dec;21(12):2167-80. doi: 10.1101/gr.121905.111. Epub 2011 Aug
29.

Discriminative prediction of mammalian enhancers from DNA sequence.

Lee D(1), Karchin R, Beer MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland 21205, USA.

Accurately predicting regulatory sequences and enhancers in entire genomes is an 
important but difficult problem, especially in large vertebrate genomes. With the
advent of ChIP-seq technology, experimental detection of genome-wide EP300/CREBBP
bound regions provides a powerful platform to develop predictive tools for
regulatory sequences and to study their sequence properties. Here, we develop a
support vector machine (SVM) framework which can accurately identify EP300-bound 
enhancers using only genomic sequence and an unbiased set of general sequence
features. Moreover, we find that the predictive sequence features identified by
the SVM classifier reveal biologically relevant sequence elements enriched in the
enhancers, but we also identify other features that are significantly depleted in
enhancers. The predictive sequence features are evolutionarily conserved and
spatially clustered, providing further support of their functional significance. 
Although our SVM is trained on experimental data, we also predict novel enhancers
and show that these putative enhancers are significantly enriched in both
ChIP-seq signal and DNase I hypersensitivity signal in the mouse brain and are
located near relevant genes. Finally, we present results of comparisons between
other EP300/CREBBP data sets using our SVM and uncover sequence elements enriched
and/or depleted in the different classes of enhancers. Many of these sequence
features play a role in specifying tissue-specific or
developmental-stage-specific enhancer activity, but our results indicate that
some features operate in a general or tissue-independent manner. In addition to
providing a high confidence list of enhancer targets for subsequent experimental 
investigation, these results contribute to our understanding of the general
sequence structure of vertebrate enhancers.

PMCID: PMC3227105
PMID: 21875935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Sep;25(9):1527-38. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1037. Epub 2011 Aug 
11.

Estrogen induces c-myc gene expression via an upstream enhancer activated by the 
estrogen receptor and the AP-1 transcription factor.

Wang C(1), Mayer JA, Mazumdar A, Fertuck K, Kim H, Brown M, Brown PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

c-myc oncogene is implicated in tumorigenesis of many cancers, including breast
cancer. Although c-myc is a well-known estrogen-induced gene, its promoter has no
estrogen-response element, and the underlying mechanism by which estrogen induces
its expression remains obscure. Recent genome-wide studies by us and others
suggested that distant elements may mediate estrogen induction of gene
expression. In this study, we investigated the molecular mechanism by which
estrogen induces c-myc expression with a focus on these distal elements. Estrogen
rapidly induced c-myc expression in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer
cells. Although estrogen had little effect on c-myc proximal promoter activity,
it did stimulate the activity of a luciferase reporter containing a distal 67-kb 
enhancer. Estrogen induction of this luciferase reporter was dependent upon both 
a half-estrogen response element and an activator protein 1 (AP-1) site within
this enhancer, which are conserved across 11 different mammalian species. Small
interfering RNA experiments and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated
the necessity of ER and AP-1 cross talk for estrogen to induce c-myc expression. 
TAM67, the AP-1 dominant negative, partially inhibited estrogen induction of
c-myc expression and suppressed estrogen-induced cell cycle progression.
Together, these results demonstrate a novel pathway of estrogen regulation of
gene expression by cooperation between ER and AP-1 at the distal enhancer element
and that AP-1 is involved in estrogen induction of the c-myc oncogene. These
results solve the long-standing question in the field of endocrinology of how
estrogen induces c-myc expression.

PMCID: PMC3165912
PMID: 21835891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Nat Genet. 2011 Aug 7;43(9):875-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.907.

Frequent mutations of chromatin remodeling genes in transitional cell carcinoma
of the bladder.

Gui Y(1), Guo G, Huang Y, Hu X, Tang A, Gao S, Wu R, Chen C, Li X, Zhou L, He M, 
Li Z, Sun X, Jia W, Chen J, Yang S, Zhou F, Zhao X, Wan S, Ye R, Liang C, Liu Z, 
Huang P, Liu C, Jiang H, Wang Y, Zheng H, Sun L, Liu X, Jiang Z, Feng D, Chen J, 
Wu S, Zou J, Zhang Z, Yang R, Zhao J, Xu C, Yin W, Guan Z, Ye J, Zhang H, Li J,
Kristiansen K, Nickerson ML, Theodorescu D, Li Y, Zhang X, Li S, Wang J, Yang H, 
Wang J, Cai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Male Reproductive Medicine and
Genetics, Institute of Urology, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen
PKU-HKUST Medical Center, Shenzhen, China.

Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) is the most common type of bladder cancer. Here
we sequenced the exomes of nine individuals with TCC and screened all the
somatically mutated genes in a prevalence set of 88 additional individuals with
TCC with different tumor stages and grades. In our study, we discovered a variety
of genes previously unknown to be mutated in TCC. Notably, we identified genetic 
aberrations of the chromatin remodeling genes (UTX, MLL-MLL3, CREBBP-EP300,
NCOR1, ARID1A and CHD6) in 59% of our 97 subjects with TCC. Of these genes, we
showed UTX to be altered substantially more frequently in tumors of low stages
and grades, highlighting its potential role in the classification and diagnosis
of bladder cancer. Our results provide an overview of the genetic basis of TCC
and suggest that aberration of chromatin regulation might be a hallmark of
bladder cancer.

PMID: 21822268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Immunol. 2011 Sep 1;187(5):2476-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003243. Epub 2011
Aug 1.

Krüppel-associated box-associated protein 1 negatively regulates TNF-a-induced
NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional activity by influencing the interactions among STAT3, p300,
and NF-<U+03BA>B/p65.

Kamitani S(1), Togi S, Ikeda O, Nakasuji M, Sakauchi A, Sekine Y, Muromoto R,
Oritani K, Matsuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.

Krüppel-associated box-associated protein 1 (KAP1) is thought to act mainly as a 
scaffold for protein complexes, which together silence transcription by
triggering the formation of heterochromatin. Using small interfering RNA-mediated
KAP1 knockdown, we found that endogenous KAP1 negatively regulated TNF-a-induced 
IL-6 production in HeLa cells. KAP1 is likely to modulate the binding of NF-<U+03BA>B to
the IL-6 promoter because KAP1 knockdown enhanced TNF-a-induced NF-<U+03BA>B-luciferase 
activity, but not I<U+03BA>Ba degradation. Of importance, we found negative regulatory
effects of KAP1 on the serine phosphorylation of STAT3, the acetylation of
NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 by p300, and the nuclear localization of NF-<U+03BA>B/p65. In addition, KAP1
associated with NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 and inhibited the binding between NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 and p300.
Thus, KAP1 is likely to negatively control the acetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B/p65, which is
critical for its nuclear retention. Taken together, KAP1 modulated the
acetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 by interfering with the interactions among STAT3, p300, 
and NF-<U+03BA>B/p65, resulting in reduced IL-6 production after TNF-a stimulation. Our 
findings that KAP1 directly interacts with transcriptional factors are new, and
will inform further research to elucidate KAP1 function.

PMID: 21810609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Brain Res Bull. 2011 Oct 10;86(3-4):189-94. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2011.07.010. Epub 2011 Jul 22.

Candidate genes influencing sensitivity and resistance of human glioblastoma to
Semustine.

Zhao Z(1), Liu Y, He H, Chen X, Chen J, Lu YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, ChangZheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: The prognosis of glioblastoma (GBM) is poor. The therapeutic outcome
of conventional surgical and adjuvant treatments remains unsatisfactory, and
therefore individualized adjuvant chemotherapy has aroused more attention.
Microarrays have been applied to study mechanism of GBM development and
progression but it has difficulty in determining responsible genes from the
plethora of genes on microarrays unrelated to outcome. The present study was
attempted to use bioinformatics method to investigate candidate genes that may
influence chemosensitivity of GBM to Semustine (Me-CCNU).
METHODS: Clinical data of 4 GBM patients in Affymetrix microarray were perfected 
through long-term follow-up study. Differential expression genes between the
long- and short-survival groups were picked out, GO-analysis and pathway-analysis
of the differential expression genes were performed. Me-CCNU-related signal
transduction networks were constructed. The methods combined three steps before
were used to screen core genes that influenced Me-CCNU chemosensitivity in GBM.
RESULTS: In Affymetrix microarray there were altogether 2018 differential
expression genes that influenced survival duration of GBM. Of them, 934 genes
were up-regulated and 1084 down-regulated. They mainly participated in 94
pathways. Me-CCNU-related signal transduction networks were constructed. The
total number of genes in the networks was 466, of which 66 were also found in
survival duration-related differential expression genes. Studied key genes
through GO-analysis, pathway-analysis and in the Me-CCNU-related signal
transduction networks, 25 core genes that influenced chemosensitivity of GBM to
Me-CCNU were obtained, including TP53, MAP2K2, EP300, PRKCA, TNF, CCND1, AKT2,
RBL1, CDC2, ID2, RAF1, CDKN2C, FGFR1, SP1, CDK6, IGFBP3, MDM4, PDGFD, SOCS2,
CCNG2, CDK2, SDC2, STMN1, TCF7L1, TUBB.
CONCLUSION: Bioinformatics may help excavate and analyze large amounts of data in
microarrays by means of rigorous experimental planning, scientific statistical
analysis and collection of complete data about survival of GBM patients. In the
present study, a novel differential gene expression pattern was constructed and
advanced study will provide new targets for chemosensitivity of GBM.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21807073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Nature. 2011 Jul 27;476(7360):298-303. doi: 10.1038/nature10351.

Frequent mutation of histone-modifying genes in non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Morin RD(1), Mendez-Lago M, Mungall AJ, Goya R, Mungall KL, Corbett RD, Johnson
NA, Severson TM, Chiu R, Field M, Jackman S, Krzywinski M, Scott DW, Trinh DL,
Tamura-Wells J, Li S, Firme MR, Rogic S, Griffith M, Chan S, Yakovenko O, Meyer
IM, Zhao EY, Smailus D, Moksa M, Chittaranjan S, Rimsza L, Brooks-Wilson A,
Spinelli JJ, Ben-Neriah S, Meissner B, Woolcock B, Boyle M, McDonald H, Tam A,
Zhao Y, Delaney A, Zeng T, Tse K, Butterfield Y, Birol I, Holt R, Schein J,
Horsman DE, Moore R, Jones SJ, Connors JM, Hirst M, Gascoyne RD, Marra MA.

Author information: 
(1)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver,
British Columbia V5Z 1L3, Canada.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) are the two
most common non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs). Here we sequenced tumour and matched
normal DNA from 13 DLBCL cases and one FL case to identify genes with mutations
in B-cell NHL. We analysed RNA-seq data from these and another 113 NHLs to
identify genes with candidate mutations, and then re-sequenced tumour and matched
normal DNA from these cases to confirm 109 genes with multiple somatic mutations.
Genes with roles in histone modification were frequent targets of somatic
mutation. For example, 32% of DLBCL and 89% of FL cases had somatic mutations in 
MLL2, which encodes a histone methyltransferase, and 11.4% and 13.4% of DLBCL and
FL cases, respectively, had mutations in MEF2B, a calcium-regulated gene that
cooperates with CREBBP and EP300 in acetylating histones. Our analysis suggests a
previously unappreciated disruption of chromatin biology in lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC3210554
PMID: 21796119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Sep;31(18):3906-16. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05887-11. Epub 2011 Jul 
26.

p300-Dependent ATF5 acetylation is essential for Egr-1 gene activation and cell
proliferation and survival.

Liu DX(1), Qian D, Wang B, Yang JM, Lu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neural and Behavioural Sciences, Penn State University College 
of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. dliu@psu.edu

ATF5 has been shown to be a critical regulator of cell proliferation and
survival; however, the underlying mechanism remains largely unknown. We
demonstrate here that ATF5 interacts with the transcriptional coactivator p300,
which acetylates ATF5 at lysine-29 (K29), which in turn enhances the interaction 
between ATF5 and p300 and binding of the ATF5/p300 complex to the ATF5 response
element (ARE) region of the Egr-1 promoter. ARE-bound ATF5/p300 acetylates
lysine-14 (K14) of nucleosomal histone H3 at both the ARE and serum response
element (SRE) of the Egr-1 promoter, which facilitates binding of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-phosphorylated Elk-1 to the SRE, activating the
Egr-1 promoter. Interference of p300-dependent acetylation of ATF5 or nucleosomal
histone H3 or blockade of ERK-dependent Elk-1 phosphorylation abrogates
ATF5-dependent Egr-1 activation and cell proliferation and survival. These
findings assign a central role for the ATF5/p300 complex in ATF5 function and
suggest that coordinated actions by ATF5, p300, Elk-1, and ERK/mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) are essential for ATF5-dependent Egr-1 activation and cell 
proliferation and survival.

PMCID: PMC3165717
PMID: 21791614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22088. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022088. Epub 2011 Jul 15.

CBP/p300 and SIRT1 are involved in transcriptional regulation of S-phase specific
histone genes.

He H(1), Yu FX, Sun C, Luo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Singapore, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Histones constitute a type of essential nuclear proteins important
for chromatin structure and functions. The expression of major histones is
strictly confined to the S phase of a cell cycle and tightly coupled to DNA
replication.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: With RT-qPCR and ChIP assays, we investigated
transcriptional regulation of the S-phase specific histone genes and found that
the acetylation level of histones on core histone gene promoters fluctuated
during cell cycle in a pattern similar to RNA polymerase II association. Further,
we showed that CBP/p300 and SIRT1 were recruited to histone gene promoters in an 
NPAT-dependent manner, knockdown of which affected histone acetylation on histone
gene promoters and histone gene transcription.
SIGNIFICANCE: These observations contribute to further understanding of the
mechanism by which the expression of canonical histone genes is regulated, and
also implicate a link between histone expression and DNA damage repair and cell
metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3137613
PMID: 21789216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Science. 2011 Aug 5;333(6043):765-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1201662. Epub 2011 Jul 
14.

The leukemogenicity of AML1-ETO is dependent on site-specific lysine acetylation.

Wang L(1), Gural A, Sun XJ, Zhao X, Perna F, Huang G, Hatlen MA, Vu L, Liu F, Xu 
H, Asai T, Xu H, Deblasio T, Menendez S, Voza F, Jiang Y, Cole PA, Zhang J,
Melnick A, Roeder RG, Nimer SD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology and Chemistry Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The chromosomal translocations found in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) generate
oncogenic fusion transcription factors with aberrant transcriptional regulatory
properties. Although therapeutic targeting of most leukemia fusion proteins
remains elusive, the posttranslational modifications that control their function 
could be targetable. We found that AML1-ETO, the fusion protein generated by the 
t(8;21) translocation, is acetylated by the transcriptional coactivator p300 in
leukemia cells isolated from t(8;21) AML patients, and that this acetylation is
essential for its self-renewal-promoting effects in human cord blood CD34(+)
cells and its leukemogenicity in mouse models. Inhibition of p300 abrogates the
acetylation of AML1-ETO and impairs its ability to promote leukemic
transformation. Thus, lysine acetyltransferases represent a potential therapeutic
target in AML.

PMCID: PMC3251012
PMID: 21764752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Cancer Lett. 2011 Nov 28;310(2):140-7. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.06.030. Epub
2011 Jul 1.

High expression of p300 in HCC predicts shortened overall survival in association
with enhanced epithelial mesenchymal transition of HCC cells.

Yokomizo C(1), Yamaguchi K, Itoh Y, Nishimura T, Umemura A, Minami M, Yasui K,
Mitsuyoshi H, Fujii H, Tochiki N, Nakajima T, Okanoue T, Yoshikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medical Science,
Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

P300 impacts the transcription of several genes involved in biological behavior
of human malignancies including hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC). We found p300 is
highly expressed in 47% of surgically resected HCC specimens by
immunohistochemistry, which correlated with advanced TNM staging (P = 0.034),
vascular invasion (P = 0.036), intrahepatic metastasis (P = 0.001) and shortened 
overall survival (P = 0.028). In vitro study, knocking down of p300 expression in
hepatoma cells recovered E-cadherin expression, inhibited the translocation of
beta (ß)-catenin into the nuclei, decreased cyclin D1 activity and suppressed the
migration/invasion of HCC cells. Furthermore, suppression of p300 led to
down-regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related molecules such
as Snail, Twist and HIF-1 alpha. These observations suggest that p300 contributes
to the EMT-related progression of HCCs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21764211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Circ J. 2011;75(9):2151-9. Epub 2011 Jul 8.

A natural p300-specific histone acetyltransferase inhibitor, curcumin, in
addition to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, exerts beneficial effects on
left ventricular systolic function after myocardial infarction in rats.

Sunagawa Y(1), Morimoto T, Wada H, Takaya T, Katanasaka Y, Kawamura T, Yanagi S, 
Marui A, Sakata R, Shimatsu A, Kimura T, Kakeya H, Fujita M, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Japan.

BACKGROUND: A natural p300-specific histone acetyltransferase (HAT) inhibitor,
curcumin, may have therapeutic potential for heart failure. However, it is
unclear whether curcumin exhibits beneficial additive or synergistic effects on
conventional therapy with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Rats were subjected to a sham operation or left coronary
artery ligation. One week later, 34 rats with a moderate sized myocardial
infarction (MI) were randomly assigned to 4 groups: solvents as control (n = 8), 
enalapril (an ACEI, 10 mg·kg<U+207B>¹·day<U+207B>¹) alone (n=8), curcumin (50 mg·kg<U+207B>¹·day<U+207B>¹)
alone (n = 9) and enalapril plus curcumin (n = 9). Daily oral treatment was
repeated and continued for 6 weeks. Echocardiographic data were similar among the
4 groups before treatment. After treatment, left ventricular (LV) fractional
shortening (FS) was significantly higher in the enalapril (29.0 ± 1.9%) and
curcumin (30.8 ± 1.7%) groups than in the vehicle group (19.7 ± 1.6%). Notably,
LVFS further increased in the enalapril/curcumin combination group (34.4 ± 1.8%).
Histologically, cardiomyocyte diameter in the non-infarct area was smaller in the
enalapril/curcumin combination group than in the enalapril group. Perivascular
fibrosis was significantly reduced in the enalapril/curcumin group compared with 
the curcumin group.
CONCLUSIONS: A natural non-toxic dietary compound, curcumin, combined with an
ACEI exerts beneficial effects on post-MI LV systolic function in rats.

PMID: 21737953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Blood. 2011 Aug 18;118(7):1865-76. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-326199. Epub 2011
Jun 24.

HTLV-1 bZIP factor enhances TGF-ß signaling through p300 coactivator.

Zhao T(1), Satou Y, Sugata K, Miyazato P, Green PL, Imamura T, Matsuoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virus Control, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is an oncogenic retrovirus that is
etiologically associated with adult T-cell leukemia. The HTLV-1 bZIP factor
(HBZ), which is encoded by the minus strand of the provirus, is involved in both 
regulation of viral gene transcription and T-cell proliferation. We showed in
this report that HBZ interacted with Smad2/3, and enhanced transforming growth
factor-ß (TGF-ß)/Smad transcriptional responses in a p300-dependent manner. The
N-terminal LXXLL motif of HBZ was responsible for HBZ-mediated TGF-ß signaling
activation. In a serial immunoprecipitation assay, HBZ, Smad3, and p300 formed a 
ternary complex, and the association between Smad3 and p300 was markedly enhanced
in the presence of HBZ. In addition, HBZ could overcome the repression of the
TGF-ß response by Tax. Finally, HBZ expression resulted in enhanced transcription
of Pdgfb, Sox4, Ctgf, Foxp3, Runx1, and Tsc22d1 genes and suppression of the Id2 
gene; such effects were similar to those by TGF-ß. In particular, HBZ induced
Foxp3 expression in naive T cells through Smad3-dependent TGF-ß signaling. Our
results suggest that HBZ, by enhancing TGF-ß signaling and Foxp3 expression,
enables HTLV-1 to convert infected T cells into regulatory T cells, which is
thought to be a critical strategy for virus persistence.

PMCID: PMC3158717
PMID: 21705495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Oct;63(10):2905-17. doi: 10.1002/art.30504.

Cytosolic phospholipase A2 induction and prostaglandin E2 release by
interleukin-1ß via the myeloid differentiation factor 88-dependent pathway and
cooperation of p300, Akt, and NF-<U+03BA>B activity in human rheumatoid arthritis
synovial fibroblasts.

Chi PL(1), Luo SF, Hsieh HL, Lee IT, Hsiao LD, Chen YL, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: Cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) is a rate-limiting enzyme that
plays a critical role in the biosynthesis of eicosanoids. The aim of this study
was to investigate the mechanisms underlying interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß)-induced cPLA2
expression in human rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RASFs).
METHODS: Synovial tissue was obtained from patients with RA who were undergoing
joint replacement surgery. In a mouse model of IL-1ß-mediated inflammatory
arthritis, neutrophil infiltration, bone erosion, and cPLA2 expression in ankle
synovium were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. IL-1ß-induced cPLA2 expression
was determined by Western blotting, real-time polymerase chain reaction, and gene
promoter assay using pharmacologic inhibitors and transfection with short hairpin
RNAs or small interfering RNAs. The recruitment of NF-<U+03BA>B and p300 to the cPLA2
promoter was determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Prostaglandin E2 
(PGE2) biosynthesis was evaluated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: IL-1ß-induced cPLA2 expression and PGE2 release were mediated through a 
myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88)/c-Src-dependent matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)/heparin-binding epidermal growth factor (HB-EGF) cascade 
linking to transactivation of the EGF receptor (EGFR)/phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI 3-kinase)/Akt, p300, and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 pathways. IL-1ß also stimulated
Akt phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. Activation of Akt eventually led
to the acetylation of histone residues by phosphorylation and recruitment of p300
and enhanced its histone acetyltransferase activity on the NF-<U+03BA>B elements of the 
cPLA2 promoter. IL-1ß-induced NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional activity was mediated through
a PI 3-kinase/Akt-dependent cascade. Up-regulation of cPLA2 by IL-1ß increased
PGE(2) biosynthesis in RASFs.
CONCLUSION: IL-1ß-induced cPLA2 expression is mediated through activation of the 
MyD88/c-Src, MMP/HB-EGF, EGFR/PI 3-kinase/Akt, p300, and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways. These
results provide insights into the mechanisms underlying IL-1ß-enhanced joint
inflammatory responses in RA and may inspire new targeted therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21702012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. BMC Gastroenterol. 2011 Jun 14;11:71. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-11-71.

Sphere-forming cell subpopulations with cancer stem cell properties in human
hepatoma cell lines.

Cao L(1), Zhou Y, Zhai B, Liao J, Xu W, Zhang R, Li J, Zhang Y, Chen L, Qian H,
Wu M, Yin Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are regarded as the cause of tumor formation
and recurrence. The isolation and identification of CSCs could help to develop
novel therapeutic strategies specifically targeting CSCs.
METHODS: Human hepatoma cell lines were plated in stem cell conditioned culture
system allowed for sphere forming. To evaluate the stemness characteristics of
spheres, the self-renewal, proliferation, chemoresistance, tumorigenicity of the 
PLC/PRF/5 sphere-forming cells, and the expression levels of stem cell related
proteins in the PLC/PRF/5 sphere-forming cells were assessed, comparing with the 
parental cells. The stem cell RT-PCR array was performed to further explore the
biological properties of liver CSCs.
RESULTS: The PLC/PRF/5, MHCC97H and HepG2 cells could form clonal nonadherent 3-D
spheres and be serially passaged. The PLC/PRF/5 sphere-forming cells possessed a 
key criteria that define CSCs: persistent self-renewal, extensive proliferation, 
drug resistance, overexpression of liver CSCs related proteins (Oct3/4, OV6,
EpCAM, CD133 and CD44). Even 500 sphere-forming cells were able to form tumors in
NOD/SCID mice, and the tumor initiating capability was not decreased when spheres
were passaged. Besides, downstream proteins DTX1 and Ep300 of the CSL (CBF1 in
humans, Suppressor of hairless in Drosophila and LAG1 in C. elegans) -independent
Notch signaling pathway were highly expressed in the spheres, and a
gamma-secretase inhibitor MRK003 could significantly inhibit the sphere formation
ability.
CONCLUSIONS: Nonadherent tumor spheres from hepatoma cell lines cultured in stem 
cell conditioned medium possess liver CSC properties, and the CSL-independent
Notch signaling pathway may play a role in liver CSCs.

PMCID: PMC3136412
PMID: 21669008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e19778. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019778. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Genome-wide profiling of H3K56 acetylation and transcription factor binding sites
in human adipocytes.

Lo KA(1), Bauchmann MK, Baumann AP, Donahue CJ, Thiede MA, Hayes LS, des Etages
SA, Fraenkel E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The growing epidemic of obesity and metabolic diseases calls for a better
understanding of adipocyte biology. The regulation of transcription in adipocytes
is particularly important, as it is a target for several therapeutic approaches. 
Transcriptional outcomes are influenced by both histone modifications and
transcription factor binding. Although the epigenetic states and binding sites of
several important transcription factors have been profiled in the mouse 3T3-L1
cell line, such data are lacking in human adipocytes. In this study, we
identified H3K56 acetylation sites in human adipocytes derived from mesenchymal
stem cells. H3K56 is acetylated by CBP and p300, and deacetylated by SIRT1, all
are proteins with important roles in diabetes and insulin signaling. We found
that while almost half of the genome shows signs of H3K56 acetylation, the
highest level of H3K56 acetylation is associated with transcription factors and
proteins in the adipokine signaling and Type II Diabetes pathways. In order to
discover the transcription factors that recruit acetyltransferases and
deacetylases to sites of H3K56 acetylation, we analyzed DNA sequences near H3K56 
acetylated regions and found that the E2F recognition sequence was enriched.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing, we
confirmed that genes bound by E2F4, as well as those by HSF-1 and C/EBPa, have
higher than expected levels of H3K56 acetylation, and that the transcription
factor binding sites and acetylation sites are often adjacent but rarely overlap.
We also discovered a significant difference between bound targets of C/EBPa in
3T3-L1 and human adipocytes, highlighting the need to construct species-specific 
epigenetic and transcription factor binding site maps. This is the first
genome-wide profile of H3K56 acetylation, E2F4, C/EBPa and HSF-1 binding in human
adipocytes, and will serve as an important resource for better understanding
adipocyte transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC3107206
PMID: 21655096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Nat Commun. 2011;2:330. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1332.

TRAF6 ubiquitinates TGFß type I receptor to promote its cleavage and nuclear
translocation in cancer.

Mu Y(1), Sundar R, Thakur N, Ekman M, Gudey SK, Yakymovych M, Hermansson A,
Dimitriou H, Bengoechea-Alonso MT, Ericsson J, Heldin CH, Landström M.

Author information: 
(1)Rudbeck Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, SE-751
85 Uppsala, Sweden.

Transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) is a pluripotent cytokine promoting
epithelial cell plasticity during morphogenesis and tumour progression. TGFß
binding to type II and type I serine/threonine kinase receptors (TßRII and TßRI) 
causes activation of different intracellular signaling pathways. TßRI is
associated with the ubiquitin ligase tumor necrosis factor receptor
(TNFR)-associated factor 6 (TRAF6). Here we show that TGFß, via TRAF6, causes
Lys63-linked polyubiquitination of TßRI, promoting cleavage of TßRI by TNF-alpha 
converting enzyme (TACE), in a PKC<U+03B6>-dependent manner. The liberated intracellular
domain (ICD) of TßRI associates with the transcriptional regulator p300 to
activate genes involved in tumour cell invasiveness, such as Snail and MMP2.
Moreover, TGFß-induced invasion of cancer cells is TACE- and PKC<U+03B6>- dependent and 
the TßRI ICD is localized in the nuclei of different kinds of tumour cells in
tissue sections. Thus, our data reveal a specific role for TßRI in TGFß mediated 
tumour invasion.

PMCID: PMC3113296
PMID: 21629263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Jun;18(6):742-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2060. Epub 2011 May 
29.

The nucleosome map of the mammalian liver.

Li Z(1), Schug J, Tuteja G, White P, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Binding to nucleosomal DNA is critical for 'pioneer' transcription factors such
as the winged-helix transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 to regulate chromatin
structure and gene activation. Here we report the genome-wide map of nucleosome
positions in the mouse liver, with emphasis on transcriptional start sites, CpG
islands, Foxa2 binding sites and their correlation with gene expression. Despite 
the heterogeneity of liver tissue, we could clearly discern the nucleosome
pattern of the predominant liver cell, the hepatocyte. By analyzing nucleosome
occupancy and the distributions of heterochromatin protein 1 (Hp1), CBP (also
known as Crebbp) and p300 (Ep300) in Foxa1- and Foxa2-deficient livers, we find
that the maintenance of nucleosome position and chromatin structure surrounding
Foxa2 binding sites is independent of Foxa1 and Foxa2.

PMCID: PMC3148658
PMID: 21623366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Mar;227(3):1081-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22824.

AMP-activated protein kinase inhibits TGF-ß-induced fibrogenic responses of
hepatic stellate cells by targeting transcriptional coactivator p300.

Lim JY(1), Oh MA, Kim WH, Sohn HY, Park SI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intractable Diseases, Center for Biomedical Sciences, National
Institute of Health, Chungcheongbuk-do, Korea.

Liver fibrosis is a common consequence of various chronic liver injuries,
including virus infection and ethanol. Activated hepatic stellate cells (HSCs)
contribute to liver fibrosis through the accumulation of extracellular matrix
proteins, including type I alpha collagen (COL1A). The activation of adenosine
monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) modulates HSCs activation, but its 
underlying mechanism remains unclear. Here, we report that AMPK inhibits
transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß-induced fibrogenic property of HSCs by
regulating transcriptional coactivator p300. We treated human (LX-2) and rat
(CFSC-2G) HSC lines with TGF-ß to induce fibrogenic activation of HSCs.
Pharmacological activation of AMPK by treatment with
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-4-ribofuranoside (AICAR), metformin, or
adiponectin lowered TGF-ß-induced expression of COL1A and myofibroblast marker
alpha-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA). Transient transduction of constitutively
active AMPKa (caAMPKa) was sufficient to attenuate COL1A and a-SMA expression,
whereas an AMPK inhibitor considerably abrogated the inhibitory effect of AICAR
on fibrogenic gene expression. Although AMPK significantly suppressed
Smad-dependent transcription, it did not affect TGF-ß-stimulated phosphorylation,
nuclear localization, or DNA-binding activity of Smad2/3. AICAR rather attenuated
TGF-ß-induced Smad3 interaction with transcriptional coactivator p300
accompanying with reduction of Smad3 acetylation. Moreover, AICAR induced not
only physical interaction between AMPK and p300 but also proteasomal degradation 
of p300 protein. Our data provide substantial evidence that AMPK could be a novel
therapeutic target for treatment of liver fibrosis, by demonstrating the
underlying mechanism of AMPK-induced antifibrotic function in HSCs.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21567395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jun 3;409(2):211-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.121. Epub 2011 May 3.

The activation of p38 MAPK primarily contributes to UV-induced RhoB expression by
recruiting the c-Jun and p300 to the distal CCAAT box of the RhoB promoter.

Ahn J(1), Choi JH, Won M, Kang CM, Gyun MR, Park HM, Kim CH, Chung KS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Center, KRIBB, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.

The Ras-related small GTP-binding protein RhoB is rapidly induced in response to 
genotoxic stresses caused by ionizing radiation. It is known that UV-induced RhoB
expression results from the binding of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2)
via NF-Y to the inverted CCAAT box (-23) of the RhoB promoter. Here, we show that
the association of c-Jun with the distal CCAAT box (-72) is primarily involved in
UV-induced RhoB expression and p38 MAPK regulated RhoB induction through the
distal CCAAT box. UV-induced RhoB expression and apoptosis were markedly
attenuated by pretreatment with the p38 MAPK inhibitor. siRNA knockdown of RhoB, 
ATF2 and c-Jun resulted in decreased RhoB expression and eventually restored the 
growth of UV-irradiated Jurkat cells. In the reporter assay using luciferase
under the RhoB promoter, inhibition of RhoB promoter activity by the p38
inhibitor and knockdown of c-Jun using siRNA occurred through the distal CCAAT
box. Immunoprecipitation and DNA affinity protein binding assays revealed the
association of c-Jun and p300 via NF-YA and the dissociation of histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) via c-Jun recruitment to the CCAAT boxes of the RhoB
promoter. These results suggest that the activation of p38 MAPK primarily
contributes to UV-induced RhoB expression by recruiting the c-Jun and p300
proteins to the distal CCAAT box of the RhoB promoter in Jurkat cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21565167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Blood. 2011 Jul 7;118(1):69-79. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-09-307942. Epub 2011 May 
9.

Crebbp haploinsufficiency in mice alters the bone marrow microenvironment,
leading to loss of stem cells and excessive myelopoiesis.

Zimmer SN(1), Zhou Q, Zhou T, Cheng Z, Abboud-Werner SL, Horn D, Lecocke M, White
R, Krivtsov AV, Armstrong SA, Kung AL, Livingston DM, Rebel VI.

Author information: 
(1)Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute, San Antonio, TX, USA.

CREB-binding protein (CREBBP) is important for the cell-autonomous regulation of 
hematopoiesis, including the stem cell compartment. In the present study, we show
that CREBBP plays an equally pivotal role in microenvironment-mediated regulation
of hematopoiesis. We found that the BM microenvironment of Crebbp(+/-) mice was
unable to properly maintain the immature stem cell and progenitor cell pools.
Instead, it stimulates myeloid differentiation, which progresses into a
myeloproliferation phenotype. Alterations in the BM microenvironment resulting
from haploinsufficiency of Crebbp included a marked decrease in trabecular bone
that was predominantly caused by increased osteoclastogenesis. Although
CFU-fibroblast (CFU-F) and total osteoblast numbers were decreased, the bone
formation rate was similar to that found in wild-type mice. At the molecular
level, we found that the known hematopoietic modulators matrix metallopeptidase-9
(MMP9) and kit ligand (KITL) were decreased with heterozygous levels of Crebbp.
Lastly, potentially important regulatory proteins, endothelial cell adhesion
molecule 1 (ESAM1) and cadherin 5 (CDH5), were increased on Crebbp(+/-)
endothelial cells. Our findings reveal that a full dose of Crebbp is essential in
the BM microenvironment to maintain proper hematopoiesis and to prevent excessive
myeloproliferation.

PMCID: PMC3139388
PMID: 21555743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Urol Int. 2011;87(2):151-8. doi: 10.1159/000324262. Epub 2011 Apr 22.

Expression of ERß and its co-regulators p300 and NCoR in human transitional cell 
bladder cancer.

Kontos S(1), Papatsoris A, Kominea A, Melachrinou M, Tanoglidi A, Kachrilas S,
Karavitakis M, Balampani E, Sotiropoulou-Bonikou G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Histology, School of Medicine, University of Patras,
Patras, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: Several data support a possible role of estrogens in bladder
carcinogenesis, mediated mainly through estrogen receptor-ß (ERß). We study the
expression of ERß and its co-regulators p300 and nuclear co-repressor (NCoR) in
patients with bladder cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: One hundred and eleven consecutive patients (74 males and
37 females), aged 23-90 years (mean 70 ± 10) diagnosed with transitional cell
bladder cancer were included in this study. The control group consisted of 29
patients that underwent transurethral prostatectomy and consented to simultaneous
bladder biopsies. Immunohistochemical studies took place on formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded sections from the TUR (transurethral resection) specimens. We
studied the expression of ERß, p300 and NCoR.<U+03C7>(2) test was used to evaluate the
relationship between the histological grade and ERß expression, grade and
co-regulators expression and grade and gender. Spearman rank correlation
coefficient (r) was used in order to estimate the direction and strength of
correlations between histological grade and ERß-p300-NCoR expressions. The
Cochran-Armitage test for trend was applied in order to examine possible trends
across the ordered levels of histological grade.
RESULTS: ERß was more frequently expressed in the nucleus of normal bladder
epithelium compared to malignant bladder epithelium with statistical significant 
association (r = -0.25, p = 0.003). The p300 was expressed only in the nucleus of
bladder cancer cells and a positive correlation between molecular expression and 
cancer progression was demonstrated (r = 0.55, p < 0.001). NCoR immunostaining
was demonstrated in the nuclei of bladder cells. Nuclear staining was
significantly higher in normal tissue than in cancer cells (r = -0.33, p <
0.001), with negative correlation. Furthermore, its expression in grade I tumors 
was significantly higher than in grade II (r = -0.46, p < 0.001) and grade III
tumors (r = -0.51, p < 0.001). Thus, like ERß, NCoR expression in bladder
epithelium decreased during cancer progression and loss of cell differentiation. 
There was no correlation between the levels of expression of the three proteins
in normal bladder epithelium, but there was an inverse correlation between the
nuclear expression of ERß and p300 in carcinomas (r = -3.88, p = 0.042).
Statistical significant association was established when correlating ERß
expression with NCoR expression (r = 0.273, p = 0.005), while co-regulators'
nuclear expression did not correlate with each other (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In bladder carcinogenesis, we demonstrated inhibition in the
expression of ERß and its co-repressor NCoR as well as increased expression of
the co-activator p300.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21525722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011 May;91(5):1538. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2011.02.005.

Invited commentary.

Wee JO(1), Colson YL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis St,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. jwee@partners.org

Comment on
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2011 May;91(5):1531-8.

PMID: 21524464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011 May;91(5):1531-8. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2010.12.012.

High expression of p300 has an unfavorable impact on survival in resectable
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Li Y(1), Yang HX, Luo RZ, Zhang Y, Li M, Wang X, Jia WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou City, Guangdong Province, People's Republic of China.

Comment in
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2011 May;91(5):1538.

BACKGROUND: p300 is a transcriptional regulator that is involved in fundamental
processes such as cell proliferation, cell differentiation, and tumor
progression. However, its role and clinical significance in resectable esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has not been elucidated. The purpose of this study
was to explore whether there was a correlation between the expression of p300 by 
immunohistochemistry and the clinical outcome of a group of patients with ESCC
treated with surgical resection.
METHODS: Tissue microarray that included 240 surgically resected ESCC specimens
and 56 cases of paracancerous tissues was successfully generated for
immunohistochemical evaluation. The clinical and prognostic significance of p300 
expression was analyzed statistically. Kaplan-Meier analysis was used to compare 
the postoperative survival between groups.
RESULTS: The expression frequency and expression levels of p300 were
significantly higher in ESCC specimens (62.5%, 150 of 240) than in normal
esophageal mucosa (8.9%, 5 of 56; p<0.001). Increased p300 expression was
associated with higher histologic grade (p=0.012), T category (p=0.032), and N
category (p=0.013). Patients with low expression of p300 demonstrated higher
overall survival compared with those with high expression of p300 (mean, 80.0
months versus 56.9 months; p<0.001). A similar result was observed for
disease-free survival (mean, 78.3 months versus 53.1 months; p<0.001).
Furthermore, p300 expression could stratify the patient survival (disease-free
survival and overall survival) in stage II (p=0.002, 0.003, respectively).
Multivariate analysis showed that the level of p300 expression was an independent
prognostic factor in ESCC (relative risk, 1.658; p=0.017).
CONCLUSIONS: High expression of p300 suggests poor prognosis for patients with
resectable ESCC.

Copyright © 2011 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21524463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Aug;226(8):2103-14. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22537.

Activation and induction of cytosolic phospholipase A2 by TNF-a mediated through 
Nox2, MAPKs, NF-<U+03BA>B, and p300 in human tracheal smooth muscle cells.

Lee CW(1), Lin CC, Lee IT, Lee HC, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Division of Basic Medical Sciences, Chronic Diseases
and Health Promotion Research Center, Chang Gung Institute of Technology,
Chia-Yi, Taiwan.

Cytosolic phospholipase A(2) (cPLA(2)) plays a pivotal role in mediating
agonist-induced arachidonic acid (AA) release for prostaglandin (PG) synthesis
during inflammation triggered by tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a). However, the
mechanisms underlying TNF-a-induced cPLA(2) expression and PGE(2) synthesis in
human tracheal smooth muscle cells (HTSMCs) remain unknown. Here, we report that 
TNF-a-induced cPLA(2) protein and mRNA expression, PGE(2) production, and
phosphorylation of p42/p44 MAPK, p38 MAPK, and JNK1/2, which were attenuated by
pretreatment with a ROS scavenger [N-acetyl-L-cysteine, (NAC)] and the inhibitors
of NADPH oxidase [apocynin (APO) and diphenyleneiodonium chloride (DPI)], MEK1/2 
(U0126), p38 MAPK (SB202190), and JNK1/2 (SP600125) or transfection with siRNA of
Nox2, p47(phox) , MEK1, p42, p38, or JNK2. TNF-a-induced cPLA(2) expression was
also inhibited by pretreatment with a selective NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor [helenalin (HLN)]
or transfection with dominant negative mutants of NF-<U+03BA>B inducing kinase (NIK) or 
I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK)a/ß. TNF-a-induced NF-<U+03BA>B translocation was blocked by
pretreatment with NAC, DPI, APO, or HLN, but not by U0126, SB202190, or SP600125.
In addition, pretreatment with curcumin (a p300 inhibitor) or transfection with
p300 siRNA blocked cPLA(2) expression and PGE(2) synthesis induced by TNF-a. We
further confirmed that p300 was associated with the cPLA(2) promoter which was
dynamically linked to histone H4 acetylation stimulated by TNF-a, determined by
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Association of p300 and histone H4 to
cPLA(2) promoter was inhibited by U0126, SB202190, and SP600125. These results
suggested that in HTSMCs, activation of p47(phox) , MAPKs, NF-<U+03BA>B, and p300 is
essential for TNF-a-induced cPLA(2) expression and PGE(2) release.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21520062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. FEBS Lett. 2011 Jun 23;585(12):1778-82. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.012. Epub 
2011 Apr 18.

The ASPP proteins complex and cooperate with p300 to modulate the transcriptional
activity of p53.

Gillotin S(1), Lu X.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd., University of Oxford, The Nuffield 
Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Understanding how p53 is able to specifically respond to particular stress
signals and regulate many different signalling pathways remains a challenge.
Several studies have demonstrated that p53's interactions with different protein 
partners are essential for it to be able to coordinate specific responses. In
particular, the apoptotic pathway is regulated by p53 in cooperation with the
Apoptosis Stimulating Proteins of p53 (ASPP) proteins. In this study, we showed
that the ASPP proteins are able to bind and cooperate with p300, a well defined
co-factor of p53, to selectively regulate p53's transcriptional activity on
promoters such as p53-inducible gene 3 but not on p21waf1. This is the first
demonstration that the ASPPs can function together with p300 in regulating the
transcriptional activity of p53.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21513714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Urol. 2011 Jun;185(6):2366-75. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2011.02.017. Epub 2011 Apr
21.

Nicotinamide inhibits growth of carcinogen induced mouse bladder tumor and human 
bladder tumor xenograft through up-regulation of RUNX3 and p300.

Kim WJ(1), Lee JW, Quan C, Youn HJ, Kim HM, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Tumor Research and Department of Urology, College of Medicine,
Cheongju, South Korea. wjkim@chungbuk.ac.kr

Erratum in
    J Urol. 2011 Aug;186(2):762.

PURPOSE: Acetylation of chromatin interacting proteins is central to the
epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Various tumor suppressors are
inactivated by abnormal epigenetic modification. A great deal of effort has been 
devoted to developing anticancer agents that reactivate silenced tumor
suppressors by modulating chromatin structure. Studies show that histone
deacetylase inhibitors can act as anticancer agents and several histone
deacetylase inhibitors are currently in clinical trials. We noted that the tumor 
suppressor RUNX3 is inactivated by promoter hypermethylation in human bladder
cancer. We investigated whether reactivation of RUNX3 could suppress bladder
cancer development in an animal model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We analyzed RUNX3 reactivation and protein stabilization
by a mild inhibitor of class III histone deacetylases, nicotinamide, by
immunoprecipitation and immunoblot. Mouse bladder tumor was induced by
N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl) nitrosamine. The effect of nicotinamide on Runx3
methylation status and tumor growth was measured.
RESULTS: Nicotinamide induced RUNX3 expression at the transcriptional and
posttranslational levels in a carcinogen induced mouse bladder tumor model and in
human bladder tumor xenografts. Nicotinamide effectively inhibited the growth and
progression of bladder tumors without decreasing body weight.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that nicotinamide has preventive and therapeutic
effects on tumorigenesis through multiple mechanisms of RUNX3 expression
up-regulation.

Copyright © 2011 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21511279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2011 Jun;20(6):1204-12. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-11-0059. Epub 2011 Apr 14.

Multilocus association of genetic variants in MLL, CREBBP, EP300, and TOP2A with 
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia in Hispanics from Texas.

Piwkham D(1), Gelfond JA, Rerkamnuaychoke B, Pakakasama S, Rebel VI, Pollock BH, 
Winick NJ, Collier AB 3rd, Tomlinson GE, Beuten J.

Author information: 
(1)Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78229, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hispanic children have both a higher incidence and a poorer outcome
in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Moreover, a higher incidence for
therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia with 11q23 translocations after treatment 
with topoisomerase II (topo II) inhibitors has been observed in Hispanic children
with ALL. We sought to determine the potential role of genetic variants within
the topoisomerase IIa gene (TOP2A), within the mixed lineage leukemia gene (MLL) 
and two of its translocation partners, cyclin AMP response element-binding
protein gene (CREBBP) and E1A binding protein gene (EP300) in the increased
sensitivity of Hispanic children with ALL to topo II inhibitors.
METHODS: Fifty-two tagged single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) covering the four
genes were genotyped in 241 samples (66 children with ALL and 175 age matched
controls) of self-identified Hispanic origin.
RESULTS: Two SNPs within MLL (rs525549 and rs6589664) and three SNPs within EP300
(rs5758222, rs7286979, and rs20551) were significantly associated with ALL (P =
0.001-0.04). A significant gene-dosage effect for increasing numbers of potential
high-risk genotypes (OR = 16.66; P = 2 × 10(-5)) and a major haplotype
significantly associated with ALL (OR = 5.68; P = 2 × 10(-6)) were found.
Replication in a sample of 137 affected White children and 239 controls showed
that only rs6589664 (MLL) was significantly associated in this ethnic group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that the association between ALL and common
genetic variants within MLL and EP300 is population specific.
IMPACT: Replication of our findings in independent Hispanic populations is
warranted to elucidate the role of these variants in ALL susceptibility and
define their importance in the ethnic specific differences in ALL risk.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21493871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. BMC Med Genomics. 2011 Apr 14;4:34. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-4-34.

Discovering functional modules by identifying recurrent and mutually exclusive
mutational patterns in tumors.

Miller CA(1), Settle SH, Sulman EP, Aldape KD, Milosavljevic A.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Structural and Computational Biology and Molecular
Biophysics, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: Assays of multiple tumor samples frequently reveal recurrent genomic 
aberrations, including point mutations and copy-number alterations, that affect
individual genes. Analyses that extend beyond single genes are often restricted
to examining pathways, interactions and functional modules that are already
known.
METHODS: We present a method that identifies functional modules without any
information other than patterns of recurrent and mutually exclusive aberrations
(RME patterns) that arise due to positive selection for key cancer phenotypes.
Our algorithm efficiently constructs and searches networks of potential
interactions and identifies significant modules (RME modules) by using the
algorithmic significance test.
RESULTS: We apply the method to the TCGA collection of 145 glioblastoma samples, 
resulting in extension of known pathways and discovery of new functional modules.
The method predicts a role for EP300 that was previously unknown in glioblastoma.
We demonstrate the clinical relevance of these results by validating that
expression of EP300 is prognostic, predicting survival independent of age at
diagnosis and tumor grade.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed a sensitive, simple, and fast method for
automatically detecting functional modules in tumors based solely on patterns of 
recurrent genomic aberration. Due to its ability to analyze very large amounts of
diverse data, we expect it to be increasingly useful when applied to the many
tumor panels scheduled to be assayed in the near future.

PMCID: PMC3102606
PMID: 21489305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Arthritis Res Ther. 2011 Apr 7;13(2):R57. doi: 10.1186/ar3309.

Whole blood transcriptional profiling in ankylosing spondylitis identifies novel 
candidate genes that might contribute to the inflammatory and tissue-destructive 
disease aspects.

Pimentel-Santos FM(1), Ligeiro D, Matos M, Mourão AF, Costa J, Santos H, Barcelos
A, Godinho F, Pinto P, Cruz M, Fonseca JE, Guedes-Pinto H, Branco JC, Brown MA,
Thomas GP.

Author information: 
(1)CEDOC, Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Campo dos
Mártires da Pátria, n° 130, 1169-056 Lisboa, Portugal. pimentel.santos@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: A number of genetic-association studies have identified genes
contributing to ankylosing spondylitis (AS) susceptibility but such approaches
provide little information as to the gene activity changes occurring during the
disease process. Transcriptional profiling generates a 'snapshot' of the sampled 
cells' activity and thus can provide insights into the molecular processes
driving the disease process. We undertook a whole-genome microarray approach to
identify candidate genes associated with AS and validated these gene-expression
changes in a larger sample cohort.
METHODS: A total of 18 active AS patients, classified according to the New York
criteria, and 18 gender- and age-matched controls were profiled using Illumina
HT-12 whole-genome expression BeadChips which carry cDNAs for 48,000 genes and
transcripts. Class comparison analysis identified a number of differentially
expressed candidate genes. These candidate genes were then validated in a larger 
cohort using qPCR-based TaqMan low density arrays (TLDAs).
RESULTS: A total of 239 probes corresponding to 221 genes were identified as
being significantly different between patients and controls with a P-value
<0.0005 (80% confidence level of false discovery rate). Forty-seven genes were
then selected for validation studies, using the TLDAs. Thirteen of these genes
were validated in the second patient cohort with 12 downregulated 1.3- to 2-fold 
and only 1 upregulated (1.6-fold). Among a number of identified genes with
well-documented inflammatory roles we also validated genes that might be of great
interest to the understanding of AS progression such as SPOCK2 (osteonectin) and 
EP300, which modulate cartilage and bone metabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: We have validated a gene expression signature for AS from whole
blood and identified strong candidate genes that may play roles in both the
inflammatory and joint destruction aspects of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3132052
PMID: 21470430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Toxicol Sci. 2011 Apr;36(2):173-80.

Chromium (VI) inhibits mouse metallothionein-I gene transcription by modifying
the transcription potential of the co-activator p300.

Kimura T(1), Okumura F, Onodera A, Nakanishi T, Itoh N, Isobe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Setsunan
University, Japan. tomoki@pharm.setsunan.ac.jp

The production of the heavy metal-binding proteins, the metallothioneins (MTs),
is induced by heavy metals such as Zn, Cd, and Hg. MTs maintain Zn homeostasis
and attenuate heavy metal-induced cytotoxicity by sequestering these metals and
lowering their intracellular concentrations. Previously, we had reported that Zn 
induced the formation of a co-activator complex containing metal response
element-binding transcription factor-1 (MTF-1) and the histone acetyltransferase 
(HAT), p300, which plays an essential role in the activation of MT-1
transcription. In addition, we had shown that Cr(VI) inhibits Zn-induced MT-1
transcription by preventing the Zn-dependent formation of the MTF-1-p300 complex.
In the current study, we have shown that the inhibition by Cr(VI) was partially
overcome by the overexpression of p300 or MTF-1 in an MT-I promoter-driven
luciferase reporter assay system and have used real-time RT-PCR to determine MT-I
mRNA levels. It has been reported that Cr(VI) inhibits CYP1A1 transcription by
crosslinking histone deacetylase (HDAC) to the promoter. The crosslink inhibits
the recruitment of p300 to the MT-1 promoter and blocks HAT-dependent
transactivation by p300. However, our results demonstrate that trichostatin A, an
HDAC inhibitor, could not block the inhibitory effects of Cr(VI) on MT-1
transcription and that there were no significant differences in the in vitro
inhibitory effects of Cr(VI), Cr(III), and Zn on p300 HAT activity. This suggests
that the inhibitory effects of Cr(VI) on MT-I transcription may be due to its
effects on the HAT-independent transactivation ability rather than the
HAT-dependent, HDAC release-related transactivation ability of p300.

PMID: 21467744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 13;286(19):16967-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.218206. Epub
2011 Mar 22.

The type III histone deacetylase Sirt1 protein suppresses p300-mediated histone
H3 lysine 56 acetylation at Bclaf1 promoter to inhibit T cell activation.

Kong S(1), Kim SJ, Sandal B, Lee SM, Gao B, Zhang DD, Fang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The NAD-dependent histone deacetylase Sirt1 is a negative regulator of T cell
activation. Here we report that Sirt1 inhibits T cell activation by suppressing
the transcription of Bcl2-associated factor 1 (Bclaf1), a protein required for T 
cell activation. Sirt1-null T cells have increased acetylation of the histone 3
lysine 56 residue (H3K56) at the bclaf1 promoter, as well as increasing Bclaf1
transcription. Sirt1 binds to bclaf1 promoter upon T cell receptor (TCR)/CD28
stimulation by forming a complex with histone acetyltransferase p300 and NF-<U+03BA>B
transcription factor Rel-A. The recruitment of Sirt1, but not p300, requires
Rel-A because blocking Rel-A nuclear translocation in T cells and siRNA-mediated 
knockdown of Rel-A can inhibit Sirt1 binding to bclaf1 promoter. Although
knockdown of either p300 or GCN5 partially suppressed global H3K56 acetylation,
only p300 knockdown specifically attenuated H3K56 acetylation at the bclaf1
promoter. Lastly, knockdown of Bclaf1 suppresses the hyperactivation observed in 
Sirt1(-/-) T cells, indicated by less IL-2 production in CD4(+) T cells and
reduced proliferation. Therefore, Sirt1 negatively regulates T cell activation
via H3K56 deacetylation at the promoter region to inhibit transcription of
Bclaf1.

PMCID: PMC3089540
PMID: 21454709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Nat Neurosci. 2011 Apr;14(4):437-41. doi: 10.1038/nn.2780. Epub 2011 Mar 20.

HDAC-mediated deacetylation of NF-<U+03BA>B is critical for Schwann cell myelination.

Chen Y(1), Wang H, Yoon SO, Xu X, Hottiger MO, Svaren J, Nave KA, Kim HA, Olson
EN, Lu QR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for
Basic Neuroscience Research on Nerve Growth and Regeneration, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2011 Apr;14(4):401-3.

Schwann cell myelination is tightly regulated by timely expression of key
transcriptional regulators that respond to specific environmental cues, but the
molecular mechanisms underlying such a process are poorly understood. We found
that the acetylation state of NF-<U+03BA>B, which is regulated by histone deacetylases
(HDACs) 1 and 2, is critical for orchestrating the myelination program. Mice
lacking both HDACs 1 and 2 (HDAC1/2) exhibited severe myelin deficiency with
Schwann cell development arrested at the immature stage. NF-<U+03BA>B p65 became heavily
acetylated in HDAC1/2 mutants, inhibiting the expression of positive regulators
of myelination and inducing the expression of differentiation inhibitors. We
observed that the NF-<U+03BA>B protein complex switched from associating with p300 to
associating with HDAC1/2 as Schwann cells differentiated. NF-<U+03BA>B and HDAC1/2 acted
in a coordinated fashion to regulate the transcriptionally linked chromatin state
for Schwann cell myelination. Thus, our results reveal an HDAC-mediated
developmental switch for controlling myelination in the peripheral nervous
system.

PMCID: PMC3074381
PMID: 21423191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Nature. 2011 Mar 10;471(7337):189-95. doi: 10.1038/nature09730.

Inactivating mutations of acetyltransferase genes in B-cell lymphoma.

Pasqualucci L(1), Dominguez-Sola D, Chiarenza A, Fabbri G, Grunn A, Trifonov V,
Kasper LH, Lerach S, Tang H, Ma J, Rossi D, Chadburn A, Murty VV, Mullighan CG,
Gaidano G, Rabadan R, Brindle PK, Dalla-Favera R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA. lp171@columbia.edu

B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma comprises biologically and clinically distinct
diseases the pathogenesis of which is associated with genetic lesions affecting
oncogenes and tumour-suppressor genes. We report here that the two most common
types--follicular lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma--harbour frequent
structural alterations inactivating CREBBP and, more rarely, EP300, two highly
related histone and non-histone acetyltransferases (HATs) that act as
transcriptional co-activators in multiple signalling pathways. Overall, about 39%
of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and 41% of follicular lymphoma cases display
genomic deletions and/or somatic mutations that remove or inactivate the HAT
coding domain of these two genes. These lesions usually affect one allele,
suggesting that reduction in HAT dosage is important for lymphomagenesis. We
demonstrate specific defects in acetylation-mediated inactivation of the BCL6
oncoprotein and activation of the p53 tumour suppressor. These results identify
CREBBP/EP300 mutations as a major pathogenetic mechanism shared by common forms
of B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, with direct implications for the use of drugs
targeting acetylation/deacetylation mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3271441
PMID: 21390126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Oral Oncol. 2011 Mar;47(3):217-23. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2011.01.004.

Downregulation and translocation of nuclear ING4 is correlated with tumorigenesis
and progression of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Li XH(1), Kikuchi K, Zheng Y, Noguchi A, Takahashi H, Nishida T, Masuda S, Yang
XH, Takano Y.

Author information: 
(1)Kanagawa Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1-2 Nakao, Asahi-ku, Yokohama
241-0815, Japan.

ING4 (inhibitor of growth gene 4) is a new member of the ING gene family and is
implicated in chromatin remodeling and repression of cell growth. In order to
explore the roles of ING4 in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), ING4 
expression was assessed in 214 cases of HNSCC by immunohistochemistry using
tissue microarray, and in three oral SCC cell lines by immunohistochemistry and
Western blotting. Expression of ING4 was also compared to clinicopathological
variables, TUNEL assay staining, and the expression of several tumorigenic
markers. We found nuclear expression of ING4 was gradually decreased from
non-cancerous epithelium and dysplasia to HNSCC and was negatively correlated
with a poorly-differentiated status, T staging, and TNM staging in HNSCC. In
contrast, cytoplasmic expression of ING4 was significantly increased in HNSCC and
was significantly associated with lymph node metastasis and 14-3-3<U+03B7> expression.
In addition, nuclear expression of ING4 was positively correlated with p21 and
p300 expression and with the apoptotic index. These results suggest that the
decreases in nuclear ING4 may play important roles in tumorigenesis, progression 
and tumor differentiation in HNSCC. Increases in cytoplasmic ING4 may be due to
14-3-3<U+03B7> binding and may also be involved in malignant progression. Nuclear ING4
may modulate the transactivation of target genes, promoting apoptosis and cell
cycle arrest through interactions with p300 and p21.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21310648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Oncotarget. 2010 Aug;1(4):289-303.

p300- and Myc-mediated regulation of glioblastoma multiforme cell
differentiation.

Panicker SP(1), Raychaudhuri B, Sharma P, Tipps R, Mazumdar T, Mal AK, Palomo JM,
Vogelbaum MA, Haque SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Ohio 44195, USA.

Tumorigenic potential of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cells is, in part,
attributable to their undifferentiated (neural stem cell-like) phenotype.
Astrocytic differentiation of GBM cells is associated with transcriptional
induction of Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein (GFAP) and repression of Nestin,
whereas the reciprocal transcription program operates in undifferentiated GBM
cells. The molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of these transcription 
programs remain elusive. Here, we show that the transcriptional co-activator p300
was expressed in GBM tumors and cell lines and acted as an activator of the GFAP 
gene and a repressor of the Nestin gene. On the other hand, Myc (formerly known
as c-Myc overrode these p300 functions by repressing the GFAP gene and inducing
the Nestin gene in GBM cells. Moreover, RNAi-mediated inhibition of p300
expression significantly enhanced the invasion potential of GBM cells in vitro.
Taken together, these data suggest that dedifferentiated/undifferentiated GBM
cells are more invasive than differentiated GBM cells. Because invasion is a
major cause of GBM morbidity, differentiation therapy may improve the clinical
outcome.

PMCID: PMC3248108
PMID: 21304179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Feb;112(2):589-99. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22949.

Cigarette smoke extract regulates cytosolic phospholipase A2 expression via NADPH
oxidase/MAPKs/AP-1 and p300 in human tracheal smooth muscle cells.

Cheng SE(1), Lin CC, Lee IT, Hsu CK, Kou YR, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Up-regulation of cytosolic phospholipase A(2) (cPLA(2)) by cigarette smoke
extract (CSE) may play a critical role in airway inflammatory diseases. However, 
the mechanisms underlying CSE-induced cPLA(2) expression in human tracheal smooth
muscle cells (HTSMCs) were not completely understood. Here, we demonstrated that 
CSE-induced cPLA(2) protein and mRNA expression was inhibited by pretreatment
with the inhibitors of AP-1 (tanshinone IIA) and p300 (garcinol) or transfection 
with siRNAs of c-Jun, c-Fos, and p300. Moreover, CSE also induced c-Jun and c-Fos
expression, which were inhibited by pretreatment with the inhibitors of NADPH
oxidase (diphenyleneiodonium chloride and apocynin) and the ROS scavenger
(N-acetyl-L-cysteine) or transfection with siRNAs of p47(phox) and NADPH oxidase 
(NOX)2. CSE-induced c-Fos expression was inhibited by pretreatment with the
inhibitors of MEK1 (U0126) and p38 MAPK (SB202190) or transfection with siRNAs of
p42 and p38. CSE-induced c-Jun expression and phosphorylation were inhibited by
pretreatment with the inhibitor of JNK1/2 (SP600125) or transfection with JNK2
siRNA. CSE-stimulated p300 phosphorylation was inhibited by pretreatment with the
inhibitors of NADPH oxidase and JNK1/2. Furthermore, CSE-induced p300 and c-Jun
complex formation was inhibited by pretreatment with diphenyleneiodonium
chloride, apocynin, N-acetyl-L-cysteine or SP600125. These results demonstrated
that CSE-induced cPLA(2) expression was mediated through NOX2-dependent p42/p44
MAPK and p38 MAPK/c-Fos and JNK1/2/c-Jun/p300 pathways in HTSMCs.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21268080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Cancer Lett. 2011 Mar 1;302(1):76-83. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.12.018. Epub
2011 Jan 12.

A rearranged EP300 gene in the human B-cell lymphoma cell line RC-K8 encodes a
disabled transcriptional co-activator that contributes to cell growth and
oncogenicity.

Garbati MR(1), Thompson RC, Haery L, Gilmore TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Lett. 2012 Feb 1;315(1):96.

Human diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell line RC-K8 has an altered EP300 locus
that encodes a C-terminally truncated histone acetyltransferase (HAT) protein
(p300<U+0394>C). We now show that p300<U+0394>C contains 1047N-terminal amino acids of p300
fused to 25 amino acids encoded by sequences from chromosome 6. Over-expressed
p300<U+0394>C localized to nuclear subdomains and interacted with transcription factor
REL. p300<U+0394>C did not function as a co-activator for REL-directed transactivation, 
and blocked the ability of wild-type p300 to enhance transcriptional activation
by REL. Knock down of p300<U+0394>C in RC-K8 cells reduced their growth in both liquid
culture and soft agar. Truncations of p300 were not found in eight other
B-lymphoma cell lines. These results suggest that p300<U+0394>C contributes to the
oncogenic state of RC-K8 cells by acting as a defective co-activator.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3042717
PMID: 21232847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Cell Cycle. 2011 Jan 15;10(2):212-21. Epub 2011 Jan 15.

Double null cells reveal that CBP and p300 are dispensable for p53 targets p21
and Mdm2 but variably required for target genes of other signaling pathways.

Kasper LH(1), Thomas MC, Zambetti GP, Brindle PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
TN, USA.

The histone acetyltransferase coactivators CBP (CREBBP) and p300 (EP300) have
more than 400 described protein interaction partners and are implicated in
numerous transcriptional pathways. We have shown previously that CBP and p300
double knockout mutations in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (dKO MEFs) result in
mixed effects on cAMP-inducible gene expression, with many CREB target genes
requiring CBP/p300 for full expression, while others are unaffected or expressed 
better in their absence. Here we used CBP and p300 dKO MEFs to examine gene
expression in response to four other signals: DNA damage (via p53),
double-stranded RNA, serum, and retinoic acid. We found that while retinoic
acid-inducible gene expression tends to be uniformly dependent on CBP/p300,
dsRNA- and serum-inducible genes displayed non-uniform requirements for CBP/p300,
with the dsRNA-inducible expression of Ifnb1 (interferon-ß) being particularly
dependent on CBP/p300. Surprisingly, the p53-dependent genes Cdkn1a (p21/CIP/WAF)
and Mdm2 did not require CBP/p300 for their expression. As with cAMP-responsive
CREB targets, we propose that the signal-responsive recruitment of CBP and p300
does not necessarily indicate a requirement for these coactivators at a locus.
Rather, target gene context (e.g. DNA sequence) influences the extent to which
transcription requires CBP/p300 versus other coactivators, which may not be HATs.

PMCID: PMC3048793
PMID: 21220944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Feb;4(2):194-206. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0367. Epub 2011 Jan 6.

The prostaglandin transporter regulates adipogenesis and aromatase transcription.

Subbaramaiah K(1), Hudis CA, Dannenberg AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065,
USA. ksubba@med.cornell.edu

Cytochrome P450 aromatase, encoded by the CYP19 gene, catalyzes estrogen
synthesis. In obese postmenopausal women, increased estrogen synthesis in adipose
tissue has been linked to hormone-dependent breast carcinogenesis. Hence, it is
important to elucidate the mechanisms that regulate CYP19 gene expression.
Prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) stimulates the cyclic AMP (cAMP) <U+2192> protein kinase A
(PKA) <U+2192> cAMP responsive element binding protein (CREB) pathway leading to
increased CYP19 transcription. The prostaglandin transporter (PGT) removes PGE(2)
from the extracellular milieu and delivers it to the cytosol, where it is
inactivated. The main objective of this study was to determine whether PGT
regulates CYP19 transcription. Silencing of PGT in preadipocytes increased PGE(2)
levels in the extracellular medium, thereby stimulating the cAMP <U+2192> PKA pathway
resulting in enhanced interaction between pCREB, p300, and the CYP19 I.3/II
promoter. A reciprocal decrease in the interaction between the CYP19 I.3/II
promoter and BRCA1, a repressor of CYP19 transcription, was observed.
Overexpressing PGT reduced extracellular PGE(2) levels, suppressed the cAMP <U+2192> PKA
pathway, enhanced the interaction between BRCA1 and p300, and inhibited aromatase
expression. We also compared the PGT <U+2192> aromatase axis in preadipocytes versus
adipocytes. Aromatase levels were markedly increased in preadipocytes versus
adipocytes. This increase in aromatase was explained, at least in part, by
reduced PGT levels leading to enhanced PGE(2) <U+2192> cAMP <U+2192> PKA signaling. In addition
to regulating aromatase expression, PGT-mediated changes in extracellular PGE(2) 
levels were a determinant of adipocyte differentiation. Collectively, these
results suggest that PGT modulates adipogenesis and thereby PGE(2)-mediated
activation of the cAMP <U+2192> PKA <U+2192> CREB pathway leading to altered CYP19
transcription and aromatase activity.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21212407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011 Feb 16;103(4):317-33. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djq541. Epub
2011 Jan 6.

ARRB1-mediated regulation of E2F target genes in nicotine-induced growth of lung 
tumors.

Dasgupta P(1), Rizwani W, Pillai S, Davis R, Banerjee S, Hug K, Lloyd M, Coppola 
D, Haura E, Chellappan SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncologic Sciences, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

BACKGROUND: Nicotine induces the proliferation of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cells via nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and the arrestin, ß1 (ARRB1) 
protein. However, whether ARRB1 translocates to the nucleus upon nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor activation and how it regulates growth of human NSCLCs are
not known.
METHODS: We investigated nuclear localization of ARRB1 in human NSCLC cell lines 
(A549 and H1650), normal lung cell lines (NHBE and SAEC), and lung cancer tissue 
microarray. A549 cells were transfected with ARRB1-specific short hairpin RNA
(A549-sh) to knockdown ARRB1 expression, or with empty vector (A549-EV), to
examine the role of ARRB1 in the mitogenic and antiapoptotic effects of nicotine,
binding of ARRB1 to E2F transcription factors, and the role of ARRB1 in
nicotine-induced expression of E2F-regulated survival and proliferative genes
cell division cycle 6 homolog (CDC6), thymidylate synthetase (TYMS), and
baculoviral IAP repeat-containing 5 (BIRC5). Real-time polymerase chain reaction 
was performed for quantitative analysis of mRNA expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays were performed on A549 cells and fresh-frozen human
NSCLC tumors (n = 8) to examine the binding of ARRB1, E1A binding protein
(EP300), and acetylated histone 3 (Ac-H3) on the E2F-regulated genes. All
statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Nicotine induced the nuclear translocation of ARRB1 in NSCLC and normal 
lung cells, and lung tumor tissues from smokers showed an increased nuclear
localization. The mitogenic and antiapoptotic effects of nicotine were reduced in
A549-sh cells. Nuclear ARRB1 bound to E2F transcription factors in normal lung
cells, NSCLC cells, and tumors. Nicotine treatment induced a statistically
significant increased expression of E2F-regulated genes in A549-EV but not in
A549-sh cells; the maximum difference being observed in BIRC5 (A549-EV vs
A549-sh, mean fold-increase in mRNA level upon nicotine treatment = 20.7-fold,
95% confidence interval = 19.2- to 22.2-fold, vs mean = 0.8-fold, 95% confidence 
interval= 0.78- to 0.82-fold, P < .001). Furthermore, nicotine induced the
binding of ARRB1, EP300, and Ac-H3 on E2F-regulated genes.
CONCLUSION: Nicotine induced the nuclear translocation of ARRB1 and showed
increased expression of proliferative and survival genes, thereby contributing to
the growth and progression of NSCLCs.

PMCID: PMC3039728
PMID: 21212384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 31;5(12):e16012. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016012.

Nonsense mediated decay resistant mutations are a source of expressed mutant
proteins in colon cancer cell lines with microsatellite instability.

Williams DS(1), Bird MJ, Jorissen RN, Yu YL, Walker F, Zhang HH, Nice EC, Burgess
AW.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Biochemistry Laboratory, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research,
Melbourne Branch, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. David.Williams@austin.org.au

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2011;6(1). doi:
10.1371/annotation/53805ecf-7d10-4d99-9cec-f27f5e0d4166. Walker, Franscesa
[corrected to Walker, Francesca].

BACKGROUND: Frameshift mutations in microsatellite instability high (MSI-High)
colorectal cancers are a potential source of targetable neo-antigens. Many
nonsense transcripts are subject to rapid degradation due to nonsense-mediated
decay (NMD), but nonsense transcripts with a cMS in the last exon or near the
last exon-exon junction have intrinsic resistance to nonsense-mediated decay
(NMD). NMD-resistant transcripts are therefore a likely source of expressed
mutant proteins in MSI-High tumours.
METHODS: Using antibodies to the conserved N-termini of predicted mutant
proteins, we analysed MSI-High colorectal cancer cell lines for examples of
naturally expressed mutant proteins arising from frameshift mutations in coding
microsatellites (cMS) by immunoprecipitation and Western Blot experiments.
Detected mutant protein bands from NMD-resistant transcripts were further
validated by gene-specific short-interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown. A genome-wide
search was performed to identify cMS-containing genes likely to generate
NMD-resistant transcripts that could encode for antigenic expressed mutant
proteins in MSI-High colon cancers. These genes were screened for cMS mutations
in the MSI-High colon cancer cell lines.
RESULTS: Mutant protein bands of expected molecular weight were detected in
mutated MSI-High cell lines for NMD-resistant transcripts (CREBBP, EP300, TTK),
but not NMD-sensitive transcripts (BAX, CASP5, MSH3). Expression of the mutant
CREBBP and EP300 proteins was confirmed by siRNA knockdown. Five cMS-bearing
genes identified from the genome-wide search and without existing mutation data
(SFRS12IP1, MED8, ASXL1, FBXL3 and RGS12) were found to be mutated in at least 5 
of 11 (45%) of the MSI-High cell lines tested.
CONCLUSION: NMD-resistant transcripts can give rise to expressed mutant proteins 
in MSI-High colon cancer cells. If commonly expressed in primary MSI-High colon
cancers, MSI-derived mutant proteins could be useful as cancer specific
immunological targets in a vaccine targeting MSI-High colonic tumours.

PMCID: PMC3013145
PMID: 21209843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Transl Med. 2011 Jan 5;9:5. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-9-5.

High expression of transcriptional coactivator p300 correlates with aggressive
features and poor prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Li M(1), Luo RZ, Chen JW, Cao Y, Lu JB, He JH, Wu QL, Cai MY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer
Center, Guangzhou, PR China.

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that p300 participates in the regulation of a
wide range of cell biological processes and mutation of p300 has been identified 
in certain types of human cancers. However, the expression dynamics of p300 in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its clinical/prognostic significance are
unclear.
METHODS: In this study, the methods of reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), Western blotting and immunohistochemistry (IHC) were utilized 
to investigate protein/mRNA expression of p300 in HCCs. Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve analysis, spearman's rank correlation, Kaplan-Meier
plots and Cox proportional hazards regression model were used to analyze the
data.
RESULTS: Up-regulated expression of p300 mRNA and protein was observed in the
majority of HCCs by RT-PCR and Western blotting, when compared with their
adjacent non-malignant liver tissues. According to the ROC curves, the cutoff
score for p300 high expression was defined when more than 60% of the tumor cells 
were positively stained. High expression of p300 was examined in 60/123 (48.8%)
of HCCs and in 8/123 (6.5%) of adjacent non-malignant liver tissues. High
expression of p300 was correlated with higher AFP level, larger tumor size,
multiplicity, poorer differentiation and later stage (P < 0.05). In univariate
survival analysis, a significant association between overexpression of p300 and
shortened patients' survival was found (P = 0.001). In different subsets of HCC
patients, p300 expression was also a prognostic indicator in patients with stage 
II (P = 0.007) and stage III (P = 0.011). Importantly, p300 expression was
evaluated as an independent prognostic factor in multivariate analysis (P =
0.021). Consequently, a new clinicopathologic prognostic model with three poor
prognostic factors (p300 expression, AFP level and vascular invasion) was
constructed. The model could significantly stratify risk (low, intermediate and
high) for overall survival (P < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide a basis for the concept that high expression of
p300 in HCC may be important in the acquisition of an aggressive phenotype,
suggesting that p300 overexpression, as examined by IHC, is an independent
biomarker for poor prognosis of patients with HCC. The combined clinicopathologic
prognostic model may become a useful tool for identifying HCC patients with
different clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3022728
PMID: 21205329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 28;404(4):997-1003. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.12.098. Epub 2010 Dec 25.

NF-<U+03BA>B suppresses HIF-1a response by competing for P300 binding.

Mendonça DB(1), Mendonça G, Aragão FJ, Cooper LF.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Católica de Brasília, Pós-Graduação em Ciências Genômicas e
Biotecnologia, SGAN Quadra 916, Av. W5 Norte, 70790-160 Brasília, DF, Brazil.

Hypoxia has emerged as a key determinant of osteogenesis. HIF-1a is the
transcription factor mediating hypoxia responses that include induction of VEGF
and related bone induction. Inflammatory signals antagonize bone repair via the
NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. The present investigation explored the functional relationship of 
hypoxia (HIF-1a function) and inflammatory signaling (NF-<U+03BA>B) in stem like and
osteoprogenitor cell lines. The potential interaction between HIF-1a and NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling was explored by co-transfection studies in hFOB with p65, HIF-1a and
9x-HRE-luc or HIF-1a target genes reporter plasmids. Nuclear cross-talk was
directly tested using the mammalian Gal4/VP16 two-hybrid, and confirmed by
co-immunoprecipitation/western blotting assays. The results show that
inflammatory stimulation (TNF-a treatment) causes a marked inhibition of HIF-1a
function at the HRE in all cell lines studied. Also, co-transfection with p65
expression vector leads to reduced hVEGFp transcription after DFO-induced
hypoxia. However, TNF-a treatment had little effect on HIF-1a mRNA levels. The
functional interaction of Gal4-HIF-1a and VP16-p300 fusion proteins is
effectively blocked by expression of p65 in a dose dependent manner. It was
concluded that NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated inflammatory signaling is able to block HIF-1a
transactivation at HRE-encoding genes by direct competition for p300 binding at
the promoter. Inflammation may influence the stem cell niche and tissue
regeneration by influencing cellular responses to hypoxia.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21187066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 13;5(12):e14301. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014301.

Chromatin remodeling pathways in smooth muscle cell differentiation, and evidence
for an integral role for p300.

Spin JM(1), Quertermous T, Tsao PS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States of America.
jspin@cvmed.stanford.edu

BACKGROUND: Phenotypic alteration of vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC) in
response to injury or inflammation is an essential component of vascular disease.
Evidence suggests that this process is dependent on epigenetic regulatory
processes. P300, a histone acetyltransferase (HAT), activates crucial
muscle-specific promoters in terminal (non-SMC) myocyte differentiation, and may 
be essential to SMC modulation as well.
RESULTS: We performed a subanalysis examining transcriptional time-course
microarray data obtained using the A404 model of SMC differentiation. Numerous
chromatin remodeling genes (up to 62% of such genes on our array platform) showed
significant regulation during differentiation. Members of several
chromatin-remodeling families demonstrated involvement, including factors
instrumental in histone modification, chromatin assembly-disassembly and DNA
silencing, suggesting complex, multi-level systemic epigenetic regulation.
Further, trichostatin A, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, accelerated expression 
of SMC differentiation markers in this model. Ontology analysis indicated a high 
degree of p300 involvement in SMC differentiation, with 60.7% of the known p300
interactome showing significant expression changes. Knockdown of p300 expression 
accelerated SMC differentiation in A404 cells and human SMCs, while inhibition of
p300 HAT activity blunted SMC differentiation. The results suggest a central but 
complex role for p300 in SMC phenotypic modulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the hypothesis that chromatin remodeling is
important for SMC phenotypic switching, and detail wide-ranging involvement of
several epigenetic modification families. Additionally, the transcriptional
coactivator p300 may be partially degraded during SMC differentiation, leaving an
activated subpopulation with increased HAT activity and SMC differentiation-gene 
specificity.

PMCID: PMC3001469
PMID: 21179216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Cancer Res. 2010 Dec 15;70(24):10101-11. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0505.

HIF-2alpha enhances beta-catenin/TCF-driven transcription by interacting with
beta-catenin.

Choi H(1), Chun YS, Kim TY, Park JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The tumor-promoting factors ß-catenin and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) are
often found to be coactivated in rapidly growing tumors. Recently, it was shown
that HIF-1a negatively regulates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by sequestering
ß-catenin from ß-catenin/T-cell factor (TCF). However, no investigation has been 
undertaken on the involvement of HIF-2a in ß-catenin regulation. In this study,
it was found that, like HIF-1a, HIF-2a interacts with ß-catenin, but at a
different site. Furthermore, HIF-2a was found to assemble with ß-catenin/TCF and 
facilitate gene transcription. Mutational analyses revealed that transactivation 
domains of HIF-2a promote p300 coactivator recruitment by ß-catenin. Furthermore,
HIF-2a and ß-catenin were found to associate in the nuclei of 786-0 renal cell
carcinoma cells, and HIF-2a was found to be required for ß-catenin activation in 
these cells and for their proliferation. These results suggest that this
interaction contributes to the unrestrained growth of tumor cells containing
coactivated HIF-2a and ß-catenin. Interestingly, these actions of HIF-2a oppose
those of HIF-1a on ß-catenin and cell growth, and this suggests that
HIF-1a/HIF-2a balance may importantly determine cell growth when hypoxia and Wnt 
stimulation coexist.

©2010 AACR.

PMID: 21159632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. EMBO J. 2011 Jan 19;30(2):249-62. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.318. Epub 2010 Dec 3.

Distinct roles of GCN5/PCAF-mediated H3K9ac and CBP/p300-mediated H3K18/27ac in
nuclear receptor transactivation.

Jin Q(1), Yu LR, Wang L, Zhang Z, Kasper LH, Lee JE, Wang C, Brindle PK, Dent SY,
Ge K.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Receptor Biology Section, CEB, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Histone acetyltransferases (HATs) GCN5 and PCAF (GCN5/PCAF) and CBP and p300
(CBP/p300) are transcription co-activators. However, how these two distinct
families of HATs regulate gene activation remains unclear. Here, we show deletion
of GCN5/PCAF in cells specifically and dramatically reduces acetylation on
histone H3K9 (H3K9ac) while deletion of CBP/p300 specifically and dramatically
reduces acetylations on H3K18 and H3K27 (H3K18/27ac). A ligand for nuclear
receptor (NR) PPARd induces sequential enrichment of H3K18/27ac, RNA polymerase
II (Pol II) and H3K9ac on PPARd target gene Angptl4 promoter, which correlates
with a robust Angptl4 expression. Inhibiting transcription elongation blocks
ligand-induced H3K9ac, but not H3K18/27ac, on the Angptl4 promoter. Finally, we
show GCN5/PCAF and GCN5/PCAF-mediated H3K9ac correlate with, but are surprisingly
dispensable for, NR target gene activation. In contrast, CBP/p300 and their HAT
activities are essential for ligand-induced Pol II recruitment on, and activation
of, NR target genes. These results highlight the substrate and site specificities
of HATs in cells, demonstrate the distinct roles of GCN5/PCAF- and
CBP/p300-mediated histone acetylations in gene activation, and suggest an
important role of CBP/p300-mediated H3K18/27ac in NR-dependent transcription.

PMCID: PMC3025463
PMID: 21131905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Feb 15;20(4):731-51. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq519. Epub 2010 Nov
30.

miRNA-132 orchestrates chromatin remodeling and translational control of the
circadian clock.

Alvarez-Saavedra M(1), Antoun G, Yanagiya A, Oliva-Hernandez R, Cornejo-Palma D, 
Perez-Iratxeta C, Sonenberg N, Cheng HY.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ont., 
Canada K1H 8M5.

Mammalian circadian rhythms are synchronized to the external time by daily
resetting of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in response to light. As the
master circadian pacemaker, the SCN coordinates the timing of diverse cellular
oscillators in multiple tissues. Aberrant regulation of clock timing is linked to
numerous human conditions, including cancer, cardiovascular disease, obesity,
various neurological disorders and the hereditary disorder familial advanced
sleep phase syndrome. Additionally, mechanisms that underlie clock resetting
factor into the sleep and physiological disturbances experienced by night-shift
workers and travelers with jet lag. The Ca(2+)/cAMP response element-binding
protein-regulated microRNA, miR-132, is induced by light within the SCN and
attenuates its capacity to reset, or entrain, the clock. However, the specific
targets that are regulated by miR-132 and underlie its effects on clock
entrainment remained elusive until now. Here, we show that genes involved in
chromatin remodeling (Mecp2, Ep300, Jarid1a) and translational control (Btg2,
Paip2a) are direct targets of miR-132 in the mouse SCN. Coordinated regulation of
these targets underlies miR-132-dependent modulation of Period gene expression
and clock entrainment: the mPer1 and mPer2 promoters are bound to and
transcriptionally activated by MeCP2, whereas PAIP2A and BTG2 suppress the
translation of the PERIOD proteins by enhancing mRNA decay. We propose that
miR-132 is selectively enriched for chromatin- and translation-associated target 
genes and is an orchestrator of chromatin remodeling and protein translation
within the SCN clock, thereby fine-tuning clock entrainment. These findings will 
further our understanding of mechanisms governing clock entrainment and its
involvement in human diseases.

PMCID: PMC3115667
PMID: 21118894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Dec 14;107(50):21689-94. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1016166108. Epub 2010 Nov 29.

Regulation of hematopoietic stem cells by their mature progeny.

de Graaf CA(1), Kauppi M, Baldwin T, Hyland CD, Metcalf D, Willson TA, Carpinelli
MR, Smyth GK, Alexander WS, Hilton DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.

Thrombopoietin (TPO), acting through its receptor Mpl, has two major
physiological roles: ensuring production of sufficient platelets via stimulation 
of megakaryocyte production and maintaining hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
quiescence. Mpl also controls circulating TPO concentration via receptor-mediated
internalization and degradation. Here, we demonstrate that the megakaryocytosis
and increased platelet mass in mice with mutations in the Myb or p300 genes
causes reduced circulating TPO concentration and TPO starvation of the stem-cell 
compartment, which is exacerbated because these cells additionally exhibit
impaired responsiveness to TPO. HSCs from Myb(Plt4/Plt4) mice show altered
expression of TPO-responsive genes and, like HSCs from Tpo and Mpl mutant mice,
exhibit increased cycling and a decline in the number of HSCs with age. These
studies suggest that disorders of platelet number can have profound effects on
the HSC compartment via effects on the feedback regulation of circulating TPO
concentration.

PMCID: PMC3003054
PMID: 21115812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2010 Dec;43(12):1215-24. Epub 2010 Nov 12.

Evaluation of the immune humoral response of Brazilian patients with
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.

Torres LC(1), Sugayama SM, Arslanian C, Sales MM, Carneiro-Sampaio M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de 
São Paulo, SP, Brasil. ltorres@usp.br

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare developmental disorder characterized by
craniofacial dysmorphisms, broad thumbs and toes, mental and growth deficiency,
and recurrent respiratory infections. RTS has been associated with CREBBP gene
mutations, but EP300 gene mutations have recently been reported in 6 individuals.
In the present study, the humoral immune response in 16 RTS patients with
recurrent respiratory infections of possible bacterial etiology was evaluated. No
significant differences between patients and 16 healthy controls were detected to
explain the high susceptibility to respiratory infections: normal or elevated
serum immunoglobulin levels, normal salivary IgA levels, and a good antibody
response to both polysaccharide and protein antigens were observed. However, most
patients presented high serum IgM levels, a high number of total B cell and B
subsets, and also high percentiles of apoptosis, suggesting that they could
present B dysregulation. The CREBBP/p300 family gene is extremely important for
B-cell regulation, and RTS may represent an interesting human model for studying 
the molecular mechanisms involved in B-cell development.

PMID: 21085895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Mar;32(3):254-61. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq244. Epub 2010 Nov 
17.

Upregulation of RhoB via c-Jun N-terminal kinase signaling induces apoptosis of
the human gastric carcinoma NUGC-3 cells treated with NSC12618.

Kim BK(1), Kim HM, Chung KS, Kim DM, Park SK, Song A, Won KJ, Lee K, Oh YK, Lee
K, Song KB, Simon JA, Han G, Won M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genome Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yuseong, Daejeon 305-806, Korea.

RhoB expression is reduced in most invasive tumors, with loss of RhoB expression 
correlating significantly with tumor stage. Here, we demonstrate that
upregulation of RhoB by the potent anticancer agent NSC126188 induces apoptosis
of NUGC-3 human gastric carcinoma cells. The crucial role of RhoB in
NSC126188-induced apoptosis is indicated by the rescue of NUGC-3 cells from
apoptosis by knockdown of RhoB. In the presence of NSC126188, c-Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK) signaling was activated, and the JNK inhibitor SP600125 reduced RhoB
expression and suppressed the apoptosis of NUGC-3 cells. Knockdowns of
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MKK) 4/7, JNK1/2 and c-Jun downregulated
RhoB expression and rescued cells from apoptotic death in the presence of
NSC126188. The JNK inhibitor SP600125 suppressed transcriptional activation of
RhoB in the presence of NSC126188, as indicated by a reporter assay that used
luciferase under the RhoB promoter. The ability of NSC126188 to increase
luciferase activity through both the p300-binding site and the inverted CCAAT
sequence (iCCAAT box) suggests that JNK signaling to upregulate RhoB expression
is mediated through both the p300-binding site and the iCCAAT box. However, the
JNK inhibitor SP600125 did not inhibit the upregulation of RhoB by
farnesyltransferase inhibitor (FTI)-277. The p300-binding site did not affect
activation of the RhoB promoter by FTI-277 in NUGC-3 cells, suggesting that the
transcriptional activation of RhoB by NSC126188 occurs by a different mechanism
than that reported for FTIs. Our data indicate that NSC126188 increases RhoB
expression via JNK-mediated signaling through a p300-binding site and iCCAAT box 
resulting in apoptosis of NUGC-3 cells.

PMID: 21084431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Genes Cells. 2011 Jan;16(1):34-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2010.01460.x. Epub
2010 Nov 9.

SIRT2 down-regulation in HeLa can induce p53 accumulation via p38 MAPK
activation-dependent p300 decrease, eventually leading to apoptosis.

Li Y(1), Matsumori H, Nakayama Y, Osaki M, Kojima H, Kurimasa A, Ito H, Mori S,
Katoh M, Oshimura M, Inoue T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genome Science, Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, 86
Nishi-cho, Yonago, Tottori 683-8503, Japan.

We previously reported that sirtuin 2 (SIRT2), a mammalian member of the
NAD+-dependent protein deacetylases, participates in mitotic regulation,
specifically, in efficient mitotic cell death caused by the spindle checkpoint.
Here, we describe a novel function of SIRT2 that is different from mitotic
regulation. SIRT2 down-regulation using siRNA caused apoptosis in cancer cell
lines such as HeLa cells, but not in normal cells. The apoptosis was caused by
p53 accumulation, which is mediated by p38 MAPK activation-dependent degradation 
of p300 and the subsequent MDM2 degradation. Sirtuin inhibitors are emerging as
antitumor drugs, and this function has been ascribed to the inhibition of SIRT1, 
the most well-characterized sirtuin that deacetylases p53 to promote cell
survival and also binds to other proteins in response to genotoxic stress. This
study suggests that SIRT2 can be a novel molecular target for cancer therapy and 
provides a molecular basis for the efficacy of SIRT2 for future cancer therapy.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2010 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21059157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Oncogene. 2011 Mar 17;30(11):1360-71. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.506. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

p85a mediates p53 K370 acetylation by p300 and regulates its promoter-specific
transactivity in the cellular UVB response.

Song L(1), Gao M, Dong W, Hu M, Li J, Shi X, Hao Y, Li Y, Huang C.

Author information: 
(1)Nelson Institute of Environmental Medicine, Department of Environmental
Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, Tuxedo, NY, USA.
lunsong@yahoo.com

Inducible acetylation of p53 at lysine residues has a great impact on regulating 
the transactivation of this protein, which is associated with cell growth arrest 
and/or apoptosis under various stress conditions. However, the factor(s) for
regulating p53 acetylation remains largely unknown. In the current study, we have
shown that p85a, the regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase, has a
critical role in mediating p53 acetylation and promoter-specific transactivation 
in the ultraviolet B (UVB) response. Depletion of p85a in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts significantly impairs UVB-induced apoptosis, as well as p53
transactivation and acetylation at Lys370 (Lys373 of human p53); however, the
accumulation, nuclear translocation and phosphorylation of p53 are not affected. 
Interestingly, p85a binds to p300, promotes the p300-p53 interaction and the
subsequent recruitment of the p53/p300 complex to the promoter region of the
specific p53 target gene in response to UVB irradiation. Moreover, ablation of
p53 acetylation at Lys370 by site-directed mutagenesis dramatically suppresses
UVB-induced expression of the specific p53-responsive gene as well as cell
apoptosis. Therefore, we conclude that p85a is a novel regulator of p53-mediated 
response under certain stress conditions, and targeting the p85a-dependent p53
pathway may be promising for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3761396
PMID: 21057544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Gynecol Oncol. 2011 Jan;120(1):113-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2010.09.019. Epub
2010 Nov 6.

Distinctive DNA methylation patterns of cell-free plasma DNA in women with
malignant ovarian tumors.

Liggett TE(1), Melnikov A, Yi Q, Replogle C, Hu W, Rotmensch J, Kamat A, Sood AK,
Levenson V.

Author information: 
(1)Rush University Medical Center, Department of Neurological Sciences, Multiple 
Sclerosis Center, 1745 W. Harrison Street, Ste. 309, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Epithelial ovarian carcinoma (OvCa) is rarely detected early, and it
is also difficult to determine whether an adnexal mass is benign or malignant.
Previously, we noted differences in methylation patterns of cell-free plasma DNA 
(cfpDNA) in women without disease compared to patients with OvCa. In this work,
we investigated whether methylation patterns of cfpDNA can differentiate between 
benign and malignant tumors.
METHODS: Methylation patterns in cfpDNA were determined in three cohorts (30
samples each) using a microarray-based assay (MethDet 56). Principal component
analysis, supervised clustering, linear discrimination analysis, and 25 rounds of
5-fold cross-validation were used to determine informative genes and assess the
sensitivity and specificity of differentiating between OvCa vs. healthy control
(HC), benign ovarian disease (mostly serous cystadenoma, BOD) vs. HC, and OvCa
vs. BOD samples.
RESULTS: Differential methylation of three promoters (RASSF1A, CALCA, and EP300) 
differentiated between OvCa vs. HC with a sensitivity of 90.0% and a specificity 
of 86.7%. Three different promoters (BRCA1, CALCA, and CDKN1C) were informative
for differentiating between BOD vs. HC, with a sensitivity of 90.0% and a
specificity of 76.7%. Finally, two promoters (RASSF1A and PGR-PROX) were
informative for differentiating between OvCa vs. BOD, with a sensitivity of 80.0%
and a specificity of 73.3%.
CONCLUSIONS: This proof-of-principle data show that differential methylation of
promoters in cfpDNA may be a useful biomarker to differentiate between certain
benign and malignant ovarian tumors.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3004216
PMID: 21056906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Clin Invest. 2010 Dec 1;120(12):4569-82. doi: 10.1172/JCI42869. Epub 2010 Nov
1.

BCL6 repression of EP300 in human diffuse large B cell lymphoma cells provides a 
basis for rational combinatorial therapy.

Cerchietti LC(1), Hatzi K(1), Caldas-Lopes E(1), Yang SN(1), Figueroa ME(1),
Morin RD(1), Hirst M(1), Mendez L(1), Shaknovich R(1), Cole PA(1), Bhalla K(1),
Gascoyne RD(1), Marra M(1), Chiosis G(1), Melnick A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Oncology Division, and Department of Pharmacology, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA. Department of Molecular
Pharmacology and Chemistry, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York, USA.
Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. Department of Pathology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, New York, USA. Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. The University
of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas University Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas,
USA. Centre for Lymphoid Cancers and the Departments of Pathology and
Experimental Therapeutics, British Columbia Cancer Agency, British Columbia
Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6), which encodes a transcriptional repressor, is a
critical oncogene in diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCLs). Although a
retro-inverted BCL6 peptide inhibitor (RI-BPI) was recently shown to potently
kill DLBCL cells, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we show that
RI-BPI induces a particular gene expression signature in human DLBCL cell lines
that included genes associated with the actions of histone deacetylase (HDAC) and
Hsp90 inhibitors. BCL6 directly repressed the expression of p300 lysine
acetyltransferase (EP300) and its cofactor HLA-B-associated transcript 3 (BAT3). 
RI-BPI induced expression of p300 and BAT3, resulting in acetylation of p300
targets including p53 and Hsp90. Induction of p300 and BAT3 was required for the 
antilymphoma effects of RI-BPI, since specific blockade of either protein rescued
human DLBCL cell lines from the BCL6 inhibitor. Consistent with this, combination
of RI-BPI with either an HDAC inhibitor (HDI) or an Hsp90 inhibitor potently
suppressed or even eradicated established human DLBCL xenografts in mice.
Furthermore, HDAC and Hsp90 inhibitors independently enhanced RI-BPI killing of
primary human DLBCL cells in vitro. We also show that p300-inactivating mutations
occur naturally in human DLBCL patients and may confer resistance to BCL6
inhibitors. Thus, BCL6 repression of EP300 provides a basis for rational targeted
combinatorial therapy for patients with DLBCL.

PMCID: PMC2993589
PMID: 21041953  [PubMed - in process]


402. Leuk Res. 2011 Mar;35(3):e18-20. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.09.024. Epub 2010
Oct 25.

Novel variant form of t(11;22)(q23;q13)/MLL-EP300 fusion transcript in the
evolution of an acute myeloid leukemia with myelodysplasia-related changes.

Duhoux FP, De Wilde S, Ameye G, Bahloula K, Medves S, Légé G, Libouton JM,
Demoulin JB, A Poirel H.

PMID: 20980053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 9;107(45):19290-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1013078107. Epub 2010 Oct 20.

Graded enhancement of p53 binding to CREB-binding protein (CBP) by multisite
phosphorylation.

Lee CW(1), Ferreon JC, Ferreon AC, Arai M, Wright PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology,
The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

The transcriptional activity of p53 is regulated by a cascade of
posttranslational modifications. Although acetylation of p53 by CREB-binding
protein (CBP)/p300 is known to be indispensable for p53 activation, the role of
phosphorylation, and in particular multisite phosphorylation, in activation of
CBP/p300-dependent p53 transcriptional pathways remains unclear. We investigated 
the role of single site and multiple site phosphorylation of the p53
transactivation domain in mediating its interaction with CBP and with the
ubiquitin ligase HDM2. Phosphorylation at Thr18 functions as an on/off switch to 
regulate binding to the N-terminal domain of HDM2. In contrast, binding to CBP is
modulated by the extent of p53 phosphorylation; addition of successive phosphoryl
groups enhances the affinity for the TAZ1, TAZ2, and KIX domains of CBP in an
additive manner. Activation of p53-dependent transcriptional pathways requires
that p53 compete with numerous cellular transcription factors for binding to
limiting amounts of CBP/p300. Multisite phosphorylation represents a mechanism
for a graded p53 response, with each successive phosphorylation event resulting
in increasingly efficient recruitment of CBP/p300 to p53-regulated
transcriptional programs, in the face of competition from cellular transcription 
factors. Multisite phosphorylation thus acts as a rheostat to enhance binding to 
CBP/p300 and provides a plausible mechanistic explanation for the gradually
increasing p53 response observed following prolonged or severe genotoxic stress.

PMCID: PMC2984141
PMID: 20962272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Biochem J. 2011 Jan 1;433(1):245-52. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101293.

Regulation of unfolded protein response modulator XBP1s by acetylation and
deacetylation.

Wang FM(1), Chen YJ, Ouyang HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology & Oncology, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh PA 15240, USA.

XBP1 (X-box-binding protein 1) is a key modulator of the UPR (unfolded protein
response), which is involved in a wide range of pathological and physiological
processes. The mRNA encoding the active spliced form of XBP1 (XBP1s) is generated
from the unspliced form by IRE1 (inositol-requiring enzyme 1) during the UPR.
However, the post-translational modulation of XBP1s remains largely unknown. In
the present study, we demonstrate that XBP1s is a target of acetylation and
deacetylation mediated by p300 and SIRT1 (sirtuin 1) respectively. p300 increases
the acetylation and protein stability of XBP1s, and enhances its transcriptional 
activity, whereas SIRT1 deacetylates XBP1s and inhibits its transcriptional
activity. Deficiency of SIRT1 enhances XBP1s-mediated luciferase reporter
activity in HEK (human embryonic kidney)-293 cells and the up-regulation of XBP1s
target gene expression under ER (endoplasmic reticulum) stress in MEFs (mouse
embryonic fibroblasts). Consistent with XBP1s favouring cell survival under ER
stress, Sirt1-/- MEFs display a greater resistance to ER-stress-induced apoptotic
cell death compared with Sirt1+/+ MEFs. Taken together, these results suggest
that acetylation/deacetylation constitutes an important post-translational
mechanism in controlling protein levels, as well as the transcriptional activity,
of XBP1s. The present study provides a novel insight into the molecular
mechanisms by which SIRT1 regulates UPR signalling.

PMCID: PMC3477812
PMID: 20955178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Biochem J. 2011 Jan 1;433(1):235-44. doi: 10.1042/BJ20100980.

Procyanidin B3, an inhibitor of histone acetyltransferase, enhances the action of
antagonist for prostate cancer cells via inhibition of p300-dependent acetylation
of androgen receptor.

Choi KC(1), Park S, Lim BJ, Seong AR, Lee YH, Shiota M, Yokomizo A, Naito S, Na
Y, Yoon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Chronic Metabolic
Disease Research, Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Sciences, Severance Medical 
Research Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

Erratum in
    Biochem J. 2011 Jan 14;433(3):535. Sung, Ah-Reum [corrected to Seong, Ah-Reum].

Increasing evidence suggests that AR (androgen receptor) acetylation is critical 
for prostate cancer cell growth. In the present study, we identified Pro-B3
(procyanidin B3) as a specific HAT (histone acetyltransferase) inhibitor. Pro-B3 
selectively inhibited the activity of HATs, but not other epigenetic enzymes.
Pro-B3 substantially inhibited the p300-mediated AR acetylation, both in vitro
and in vivo. Pro-B3 inhibited both p300-dependent and agonist-induced AR
transcription. We demonstrate that the p300-mediated AR acetylation is critical
for the hormone responsiveness of AR. Interestingly, B3 treatment efficiently
enhanced the antagonist activity of flutamide through suppression of p300 HAT
activity, demonstrating that relative p300 activity is critical for the
antagonist action. Finally, Pro-B3 treatment inhibited acetylation-dependent
prostate cell proliferation and expression of cell-cycle control genes,
subsequently increasing cell death, indicating the functional importance of AR
acetylation for prostate cancer cell growth.

PMID: 20955177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Oct 8;11:141. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-141.

Genes encoding critical transcriptional activators for murine neural tube
development and human spina bifida: a case-control study.

Lu W(1), Guzman AR, Yang W, Chapa CJ, Shaw GM, Greene RM, Pisano MM, Lammer EJ,
Finnell RH, Zhu H.

Author information: 
(1)Dell Pediatric Research Institute, UT Austin, Austin, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Spina bifida is a malformation of the neural tube and is the most
common of neural tube defects (NTDs). The etiology of spina bifida is largely
unknown, although it is thought to be multi-factorial, involving multiple
interacting genes and environmental factors. Mutations in transcriptional
co-activator genes-Cited2, p300, Cbp, Tfap2a, Carm1 and Cart1 result in NTDs in
murine models, thus prompt us to investigate whether homologues of these genes
are associated with NTDs in humans.
METHODS: Data and biological samples from 297 spina bifida cases and 300 controls
were derived from a population-based case-control study conducted in California. 
37 SNPs within CITED2, EP300, CREBBP, TFAP2A, CARM1 and ALX1 were genotyped using
an ABI SNPlex assay. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated for
alleles, genotypes and haplotypes to evaluate the risk for spina bifida.
RESULTS: Several SNPs showed increased or decreased risk, including CITED2
rs1131431 (OR = 5.32, 1.04~27.30), EP300 rs4820428 (OR = 1.30, 1.01~1.67), EP300 
rs4820429 (OR = 0.50, 0.26~0.50, in whites, OR = 0.7, 0.49~0.99 in all subjects),
EP300 rs17002284 (OR = 0.43, 0.22~0.84), TFAP2A rs3798691 (OR = 1.78, 1.13~2.87
in Hispanics), CREBBP rs129986 (OR = 0.27, 0.11~0.69), CARM1 rs17616105 (OR =
0.41, 0.22~0.72 in whites). In addition, one haplotype block in EP300 and one in 
TFAP2A appeared to be associated with increased risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Modest associations were observed in CITED2, EP300, CREBBP, TFAP2A
and CARM1 but not ALX1. However, these modest associations were not statistically
significant after correction for multiple comparisons. Searching for potential
functional variants and rare causal mutations is warranted in these genes.

PMCID: PMC2964532
PMID: 20932315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 3;285(49):38014-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.142141. Epub 2010
Sep 24.

Parathyroid hormone activation of matrix metalloproteinase-13 transcription
requires the histone acetyltransferase activity of p300 and PCAF and
p300-dependent acetylation of PCAF.

Lee M(1), Partridge NC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Medicine and Dentistry
of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) regulates the transcription of many genes involved in
bone remodeling in osteoblasts. One of these genes is matrix metalloproteinase-13
(MMP-13), which is involved in bone remodeling and early stages of endochondral
bone formation. We have previously shown that Mmp-13 gene expression is highly
induced by PTH treatment in osteoblastic UMR 106-01 cells, as well as primary
osteoblasts. Here, we show that p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF), in addition to
p300 and Runx2, is required for PTH activation of Mmp-13 transcription. PCAF was 
increasingly recruited to the MMP-13 proximal promoter region after PTH
treatment, and this was associated with an increase in RNA polymerase II
recruitment and histone acetylation. In addition, PTH treatment increased the
acetylation of PCAF, a process that required p300. Knockdown of PCAF, p300, or
Runx2 by siRNA decreased Mmp-13 mRNA expression after PTH treatment in both UMR
106-01 cells and primary osteoblasts. We found that there is a mutual dependence 
between p300 and PCAF to be recruited to the Mmp-13 promoter after PTH treatment.
In promoter-reporter assays, p300 and PCAF had an additive effect on PTH
stimulation of MMP-13 promoter activity, and this required their histone
acetyltransferase activity. Our findings demonstrate that PCAF acts downstream of
PTH signaling as a transcriptional coactivator that is required for PTH
stimulation of MMP-13 transcription. PCAF cooperates with p300 and Runx2 to
mediate PTH activation of MMP-13 transcription.

PMCID: PMC2992235
PMID: 20870727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Prostate. 2011 Mar 1;71(4):431-7. doi: 10.1002/pros.21257. Epub 2010 Sep 21.

Transcriptional coactivators p300 and CBP stimulate estrogen receptor-beta
signaling and regulate cellular events in prostate cancer.

Bouchal J(1), Santer FR, Höschele PP, Tomastikova E, Neuwirt H, Culig Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Steroid receptor coactivators p300 and CBP are highly expressed in
advanced prostate cancer. They potentiate activation of androgen receptor by
androgens and anti-androgens. In the present study, we have addressed the
question whether these coactivators enhance activity of estrogen receptor-beta
(ER-ß), which is variably expressed in prostate cancers.
METHODS: Expression levels of the coactivators p300 and CBP were manipulated by
plasmid or siRNA transfections and activity of ER-ß was measured by luciferase
assays. Viability was measured by MTT assays and cellular migration was
determined by wound-healing and Boyden chamber assays.
RESULTS: High expression of ER-ß was found in PC3 cells which were used for the
experiments. p300 or CBP enhanced activation of ER-ß by genistein. Antiestrogens 
did not acquire agonistic properties in the presence of increased concentrations 
of either coactivator. Inhibition of p300 or CBP decreased genistein stimulation 
of ER-ß. Genistein reduced migration of PC3 prostate cancer cells and
down-regulation of p300 potentiated this effect.
CONCLUSIONS: p300 and CBP are implicated in regulation of ER-ß activity and
cellular migration in prostate cancer. These findings are important for
understanding of action of ER-ß in carcinoma of the prostate.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20859991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. EMBO J. 2010 Nov 3;29(21):3660-72. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.235. Epub 2010 Sep 21.

CBP/p300 double null cells reveal effect of coactivator level and diversity on
CREB transactivation.

Kasper LH(1), Lerach S, Wang J, Wu S, Jeevan T, Brindle PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 
38105, USA.

It remains uncertain how the DNA sequence of mammalian genes influences the
transcriptional response to extracellular signals. Here, we show that the number 
of CREB-binding sites (CREs) affects whether the related histone
acetyltransferases (HATs) CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 are required for
endogenous gene transcription. Fibroblasts with both CBP and p300 knocked-out had
strongly attenuated histone H4 acetylation at CREB-target genes in response to
cyclic-AMP, yet transcription was not uniformly inhibited. Interestingly,
dependence on CBP/p300 was often different between reporter plasmids and
endogenous genes. Transcription in the absence of CBP/p300 correlated with
endogenous genes having more CREs, more bound CREB, and more CRTC2 (a non-HAT
coactivator of CREB). Indeed, CRTC2 rescued cAMP-inducible expression for certain
genes in CBP/p300 null cells and contributed to the CBP/p300-independent
expression of other targets. Thus, endogenous genes with a greater local
concentration and diversity of coactivators tend to have more resilient-inducible
expression. This model suggests how gene expression patterns could be tuned by
altering coactivator availability rather than by changing signal input or
transcription factor levels.

PMCID: PMC2982758
PMID: 20859256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 19;285(47):36410-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.142307. Epub 2010
Sep 17.

BMP2-activated Erk/MAP kinase stabilizes Runx2 by increasing p300 levels and
histone acetyltransferase activity.

Jun JH(1), Yoon WJ, Seo SB, Woo KM, Kim GS, Ryoo HM, Baek JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Dentistry and Dental Research
Institute, BK21 Program, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-749, Republic of
Korea.

Runx2 is a critical transcription factor for osteoblast differentiation.
Regulation of Runx2 expression levels and transcriptional activity is important
for bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-induced osteoblast differentiation. Previous
studies have shown that extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) activation
enhances the transcriptional activity of Runx2 and that BMP-induced Runx2
acetylation increases Runx2 stability and transcriptional activity. Because BMP
signaling induces Erk activation in osteoblasts, we sought to investigate whether
BMP-induced Erk signaling regulates Runx2 acetylation and stability. Erk
activation by overexpression of constitutively active MEK1 increased Runx2
transcriptional activity, whereas U0126, an inhibitor of MEK1/2, suppressed basal
Runx2 transcriptional activity and BMP-induced Runx2 acetylation and
stabilization. Overexpression of constitutively active MEK1 stabilized Runx2
protein via up-regulation of acetylation and down-regulation of ubiquitination.
Erk activation increased p300 protein levels and histone acetyltransferase
activity. Knockdown of p300 using siRNA diminished Erk-induced Runx2
stabilization. Overexpression of Smad5 increased Runx2 acetylation and
stabilization. Erk activation further increased Smad-induced Runx2 acetylation
and stabilization, whereas U0126 suppressed these functions. On the other hand,
knockdown of Smad1 and Smad5 by siRNA suppressed both basal and Erk-induced Runx2
protein levels. Erk activation enhanced the association of Runx2 with p300 and
Smad1. Taken together these results indicate that Erk signaling increases Runx2
stability and transcriptional activity, partly via increasing p300 protein levels
and histone acetyltransferase activity and subsequently increasing Runx2
acetylation by p300. In addition to the canonical Smad pathway, a BMP-induced
non-Smad Erk signaling pathway cooperatively regulates osteoblast differentiation
partly via increasing the stability and transcriptional activity of Runx2.

PMCID: PMC2978570
PMID: 20851880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 15;285(42):31954-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.148718. Epub
2010 Aug 18.

Activator-dependent p300 acetylation of chromatin in vitro: enhancement of
transcription by disruption of repressive nucleosome-nucleosome interactions.

Szerlong HJ(1), Prenni JE, Nyborg JK, Hansen JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, Colorado 80523-1870, USA.

Condensation of chromatin into higher order structures is mediated by intra- and 
interfiber nucleosome-nucleosome interactions. Our goals in this study were to
determine the impact specific activator-dependent histone acetylation had on
chromatin condensation and to ascertain whether acetylation-induced changes in
chromatin condensation were related to changes in RNA polymerase II (RNAPII)
activity. To accomplish this, an in vitro model system was constructed in which
the purified transcriptional activators, Tax and phosphorylated CREB
(cAMP-response element-binding protein), recruited the p300 histone
acetyltransferase to nucleosomal templates containing the human T-cell leukemia
virus type-1 promoter sequences. We find that activator-dependent p300 histone
acetylation disrupted both inter- and intrafiber nucleosome-nucleosome
interactions and simultaneously led to enhanced RNAPII transcription from the
decondensed model chromatin. p300 histone acetyltransferase activity had two
distinct components: non-targeted, ubiquitous activity in the absence of
activators and activator-dependent activity targeted primarily to
promoter-proximal nucleosomes. Mass spectrometry identified several unique p300
acetylation sites on nucleosomal histone H3 (H3K9, H3K27, H3K36, and H3K37).
Collectively, our data have important implications for understanding both the
mechanism of RNAPII transcriptional regulation by chromatin and the molecular
determinants of higher order chromatin structure.

PMCID: PMC2952196
PMID: 20720004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan;19(1):43-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.121. Epub 2010 Aug
18.

Exon deletions of the EP300 and CREBBP genes in two children with
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome detected by aCGH.

Tsai AC(1), Dossett CJ, Walton CS, Cramer AE, Eng PA, Nowakowska BA, Pursley AN, 
Stankiewicz P, Wiszniewska J, Cheung SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital, Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Denver, 
UC Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.

We demonstrate the utility of an exon coverage microarray platform in detecting
intragenic deletions: one in exons 24-27 of the EP300 gene and another in exons
27 and 28 of the CREBBP gene in two patients with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome
(RSTS). RSTS is a heterogeneous disorder in which approximately 45-55% of cases
result from deletion or mutations in the CREBBP gene and an unknown portion of
cases result from gene changes in EP300. The first case is a 3-year-old female
with an exonic deletion of the EP300 gene who has classic facial features of RSTS
without the thumb and great toe anomalies, consistent with the milder skeletal
phenotype that has been described in other RSTS cases with EP300 mutations. In
addition, the mother of this patient also had preeclampsia during pregnancy,
which has been infrequently reported. The second case is a newborn male who has
the classical features of RSTS. Our results illustrate that exon-targeted array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is a powerful tool for detecting
clinically significant intragenic rearrangements that would be otherwise missed
by aCGH platforms lacking sufficient exonic coverage or sequencing of the gene of
interest.

PMCID: PMC3039495
PMID: 20717166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2010 Oct;31(10):1293-302. doi: 10.1038/aps.2010.96. Epub 2010
Aug 16.

Krüppel-like factor 4 interacts with p300 to activate mitofusin 2 gene expression
induced by all-trans retinoic acid in VSMCs.

Zhang R(1), Han M, Zheng B, Li YJ, Shu YN, Wen JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, China.

AIM: To elucidate how krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) activates mitofusin 2 (mfn-2) 
expression in all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)-induced vascular smooth muscle cell 
(VSMC) differentiation.
METHODS: The mfn-2 promoter-reporter constructs and the KLF4
acetylation-deficient or phosphorylation-deficient mutants were constructed.
Adenoviral vector of KLF4-mediated overexpression and Western blot analysis were 
used to determine the effect of KLF4 on mfn-2 expression. The luciferase assay
and chromatin immunoprecipitation were used to detect the transactivation of KLF4
on mfn-2 gene expression. Co-immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assays were
used to determine the modification of KLF4 and interaction of KLF4 with p300 in
VSMCs.
RESULTS: KLF4 mediated ATRA-induced mfn-2 expression in VSMCs. KLF4 bound
directly to the mfn-2 promoter and activated its transcription. ATRA increased
the interaction of KLF4 with p300 by inducing KLF4 phosphorylation via activation
of JNK and p38 MAPK signaling. KLF4 acetylation by p300 increased its activity to
transactivate the mfn-2 promoter.
CONCLUSION: ATRA induces KLF4 acetylation by p300 and increases the ability of
KLF4 to transactivate the mfn-2 promoter in VSMCs.

PMCID: PMC4012908
PMID: 20711222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. EMBO J. 2010 Sep 1;29(17):2943-52. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.176. Epub 2010 Jul 30.

Oncogenesis by sequestration of CBP/p300 in transcriptionally inactive
hyperacetylated chromatin domains.

Reynoird N(1), Schwartz BE, Delvecchio M, Sadoul K, Meyers D, Mukherjee C, Caron 
C, Kimura H, Rousseaux S, Cole PA, Panne D, French CA, Khochbin S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U823, Université Joseph Fourier-Grenoble 1, Institut Albert Bonniot,
Grenoble, France.

In a subset of poorly differentiated and highly aggressive carcinoma, a
chromosomal translocation, t(15;19)(q13;p13), results in an in-frame fusion of
the double bromodomain protein, BRD4, with a testis-specific protein of unknown
function, NUT (nuclear protein in testis). In this study, we show that, after
binding to acetylated chromatin through BRD4 bromodomains, the NUT moiety of the 
fusion protein strongly interacts with and recruits p300, stimulates its
catalytic activity, initiating cycles of BRD4-NUT/p300 recruitment and creating
transcriptionally inactive hyperacetylated chromatin domains. Using a
patient-derived cell line, we show that p300 sequestration into the BRD4-NUT foci
is the principal oncogenic mechanism leading to p53 inactivation. Knockdown of
BRD4-NUT released p300 and restored p53-dependent regulatory mechanisms leading
to cell differentiation and apoptosis. This study demonstrates how the
off-context activity of a testis-specific factor could markedly alter vital
cellular functions and significantly contribute to malignant cell transformation.

PMCID: PMC2944051
PMID: 20676058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan;19(1):preceeding 118-20. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.124.
Epub 2010 Jul 28.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (CREBBP, EP300).

van Belzen M(1), Bartsch O, Lacombe D, Peters DJ, Hennekam RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

PMCID: PMC3039496
PMID: 20664634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Cancer Res. 2010 Sep 1;70(17):6824-36. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1992. Epub
2010 Jul 21.

Inactivation of the orphan nuclear receptor TR3/Nur77 inhibits pancreatic cancer 
cell and tumor growth.

Lee SO(1), Abdelrahim M, Yoon K, Chintharlapalli S, Papineni S, Kim K, Wang H,
Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

Activation of the orphan nuclear receptor TR3/Nur77 (NR4A1) promotes apoptosis
and inhibits pancreatic tumor growth, but its endogenous function and the effects
of its inactivation have yet to be determined. TR3 was overexpressed in human
pancreatic tumors compared with nontumor tissue. Small interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of TR3 or cell treatment with the TR3 antagonist
1,1-bis(3'-indolyl)-1-(p-hydroxyphenyl)methane (DIM-C-pPhOH) decreased
proliferation, induced apoptosis, and decreased expression of antiapoptotic genes
including Bcl-2 and survivin in pancreatic cancer cells. Survivin suppression was
mediated by formation of a TR3-Sp1-p300 DNA binding complex on the proximal
GC-rich region of the survivin promoter. When administered in vivo, DIM-C-pPhOH
induced apoptosis and inhibited tumor growth in an orthotopic model of pancreatic
cancer, associated with inhibition of the same antiapoptotic markers observed in 
vitro. Our results offer preclinical validation of TR3 as a drug target for
pancreatic cancer chemotherapy, based on the ability of TR3 inhibitors to block
the growth of pancreatic tumors.

PMCID: PMC2988472
PMID: 20660371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jul 15;6(7):e1001023. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001023.

CHD7 targets active gene enhancer elements to modulate ES cell-specific gene
expression.

Schnetz MP(1), Handoko L, Akhtar-Zaidi B, Bartels CF, Pereira CF, Fisher AG,
Adams DJ, Flicek P, Crawford GE, Laframboise T, Tesar P, Wei CL, Scacheri PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio,
United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2010 Jul;6(7):e1001010.

CHD7 is one of nine members of the chromodomain helicase DNA-binding domain
family of ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling enzymes found in mammalian cells. De
novo mutation of CHD7 is a major cause of CHARGE syndrome, a genetic condition
characterized by multiple congenital anomalies. To gain insights to the function 
of CHD7, we used the technique of chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
massively parallel DNA sequencing (ChIP-Seq) to map CHD7 sites in mouse ES cells.
We identified 10,483 sites on chromatin bound by CHD7 at high confidence. Most of
the CHD7 sites show features of gene enhancer elements. Specifically, CHD7 sites 
are predominantly located distal to transcription start sites, contain high
levels of H3K4 mono-methylation, found within open chromatin that is
hypersensitive to DNase I digestion, and correlate with ES cell-specific gene
expression. Moreover, CHD7 co-localizes with P300, a known enhancer-binding
protein and strong predictor of enhancer activity. Correlations with 18 other
factors mapped by ChIP-seq in mouse ES cells indicate that CHD7 also co-localizes
with ES cell master regulators OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG. Correlations between CHD7
sites and global gene expression profiles obtained from Chd7(+/+), Chd7(+/-), and
Chd7(-/-) ES cells indicate that CHD7 functions at enhancers as a transcriptional
rheostat to modulate, or fine-tune the expression levels of ES-specific genes.
CHD7 can modulate genes in either the positive or negative direction, although
negative regulation appears to be the more direct effect of CHD7 binding. These
data indicate that enhancer-binding proteins can limit gene expression and are
not necessarily co-activators. Although ES cells are not likely to be affected in
CHARGE syndrome, we propose that enhancer-mediated gene dysregulation contributes
to disease pathogenesis and that the critical CHD7 target genes may be subject to
positive or negative regulation.

PMCID: PMC2904778
PMID: 20657823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Glia. 2010 Oct;58(13):1640-8. doi: 10.1002/glia.21038.

Involvement of p300 in constitutive and HIV-1 Tat-activated expression of glial
fibrillary acidic protein in astrocytes.

Zou W(1), Wang Z, Liu Y, Fan Y, Zhou BY, Yang XF, He JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

HIV-1 Tat protein is an important pathogenic factor in HIV-1-associated
neurological diseases. One hallmark of HIV-1 infection of the central nervous
system (CNS) is astrocytosis, which is characterized by elevated glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP) expression in astrocytes. We have shown that Tat activates 
GFAP expression in astrocytes [Zhou et al., (2004) Mol Cell Neurosci 27:296-305] 
and that GFAP is an important regulator of Tat neurotoxicity [Zou et al., (2007) 
Am J Pathol 171:1293-1935]. However, the underlying mechanisms for Tat-mediated
GFAP up-regulation are not understood. In this study, we reported concurrent
up-regulation of adenovirus E1a-associated 300 kDa protein p300 and GFAP in
Tat-expressing human astrocytoma cells and primary astrocytes. We showed that
p300 was indeed induced by Tat expression and HIV-1 infection and that the
induction occurred at the transcriptional level through the cis-acting elements
of early growth response 1 (egr-1) within its promoter. Using siRNA, we further
showed that p300 regulated both constitutive and Tat-mediated GFAP expression.
Moreover, we showed that ectopic expression of p300 potentiated Tat
transactivation activity and increased proliferation of HIV-1-infected
astrocytes, but had little effect on HIV-1 replication in these cells. Taken
together, these results demonstrate for the first time that Tat is a positive
regulator of p300 expression, which in turn regulates GFAP expression, and
suggest that the Tat-Egr-1-p300-GFAP axis likely contributes to Tat neurotoxicity
and predisposes astrocytes to be an HIV-1 sanctuary in the CNS.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2919602
PMID: 20578042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jul;239(7):1950-66. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22329.

The transcriptional activity of Neurog3 affects migration and differentiation of 
ectopic endocrine cells in chicken endoderm.

Rosenberg LC(1), Lafon ML, Pedersen JK, Yassin H, Jensen JN, Serup P,
Hecksher-Sørensen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels
Steensens Vej 6, Gentofte, Denmark.

Neurog3 is expressed transiently in pancreatic endocrine progenitors where it is 
responsible for activating a transcription factor cascade which eventually
defines the mature endocrine cells. However, the mechanism by which Neurog3
regulates different aspects of the endocrine differentiation program is less
clear. In this report we used in ovo electroporation to investigate how
manipulation of Neurog3 protein activity affected migration, differentiation and 
fate determination. We found that changes in the onset of Neurog3 expression only
had minor effect on differentiation. However increasing the transcriptional
activity of Neurog3 by fusing it to VP16 or co-electroporating with Ep300 caused 
the electroporated cells to migrate rather than differentiate. In contrast,
reducing the transcriptional activity of Neurog3 by deleting parts of the
activation domain, by fusing Neurog3 to the engrailed repressor domain, or
co-electroporating with Hdac1 greatly increased the proportion of glucagon
expressing cells.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3070887
PMID: 20549731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Aug;299(2):R509-20. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00858.2009. Epub 2010 Jun 10.

Sepsis and glucocorticoids upregulate p300 and downregulate HDAC6 expression and 
activity in skeletal muscle.

Alamdari N(1), Smith IJ, Aversa Z, Hasselgren PO.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Muscle wasting during sepsis is in part regulated by glucocorticoids. In recent
studies, treatment of cultured muscle cells in vitro with dexamethasone
upregulated expression and activity of p300, a histone acetyl transferase (HAT), 
and reduced expression and activity of the histone deacetylases-3 (HDAC3) and -6,
changes that favor hyperacetylation. Here, we tested the hypothesis that sepsis
and glucocorticoids regulate p300 and HDAC3 and -6 in skeletal muscle in vivo.
Because sepsis-induced metabolic changes are particularly pronounced in white,
fast-twitch skeletal muscle, most experiments were performed in extensor
digitorum longus muscles. Sepsis in rats upregulated p300 mRNA and protein
levels, stimulated HAT activity, and reduced HDAC6 expression and HDAC activity. 
The sepsis-induced changes in p300 and HDAC expression were prevented by the
glucocorticoid receptor antagonist RU38486. Treatment of rats with dexamethasone 
increased expression of p300 and HAT activity, reduced expression of HDAC3 and
-6, and inhibited HDAC activity. Finally, treatment with the HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A resulted in increased muscle proteolysis and expression of the
ubiquitin ligase atrogin-1. Taken together, our results suggest for the first
time that sepsis-induced muscle wasting may be regulated by
glucocorticoid-dependent hyperacetylation caused by increased p300 and reduced
HDAC expression and activity. The recent development of pharmacological HDAC
activators may provide a novel avenue to prevent and treat muscle wasting in
sepsis and other catabolic conditions.

PMCID: PMC2928620
PMID: 20538901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jul 9;397(4):637-43. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.060. Epub 2010 May 22.

Phosphorylation of p300 by ATM controls the stability of NBS1.

Jang ER(1), Choi JD, Jeong G, Lee JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology, College of Natural Sciences,
Ajou University, Suwon 443-749, Republic of Korea.

Acetyltransferase, p300 is a transcriptional cofactor of signal-responsive
transcriptional regulation. The surveillance kinase ataxia-telangiectasia mutated
(ATM) plays a central role in regulation of a wide range of cellular DNA damage
responses. Here, we investigated whether and how ATM mediates phosphorylation of 
p300 in response to DNA damage and how p300 phosphorylation is functionally
linked to DNA damage. ATM-phosphorylated p300 in vitro and in vivo, in response
to DNA damage. Phosphorylation of p300 proteins was observed upon
gamma-irradiation in ATM(+) cells but not ATM(-) cells. Importantly, expression
of nonphosphorylatable serine to alanine form of p300 (S106A) destabilized both
p300 and NBS1 proteins, after DNA damage. These data demonstrate that ATM
transduces a DNA damage signal to p300, and that ATM-dependent phosphorylation of
p300 is required for stabilization of NBS1 proteins in response to DNA damage.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 20471956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Genome Biol. 2010;11(5):R51. doi: 10.1186/gb-2010-11-5-r51. Epub 2010 May 12.

Nucleosome rotational setting is associated with transcriptional regulation in
promoters of tissue-specific human genes.

Hebert C(1), Roest Crollius H.

Author information: 
(1)Dyogen Group, Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure (IBENS), 46
rue d'Ulm, CNRS UMR8197, INSERM U1024, 75005 Paris Cedex 05, France.
charles.hebert@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The position of a nucleosome, both translational along the DNA
molecule and rotational between the histone core and the DNA, is controlled by
many factors, including the regular occurrence of specific dinucleotides with a
period of approximately 10 bp, important for the rotational setting of the DNA
around the histone octamer.
RESULTS: We show that such a 10 bp periodic signal of purine-purine dinucleotides
occurs in phase with the transcription start site (TSS) of human genes and is
centered on the position of the first (+1) nucleosome downstream of the TSS.
These data support a direct link between transcription and the rotational setting
of the nucleosome. The periodic signal is most prevalent in genes that contain
CpG islands that are expressed at low levels in a tissue-specific manner and are 
involved in the control of transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: These results, together with several lines of evidence from the
recent literature, support a new model whereby the +1 nucleosome could be more
efficiently disassembled from gene promoters by H3K56 acetylation marks if the
periodic signal specifies an optimal rotational setting.

PMCID: PMC2898081
PMID: 20462404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 9;285(28):21824-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.120600. Epub 2010
May 6.

Transcriptional synergy between melanoma antigen gene protein-A11 (MAGE-11) and
p300 in androgen receptor signaling.

Askew EB(1), Bai S, Blackwelder AJ, Wilson EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR)-mediated gene regulation involves interactions with
coregulatory proteins that include the melanoma antigen gene protein-A11
(MAGE-11). To understand the functional significance of sequence similarity
between MAGE-11 and the adenovirus early protein E1A, we determined whether
MAGE-11 contributes to AR transcriptional activity through an interaction with
p300, a potent and ubiquitous transcriptional regulator. Here, we report that
MAGE-11 interacts with the NH(2)-terminal region of p300 through the MAGE-11
MXXIF motif (185)MXXIF(189), with transcriptional activity depending on the
MAGE-11 F-box and MAPK phosphorylation. The MAGE-11- and p300-dependent increase 
in AR transactivation required the NH(2)-terminal regions of AR and p300, p300
acetyltransferase activity, and the AR FXXLF motif (23)FQNLF(27) interaction with
MAGE-11. MAGE-11 linked AR to p300 and the p160 coactivator, transcriptional
intermediary protein 2 (TIF2). The p300 NH(2)-terminal FXXLF motif (33)FGSLF(37) 
was required for transcriptional activation by TIF2. Increased expression of p300
decreased the ubiquitinylation of MAGE-11 and transiently increased endogenous
MAGE-11 levels. Autoacetylation of p300 and decreased acetylation of TIF2 were
evident in the MAGE-11, p300, and TIF2 complex. The studies suggest that MAGE-11 
links NH(2)-terminal domains of AR and p300 to promote transcriptional synergy
through a cadre of FXXLF-related interacting motifs.

PMCID: PMC2898404
PMID: 20448036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Sep 15;80(6):867-73. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.04.026. Epub
2010 May 11.

Regulation of Nur77 protein turnover through acetylation and deacetylation
induced by p300 and HDAC1.

Kang SA(1), Na H, Kang HJ, Kim SH, Lee MH, Lee MO.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Bio-MAX Institute, and Research Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of
Korea.

Although the roles of Nur77, an orphan member of the nuclear hormone receptor
superfamily, in the control of cellular proliferation, apoptosis, inflammation,
and glucose metabolism, are well recognized, the molecular mechanism regulating
the activity and expression of Nur77 is not fully understood. Acetylation of
transcription factors has emerged recently as a major post-translational
modification that regulates protein stability and transcriptional activity. Here,
we examined whether Nur77 is acetylated, and we characterized potential
associated factors. First, Nur77 was found to be an acetylated protein when
examined by immunoprecipitation and western blotting using acetyl
protein-specific antibodies. Second, expression of p300, which possesses histone 
acetyltransferase activity, enhanced the acetylation and protein stability of
Nur77. Treatment with a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, trichostatin A,
also increased Nur77 acetylation. Among the several types of HDACs, HDAC1 was
found as the major enzyme affecting protein level of Nur77. HDAC1 decreased the
acetylation level, protein level, and transcriptional activity of Nur77.
Interestingly, overexpression of Nur77 induced expression of both p300 and HDAC1.
Finally, the expression of Nur77 increased along with that of p300, but decreased
with induction of HDAC1 after treatment with epithelial growth factor, nerve
growth factor, or 6-mercaptopurine, suggesting that the self-control of the
acetylation status contributes to the transient induction of Nur77 protein. Taken
together, these results demonstrate that acetylation of Nur77 is modulated by
p300 and HDAC1, and suggest that acetylation is an important post-translational
modification for the rapid turnover of Nur77 protein.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20438716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Nat Biotechnol. 2010 May;28(5):495-501. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1630. Epub 2010 May 2.

GREAT improves functional interpretation of cis-regulatory regions.

McLean CY(1), Bristor D, Hiller M, Clarke SL, Schaar BT, Lowe CB, Wenger AM,
Bejerano G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California,
USA.

We developed the Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool (GREAT) to
analyze the functional significance of cis-regulatory regions identified by
localized measurements of DNA binding events across an entire genome. Whereas
previous methods took into account only binding proximal to genes, GREAT is able 
to properly incorporate distal binding sites and control for false positives
using a binomial test over the input genomic regions. GREAT incorporates
annotations from 20 ontologies and is available as a web application. Applying
GREAT to data sets from chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with massively
parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) of multiple transcription-associated factors,
including SRF, NRSF, GABP, Stat3 and p300 in different developmental contexts, we
recover many functions of these factors that are missed by existing gene-based
tools, and we generate testable hypotheses. The utility of GREAT is not limited
to ChIP-seq, as it could also be applied to open chromatin, localized epigenomic 
markers and similar functional data sets, as well as comparative genomics sets.

PMID: 20436461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 May;12(5):513-9. doi: 10.1038/ncb2054. Epub 2010 Apr 25.

miR-132 regulates antiviral innate immunity through suppression of the p300
transcriptional co-activator.

Lagos D(1), Pollara G, Henderson S, Gratrix F, Fabani M, Milne RS, Gotch F,
Boshoff C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Viral Oncology Group, UCL Cancer Institute, University
College London, London WC1E 6BT, U.K.

MicroRNAs are small, non-coding RNAs that negatively regulate gene expression. It
has been proposed that microRNAs could function in the regulation of innate
immunity, but this has not been demonstrated for viral infection. Here we test
this hypothesis using the human pathogenic virus Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV) and one of its putative natural cellular targets, primary
lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs). We show that an early antiviral microRNA
response (6 h post-infection) includes expression of microRNAs that enhance viral
gene expression. In particular, the CREB-induced miR-132 microRNA is highly
upregulated after infection and has a negative effect on the expression of
interferon-stimulated genes, facilitating viral replication. We show a similar
function for miR-132 during infection of monocytes with herpes simplex virus-1
(HSV-1) and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV). miR-132 regulates innate antiviral
immunity by inhibiting expression of the p300 transcriptional co-activator. p300 
is downregulated early after KSHV infection, and inhibition of miR-132 induction 
restores p300 expression. Furthermore, p300 regulates miR-132 levels, revealing a
dynamic equilibrium between miR-132 and p300. By targeting p300, rather than a
transcription factor or signalling protein, miR-132 has a broad role in the
regulation of antiviral immunity.

PMID: 20418869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010 Aug;49(2):176-85. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2010.04.006. Epub
2010 Apr 18.

Prostacyclin receptor suppresses cardiac fibrosis: role of CREB phosphorylation.

Chan EC(1), Dusting GJ, Guo N, Peshavariya HM, Taylor CJ, Dilley R, Narumiya S,
Jiang F.

Author information: 
(1)O'Brien Institute, University of Melbourne, Fitzroy, Victoria 3065, Australia.
chane@unimelb.edu.au

Cardiac fibrosis is a consequence of many cardiovascular diseases and contributes
to impaired ventricular function. Activation of the prostacyclin receptor (IP)
protects against cardiac fibrosis, but the molecular mechanisms are not totally
understood. Using mouse cardiac fibroblasts, we found that IP activation with
cicaprost suppressed expression of collagen I and other target genes of
transforming growth factor-beta. This effect of cicaprost was unlikely to be
mediated by inhibition of the Smad2/3 or mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
activities, but was associated with cAMP elevation and phosphorylation of the
transcription factor cAMP response element binding protein (CREB). Expression of 
a non-phosphorylated CREB mutant suppressed the inhibitory effect of cicaprost.
It appears that phosphorylated CREB binds to and sequestrates the transcription
coactivator CBP/p300 from binding to Smad. Inhibition of the intrinsic histone
acetyl-transferase activity of CBP/p300 with garcinol significantly suppressed
collagen I expression in fibroblasts. Using apolipoprotein E and IP double
knockout mouse, we demonstrated that endogenous prostacyclin/IP signaling had an 
inhibitory effect on angiotensin II-induced cardiac fibrosis under
hypercholesterolemic conditions. Taken together, our results suggest that the
prostacyclin/IP pathway suppresses cardiac fibrosis, at least partly, by inducing
CREB phosphorylation.

PMID: 20403362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 May 28;396(2):294-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.04.083. Epub 2010 Apr 23.

Dynamic association of p300 with the promoter of the G protein-coupled rat delta 
opioid receptor gene during NGF-induced neuronal differentiation.

Chen YL(1), Monteith N, Law PY, Loh HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The State University of New York at
Binghamton, Binghamton, NY 13902, USA. ylchen@binghamton.edu

The G protein-coupled delta opioid receptor (DOR) plays a critical role in pain
control. Emerging evidence shows that DOR also plays a role in neuronal
differentiation and survival. Nerve growth factor (NGF) is known to be critical
for the development and maintenance of the central and peripheral nervous
systems. Our previous studies have shown that sustained activation of
NGF/PI3K/Akt/NF-kappaB signaling is essential for NGF-induced dor gene expression
during neuronal differentiation and that the epigenetic modifications at histone 
3 lysine 9 temporally correlate with the dor gene transcription. In this study,
we cloned the rat dor gene promoter and identified an NGF-responsive region
similar to that from the mouse dor gene promoter. We further identified p300, a
known NF-kappaB binding partner with intrinsic histone acetyltransferase
activity, to be dynamically associated with the dor gene. We also found that
assembling of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) at the promoter took place before NGF
stimulation, indicating that p300 could only interact with preassembled Pol II at
the promoter after NGF stimulation. Taken together, these results implicate that 
preassembly of the Pol II preinitiation complex, sustained activation of
PI3K/Akt/NF-kappaB signaling, and dynamic p300 association at the promoters
sequentially is one of the mechanisms of induction of the late phase genes during
NGF-induced neuronal differentiation.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20399742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(2):R22. doi: 10.1186/bcr2562. Epub 2010 Apr 13.

Trichostatin A enhances acetylation as well as protein stability of ERalpha
through induction of p300 protein.

Kim SH(1), Kang HJ, Na H, Lee MO.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, San 56-1, Sillim-dong,
Kwanak-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea. kshsmj@greencross.com

INTRODUCTION: Trichostatin A (TSA) is a well-characterized histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitor. TSA modifies the balance between HDAC and histone
acetyltransferase activities that is important in chromatin remodeling and gene
expression. Although several previous studies have demonstrated the role of TSA
in regulation of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha), the precise mechanism by
which TSA affects ERalpha activity remains unclear.
METHODS: Transient transfection was performed using the Welfect-EX Plus
procedure. The mRNA expression was determined using RT-PCR. Protein expression
and interaction were determined by western blotting and immunoprecipitation. The 
transfection of siRNAs was performed using the Oligofectamine reagent procedure.
RESULTS: TSA treatment increased acetylation of ERalpha in a dose-dependent
manner. The TSA-induced acetylation of ERalpha was accompanied by an increased
stability of ERalpha protein. Interestingly, TSA also increased the acetylation
and the stability of p300 protein. Overexpression of p300 induced acetylation and
stability of ERalpha by blocking ubiquitination. Knockdown of p300 by RNA
interference decreased acetylation as well as the protein level of ERalpha,
indicating that p300 mediated the TSA-induced stabilization of ERalpha.
CONCLUSIONS: We report that TSA enhanced acetylation as well as the stability of 
the ERalpha protein by modulating stability of p300. These results may provide
the molecular basis for pharmacological functions of HDAC inhibitors in the
treatment of human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2879569
PMID: 20388208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 May;12(5):457-67. doi: 10.1038/ncb2047. Epub 2010 Apr 11.

Deciphering the transcriptional complex critical for RhoA gene expression and
cancer metastasis.

Chan CH(1), Lee SW, Li CF, Wang J, Yang WL, Wu CY, Wu J, Nakayama KI, Kang HY,
Huang HY, Hung MC, Pandolfi PP, Lin HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The RhoA GTPase is crucial in numerous biological functions and is linked to
cancer metastasis. However, the understanding of the molecular mechanism
responsible for RhoA transcription is still very limited. Here we show that RhoA 
transcription is orchestrated by the Myc-Skp2-Miz1-p300 transcriptional complex. 
Skp2 cooperates with Myc to induce RhoA transcription by recruiting Miz1 and p300
to the RhoA promoter independently of Skp1-Cullin-F-box protein containing
complex (SCF)-Skp2 E3 ligase activity. Deficiency of this complex results in
impairment in RhoA expression, cell migration, invasion, and breast cancer
metastasis, recapitulating the phenotypes observed in RhoA knockdown, and RhoA
restoration rescues the defect in cell invasion. Overexpression of the
Myc-Skp2-Miz1 complex is found in metastatic human cancers and is correlated with
RhoA expression. Our study provides insight into how oncogenic Skp2 and Myc
coordinate to induce RhoA transcription and establishes a novel SCF-Skp2
E3-ligase-independent function for oncogenic Skp2 in transcription and cancer
metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3855841
PMID: 20383141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Sci Transl Med. 2010 Apr 7;2(26):26ra26. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3000502.

Klf15 deficiency is a molecular link between heart failure and aortic aneurysm
formation.

Haldar SM(1), Lu Y, Jeyaraj D, Kawanami D, Cui Y, Eapen SJ, Hao C, Li Y, Doughman
YQ, Watanabe M, Shimizu K, Kuivaniemi H, Sadoshima J, Margulies KB, Cappola TP,
Jain MK.

Author information: 
(1)Case Cardiovascular Research Institute, Department of Medicine,
Harrington-McLaughlin Heart and Vascular Institute, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, University Hospitals Case Medical Center,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Current therapies for diseases of heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) and aorta
(aortopathy) include inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system, beta-adrenergic 
antagonists, and the statin class of cholesterol-lowering agents. These therapies
have limited efficacy, as adverse cardiovascular events continue to occur with
some frequency in patients taking these drugs. Although cardiomyopathy and
aortopathy can coexist in a number of conditions (for example, Marfan's syndrome,
acromegaly, pregnancy, and aging), pathogenetic molecular links between the two
diseases remain poorly understood. We reasoned that identification of common
molecular perturbations in these two tissues could point to therapies for both
conditions. Here, we show that deficiency of the transcriptional regulator
Kruppel-like factor 15 (Klf15) in mice leads to both heart failure and aortic
aneurysm formation through a shared molecular mechanism. Klf15 concentrations are
markedly reduced in failing human hearts and in human aortic aneurysm tissues.
Mice deficient in Klf15 develop heart failure and aortic aneurysms in a
p53-dependent and p300 acetyltransferase-dependent fashion. KLF15 activation
inhibits p300-mediated acetylation of p53. Conversely, Klf15 deficiency leads to 
hyperacetylation of p53 in the heart and aorta, a finding that is recapitulated
in human tissues. Finally, Klf15-deficient mice are rescued by p53 deletion or
p300 inhibition. These findings highlight a molecular perturbation common to the 
pathobiology of heart failure and aortic aneurysm formation and suggest that
manipulation of KLF15 function may be a productive approach to treat these morbid
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3003709
PMID: 20375365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Genome Res. 2010 May;20(5):565-77. doi: 10.1101/gr.104471.109. Epub 2010 Apr 2.

Homotypic clusters of transcription factor binding sites are a key component of
human promoters and enhancers.

Gotea V(1), Visel A, Westlund JM, Nobrega MA, Pennacchio LA, Ovcharenko I.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20894, USA.

Clustering of multiple transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) for the same
transcription factor (TF) is a common feature of cis-regulatory modules in
invertebrate animals, but the occurrence of such homotypic clusters of TFBSs
(HCTs) in the human genome has remained largely unknown. To explore whether HCTs 
are also common in human and other vertebrates, we used known binding motifs for 
vertebrate TFs and a hidden Markov model-based approach to detect HCTs in the
human, mouse, chicken, and fugu genomes, and examined their association with
cis-regulatory modules. We found that evolutionarily conserved HCTs occupy nearly
2% of the human genome, with experimental evidence for individual TFs supporting 
their binding to predicted HCTs. More than half of the promoters of human genes
contain HCTs, with a distribution around the transcription start site in
agreement with the experimental data from the ENCODE project. In addition, almost
half of the 487 experimentally validated developmental enhancers contain them as 
well--a number more than 25-fold larger than expected by chance. We also found
evidence of negative selection acting on TFBSs within HCTs, as the conservation
of TFBSs is stronger than the conservation of sequences separating them. The
important role of HCTs as components of developmental enhancers is additionally
supported by a strong correlation between HCTs and the binding of the
enhancer-associated coactivator protein Ep300 (also known as p300). Experimental 
validation of HCT-containing elements in both zebrafish and mouse suggest that
HCTs could be used to predict both the presence of enhancers and their tissue
specificity, and are thus a feature that can be effectively used in deciphering
the gene regulatory code. In conclusion, our results indicate that HCTs are a
pervasive feature of human cis-regulatory modules and suggest that they play an
important role in gene regulation in the human and other vertebrate genomes.

PMCID: PMC2860159
PMID: 20363979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Immunity. 2010 Mar 26;32(3):296-8. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.03.011.

Seq-ing LPS-induced enhancers.

Smale ST(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. smale@mednet.ucla.edu

Comment on
    Immunity. 2010 Mar 26;32(3):317-28.

In this issue of Immunity, Ghisletti et al. (2010) examined lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced binding of the p300 transcription coactivator to identify inducible
enhancers throughout the genome of mouse macrophages, thereby revealing common
features of enhancers that contribute to the LPS response and a critical role for
PU.1 in enhancer marking.

PMID: 20346768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Aug;224(2):454-64. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22142.

TNF-alpha induces matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression in A549 cells: role of
TNFR1/TRAF2/PKCalpha-dependent signaling pathways.

Lee IT(1), Lin CC, Wu YC, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Chang Gung University, Kwei-San,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), in particular MMP-9, have been shown to be
induced by cytokines, including TNF-alpha and contributes to airway inflammation.
However, the mechanisms underlying TNF-alpha-induced MMP-9 expression in human
A549 cells remain unclear. Here, we report that TNF-alpha-induced MMP-9 gene
expression was mediated through the TNFR1/TRAF2/PKCalpha-dependent signaling
pathways in A549 cells, determined by zymographic, RT-PCR, and Western blotting
analyses. TNF-alpha-induced MMP-9 expression was reduced by pretreatment with a
TNFR Ab. Furthermore, TNF-alpha-induced TNFR1 and TRAF2 complex formation was
revealed by immunoprecipitation using an anti-TNFR1 Ab followed by Western blot
analysis against an anti-TRAF2 or anti-TNFR1 Ab. In addition, TNF-alpha-induced
MMP-9 expression was also reduced by pretreatment with the inhibitor of PKCalpha 
(Gö6983), c-Src (PP1), EGFR (AG1478), or PI3K (LY294002) or transfection with
siRNAs of PKCalpha, Src, EGFR, Akt, p65, p300, and c-Jun. On the other hand,
TNF-alpha stimulated the phosphorylation of c-Src, EGFR, Akt, JNK1/2, and c-Jun, 
which were inhibited by pretreatment with Gö6983. We also showed that TNF-alpha
induced Akt translocation and the formation of an Akt/p65/p300 complex.
Pretreatment with the inhibitor of JNK1/2 (SP600125) but not the inhibitor of
MEK1/2 (U0126), p38 MAPK (SB202190), or PI3K (LY294002), markedly inhibited
TNF-alpha-induced c-Jun mRNA levels. Taken together, these data suggest that in
A549 cells, TNF-alpha induces MMP-9 expression via the
TNFR1/TRAF2/PKCalpha-dependent JNK1/2/c-Jun and c-Src/EGFR/PI3K/Akt pathways.

PMID: 20333651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome.

Stevens CA.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2002 Aug 30.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is characterized by
distinctive facial features, broad and often angulated thumbs and great toes,
short stature, and moderate to severe intellectual disability. The characteristic
craniofacial features are downslanted palpebral fissures, low hanging columella, 
high palate, grimacing smile, and talon cusps. Prenatal growth is often normal;
however, height, weight, and head circumference percentiles rapidly drop in the
first few months of life. Obesity may occur in childhood or adolescence. IQ
scores range from 25 to 79; average IQ is between 36 and 51. Other variable
findings are coloboma, cataract, congenital heart defects, renal abnormalities,
and cryptorchidism.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of RSTS is primarily based on clinical features.
Chromosome abnormalities are occasionally observed on routine cytogenetic
testing. CREBBP and EP300 are the only genes currently known to be associated
with RSTS. FISH analysis of CREBBP detects microdeletions in approximately 10% of
individuals with RSTS. Sequence analysis detects CREBBP pathogenic variants in
another 40%-50% of affected individuals. Pathogenic variants in EP300 are
identified in approximately 3%-8% of individuals with RSTS.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Early intervention programs, special
education, vocational training to address developmental disabilities, and
referral to behavioral specialists/psychologists and support groups/resources for
family members; standard treatment for eye abnormalities, hearing loss, cardiac
defects, cryptorchidism, and sleep apnea; surgical repair of significantly
angulated thumbs or duplicated halluces; aggressive management of
gastroesophageal reflux and constipation. Surveillance: Monitoring of growth and 
feeding, especially in the first year of life; annual eye and hearing
evaluations; and routine monitoring for cardiac, dental, and renal anomalies.
GENETIC COUNSELING: RSTS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. RSTS
typically occurs as the result of a de novo mutation in the family; most
individuals represent simplex cases (i.e., the only affected member in a family).
In most instances, the parents of an individual with RSTS are not affected. When 
the parents are clinically unaffected, the empiric recurrence risk for sibs is
less than 1%. Individuals with RSTS rarely reproduce. The risk to offspring is
50%. Prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the
pathogenic variant or deletion in the family is known.

PMID: 20301699  [PubMed]


436. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 7;285(19):14534-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.115345. Epub 2010
Mar 15.

Epigenetic regulatory mechanisms distinguish retinoic acid-mediated
transcriptional responses in stem cells and fibroblasts.

Kashyap V(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA), a vitamin A metabolite, regulates transcription by binding to
RA receptor (RAR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR) heterodimers. This
transcriptional response is determined by receptor interactions with
transcriptional regulators and chromatin modifying proteins. We compared
transcriptional responses of three RA target genes (Hoxa1, Cyp26a1, RARbeta(2))
in primary embryo fibroblasts (mouse embryonic fibroblasts), immortalized
fibroblasts (Balb/c3T3), and F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells. Hoxa1 and Cyp26a1
transcripts are not expressed, but RARbeta(2) transcripts are induced by RA in
mouse embryonic fibroblasts and Balb/c3T3 cells. Retinoid receptors (RARgamma,
RXRalpha), coactivators (pCIP (NCOA3, SRC3)), and p300 and RNA polymerase II are 
recruited only to the RARbeta(2) RA response element (RARE) in Balb/c3T3, whereas
these proteins are recruited to RAREs of all three genes by RA in F9 cells. In
F9, RA reduces polycomb (PcG) protein Suz12 and the associated H3K27me3
repressive epigenetic modification at the RAREs of all three genes. In contrast, 
in Balb/c3T3 cells cultured in the +/-RA, Suz12 is not associated with the Hoxa1,
RARbeta(2), and Cyp26a1 RAREs, whereas slow levels of the H3K27me3 mark are seen 
at these RAREs. Thus, Suz12 is not required for gene repression in the absence of
RA. Even though the Hoxa1 RARE and proximal promoter show high levels of H3K9,K14
acetylation in Balb/c3T3, the Hoxa1 gene is not transcriptionally activated by
RA. In Balb/c3T3, CpG islands are methylated in the Cyp26a1 promoter region but
not in the Hoxa1 promoter or in these promoters in F9 cells. We have delineated
the complex mechanisms that control RA-mediated transcription in fibroblasts
versus stem cells.

PMCID: PMC2863236
PMID: 20231276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Immunity. 2010 Mar 26;32(3):317-28. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.02.008. Epub 2010 
Mar 4.

Identification and characterization of enhancers controlling the inflammatory
gene expression program in macrophages.

Ghisletti S(1), Barozzi I, Mietton F, Polletti S, De Santa F, Venturini E,
Gregory L, Lonie L, Chew A, Wei CL, Ragoussis J, Natoli G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology (IEO),
IFOM-IEO Campus, Via Adamello 16, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 Mar 26;32(3):296-8.

Enhancers determine tissue-specific gene expression programs. Enhancers are
marked by high histone H3 lysine 4 mono-methylation (H3K4me1) and by the
acetyl-transferase p300, which has allowed genome-wide enhancer identification.
However, the regulatory principles by which subsets of enhancers become active in
specific developmental and/or environmental contexts are unknown. We exploited
inducible p300 binding to chromatin to identify, and then mechanistically
dissect, enhancers controlling endotoxin-stimulated gene expression in
macrophages. In these enhancers, binding sites for the lineage-restricted and
constitutive Ets protein PU.1 coexisted with those for ubiquitous
stress-inducible transcription factors such as NF-kappaB, IRF, and AP-1. PU.1 was
required for maintaining H3K4me1 at macrophage-specific enhancers. Reciprocally, 
ectopic expression of PU.1 reactivated these enhancers in fibroblasts. Thus, the 
combinatorial assembly of tissue- and signal-specific transcription factors
determines the activity of a distinct group of enhancers. We suggest that this
may represent a general paradigm in tissue-restricted and stimulus-responsive
gene regulation.

PMID: 20206554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Ren Fail. 2010 Jan;32(2):243-53. doi: 10.3109/08860220903411164.

Transcription factor Sp1 expression is upregulated in human glomerulonephritis:
correlation with pSmad2/3 and p300 expression and renal injury.

Kassimatis TI(1), Nomikos A, Giannopoulou I, Lymperopoulos A, Moutzouris DA,
Varakis I, Nakopoulou L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Evangelismos General Hospital, Athens, Greece.
tkassimatis@yahoo.gr

BACKGROUND: Sp1 is a ubiquitous transcription factor that mediates the fibrogenic
factor transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signals through cooperation
with Smad proteins. The transcriptional coactivator p300 is also suggested to
play a role in Smad signal transduction.
METHODS: We investigated the immunohistochemical expression of Sp1 as well as the
expression of pSmad2/3 and the coactivator p300 in 157 renal biopsy specimens
from patients with various types of glomerulonephritis (GN). Correlations between
immunohistochemical, clinical, and histologic parameters were performed.
RESULTS: Sp1 exhibited an increased glomerular and proximal tubular expression in
all forms of GN compared to controls. The proximal tubular expression of Sp1 was 
significantly increased in proliferative GNs (p = 0.025), whereas in secondary
GNs, there was a significant increase in the molecule's glomerular expression (p 
= 0.008). Sp1 correlated positively with pSmad2/3 and p300 expression in proximal
tubules (r = 0.241, p = 0.018 and r = 0.244, p = 0.014, respectively), while in
proliferative GNs, its expression correlated positively with pSmad2/3 expression 
in glomeruli (r = 0.32, p = 0.028). Sp1 glomerular and proximal tubular
immunostaining correlated positively with serum creatinine levels (r = 0.265, p =
0.02 and r = 0.306, p = 0.006, respectively), while its proximal tubular
expression showed a similar correlation with interstitial fibrosis (r = 0.213, p 
= 0.025). Sp1 was constantly detected in hyperplastic lesions and cellular
crescents (each 100%), and very often in micro adhesions (94%) and segmentally or
globally sclerotic areas (each 83%).
CONCLUSIONS: This study documents the upregulation of Sp1 expression in glomeruli
and proximal tubules of GN specimens. Our findings suggest a possible cooperation
of Sp1 with pSmad2/3 and p300 in mediating renal injury as well as a possible
role for this molecule in the pathogenesis and the progression of human GN.

PMID: 20199187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 15;9(4):650-1. Epub 2010 Feb 15.

KLF8 sets the pace for the cell cycle through interactions with p300 and PCAF.

Lloyd JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)jlloyd@vcu.edu

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 1;9(3):601-11.

PMID: 20190581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010 Oct;136(10):1573-83. doi:
10.1007/s00432-010-0815-x. Epub 2010 Feb 25.

Decreased nuclear expression and increased cytoplasmic expression of ING5 may be 
linked to tumorigenesis and progression in human head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Li X(1), Nishida T, Noguchi A, Zheng Y, Takahashi H, Yang X, Masuda S, Takano Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Science, University of Toyama, Sugitani 2630, Toyama 930-0194,
Japan.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to assess the protein level of inhibitor of growth gene
5 (ING5) in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and to explore its
roles in tumorigenesis and cancer progression.
METHODS: ING5 expression was assessed in 172 cases of HNSCC by
immunohistochemistry using tissue microarray, and in 3 oral SCC cell lines by
immunohistochemistry and Western blot. Expression of ING5 was compared with
clinicopathological variables, TUNEL assay staining, and the expression of
several tumorigenic markers. In addition, double immunofluorescence labeling was 
performed in order to analyze the colocalization of ING5 with p300 and p21.
RESULTS: ING5 expression was primarily observed in the nuclei, but was also
occasionally found in the cytoplasm of both SCC cell lines and tissue samples of 
HNSCC. Nuclear expression of ING5 in HNSCC was significantly lower than that of
non-cancerous epithelium, and was positively correlated with a
well-differentiated status. In contrast, cytoplasmic expression of ING5 was
significantly increased in HNSCC, and was inversely correlated with a
well-differentiated status and nuclear ING5 expression. In addition, nuclear
expression of ING5 was positively correlated with p21 and p300 expression, and
with the apoptotic index. In contrast, cytoplasmic expression of ING5 was
negatively correlated with the expression of p300, p21, and PCNA. Although no
statistical association was found between the expression of nuclear ING5 and
mutant p53 in HNSCC, patients with high expression of nuclear ING5 tended to have
converse prognoses when grouped according to mutant p53 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that a decrease in nuclear ING5 localization and
cytoplasmic translocation are involved in tumorigenesis and tumor differentiation
in HNSCC. Nuclear ING5 may modulate the transactivation of target genes, and may 
promote apoptosis and cell cycle arrest by interacting with the p300 and p21
proteins. ING5 may function as a tumor suppressor gene or oncogene tightly linked
with p53 status, and may play an important role in the prognosis of HNSCC
patients. Therefore, we propose that ING5 represents a novel potential molecular 
therapeutic target for HNSCC.

PMID: 20182888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2009 Dec;15(12):1102-7.

[Literature-mining and bioinformatic analysis of androgen-independent prostate
cancer-specific genes].

[Article in Chinese]

Li TQ(1), Feng CQ, Zou YG, Shi R, Liang S, Mao XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Nanfang Hospital, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China.
litieqiu@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To compare the differences of the gene expressions in
androgen-independent and androgen-dependent prostate cancer (ADPC), gain a deeper
insight into the molecular mechanism of androgen-independent prostate cancer
(AIPC), and find effective means for its clinical diagnosis and treatment.
METHODS: Eats of genes highly-associated with prostate cancer were obtained by
mining PubMed with the FACTA tool, and the specifically expressed genes in AIPC
were analyzed with a set of bioinformatic tools including GATHER, PANTHER, STRING
and ToppGene.
RESULTS: A total of 128 genes specifically expressed in AIPC were identified, as 
compared with 23 that were specific to ADPC. Bioinformatic analysis showed the
essential roles of AIPC-specific genes in such important biological processes as 
cell signal transduction, cell adhesion, apoptosis, oncogenesis, cell
proliferation and cell differentiation.
CONCLUSION: Such genes as MMPJ, EGFR, MMP2, ADM, MIF, IGFBP3, 112, MET, BAD,
RHOA, SPP1, EP300, SMAD3, RAE1, PTK2, and TGFB2 may play important roles in
transforming ADPC into AIPC.

PMID: 20180422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2010 Mar;29(2):135-45. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e3181bccaec.

p300 expression is related to high-risk human papillomavirus infections and
severity of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia but not to viral or disease
outcomes in a longitudinal setting.

Syrjänen S(1), Naud P, Sarian L, Derchain S, Roteli-Martins C, Longatto-Filho A, 
Tatti S, Branca M, Erzen M, Serpa-Hammes L, Matos J, Arlindo F, Sakamoto-Maeda M,
Costa S, Syrjänen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, Institute of Dentistry, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Turku, Turku, Finland. stina.syrjanen@utu.fi

To evaluate the role of the expression of the transcription factor p300 as an
independent predictor of high-risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) infections and
outcome of the cervical disease.Cervical biopsy samples taken at enrolment from
225 women of the Latin American Screening study cohort were analyzed for p300
using immunohistochemistry to assess its value as predictor of (a) cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) grade, and (b) HR-HPV at baseline, as well as (c)
outcomes of HR-HPV infections, and (d) development of incident CIN as surrogate
endpoints of progressive disease.There was a significant linear trend in
increasing upregulation (=pattern shift) of p300 (P=0.0001) in parallel with
increasing grade of CIN. When dichotomized (normal/moderately increase vs.
strong-intense), upregulated p300 expression predicted CIN3+ with odds ratio=4.16
(95% confidence interval: 1.95-8.86) (P=0.0001) and CIN2+ with odds ratio=3.48
(95% confidence interval: 1.86-6.48) (P=0.0001). p300 was upregulated more often 
in HR-HPV+ lesions than in those remaining negative. Semiquantitative viral loads
were also directly related to upregulation of p300 (P=0.036), but p300 was not a 
significant predictor of disease progression to either CIN1+ or CIN2+.p300
expression was upregulated in CIN lesions and related to detection and viral load
of HR-HPV but not to their outcome or to incident CIN.

PMID: 20173499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Nature. 2010 Feb 18;463(7283):953-7. doi: 10.1038/nature08763.

Rere controls retinoic acid signalling and somite bilateral symmetry.

Vilhais-Neto GC(1), Maruhashi M, Smith KT, Vasseur-Cognet M, Peterson AS, Workman
JL, Pourquié O.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Missouri 64110, USA.

One of the most notable features of the vertebrate body plan organization is its 
bilateral symmetry, evident at the level of vertebrae and skeletal muscles. Here 
we show that a mutation in Rere (also known as atrophin2) leads to the formation 
of asymmetrical somites in mouse embryos, similar to embryos deprived of retinoic
acid. Furthermore, we also demonstrate that Rere controls retinoic acid
signalling, which is required to maintain somite symmetry by interacting with
Fgf8 in the left-right signalling pathway. Rere forms a complex with Nr2f2, p300 
(also known as Ep300) and a retinoic acid receptor, which is recruited to the
retinoic acid regulatory element of retinoic acid targets, such as the Rarb
promoter. Furthermore, the knockdown of Nr2f2 and/or Rere decreases retinoic acid
signalling, suggesting that this complex is required to promote transcriptional
activation of retinoic acid targets. The asymmetrical expression of Nr2f2 in the 
presomitic mesoderm overlaps with the asymmetry of the retinoic acid signalling
response, supporting its implication in the control of somitic symmetry.
Misregulation of this mechanism could be involved in symmetry defects of the
human spine, such as those observed in patients with scoliosis.

PMID: 20164929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. EMBO Rep. 2010 Mar;11(3):220-5. doi: 10.1038/embor.2010.2. Epub 2010 Feb 5.

Skp2B attenuates p53 function by inhibiting prohibitin.

Chander H(1), Halpern M, Resnick-Silverman L, Manfredi JJ, Germain D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

The F-box protein Skp2 and its isoform Skp2B are both overexpressed in breast
cancers. Skp2 alters the activity of p53 by inhibiting its interaction with p300 
and by promoting p300 degradation. Here, we report that Skp2B also attenuates the
activity of p53; however, this effect is independent of p300, suggesting that
another mechanism might be involved. Prohibitin, a protein reported to activate
p53, was isolated in a two-hybrid screen with the carboxy-terminal domain unique 
to Skp2B. We observed that prohibitin is a new substrate of Skp2B and that the
degradation of prohibitin is responsible for the attenuated activity of p53 in
cells overexpressing Skp2B. Furthermore, we show that the activity of p53 is
reduced in the mammary glands of Skp2B transgenic mice. This study indicates that
both Skp2 and Skp2B attenuate p53 activity through different pathways, suggesting
that amplification of the Skp2 locus represents a powerful mechanism to attenuate
p53 function in cancer.

PMCID: PMC2838694
PMID: 20134482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. PLoS Biol. 2010 Jan 26;8(1):e1000296. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000296.

Global regulator SATB1 recruits beta-catenin and regulates T(H)2 differentiation 
in Wnt-dependent manner.

Notani D(1), Gottimukkala KP, Jayani RS, Limaye AS, Damle MV, Mehta S, Purbey PK,
Joseph J, Galande S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune, India.

In vertebrates, the conserved Wnt signalling cascade promotes the stabilization
and nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin, which then associates with the lymphoid
enhancer factor/T cell factor proteins (LEF/TCFs) to activate target genes.
Wnt/beta -catenin signalling is essential for T cell development and
differentiation. Here we show that special AT-rich binding protein 1 (SATB1), the
T lineage-enriched chromatin organizer and global regulator, interacts with
beta-catenin and recruits it to SATB1's genomic binding sites. Gene expression
profiling revealed that the genes repressed by SATB1 are upregulated upon Wnt
signalling. Competition between SATB1 and TCF affects the transcription of
TCF-regulated genes upon beta-catenin signalling. GATA-3 is a T helper type 2
(T(H)2) specific transcription factor that regulates production of T(H)2
cytokines and functions as T(H)2 lineage determinant. SATB1 positively regulated 
GATA-3 and siRNA-mediated knockdown of SATB1 downregulated GATA-3 expression in
differentiating human CD4(+) T cells, suggesting that SATB1 influences T(H)2
lineage commitment by reprogramming gene expression. In the presence of Dickkopf 
1 (Dkk1), an inhibitor of Wnt signalling, GATA-3 is downregulated and the
expression of signature T(H)2 cytokines such as IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13 is
reduced, indicating that Wnt signalling is essential for T(H)2 differentiation.
Knockdown of beta-catenin also produced similar results, confirming the role of
Wnt/beta-catenin signalling in T(H)2 differentiation. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that SATB1 recruits beta-catenin and p300
acetyltransferase on GATA-3 promoter in differentiating T(H)2 cells in a
Wnt-dependent manner. SATB1 coordinates T(H)2 lineage commitment by reprogramming
gene expression. The SATB1:beta-catenin complex activates a number of SATB1
regulated genes, and hence this study has potential to find novel Wnt responsive 
genes. These results demonstrate that SATB1 orchestrates T(H)2 lineage commitment
by mediating Wnt/beta-catenin signalling. This report identifies a new global
transcription factor involved in beta-catenin signalling that may play a major
role in dictating the functional outcomes of this signalling pathway during
development, differentiation, and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2811152
PMID: 20126258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Jul;18(7):768-75. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.1. Epub 2010 Feb
3.

High frequency of copy number imbalances in Rubinstein-Taybi patients negative to
CREBBP mutational analysis.

Gervasini C(1), Mottadelli F, Ciccone R, Castronovo P, Milani D, Scarano G,
Bedeschi MF, Belli S, Pilotta A, Selicorni A, Zuffardi O, Larizza L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, San Paolo School of Medicine, University of
Milan, Milan, Italy.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder
characterised by facial dysmorphisms, growth and psychomotor development delay,
and skeletal defects. The known genetic causes are point mutations or deletions
of the CREBBP (50-60%) and EP300 (5%) genes. To detect chromosomal rearrangements
indicating novel positional candidate RSTS genes, we used a-CGH to study 26
patients fulfilling the diagnostic criteria for RSTS who were negative at
fluorescence in situ hybridisation analyses of the CREBBP and EP300 regions, and 
direct sequencing analyses of the CREBBP gene. We found seven imbalances (27%):
four de novo and three inherited rearrangements not reported among the copy
number variants. A de novo 7p21.1 deletion of 500 kb included the TWIST1 gene, a 
suggested candidate for RSTS that is responsible for the Saethre-Chotzen
syndrome, an entity that enters in differential diagnosis with RSTS. A similar
issue of differential diagnosis was raised by a large 4.3 Mb 2q22.3q23.1 deletion
encompassing ZEB2, the gene responsible for the Mowat-Wilson syndrome, whose
signs may overlap with RSTS. Positional candidate genes could not be sought in
the remaining pathogenetic imbalances, because of the size of the involved region
(a 9 Mb 2q24.3q31.1 deletion) and/or the relative paucity of suitable genes (a 5 
Mb 3p13p12.3 duplication). One of the inherited rearrangements, the 17q11.2 379Kb
duplication, represents the reciprocal event of the deletion underlying an
overgrowth syndrome, both being mediated by the NF1-REP-P1 and REP-P2
sub-duplicons. The contribution of this and the other detected CNVs to the
clinical RSTS phenotype is difficult to assess.

PMCID: PMC2987354
PMID: 20125191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 1;9(3):601-11.

KLF8 recruits the p300 and PCAF co-activators to its amino terminal activation
domain to activate transcription.

Urvalek AM(1), Wang X, Lu H, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany,
NY, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 15;9(4):649-50.
    Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 15;9(4):650-1.

Krüppel-like factor 8 (KLF8) regulates critical cellular processes including cell
cycle progression, transformation, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition,
migration and invasion by either repressing or activating target gene promoters. 
As a repressor, KLF8 recruits the CtBP co-repressor via its PVDLS repression
motif. However, how KLF8 acts as an activator has not been determined. Here we
report the identification of both the KLF8 activation domain and associated
co-activators. By site-directed mutagenesis and cyclin D1 promoter reporter
assays using both mouse fibroblasts and human epithelial cells, we determined
that deletion of residues 100-260 or mutation of Q118-Q248 abolished KLF8
transactivity. this transactivity was dramatically reduced in p300(-/-), CBP(-/-)
or PCAF(-/-) cells and could be restored by re-expressing p300 or PCAF, but not
CBP. Co-immunoprecipitation analyses demonstrated that KLF8 interacted with these
co-activators whereas the Q118N-Q248N mutant did not. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments showed that KLF8 promoted histone acetylation at 
the promoter whereas the Q118N-Q248N mutant had a dramatic loss of this function.
Western blotting revealed that unlike wild-type KLF8 the Q118N-Q248N was no
longer able to upregulate cyclin D1 protein level. BrdU incorporation assays
showed that the Q118N-Q248N mutant also lost the ability to promote DNA
synthesis. Taken together, these results identified the KLF8 activation domain
located between residues 101-260 where the well-conserved Q118 and Q248 are
essential for recruiting p300 and PCAF to activate target gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2888133
PMID: 20107328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Oncogene. 2010 Apr 8;29(14):2142-52. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.498. Epub 2010 Jan 25.

The HTLV-1 tax protein cooperates with phosphorylated CREB, TORC2 and p300 to
activate CRE-dependent cyclin D1 transcription.

Kim YM(1), Geiger TR, Egan DI, Sharma N, Nyborg JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, CO 80523-1870, USA.

Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma is a fatal malignancy etiologically linked to
infection with the human T-cell leukemia virus (HTLV-1). The virally encoded
oncoprotein Tax activates the transcription of HTLV-1 and cellular genes by
cooperating with cellular transcription factors. Cyclin D1 is a pivotal regulator
of cell cycle progression, and increased expression strongly correlates with
malignant transformation. Here, we characterize the mechanism of Tax
transactivation of cyclin D1. We find that cyclin D1 transcript levels are
elevated in HTLV-1 infected cells and that Tax physically associates with the
cyclin D1 gene in vivo. Tax binds the cyclin D1 promoter-proximal cyclic AMP
response element (CRE) in the presence of phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) in vitro,
and together the Tax-pCREB complex recruits the cellular co-activator p300 to the
promoter through this unconventional Tax-responsive element. We further show that
the transducer of regulated CREB 2 (TORC2) cooperates with Tax to further enhance
p300 recruitment to the cyclin D1 promoter in vitro. Tax and TORC2 in combination
stimulate cyclin D1 expression in vivo, demonstrating the functional outcome of
the binding interactions. Together, our findings support a model in which
Tax-induced accumulation of cyclin D1 shortens the G1 phase of the cell cycle,
promotes mitotic replication of the virus, and drives selection and expansion of 
malignant T-cells.

PMCID: PMC2851846
PMID: 20101207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Exp Mol Pathol. 2010 Apr;88(2):256-64. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2010.01.007. Epub
2010 Jan 25.

Intracellular distribution of p300 and its differential recruitment to aggresomes
in breast cancer.

Fermento ME(1), Gandini NA, Lang CA, Perez JE, Maturi HV, Curino AC, Facchinetti 
MM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología Básica del Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones
Bioquímicas Bahía Blanca (INIBIBB-CONICET), Camino La Carrindanga Km 7, 8000,
Bahía Blanca, Argentina.

Retraction in
    Exp Mol Pathol. 2013 Apr;94(2):418.

It has been recently suggested that p300 cytoplasmic redistribution and
degradation are important for controlling the availability and activity of the
protein as a transcriptional coactivator. As a step towards determining the
functional relevance of p300 intracellular redistribution in mammary cancer, we
aimed at studying p300 localization in two different animal models of mammary
carcinoma as well as in human primary breast carcinoma samples. Analysis of p300 
protein levels showed stronger expression in tumor epithelia than in normal
mammary gland. Cytoplasmic localization of p300 was observed in malignant cells. 
Furthermore, cytoplasmic p300 was found in tumor epithelia whereas nuclear
localization was observed in normal mammary glands in both animal models and in
non-malignant adjacent areas of human breast cancer specimens. Interestingly,
proteasomal inhibition induced p300 redistribution to perinuclear inclusion
bodies in tumor but not in normal mammary gland-derived cells. These inclusions
were confirmed to be aggresomes by doing immunofluorescence for ubiquitin,
vimentin and 20S proteasomal subunit. Taken together, these findings show that
both the localization of p300 and the recruitment to aggresomes differ between
mammary tumors and normal mammary glands, and suggest that the formation of these
inclusions could be a potential target for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20097195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Cell Cycle. 2010 Feb 1;9(3):612-7.

Cardiac ventricular chambers are epigenetically distinguishable.

Mathiyalagan P(1), Chang L, Du XJ, El-Osta A.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics in Human Health and Disease Laboratory, Baker IDI Heart and
Diabetes Institute, The Alfred Medical Research and Education Precinct,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

The left and right ventricles are muscular chambers of the heart that differ
significantly in the extent of pressure work-load. The regional and differential 
distribution of gene expression patterns is critical not only for heart
development, but, also in the establishment of cardiac hypertrophy phenotypes.
the cells of the myocardium employ elaborate regulatory mechanisms to establish
changes in chromatin structure and function, yet, the role of epigenetic
modifications and specific gene expression patterns in cardiac ventricles remains
poorly understood. We have examined gene expression changes and studied histone
H3 and H4 acetylation as well as dimethylation of lysine 4 on histone H3 on
promoters of alpha-Myosin heavy chain gene (alpha-MHC), beta-Myosin heavy chain
gene (beta-MHC), Atrial natriuretic peptide gene (ANp), B-type natriuretic
peptide gene (BNP) and Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase gene (SERCA2a). The
recruitment of histone acetyltransferase (HAT) enzyme p300, which is a
transcriptional coactivator, was also studied on the hyperacetylated promoters
using immunopurification of soluble chromatin in the left and right ventricles of
the mouse. We present evidence for the first time that the pattern of gene
expression is closely linked with histone modifications and propose the left and 
right chambers of the heart are epigenetically distinguishable.

PMID: 20090419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 26;285(13):9556-68. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.070458. Epub 2010
Jan 17.

Cyclin-dependent kinase-9 is a component of the p300/GATA4 complex required for
phenylephrine-induced hypertrophy in cardiomyocytes.

Sunagawa Y(1), Morimoto T, Takaya T, Kaichi S, Wada H, Kawamura T, Fujita M,
Shimatsu A, Kita T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research, Kyoto Medical Center, National Hospital
Organization, 1-1 Mukaihata-cho, Fukakusa, Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

A zinc finger protein GATA4 is one of the hypertrophy-responsive transcription
factors and forms a complex with an intrinsic histone acetyltransferase, p300.
Disruption of this complex results in the inhibition of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy
and heart failure in vivo. By tandem affinity purification and mass spectrometric
analyses, we identified cyclin-dependent kinase-9 (Cdk9) as a novel GATA4-binding
partner. Cdk9 also formed a complex with p300 as well as GATA4 and cyclin T1. We 
showed that p300 was required for the interaction of GATA4 with Cdk9 and for the 
kinase activity of Cdk9. Conversely, Cdk9 kinase activity was required for the
p300-induced transcriptional activities, DNA binding, and acetylation of GATA4.
Furthermore, the kinase activity of Cdk9 was required for the phosphorylation of 
p300 as well as for cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. These findings demonstrate that
Cdk9 forms a functional complex with the p300/GATA4 and is required for
p300/GATA4- transcriptional pathway during cardiomyocyte hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC2843206
PMID: 20081228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Apr 1;109(5):1045-56. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22488.

Activation and induction of cytosolic phospholipase A2 by IL-1beta in human
tracheal smooth muscle cells: role of MAPKs/p300 and NF-kappaB.

Lee CW(1), Lee IT, Lin CC, Lee HC, Lin WN, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Medical Sciences, Department of Nursing, Chang Gung
Institute of Technology, Chia-Yi, Taiwan.

Cytosolic phospholipase A(2) (cPLA(2)) plays a pivotal role in mediating
agonist-induced arachidonic acid (AA) release for prostaglandin (PG) synthesis
during inflammation triggered by IL-1beta. However, the mechanisms underlying
IL-1beta-induced cPLA(2) expression and PGE(2) synthesis in human tracheal smooth
muscle cells (HTSMCs) remain unknown. IL-1beta-induced cPLA(2) protein and mRNA
expression, PGE(2) production, or phosphorylation of p42/p44 MAPK, p38 MAPK, and 
JNK1/2, which was attenuated by pretreatment with the inhibitors of MEK1/2
(U0126), p38 MAPK (SB202190), and JNK1/2 (SP600125) or transfection with siRNAs
of MEK1, p42, p38, and JNK2. IL-1beta-induced cPLA(2) expression was also
inhibited by pretreatment with a NF-kappaB inhibitor, helenalin or transfection
with siRNA of NIK, IKKalpha, or IKKbeta. IL-beta-induced NF-kappaB translocation 
was blocked by pretreatment with helenalin, but not U0126, SB202190, and
SP600125. In addition, transfection with p300 siRNA blocked cPLA(2) expression
induced by IL-1beta. Moreover, p300 was associated with the cPLA(2) promoter,
which was dynamically linked to histone H4 acetylation stimulated by IL-1beta.
These results suggest that in HTSMCs, activation of MAPKs, NF-kappaB, and p300
are essential for IL-1beta-induced cPLA(2) expression and PGE(2) secretion.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20069553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Cells. 2010 Jan;29(1):57-62. doi: 10.1007/s10059-010-0004-4. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

IFN-gamma down-regulates TGF-beta1-induced IgA expression through Stat1 and p300 
signaling.

Park SR(1), Jung MH, Jeon SH, Park MH, Park KH, Lee MR, Kim PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Bioscience, School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, 200-701, Korea.

IFN-gamma has been shown to either up- or down-regulate the expression of
specific TGF-beta1-induced target genes. We investigated the effect of IFN-gamma 
on TGF-beta1-induced IgA isotype expression. We found that IFN-gamma inhibited
not only TGF-beta1-induced germ-line (GL) alpha transcription, but also IgA
secretion by TGF-beta1-stimulated murine B cells. Overexpression of Stat1
diminished TGF-beta1-induced, Smad3/4-and Runx3-mediated GL alpha promoter
activity. Overexpression of p300 also increased the promoter activity, while its 
effect was abrogated by co-transfected Stat1. Stat1 interfered with the
Smad3:p300 interaction, likely due to a stronger Stat1:p300 binding affinity.
These results indicate that Stat1 can inhibit GL alpha transcription through
binding to p300. Further, overexpression of SOCS1, a JAK inhibitor, diminished
the antagonistic effect of IFN-gamma on TGF-beta1-induced GL alpha transcription 
and IgA secretion. These results indicate that JAK/Stat1-mediated IFN-gamma
signaling antagonizes TGF-beta1-induced GL alpha transcription, mainly through
deprivation of p300 from Smad3, resulting in decreased IgA synthesis.

PMID: 20016942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Jan;152A(1):181-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33153.

Two patients with EP300 mutations and facial dysmorphism different from the
classic Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.

Bartsch O(1), Labonté J, Albrecht B, Wieczorek D, Lechno S, Zechner U, Haaf T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsmedizin der Johannes
Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Langenbeckstrasse 1, D-55131 Mainz, Germany.
bartsch@humgen.klinik.uni-mainz.de

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Nov;152A(11):2939-41.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is characterized by mental retardation, broad
thumbs and great toes and a recognizable craniofacial phenotype. Causative
mutations have been described in the CREBBP and EP300 genes. Here we present a
19-year-old woman and an unrelated 3-year-old boy, both with broad thumbs and
halluces, but with facial aspects distinct from those of typical RTS. The woman
had a marked learning disability, but no mental retardation. We identified a de
novo c.7100delC mutation in EP300 (which predicts p.P2366RfsX35) in the woman and
an apparently de novo c.638delG mutation in the boy, which predicts p.G213EfsX6. 
Mutations in EP300 are a known but rare cause of RTS. Only five other patients
have been reported. We propose that individuals with EP300 mutations may exhibit 
a slightly different phenotype compared to individuals with CREBBP mutations,
with milder cognitive impairment, more pronounced microcephaly, absent or mild
downslanting of palpebral fissures, distinct arched eyebrows, and greater degree 
of retrognathia.

PMID: 20014264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Dec;7(12):2011-21. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0239. Epub 
2009 Dec 8.

Gallic acid suppresses lipopolysaccharide-induced nuclear factor-kappaB signaling
by preventing RelA acetylation in A549 lung cancer cells.

Choi KC(1), Lee YH, Jung MG, Kwon SH, Kim MJ, Jun WJ, Lee J, Lee JM, Yoon HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, 134 Sicnchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, South Korea.

Although multiple studies have revealed that gallic acid plays an important role 
in the inhibition of malignant transformation, cancer development, and
inflammation, the molecular mechanism of gallic acid in inflammatory diseases is 
still unclear. In this study, we identified gallic acid from Rosa rugosa as a
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) inhibitor with global specificity for the
majority of HAT enzymes, but with no activity toward epigenetic enzymes including
sirtuin (silent mating type information regulation 2 homologue) 1 (S.
cerevisiae), histone deacetylase, and histone methyltransferase. Enzyme kinetic
studies indicated that gallic acid uncompetitively inhibits p300/CBP-dependent
HAT activities. We found that gallic acid inhibits p300-induced p65 acetylation, 
both in vitro and in vivo, increases the level of cytosolic IkappaBalpha,
prevents lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced p65 translocation to the nucleus, and
suppresses LPS-induced nuclear factor-kappaB activation in A549 lung cancer
cells. We have also shown that gallic acid treatment inhibits the acetylation of 
p65 and the LPS-induced serum levels of interleukin-6 in vivo. Importantly,
gallic acid generally inhibited inflammatory responses caused by other stimuli,
including LPS, IFN-gamma, and interleukin-1beta, and further downregulated the
expression of nuclear factor-kappaB-regulated antiapoptotic genes. These results 
show the crucial role of acetylation in the development of inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 19996305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Dec;7(12):1928-36. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0372. Epub 
2009 Dec 8.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4-independent synthesis of coagulation factor VII in
breast cancer cells and its inhibition by targeting selective histone
acetyltransferases.

Koizume S(1), Yokota N, Miyagi E, Hirahara F, Nakamura Y, Sakuma Y, Yoshida A,
Kameda Y, Tsuchiya E, Ruf W, Miyagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology and Genetics Division, Kanagawa Cancer Center Research
Institute, 1-1-2 Nakao, Asahi-ku, Yokohama 241-0815, Japan.

Tissue factor/coagulation factor VII (fVII) complex formation on the surface of
cancer cells plays important roles in cancer biology, such as cell migration and 
invasion, angiogenesis, and antiapoptotic effects. We recently found that various
cancer cells ectopically synthesize fVII, resulting in activation of cell
motility and invasion. Here, we characterized mechanisms of hepatic and ectopic
fVII (FVII) gene expression to identify molecular targets enabling selective
inhibition of the ectopic expression. Unlike hepatic expression, hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4 binding to the promoter is not required for ectopic FVII
expression, although Sp1 binding is essential. Furthermore, we found novel
nuclear targets of basal hepatocytic and ectopic FVII expression. Notably,
histone acetyltransferases p300 and cyclic AMP-responsive element binding
protein-binding protein (CBP) are exclusively recruited to the promoter region of
the FVII gene specifically in breast cancer cells. We further show that curcumin,
a dietary compound, can selectively inhibit ectopic fVII expression by targeting 
p300/CBP activity. These results suggest a strategy to inhibit ectopic
fVII-induced tumor progression without impairment of the physiologic hemostatic
process.

PMCID: PMC2796277
PMID: 19996301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Circ J. 2010 Jan;74(1):156-62. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

Aldosterone signaling associates with p300/GATA4 transcriptional pathway during
the hypertrophic response of cardiomyocytes.

Yoshida Y(1), Morimoto T, Takaya T, Kawamura T, Sunagawa Y, Wada H, Fujita M,
Shimatsu A, Kita T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Aldosterone exerts its effect by binding to specific
mineralocorticoid receptors (MRs). Spironolactone blocks the aldosterone system, 
which ameliorates heart failure in humans, but the precise molecular mechanisms
of MR blockade are unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were stimulated with
phenylephrine (PE), aldosterone, and/or spironolactone. The association of the MR
with p300, a transcriptional coactivator of GATA4 required for hypertrophic
responses, was examined. MR and p300 synergistically activated GATA4-dependent
atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) promoter activities. The stimulation of
cardiomyocytes with PE induced translocation of the MRs into the nuclei and
markedly increased the association of MRs with p300. Compatible with the
synergistic activation by the MR and p300, aldosterone further augmented the
PE-induced increase in cell size and induction of ANF gene transcription.
Blockade of MR activation by spironolactone inhibited the PE-induced nuclear
translocation of MRs and hypertrophic responses.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time it has been demonstrated that the aldosterone/MR 
system associates with the p300/GATA4 transcriptional pathway during the
hypertrophic response of cardiomyocytes, and may provide a mechanism of the
beneficial effects of aldosterone-blocking agents in heart failure therapy in
humans. (Circ J 2010; 74: 156 - 162).

PMID: 19966502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2009 Dec;65(Pt 12):1301-8. doi:
10.1107/S0907444909040153. Epub 2009 Nov 17.

Structure of the Taz2 domain of p300: insights into ligand binding.

Miller M(1), Dauter Z, Cherry S, Tropea JE, Wlodawer A.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Structure Section, Macromolecular Crystallography Laboratory,
NCI-Frederick, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA. mariami@mail.nih.gov

CBP and its paralog p300 are histone acetyl transferases that regulate gene
expression by interacting with multiple transcription factors via specialized
domains. The structure of a segment of human p300 protein (residues 1723-1836)
corresponding to the extended zinc-binding Taz2 domain has been investigated. The
crystal structure was solved by the SAD approach utilizing the anomalous
diffraction signal of the bound Zn ions. The structure comprises an atypical
helical bundle stabilized by three Zn ions and closely resembles the solution
structures determined previously for shorter peptides. Residues 1813-1834 from
the current construct form a helical extension of the C-terminal helix and make
extensive crystal-contact interactions with the peptide-binding site of Taz2,
providing additional insights into the mechanism of the recognition of diverse
transactivation domains (TADs) by Taz2. On the basis of these results and
molecular modeling, a hypothetical model of the binding of phosphorylated p53
TAD1 to Taz2 has been proposed.

PMCID: PMC2789004
PMID: 19966416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Cancer Lett. 2010 May 28;291(2):237-45. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.10.018. Epub
2009 Nov 30.

Histone acetyltransferase p300 is a coactivator for transcription factor REL and 
is C-terminally truncated in the human diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell line
RC-K8.

Garbati MR(1), Alço G, Gilmore TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Human c-Rel (REL) is a member of the NF-kappaB family of transcription factors.
REL's normal physiological role is in the regulation of B-cell proliferation and 
survival. The REL gene is amplified in many human B-cell lymphomas and
overexpression of REL can transform chicken lymphoid cells. In this report,
histone acetyltransferase p300 enhanced REL-induced transactivation and
interacted with REL both in vitro and in REL-transformed chicken spleen cells and
the B-lymphoma cell line RC-K8, in which REL is constitutively active and
required for proliferation. However, due to a deletion in the EP300 locus, only a
C-terminally truncated form of p300 is expressed in RC-K8 cells. These results
suggest a role for p300 in REL-mediated oncogenic activity in B lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC2849871
PMID: 19948376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Sep;123(2):359-73. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0652-2. 
Epub 2009 Nov 27.

UHRF1 is associated with epigenetic silencing of BRCA1 in sporadic breast cancer.

Jin W(1), Chen L, Chen Y, Xu SG, Di GH, Yin WJ, Wu J, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Breast Cancer Institute, Cancer Hospital/Cancer 
Institute, Fudan University, 200032, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
jinwei7207@163.com

BRCA1 is closely related to the pathogenesis of breast cancer, BRCA1 mRNA is
reduced in sporadic breast cancer cells despite the lack of mutations. In the
present report, we found that overexpression of UHRF1 (ubiquitin-like, containing
PHD and RING finger domains 1) was closely related to DNA methylation,
deacetylation, and methylation of histones, recruitment of an inhibiting
transcriptional complex on the BRCA1 promoter in sporadic breast cancer.
Overexpression of UHRF1 induced deacetylation of histones H3 and H4, which was
facilitated by recruitment of histone deacetylase1 (HDAC1) to the BRCA1 promoter.
Loss of acetylation was accompanied by loss of binding of the key transcription
factors MyoD, CBP, and p300. UHRF1 also recruited histone lysine
methyltransferase G9a to the BRCA1 promoter and histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4) was
demethylated, and histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) was methylated. Finally,
overexpression of UHRF1 leaded to methylation of BRCA1 promoter by recruitment of
DNMT1 to the BRCA1 promoter, locking in marked suppression of BRCA1. It is the
first to describe that UHRF1 is responsible for regulating BRCA1 transcription by
inducing DNA methylation, histone modifications, and recruitment of
transcriptional complex on the BRCA1 promoter, UHRF1 is a new bio-marker in
sporadic breast cancer.

PMID: 19943104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Psychopathology. 2010;43(1):63-8. doi: 10.1159/000260045. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Psychiatric profile in rubinstein-taybi syndrome. A review and case report.

Verhoeven WM(1), Tuinier S, Kuijpers HJ, Egger JI, Brunner HG.

Author information: 
(1)Vincent van Gogh Institute for Psychiatry, Center of Excellence for
Neuropsychiatry, Venray, The Netherlands. wverhoeven@vvgi.nl

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is primarily
clinical and based on the characteristic phenotype that is often combined with a 
variety of somatic anomalies and psychiatric disorders.
SAMPLING AND METHODS: In this paper, a review is presented of the psychiatric and
behavioural aspects of RTS. This is illustrated with a case report.
RESULTS: Behavioural aspects of about 150 patients are described, and include a
variable degree of mental retardation, impulsivity, distractibility, instability 
of mood and stereotypies. In general, patients with RTS are described as sociable
and friendly. Information about brain pathology is virtually absent. In about
half of the cases, the syndrome is caused by a mutation or deletion of the
CREB-binding protein (CBP) gene (16p13.3). The case report deals with an adult
male who was referred for impulsivity and temper outbursts. A provisional
diagnosis of atypical depression was made, and treatment with citalopram resulted
in a remarkable amelioration of his mood and behaviour that persisted for more
than 2 years (last observation).
CONCLUSION: Patients with undetected genetic syndromes do occur in clinical
psychiatry, and the clinician has to consider such disorders in cases with
disturbed development, dysmorphias and somatic comorbidity.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19940543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Dec;149A(12):2849-54. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33129.

Two adults with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome with mild mental retardation, glaucoma,
normal growth and skull circumference, and camptodactyly of third fingers.

Wieczorek D(1), Bartsch O, Lechno S, Kohlhase J, Peters DJ, Dauwerse H,
Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Hennekam RC, Passarge E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45122 
Essen, Germany. dagmar.wieczorek@uni-due.de

The Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS; OMIM 180849) is a well-defined mental
retardation/multiple congenital anomalies (MR/MCA) syndrome characterized by
postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, specific facial features, broad
thumbs and halluces, and MR of variable degree. Ten percent of patients with RTS 
have a microdeletion 16p13.3, 40-50% carry a mutation of the CREBBP gene and
another 3% have a mutation in the EP300 gene. In the remaining patients with
clinically suspected RTS no mutation can be detected. Here we describe two
patients with an RTS phenotype, one with a mutation in the CREBBP gene and the
other without a detectable CREBBP or EP300 mutation and without a chromosomal
imbalance on high-resolution arrays. Both patients present with the
characteristic facial RTS phenotype, broad thumbs and big toes, mild MR,
formation of keloids and glaucoma, but without postnatal growth retardation or
microcephaly. In addition, they have both congenital camptodactyly of third (and 
fourth) fingers, which has not reported in RTS previously. We suggest that they
represent a clinical subtype of RTS.

PMID: 19938080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Mol Brain. 2009 Nov 19;2:34. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-2-34.

CBP/p300 is a cell type-specific modulator of CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcription.

Hosoda H(1), Kato K, Asano H, Ito M, Kato H, Iwamoto T, Suzuki A, Masushige S,
Kida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Faculty of Applied Bioscience, Tokyo University of
Agriculture, 1-1-1 Sakuragaoka, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8502, Japan.
hhosoda@juntendo.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have demonstrated tissue-specific regulation of the 
rhythm of circadian transcription, suggesting that transcription factor complex
CLOCK/BMAL1, essential for maintaining circadian rhythm, regulates transcription 
in a tissue-specific manner. To further elucidate the mechanism of the cell
type-specific regulation of transcription by CLOCK/BMAL1 at the molecular level, 
we investigated roles of CBP/p300 and tissue-specific cofactors in
CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcription.
RESULTS: As shown previously, CBP/p300 stimulates CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated
transcription in COS-1 cells. However, CBP/p300 repressed CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated
transcription in NIH3T3 cells and knockdown of CBP or p300 expression by siRNA
enhanced this transcription. Studies using GAL4-fusion proteins suggested that
CBP represses CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcription by targeting CLOCK. We further
investigated mechanisms of this cell type-specific modulation of
CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcription by CBP by examining roles of co-repressor
HDAC3 and co-activator pCAF, which are highly expressed in NIH3T3 and COS cells, 
respectively. CBP repressed CLOCK/BMAL1-mediated transcription in COS-1 cells
when HDAC3 was overexpressed, but activated it in NIH3T3 cells when pCAF was
overexpressed. CBP forms a complex with CLOCK by interacting with HDAC3 or pCAF; 
however, direct interaction of CBP with CLOCK was not observed.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate possible mechanisms by which CBP/p300
tissue-specifically acts cooperatively with pCAF and HDAC3 either as a
co-activator or co-repressor, respectively, for CLOCK/BMAL1.

PMCID: PMC2785803
PMID: 19922678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 17;106(46):19286-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0905469106. Epub 2009 Oct 30.

Dynamic bookmarking of primary response genes by p300 and RNA polymerase II
complexes.

Byun JS(1), Wong MM, Cui W, Idelman G, Li Q, De Siervi A, Bilke S, Haggerty CM,
Player A, Wang YH, Thirman MJ, Kaberlein JJ, Petrovas C, Koup RA, Longo D, Ozato 
K, Gardner K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Profiling the dynamic interaction of p300 with proximal promoters of human T
cells identified a class of genes that rapidly coassemble p300 and RNA polymerase
II (pol II) following mitogen stimulation. Several of these p300 targets are
immediate early genes, including FOS, implicating a prominent role for p300 in
the control of primary genetic responses. The recruitment of p300 and pol II
rapidly transitions to the assembly of several elongation factors, including the 
positive transcriptional elongation factor (P-TEFb), the bromodomain-containing
protein (BRD4), and the elongin-like eleven nineteen lysine-rich leukemia protein
(ELL). However, transcription at many of these rapidly induced genes is
transient, wherein swift departure of P-TEFb, BRD4, and ELL coincides with
termination of transcriptional elongation. Unexpectedly, both p300 and pol II
remain accumulated or "bookmarked" at the proximal promoter long after
transcription has terminated, demarking a clear mechanistic separation between
the recruitment and elongation phases of transcription in vivo. The bookmarked
pol II is depleted of both serine-2 and serine-5 phosphorylation of its
C-terminal domain and remains proximally positioned at the promoter for hours.
Surprisingly, these p300/pol II bookmarked genes can be readily reactivated, and 
elongation factors can be reassembled by subsequent addition of nonmitogenic
agents that, alone, have minimal effects on transcription in the absence of prior
preconditioning by mitogen stimulation. These findings suggest that p300 is
likely to play an important role in biological processes in which transcriptional
bookmarking or preconditioning influences cellular growth and development through
the dynamic priming of genes for response to rechallenge by secondary stimuli.

PMCID: PMC2780808
PMID: 19880750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 1;285(1):409-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.038620. Epub 2009
Oct 26.

Increased cAMP levels modulate transforming growth factor-beta/Smad-induced
expression of extracellular matrix components and other key fibroblast effector
functions.

Schiller M(1), Dennler S, Anderegg U, Kokot A, Simon JC, Luger TA, Mauviel A,
Böhm M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cell Biology and
Immunobiology of the Skin, 48149 Münster, Germany. schillm@uni-muenster.de

cAMP is a key messenger of many hormones and neuropeptides, some of which
modulate the composition of extracellular matrix. Treatment of human dermal
fibroblasts with dibutyryl cyclic AMP and forskolin antagonized the inductive
effects of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) on the expression of
collagen, connective tissue growth factor, tissue inhibitor of matrix
metalloproteinase-1, and plasminogen activator inhibitor type I, four
prototypical TGF-beta-responsive genes. Increased intracellular cAMP prevented
TGF-beta-induced Smad-specific gene transactivation, although TGF-beta-mediated
Smad phosphorylation and nuclear translocation remained unaffected. However,
increased cAMP levels abolished TGF-beta-induced interaction of Smad3 with its
transcriptional co-activator cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB)-binding
protein (CBP)/p300. Overexpression of the transcriptional co-activator CBP/p300
rescued Smad-specific gene transcription in the presence of cAMP suggesting that 
sequestration of limited amounts of CBP/p300 by the activated cAMP/CREB pathway
is the molecular basis of this inhibitory effect. These findings were extended by
two functional assays. Increased intracellular cAMP levels suppressed the
inductive activity of TGF-beta to contract mechanically unloaded collagen
lattices and resulted in an attenuation of fibroblast migration of mechanically
induced cell layer wounds. Of note, cAMP and TGF-beta synergistically induced
hyaluronan synthase 2 (HAS2) expression and hyaluronan secretion, presumably via 
putative CREB-binding sites adjacent to Smad-binding sites within the HAS2
promoter. Our findings identify the cAMP pathway as a potent but differential and
promoter-specific regulator of TGF-beta-mediated effects involved in
extracellular matrix homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2804188
PMID: 19858184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Genet Couns. 2009;20(3):255-60.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome and CREBBP c.201 202delTA mutation: a case presenting
with varicella meningoencephalitis.

Çaksen H(1), Bartsch O, Okur M, Temel H, Açikgoz M, Yilmaz C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yüzüncü Yil University, Faculty of Medicine, Van,
Turkey. huseyincaksen@hotmail.com

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare syndrome with a frequency of
approximately 1 in 125,000 affected newborns, which is characterized by mental
retardation, growth retardation, a particular dysmorphology and, in a subset of
cases, immunodeficiency. RTS is typically caused by CREBBP deficiency, and
heterozygous mutation or deletion of the CREBBP gene has been identified in
60-70% of patients. The inheritance is autosomal dominant but reports of vertical
transmission are exceedingly rare; near-all cases are caused by de novo
mutations. Here we present an 8-month-old boy with varicella meningoencephalitis,
RTS, and a de novo deletion of the CREBBP gene of two base pairs at position
201-202 in exon 2, c. 201 202delT. The mutation has not been described previously
but it predicts a protein truncation, and truncating CREBBP mutations are typical
causes of RTS.

PMID: 19852432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Oncogene. 2010 Jan 14;29(2):201-13. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.323. Epub 2009 Oct 19.

Notch-1 activates estrogen receptor-alpha-dependent transcription via IKKalpha in
breast cancer cells.

Hao L(1), Rizzo P, Osipo C, Pannuti A, Wyatt D, Cheung LW, Sonenshein G, Osborne 
BA, Miele L.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Cardinal Bernardin Cancer Center, Loyola University
Chicago, Maywood, IL, USA.

Approximately 80% of breast cancers express the estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha)
and are treated with anti-estrogens. Resistance to these agents is a major cause 
of mortality. We have shown that estrogen inhibits Notch, whereas anti-estrogens 
or estrogen withdrawal activate Notch signaling. Combined inhibition of Notch and
estrogen signaling has synergistic effects in ERalpha-positive breast cancer
models. However, the mechanisms whereby Notch-1 promotes the growth of
ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells are unknown. Here, we demonstrate that
Notch-1 increases the transcription of ERalpha-responsive genes in the presence
or absence of estrogen via a novel chromatin crosstalk mechanism. Our data
support a model in which Notch-1 can activate the transcription of ERalpha-target
genes via IKKalpha-dependent cooperative chromatin recruitment of Notch-CSL-MAML1
transcriptional complexes (NTC) and ERalpha, which promotes the recruitment of
p300. CSL binding elements frequently occur in close proximity to
estrogen-responsive elements (EREs) in the human and mouse genomes. Our
observations suggest that a hitherto unknown Notch-1/ERalpha chromatin crosstalk 
mediates Notch signaling effects in ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells and
contributes to regulate the transcriptional functions of ERalpha itself.

PMID: 19838210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2010 Jan;42(1):148-56. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2009.10.003. Epub 2009 Oct 12.

Scleraxis and E47 cooperatively regulate the Sox9-dependent transcription.

Furumatsu T(1), Shukunami C, Amemiya-Kudo M, Shimano H, Ozaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Science of Functional Recovery and
Reconstruction, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kitaku, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.
matino@md.okayama-u.ac.jp

During musculoskeletal development, Sry-type HMG box 9 (Sox9) has a crucial role 
in mesenchymal condensation and chondrogenesis. On the other hand, a
tissue-specific basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Scleraxis
(Scx) regulates the differentiation of tendon and ligament progenitors. Whereas
these two transcription factors cooperatively participate in the determination of
cellular lineages, the precise interaction between Sox9 and Scx remains unclear. 
We have previously demonstrated that the Sox9-dependent transcription is
synergistically activated by several Sox9-associating molecules, such as p300 and
Smad3, on chromatin. In this study, we investigated the function of Scx in the
Sox9-dependent transcription. The expression of alpha1(II) collagen (Col2a1) gene
was stimulated by an appropriate transduction of Sox9 and Scx. Scx and its
partner E47, which dimerizes with other bHLH proteins, cooperatively enhanced the
Sox9-dependent transcription in luciferase reporter assays. Coactivator p300
synergistically increased the activity of Sox9-regulated reporter gene, which
contains promoter and enhancer regions of Col2a1, in the presence of Scx and E47.
Immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that Scx and E47 formed a transcriptional
complex with Sox9 and p300. Scx/E47 heterodimer also associated with a conserved 
E-box sequence (CAGGTG) in the Col2a1 promoter on chromatin. These findings
suggest that Scx and E47 might modulate the primary chondrogenesis by associating
with the Sox9-related transcriptional complex, and by binding to the conserved
E-box on Col2a1 promoter.

PMID: 19828133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mol Cancer. 2009 Oct 14;8:85. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-85.

HIPK2 modulates p53 activity towards pro-apoptotic transcription.

Puca R(1), Nardinocchi L, Sacchi A, Rechavi G, Givol D, D'Orazi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, Molecular Oncogenesis Laboratory,
National Cancer Institute Regina Elena, Rome, Italy. puca@ifo.it

BACKGROUND: Activation of p53-mediated gene transcription is a critical cellular 
response to DNA damage and involves a phosphorylation-acetylation cascade of p53.
The discovery of differences in the response to different agents raises the
question whether some of the p53 oncosuppressor functions might be exerted by
different posttranslational modifications. Stress-induced homeodomain-interacting
protein kinase-2 (HIPK2) phosphorylates p53 at serine-46 (Ser46) for p53
apoptotic activity; p53 acetylation at different C-terminus lysines including
p300-mediated lysine-382 (Lys382) is also required for full activation of p53
transcriptional activity. The purpose of the current study was to evaluate the
interplay among HIPK2, p300, and p53 in p53 acetylation and apoptotic
transcriptional activity in response to drug by using siRNA interference, p300
overexpression or deacetylase inhibitors, in cancer cells.
RESULTS: Knockdown of HIPK2 inhibited both adriamycin-induced Ser46
phosphorylation and Lys382 acetylation in p53 protein; however, while combination
of ADR and zinc restored Ser46 phosphorylation it did not recover Lys382
acetylation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies showed that HIPK2 was required
in vivo for efficient p300/p53 co-recruitment onto apoptotic promoters and that
both p53 modifications at Ser46 and Lys382 were necessary for p53 apoptotic
transcription. Thus, p53Lys382 acetylation in HIPK2 knockdown as well as p53
apoptotic activity in response to drug could be rescued by p300 overexpression.
Similar effect was obtained with the Sirt1-inhibitor nicotinamide. Interestingly 
trichostatin A (TSA), the inhibitor of histone deacetylase complexes (HDAC) did
not have effect, suggesting that Sirt1 was the deacetylase involved in p53
deacetylation in HIPK2 knockdown.
CONCLUSION: These results reveal a novel role for HIPK2 in activating p53
apoptotic transcription. Our results indicate that HIPK2 may regulate the balance
between p53 acetylation and deacetylation, by stimulating on one hand
co-recruitment of p300 and p53Lys382 on apoptotic promoters and on the other hand
by inhibiting Sirt1 deacetylase activity. We attempted to reactivate p53
apoptotic transcriptional activity by rescuing both Ser46 and Lys382 modification
in response to drug. Our data propose combination strategies for the treatment of
tumors with dysfunctional p53 and/or HIPK2 that include classical chemotherapy
with pharmacological or natural agents such as Sirt1-deacetylase inhibitors or
zinc, respectively.

PMCID: PMC2768676
PMID: 19828042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Blood. 2009 Nov 26;114(23):4804-12. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-217794. Epub 2009 
Oct 12.

Systematic in vivo structure-function analysis of p300 in hematopoiesis.

Kimbrel EA(1), Lemieux ME, Xia X, Davis TN, Rebel VI, Kung AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Children's
Hospital Boston and Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element binding (CREB)-binding protein
(CBP) and p300 are multidomain transcriptional coactivators that help assemble
large regulatory complexes at sites of active transcription. Nullizygosity of CBP
or p300 results in pervasive defects in hematopoiesis. To systematically assess
the structural domains of p300 required for normal hematopoiesis, we used
recombinase-mediated cassette exchange to create an allelic series of coisogenic 
embryonic stem cells, each expressing a different mutant of p300 from the
endogenous locus. We found that deletion of either the KIX or CH1 domain caused
profound and pervasive defects in hematopoiesis, whereas the loss of most other
domains had only lineage-restricted effects. When expressed from the p300 locus, 
an extra copy of CBP largely compensated for a lack of p300. Surprisingly,
mutation of the p300 histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain had minimal effects
on hematopoiesis, and actually increased progenitor and stem cell numbers and
proliferative potential. Our results suggest that, in distinct contrast to other 
organ systems, HAT activity does not provide a critical function for
hematopoietic development and emphasizes the importance of enzyme-independent
functions of p300.

PMID: 19822904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Neurobiol Dis. 2010 Jan;37(1):186-94. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.10.001. Epub 2009
Oct 12.

Syndromic features and mild cognitive impairment in mice with genetic reduction
on p300 activity: Differential contribution of p300 and CBP to Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome etiology.

Viosca J(1), Lopez-Atalaya JP, Olivares R, Eckner R, Barco A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante (Universidad Miguel Hernández-Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas), Campus de Sant Joan, Apt. 18, Sant Joan
d'Alacant, 03550 Alicante, Spain.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a complex autosomal-dominant disease
characterized by mental and growth retardation and skeletal abnormalities. A
majority of the individuals diagnosed with RSTS carry heterozygous mutation in
the gene CREBBP, but a small percentage of cases are caused by mutations in
EP300. To investigate the contribution of p300 to RSTS pathoetiology, we carried 
out a comprehensive and multidisciplinary characterization of p300(+/-) mice.
These mice exhibited facial abnormalities and impaired growth, two traits
associated to RSTS in humans. We also observed abnormal gait, reduced swimming
speed, enhanced anxiety in the elevated plus maze, and mild cognitive impairment 
during the transfer task in the water maze. These analyses demonstrate that
p300(+/-) mice exhibit phenotypes that are reminiscent of neurological traits
observed in RSTS patients, but their comparison with previous studies on CBP
deficient strains also indicates that, in agreement with the most recent findings
in human patients, the activity of p300 in cognition is likely less relevant or
more susceptible to compensation than the activity of CBP.

PMID: 19822209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 22;106(38):16275-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0904305106. Epub 2009 Sep 4.

CBP and p300 are cytoplasmic E4 polyubiquitin ligases for p53.

Shi D(1), Pop MS, Kulikov R, Love IM, Kung AL, Grossman SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School and
University of Massachusetts Memorial Cancer Center, 364 Plantation Street,
Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 27;106(43):18427. Kung, Andrew [corrected to
Kung, Andrew L].

p300 and CREB-binding protein (CBP) act as multifunctional regulators of p53 via 
acetylase and polyubiquitin ligase (E4) activities. Prior work in vitro has shown
that the N-terminal 595 aa of p300 encode both generic ubiquitin ligase (E3) and 
p53-directed E4 functions. Analysis of p300 or CBP-deficient cells revealed that 
both coactivators were required for endogenous p53 polyubiquitination and the
normally rapid turnover of p53 in unstressed cells. Unexpectedly, p300/CBP
ubiquitin ligase activities were absent in nuclear extracts and exclusively
cytoplasmic. Consistent with the cytoplasmic localization of its E3/E4 activity, 
CBP deficiency specifically stabilized cytoplasmic, but not nuclear p53. The
N-terminal 616 aa of CBP, which includes the conserved Zn(2+)-binding C/H1-TAZ1
domain, was the minimal domain sufficient to destabilize p53 in vivo, and it
included within an intrinsic E3 autoubiquitination activity and, in a two-step E4
assay, exhibited robust E4 activity for p53. Cytoplasmic compartmentalization of 
p300/CBP's ubiquitination function reconciles seemingly opposed functions and
explains how a futile cycle is avoided-cytoplasmic p300/CBP E4 activities
ubiquitinate and destabilize p53, while physically separate nuclear p300/CBP
activities, such as p53 acetylation, activate p53.

PMCID: PMC2752525
PMID: 19805293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Nature. 2009 Oct 1;461(7264):664-8. doi: 10.1038/nature08397.

Cooperative binding of two acetylation marks on a histone tail by a single
bromodomain.

Morinière J(1), Rousseaux S, Steuerwald U, Soler-López M, Curtet S, Vitte AL,
Govin J, Gaucher J, Sadoul K, Hart DJ, Krijgsveld J, Khochbin S, Müller CW,
Petosa C.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Grenoble Outstation, 6 rue Jules
Horowitz, BP 181, 38042 Grenoble Cedex 9, France.

A key step in many chromatin-related processes is the recognition of histone
post-translational modifications by effector modules such as bromodomains and
chromo-like domains of the Royal family. Whereas effector-mediated recognition of
single post-translational modifications is well characterized, how the cell
achieves combinatorial readout of histones bearing multiple modifications is
poorly understood. One mechanism involves multivalent binding by linked effector 
modules. For example, the tandem bromodomains of human TATA-binding
protein-associated factor-1 (TAF1) bind better to a diacetylated histone H4 tail 
than to monoacetylated tails, a cooperative effect attributed to each bromodomain
engaging one acetyl-lysine mark. Here we report a distinct mechanism of
combinatorial readout for the mouse TAF1 homologue Brdt, a testis-specific member
of the BET protein family. Brdt associates with hyperacetylated histone H4 (ref. 
7) and is implicated in the marked chromatin remodelling that follows histone
hyperacetylation during spermiogenesis, the stage of spermatogenesis in which
post-meiotic germ cells mature into fully differentiated sperm. Notably, we find 
that a single bromodomain (BD1) of Brdt is responsible for selectively
recognizing histone H4 tails bearing two or more acetylation marks. The crystal
structure of BD1 bound to a diacetylated H4 tail shows how two acetyl-lysine
residues cooperate to interact with one binding pocket. Structure-based
mutagenesis that reduces the selectivity of BD1 towards diacetylated tails
destabilizes the association of Brdt with acetylated chromatin in vivo.
Structural analysis suggests that other chromatin-associated proteins may be
capable of a similar mode of ligand recognition, including yeast Bdf1, human TAF1
and human CBP/p300 (also known as CREBBP and EP300, respectively). Our findings
describe a new mechanism for the combinatorial readout of histone modifications
in which a single effector module engages two marks on a histone tail as a
composite binding epitope.

PMID: 19794495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Feb 1;316(3):466-76. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.09.018. Epub
2009 Sep 26.

Stanniocalcin-2 is a HIF-1 target gene that promotes cell proliferation in
hypoxia.

Law AY(1), Wong CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong.

Stanniocalcin-2 (STC2), the paralog of STC1, has been suggested as a novel target
of oxidative stress response to protect cells from apoptosis. The expression of
STC2 has been reported to be highly correlated with human cancer development. In 
this study, we reported that STC2 is a HIF-1 target gene and is involved in the
regulation of cell proliferation. STC2 was shown to be up-regulated in different 
breast and ovarian cancer cells, following exposure to hypoxia. Using ovarian
cancer cells (SKOV3), the underlying mechanism of HIF-1 mediated STC2 gene
transactivation was characterized. Hypoxia-induced STC2 expression was found to
be HIF-1alpha dependent and required the recruitment of p300 and HDAC7. Using
STC2 promoter deletion constructs and site-directed mutagenesis, two authentic
consensus HIF-1 binding sites were identified. Under hypoxic condition, the
silencing of STC2 reduced while the overexpression of STC2 increased the levels
of phosphorylated retinoblastoma and cyclin D in both SKOV3 and MCF7 cells. The
change in cell cycle proteins correlated with the data of the serial cell counts.
The results indicated that cell proliferation was reduced in STC2-silenced cells 
but was increased in STC2-overexpressing hypoxic cells. Solid tumor progression
is usually associated with hypoxia. The identification and functional analysis of
STC2 up-regulation by hypoxia, a feature of the tumor microenvironment, sheds
light on a possible role for STC2 in tumors.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19786016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Br J Cancer. 2009 Oct 6;101(7):1168-74. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605287. Epub 2009
Sep 1.

BRCA1 tumours correlate with a HIF-1alpha phenotype and have a poor prognosis
through modulation of hydroxylase enzyme profile expression.

Yan M(1), Rayoo M, Takano EA; KConFab Investigators, Fox SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St Andrews Place, East
Melbourne, Victoria 3002, Australia.

Erratum in
    Br J Cancer. 2009 Nov 17;101(10):1806. Thorne, H [removed].

BACKGROUND: There are limited data regarding the hypoxia pathway in familial
breast cancers. We therefore performed a study of hypoxic factors in BRCA1, BRCA2
and BRCAX breast cancers.
METHODS: Immunoperoxidase staining for HIF-1alpha, PHD1, PHD2, PHD3, VEGF and FIH
was carried out in 125 (38 BRCA1, 33 BRCA2 and 54 BRCAX) breast carcinomas. These
were correlated with clinicopathological parameters and the intrinsic breast
cancer phenotypes.
RESULTS: BRCA1 tumours correlated with positivity for HIF-1alpha (P=0.008) and
negativity for PHD3 (P=0.037). HIF-1alpha positivity (P=0.001), PHD3 negativity
(P=0.037) and nuclear FIH negativity (P=0.011) was associated with basal
phenotype. HIF-1alpha expression correlated with high tumour grade (P=0.009),
negative oestrogen receptor (ER) status (P=0.001) and the absence of lymph node
metastasis (P=0.028). Nuclear FIH expression and PHD3 correlated with positive ER
expression (P=0.024 and P=0.035, respectively). BRCA1 cancers with positive
HIF-1alpha or cytoplasmic FIH had a significantly shorter relapse-free survival
(P=0.007 and P=0.049, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The aggressive nature of BRCA1 and basal-type tumours may be partly 
explained by an enhanced hypoxic drive and hypoxia driven ER degradation because 
of suppressed PHD and aberrantly located FIH expression. This may have important 
implications, as these tumours may respond to compounds directed against
HIF-1alpha or its downstream targets.

PMCID: PMC2768103
PMID: 19724277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Cell Sci. 2009 Oct 1;122(Pt 19):3481-91. doi: 10.1242/jcs.048678. Epub 2009 Sep
1.

The small chromatin-binding protein p8 coordinates the association of
anti-proliferative and pro-myogenic proteins at the myogenin promoter.

Sambasivan R(1), Cheedipudi S, Pasupuleti N, Saleh A, Pavlath GK, Dhawan J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, 500 007 India.

Quiescent muscle progenitors called satellite cells persist in adult skeletal
muscle and, upon injury to muscle, re-enter the cell cycle and either undergo
self-renewal or differentiate to regenerate lost myofibers. Using synchronized
cultures of C2C12 myoblasts to model these divergent programs, we show that p8
(also known as Nupr1), a G1-induced gene, negatively regulates the cell cycle and
promotes myogenic differentiation. p8 is a small chromatin protein related to the
high mobility group (HMG) family of architectural factors and binds to histone
acetyltransferase p300 (p300, also known as CBP). We confirm this interaction and
show that p300-dependent events (Myc expression, global histone acetylation and
post-translational acetylation of the myogenic regulator MyoD) are all affected
in p8-knockdown myoblasts, correlating with repression of MyoD target-gene
expression and severely defective differentiation. We report two new partners for
p8 that support a role in muscle-specific gene regulation: p68 (Ddx5), an RNA
helicase reported to bind both p300 and MyoD, and MyoD itself. We show that,
similar to MyoD and p300, p8 and p68 are located at the myogenin promoter, and
that knockdown of p8 compromises chromatin association of all four proteins.
Thus, p8 represents a new node in a chromatin regulatory network that coordinates
myogenic differentiation with cell-cycle exit.

PMCID: PMC2746131
PMID: 19723804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2009 Nov;297(5):L892-902. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00151.2009. Epub 2009 Aug 28.

Cigarette smoke extract induces COX-2 expression via a PKCalpha/c-Src/EGFR,
PDGFR/PI3K/Akt/NF-kappaB pathway and p300 in tracheal smooth muscle cells.

Yang CM(1), Lee IT, Lin CC, Yang YL, Luo SF, Kou YR, Hsiao LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Chang Gung University, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.
chuenmao@mail.cgu.edu.tw

Exposure to cigarette smoke extract (CSE) leads to airway or lung inflammation,
which may be mediated through cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression and its product
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) synthesis. The aim of this study was to investigate the
molecular mechanisms underlying CSE-induced COX-2 expression in human tracheal
smooth muscle cells (HTSMCs). Here, we describe that COX-2 induction is dependent
on PKCalpha/c-Src/EGFR, PDGFR/PI3K/Akt/NF-kappaB signaling in HTSMCs. CSE
stimulated the phosphorylation of c-Src, EGFR, PDGFR, and Akt, which were
inhibited by pretreatment with the inhibitor of PKCalpha (Gö6976 or Gö6983),
c-Src (PP1), EGFR (AG1478), PDGFR (AG1296), or PI3K (LY294002). Moreover, CSE
induced a significant increase in COX-2 expression, which was reduced by
pretreatment with these inhibitors or transfection with siRNA of PKCalpha, Src,
or Akt. Furthermore, CSE-stimulated NF-kappaB p65 phosphorylation and
translocation were also attenuated by pretreatment with Gö6976, PP1, AG1478,
AG1296, or LY294002. CSE-induced COX-2 expression was also mediated through the
recruitment of p300 associated with NF-kappaB in HTSMCs, revealed by
coimmunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis. In addition, pretreatment with
the inhibitors of NF-kappaB (helenalin) and p300 (garcinol) or transfection with 
p65 siRNA and p300 siRNA markedly inhibited CSE-regulated COX-2 expression.
However, CSE-induced PGE2 generation was reduced by pretreatment with the
inhibitor of COX-2 (NS-398). These results demonstrated that in HTSMCs,
CSE-induced COX-2-dependent PGE2 generation was mediated through
PKCalpha/c-Src/EGFR, PDGFR/PI3K/Akt leading to the recruitment of p300 with
NF-kappaB complex.

PMID: 19717552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Dec;221(3):668-76. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21904.

PI3K/AKT regulates aggrecan gene expression by modulating Sox9 expression and
activity in nucleus pulposus cells of the intervertebral disc.

Cheng CC(1), Uchiyama Y, Hiyama A, Gajghate S, Shapiro IM, Risbud MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The goal of the investigation was to test the hypothesis that the
phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway regulates the expression
of the major extracellular matrix component of the intervertebral disc, aggrecan,
in nucleus pulposus cells. Primary rat nucleus pulposus cells were treated with
PI3K inhibitor to measure changes in gene and protein expression. In addition,
cells were transfected with various luciferase reporter plasmids to investigate
mechanisms of regulation of aggrecan gene expression. We found that treatment of 
nucleus pulposus cells with a PI3K inhibitor, LY294002 resulted in decreased
expression of aggrecan and a reduction in deposition of sulfated
glycosaminoglycans. Moreover, pharmacological suppression or co-expression of
dominant negative (DN)-PI3K or DN-AKT resulted in downregulation of aggrecan
promoter activity. Expression of constitutively active (CA)-PI3K significantly
induced aggrecan promoter activity. We observed that PI3K maintained Sox9 gene
expression and activity: inhibition of PI3K/AKT resulted in decreased Sox9
expression, lowered promoter activity, and mediated a reduction in Sox9
transcriptional activity. PI3K effects were independent of phosphorylation status
of C-terminus transactivation domain (TAD) of Sox9. Finally, we noted that in
nucleus pulposus cells, PI3K signaling controlled transactivation of p300
(p300-TAD activity), an important transcriptional co-activator of Sox9. Results
of these studies demonstrate for the first time that PI3K/AKT signaling controls 
aggrecan gene expression, in part by modulating Sox9 expression and activity in
cells of the nucleus pulposus.

PMCID: PMC3042319
PMID: 19711351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. EMBO J. 2009 Sep 16;28(18):2748-62. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.210. Epub 2009 Aug
13.

SENP3 is responsible for HIF-1 transactivation under mild oxidative stress via
p300 de-SUMOylation.

Huang C(1), Han Y, Wang Y, Sun X, Yan S, Yeh ET, Chen Y, Cang H, Li H, Shi G,
Cheng J, Tang X, Yi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of the Education Ministry for Cell 
Differentiation and Apoptosis, Institutes of Medical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

The physiological function of Sentrin/SUMO-specific proteases (SENPs) remains
largely unexplored, and little is known about the regulation of SENPs themselves.
Here, we show that a modest increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS) regulates
SENP3 stability and localization. We found that SENP3 is continuously degraded
through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway under basal condition and that ROS
inhibit this degradation. Furthermore, ROS causes SENP3 to redistribute from the 
nucleoli to the nucleoplasm, allowing it to regulate nuclear events. The
stabilization and redistribution of SENP3 correlate with an increase in the
transcriptional activity of the hypoxia-inducing factor-1 (HIF-1) under mild
oxidative stress. ROS-enhanced HIF-1 transactivation is blocked by SENP3
knockdown. The de-SUMOylating activity of SENP3 is required for ROS-induced
increase of HIF-1 transactivation, but the true substrate of SENP3 is the
co-activator of HIF-1 alpha, p300, rather than HIF-1 alpha itself. Removing
SUMO2/3 from p300 enhances its binding to HIF-1 alpha. In vivo nude mouse
xenografts overexpressing SENP3 are more angiogenic. Taken together, our results 
identify SENP3 as a redox sensor that regulates HIF-1 transcriptional activity
under oxidative stress through the de-SUMOylation of p300.

PMCID: PMC2750016
PMID: 19680224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Nutrition. 2009 Sep;25(9):973-4; author reply 975-6. doi:
10.1016/j.nut.2009.04.019.

Inhibition of p300 and nuclear factor-kappaB by curcumin and its role in diabetic
nephropathy.

Kurien BT.

Comment on
    Nutrition. 2009 Sep;25(9):964-72.

PMCID: PMC2772822
PMID: 19647625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. FASEB J. 2009 Nov;23(11):3851-64. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-132415. Epub 2009 Jul 28.

Histone deacetylases facilitate sodium/calcium exchanger up-regulation in adult
cardiomyocytes.

Chandrasekaran S(1), Peterson RE, Mani SK, Addy B, Buchholz AL, Xu L,
Thiyagarajan T, Kasiganesan H, Kern CB, Menick DR.

Author information: 
(1)Gazes Cardiac Research Institute, Division of Cardiology, Department of
Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425,
USA.

It is becoming increasingly evident that histone deacetylases (HDACs) have a
prominent role in the alteration of gene expression during the growth remodeling 
process of cardiac hypertrophy. HDACs are generally viewed as corepressors of
gene expression. However, we demonstrate that class I and class II HDACs play an 
important role in the basal expression and up-regulation of the sodium calcium
exchanger (Ncx1) gene in adult cardiomyocytes. Treatment with the HDAC inhibitor 
trichostatin A (TSA) prevented the pressure-overload-stimulated up-regulation of 
Ncx1 expression. Overexpression of HDAC5 resulted in the dose-dependent
up-regulation of basal and alpha-adrenergic stimulated Ncx1 expression. We show
that Nkx2.5 recruits HDAC5 to the Ncx1 promoter, where HDAC5 complexes with
HDAC1. Nkx2.5 also interacts with transcriptional activator p300, which is
recruited to the Ncx1 promoter. We demonstrate that when Nkx2.5 is acetylated, it
is found associated with HDAC5, whereas deacetylated Nkx2.5 is in complex with
p300. Notably, TSA treatment prevents p300 from being recruited to the endogenous
Ncx1 promoter, resulting in the repression of Ncx1 expression. We propose a novel
model for Ncx1 regulation in which deacetylation of Nkx2.5 is required for the
recruitment of p300 and results in up-regulation of exchanger expression.

PMCID: PMC2775004
PMID: 19638401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. FASEB J. 2009 Nov;23(11):3978-89. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-137695. Epub 2009 Jul 21.

Sumoylation of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 inhibits its acetylation and
restrains transcriptional coactivator function.

Messner S(1), Schuermann D, Altmeyer M, Kassner I, Schmidt D, Schär P, Müller S, 
Hottiger MO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) is a chromatin-associated nuclear protein
and functions as a molecular stress sensor. At the cellular level, PARP1 has been
implicated in a wide range of processes, such as maintenance of genome stability,
cell death, and transcription. PARP1 functions as a transcriptional coactivator
of nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) and hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF1). In
proteomic studies, PARP1 was found to be modified by small ubiquitin-like
modifiers (SUMOs). Here, we characterize PARP1 as a substrate for modification by
SUMO1 and SUMO3, both in vitro and in vivo. PARP1 is sumoylated at the single
lysine residue K486 within its automodification domain. Interestingly,
modification of PARP1 with SUMO does not affect its ADP-ribosylation activity but
completely abrogates p300-mediated acetylation of PARP1, revealing an intriguing 
crosstalk of sumoylation and acetylation on PARP1. Genetic complementation of
PARP1-depleted cells with wild-type and sumoylation-deficient PARP1 revealed that
SUMO modification of PARP1 restrains its transcriptional coactivator function and
subsequently reduces gene expression of distinct PARP1-regulated target genes.

PMID: 19622798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(7):1097-104. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.072489vb.

CBP/p300 and associated transcriptional co-activators exhibit distinct expression
patterns during murine craniofacial and neural tube development.

Bhattacherjee V(1), Horn KH, Singh S, Webb CL, Pisano MM, Greene RM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Louisville Birth Defects Center, Department of Molecular,
Cellular and Craniofacial Biology, ULSD, KY 40292, USA.

Mutations in each of the transcriptional co-activator genes - CBP, p300, Cited2, 
Cart1 and Carm1 - result in neural tube defects in mice. The present study thus
furnishes a complete and comparative temporal and spatial expression map of
CBP/p300 and associated transcriptional co-activators, Cited2, Cart1 and Carm1
during the period of murine neural tube development (embryonic days 8.5 to 10.5).
Each co-activator except Cart1 was expressed in the dorsal neural folds on E8.5. 
Although CBP and p300 are functionally interchangeable in vitro, their respective
expression patterns diverge during embryogenesis before neural fold fusion is
complete. CBP gene expression was lost from the neural folds by E8.75 and was
thereafter weakly expressed in the maxillary region and limb buds, while p300
exhibited strong expression in the first branchial arch, limb bud and
telencephalic regions on E9.5. Cart1 exhibited strong expression in the forebrain
mesenchyme from E9.0 through E10.5. Although CBP, p300, Carm1 and Cited2 share
temporal expression on E8.5, these co-activators have different spatial
expression in mesenchyme and/or the neuroepithelium. Nevertheless,
co-localization to the dorsal neural folds on E8.5 suggests a functional role in 
elevation and/or fusion of the neural folds. Target genes, and pathways that
promote cranial neural tube fusion that are activated by
CBP/p300/Carm1/Cited2/Cart1-containing transcriptional complexes await
elucidation.

PMCID: PMC2746635
PMID: 19598128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(18):5115-27. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01969-08. Epub 2009 Jul 
6.

Acetylated NPM1 localizes in the nucleoplasm and regulates transcriptional
activation of genes implicated in oral cancer manifestation.

Shandilya J(1), Swaminathan V, Gadad SS, Choudhari R, Kodaganur GS, Kundu TK.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription and Disease Laboratory, Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit,
Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India.

Nucleophosmin (NPM1) is a multifunctional protein involved in the regulation of
centrosome duplication, ribosome biogenesis, genomic stability, histone chaperone
function, and transcription. Overexpression of NPM1 is associated with cancers of
diverse histological origins. Here, we have found that p300-mediated acetylation 
of NPM1 modulates its subcellular localization and augments its oncogenic
potential. Acetylated NPM1 is predominantly localized in the nucleoplasm, where
it associates with transcriptionally active RNA polymerase II. Deacetylation of
NPM1 is brought about by human SIRT1 and reduces its transcriptional activation
potential. Remarkably, increased levels of acetylated NPM1 were found in grade II
and III oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) patient samples. Small interfering
RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of NPM1 in an OSCC cell line, followed by
microarray analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, revealed that 
some of the genes involved in oral cancer malignancy are regulated by NPM1 and
have acetylated NPM1 localized at their promoters. Either suppression of p300 by 
siRNA or mutation of acetylatable lysine residues of NPM1 resulted in reduced
occupancy of acetylated NPM1 on the target gene promoter concomitant with its
decreased transcript levels. These observations suggest that acetylated NPM1
transcriptionally regulates genes involved in cell survival and proliferation
during carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2738287
PMID: 19581289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009 Jul;138(1):185-91. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2008.12.024. Epub 2009 Mar 13.

Increased vascular permeability after cardiopulmonary bypass in patients with
diabetes is associated with increased expression of vascular endothelial growth
factor and hepatocyte growth factor.

Emani S(1), Ramlawi B, Sodha NR, Li J, Bianchi C, Sellke FW.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Mass, USA.

BACKGROUND: Several inflammatory mediators such as vascular endothelial growth
factor and hepatocyte growth factor are known to play a critical role in the
regulation of vascular permeability and angiogenesis. We studied the serum levels
of growth factors and gene expression profiles of genes involved in growth factor
signaling in the peripheral blood of patients with and patients without diabetes 
following cardiopulmonary bypass and cardioplegic arrest.
METHODS: Serum and total RNA were obtained from the blood samples collected from 
patients with diabetes and matched patients without diabetes (n = 7 patients
each) who had coronary artery bypass graft before and 6 hours and 4 days after
cardiopulmonary bypass/cardioplegic arrest. The cytokine panel, consisting of
growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor, hepatocyte growth
factor, fibroblast growth factor, and epidermal growth factor, was quantified in 
patients with diabetes and patients without diabetes before and 6 hours and 4
days post-cardiopulmonary bypass/cardioplegic arrest using multiplex cytokine
quantification system. cDNA microarray analysis was performed and fold-change was
calculated.
RESULTS: Length of hospitalization (10 vs 6 days; P = .04) and weight gain (5 vs 
2.5 kg; P = .001) were significantly greater for patients with diabetes compared 
with patients without diabetes. The serum levels of vascular endothelial growth
factor and hepatocyte growth factor were significantly elevated in patients with 
diabetes when compared with patients without diabetes before versus 6 hours
post-cardiopulmonary bypass/cardioplegic arrest. In addition, significantly
elevated mRNA expression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha, cyclic adenosine
monophosphate response element binding protein, and E1A binding protein p300
(more than twofold) was observed 4 days post-cardiopulmonary bypass/cardioplegic 
arrest exclusively in patients with diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: The differential profile of gene and protein expression of growth
factors and their related genes in patients with diabetes and patients without
diabetes could be associated with increased edema and weight gain in patients
with diabetes after cardiopulmonary bypass/cardioplegic arrest.

PMCID: PMC2762706
PMID: 19577077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jan 1;126(1):114-24. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24695.

EP300--a miRNA-regulated metastasis suppressor gene in ductal adenocarcinomas of 
the pancreas.

Mees ST(1), Mardin WA, Wendel C, Baeumer N, Willscher E, Senninger N, Schleicher 
C, Colombo-Benkmann M, Haier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University Hospital of Muenster,
Muenster, Germany. soerentorge.mees@ukmuenster.de

Genetic and epigenetic alterations during development of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinomas (PDACs) are well known. This study investigates genetic and
epigenetic data together with tumor biology to find specific alterations
responsible for metastasis formation. Using 16 human PDAC cell lines in a murine 
orthotopic PDAC model, local infiltration and metastatic spread were assessed by 
standardized dissemination scores. The cell lines were further classified into 3 
hierarchical groups according to their metastatic potential. Their mRNA and
microRNA (miRNA) expression was profiled via mRNA-microarray as well as Taqman
Low Density Array, and validated by single quantitative RT-PCR and Western
blotting. In the highly metastatic group, a significant induction of EP300
targeting miRNAs miR-194 (fold change: 26.88), miR-200b (fold change: 61.65),
miR-200c (fold change: 19.44) and miR-429 (fold change: 21.67) (p < 0.05) was
detected. Corresponding to this, decreased expression of EP300 mRNA (p < 0.0001) 
and protein (p < 0.05) were detected in the highly metastatic PDAC cell lines
with liver metastases compared to the nonmetastatic or marginally metastatic cell
lines, while no correlation with local tumor growth was found. In conclusion,
epigenetic alterations with upregulated EP300 targeting miRNAs miR-194, miR-200b,
miR-200c and miR-429 are related to reduced EP300 mRNA and protein in PDAC. These
results demonstrate that miRNAs might be able to modulate the expression of
metastasis-specific suppressor genes and metastatic behavior in PDAC, suggesting 
diagnostic and therapeutic opportunities for EP300 and its targeting miRNAs in
PDAC.

PMID: 19569050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Jul;149A(7):1463-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32948.

Somatic and germ-line mosaicism in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.

Chiang PW(1), Lee NC, Chien N, Hwu WL, Spector E, Tsai AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UC Denver DNA Diagnostic Laboratory, UC Denver
School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Apr;152A(4):1036-8.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a rare autosomal dominant genetic disease and
is characterized by mental retardation, distinctive facial features, broad and
often angulated thumbs and great toes, short stature, and growth retardation.
CREBBP and EP300 are the only genes currently known to be associated with RSTS.
Mutations in CREBBP and EP300 were identified in approximately 50% and 3% of RSTS
patients, respectively. To date, most of CREBBP mutations were de novo mutations 
and the recurrence rate in a family was low. Families with more than one affected
child are extremely rare. In this study, we have shown a family with two affected
siblings; the same mutation was found in both siblings. However, the mutation was
not found in the blood or saliva DNA samples from the parents, suggesting the
mechanism of germ-line mosaicism. In addition, we identified low-level mosaicism 
of a CREBBP mutation in the father from a second family with one affected child. 
Among the three analyzed tissue samples from the father, low-level mosaicism is
present only significantly in the blood sample. We hypothesize mutations in
CREBBP in these two families occur in the postzygotic stage in one of the parents
(one generation ahead) of the affected individual. Additional family studies are 
required to determine how common somatic and/or gonadal mosaicism is present in
RSTS patients.

PMID: 19533794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 1;8(13):2093-100. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

Identification of new Rel/NFkappaB regulatory networks by focused genome location
analysis.

De Siervi A(1), De Luca P, Moiola C, Gueron G, Tongbai R, Chandramouli GV,
Haggerty C, Dzekunova I, Petersen D, Kawasaki E, Kil WJ, Camphausen K, Longo D,
Gardner K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. adesiervi@qb.fcen.uba.ar

NFkappaB is an inducible transcription factor that controls kinetically complex
patterns of gene expression. Several studies reveal multiple pathways linking
NFkappaB to the promotion and progression of various cancers. Despite extensive
interest and characterization, many NFkappaB controlled genes still remain to be 
identified. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with microarray
technology (ChIP/chip) to investigate the dynamic interaction of NFkappaB with
the promoter regions of 100 genes known to be expressed in mitogen-induced
T-cells. Six previously unrecognized NFkappaB controlled genes (ATM, EP300,
TGFbeta, Selectin, MMP-1 and SFN) were identified. Each gene is induced in
mitogen-stimulated T-cells, repressed by pharmacological NFkappaB blockade,
reduced in cells deficient in the p50 NFkappaB subunit and dramatically repressed
by RNAi specifically designed against cRel. A coregulatory role for Ets
transcription factors in the expression of the NFkappaB controlled genes was
predicted by comparative promoter analysis and confirmed by ChIP and by
functional disruption of Ets. NFkappaB deficiency produces a deficit in ATM
function and DNA repair indicating an active role for NFkappaB in maintaining DNA
integrity. These results define new potential targets and transcriptional
networks governed by NFkappaB and provide novel functional insights for the role 
of NFkappaB in genomic stability, cell cycle control, cell-matrix and cell-cell
interactions during tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC2809250
PMID: 19502793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cell Microbiol. 2009 Sep;11(9):1409-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2009.01340.x.
Epub 2009 Jun 1.

The hepatitis E virus ORF3 protein stabilizes HIF-1alpha and enhances
HIF-1-mediated transcriptional activity through p300/CBP.

Moin SM(1), Chandra V, Arya R, Jameel S.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India.

The hepatitis E virus (HEV) causes hepatitis E and is an important human
pathogen. We have previously shown that the HEV open reading frame 3 (ORF3)
protein promotes survival of the host cell. Here we report finding increased
expression of glycolytic pathway enzymes in ORF3-expressing cells. Promoter
analysis of these genes revealed the ubiquitous presence of hypoxia inducible
factor (HIF) responsive element (HRE). Dominant-negative and siRNA studies showed
increased expression of glycolytic pathway genes by the ORF3 to be mediated by
the HIF-1 transcription factor. Our results showed that HIF-1alpha, a highly
unstable subunit of the HIF-1, was stabilized in ORF3-expressing cells. This was 
through phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) mediated activation of Akt/protein
kinase B. Enhanced binding to the consensus HRE and increased transactivation
activity of HIF-1 were also observed in ORF3-expressing cells. The HIF complex
recruits the transcriptional adapter/histone acetyltransferase protein p300/CBP
to target gene promoters and p300/CBP phosphorylation is required for this
interaction. We show that ORF3-mediated extracellularly regulated kinase (Erk)
activation was responsible for the observed increase in phosphorylation and
transactivation activity of p300/CBP. Our results reveal a two-pronged strategy
through which the ORF3 protein might modulate the energy homeostasis in HEV
infected cells and thus contribute to pathogenesis.

PMID: 19489936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Hypertension. 2009 Jul;54(1):172-8. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.109.133033. Epub
2009 Jun 1.

Cooperative activation of Npr1 gene transcription and expression by interaction
of Ets-1 and p300.

Kumar P(1), Pandey KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Tulane University Health Sciences Center School of
Medicine, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

The objective of the present study was to gain insight into the cooperative roles
of Ets-1 and p300 in transcriptional regulation and expression of the Npr1 gene
(coding for guanylyl cyclase-A/natriuretic peptide receptor-A). Overexpression of
Ets-1 and p300 in mouse mesangial cells increased Npr1 promoter activity by
12-fold, natriuretic peptide receptor-A mRNA levels by 5-fold, and ANP-dependent 
intracellular accumulation of cGMP by 26-fold. Knockdown of Ets-1 and p300
expression by small interfering RNA inhibited Npr1 gene transcription by 90%.
Sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated a direct physical
association between p300 and Ets-1 on binding to the Npr1 promoter, suggesting
that a physical interaction between Ets-1 and p300 is important to enhance Npr1
gene transcription. Mutant p300 lacking histone acetyltransferase activity did
not show a functional effect with Ets-1, suggesting that histone
acetyltransferase activity of p300 is required for the cooperative interaction in
modulating Npr1 gene transcription. Overexpression of wild-type adenovirus E1A
significantly decreased the Npr1 promoter activity by 40%, whereas mutant E1A,
which is incapable of binding to p300, did not show any effect. The results
indicate that Npr1 gene transcription is critically controlled by histone
acetyltransferase p300 and Ets-1. The present findings should yield important
insights into the molecular signaling governing Npr1 gene transcription, an
important regulator in the control of hypertension and cardiovascular events.

PMCID: PMC3085902
PMID: 19487584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Aug;23(8):1255-63. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0217. Epub 2009 May 
7.

Runx2 recruits p300 to mediate parathyroid hormone's effects on histone
acetylation and transcriptional activation of the matrix metalloproteinase-13
gene.

Boumah CE(1), Lee M, Selvamurugan N, Shimizu E, Partridge NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Medicine and Dentistry 
of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854,
USA.

PTH regulates transcription of a number of genes involved in bone remodeling and 
calcium homeostasis. We have previously shown that the matrix
metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13) gene is induced by PTH in osteoblastic cells as a
secondary response through the protein kinase A pathway requiring the runt domain
and activator protein 1 binding sites of the proximal promoter. Here, we
investigated the changes PTH causes in histone acetylation in this region (which 
contains the only deoxyribonuclease-hypersensitive sites in the promoter) leading
to MMP-13 gene activation in these cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments revealed that PTH rapidly increased histone H4 acetylation followed
by histone H3 acetylation associated with the different regions of the MMP-13
proximal promoter. The hormone also stimulated p300 histone acetyl transferase
activity and increased p300 bound to the MMP-13 proximal promoter, and this
required protein synthesis. Upon PTH treatment, Runx2, already bound to the runt 
domain site of the MMP-13 promoter, interacted with p300, which then acetylated
histones H4 and H3. The knockdown of either Runx2 or p300 by RNA interference
reduced PTH-induced acetylation of histones H3 and H4, association of p300 with
the MMP-13 promoter, and resultant MMP-13 gene transcription. Overall, our
studies suggest that without altering the gross chromatin structure, PTH
stimulates acetylation of histones H3 and H4 via recruitment of p300 to Runx2
bound to the MMP-13 promoter, resulting in gene activation. This work establishes
the molecular basis of transcriptional regulation in osteoblasts by PTH, a
hormone acting through a G-protein coupled receptor.

PMCID: PMC2718752
PMID: 19423655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cell Signal. 2009 Jun;21(6):867-72.

TNF-alpha suppressed TGF-beta-induced CTGF expression by switching the binding
preference of p300 from Smad4 to p65.

Yu F(1), Chou CW, Chen CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
No. 1 Jen-Ai Road, Taipei, Taiwan.

TGF-beta regulates diverse biologic effects including cell growth, cell death or 
apoptosis, cell differentiation, and extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis.
Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), induced by TGF-beta has been reported to 
mediate stimulatory action of TGF-beta-induced ECM. Although TNF-alpha was
reported to suppress theTGF-beta-induced CTGF gene expression, the molecular
mechanism is not well clarified. In this study, we found the inhibitory effect of
TNF-alpha on TGF-beta-induced CTGF expression in WT but not p65-/-MEF cells.
TNF-alpha neither induced Smad7 expression nor affected TGF-beta-induced Smad2
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. We demonstrated that p300 physically
associated with p65 rather than Smad4 in the presence of both TNF-alpha and
TGF-beta. Moreover, the TGF-beta-induced binding of p300 and acetylated H4, but
not Smad4 to the CTGF promoter was disturbed by TNF-alpha treatment. Overall, our
data showed that suppression of TNF-alpha on TGF-beta-induced CTGF expression is 
due to the competition of p300 by p65 and Smad4.

PMID: 19385047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Osteoporos Int. 2010 Jan;21(1):109-18. doi: 10.1007/s00198-009-0931-0. Epub 2009 
Apr 17.

Wnt pathway genes in osteoporosis and osteoarthritis: differential expression and
genetic association study.

Velasco J(1), Zarrabeitia MT, Prieto JR, Perez-Castrillon JL, Perez-Aguilar MD,
Perez-Nuñez MI, Sañudo C, Hernandez-Elena J, Calvo I, Ortiz F, Gonzalez-Macias J,
Riancho JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital U M Valdecilla, IFIMAV, RETICEF,
University of Cantabria, Santander, Spain.

In comparison with hip fractures, increased expression of genes in the Wnt
pathway and increased Wnt activity were found in bone samples and osteoblast
cultures from patients with osteoarthritis, suggesting the involvement of this
pathway in subchondral bone changes. No consistent differences were found in the 
genetic association study.INTRODUCTION: This study aims to explore the allelic
variations and expression of Wnt pathway genes in patients with osteoporosis and 
osteoarthritis.
METHODS: The expression of 86 genes was studied in bone samples and osteoblast
primary cultures from patients with hip fractures and hip or knee osteoarthritis.
The Wnt-related activity was assessed by measuring AXIN2 and in transfection
experiments. Fifty-five SNPs of the LRP5, LRP6, FRZB, and SOST genes were
analyzed in 1,128 patients.
RESULTS: Several genes were differentially expressed in bone tissue, with the
lowest values usually found in hip fracture and the highest in knee
osteoarthritis. Overall, seven genes were consistently upregulated both in tissue
samples and in cell cultures from patients with knee osteoarthritis (BCL9, FZD5, 
DVL2, EP300, FRZB, LRP5, and TCF7L1). The increased expression of AXIN2 and
experiments of transient transfection of osteoblasts with the TOP-Flash construct
confirmed the activation of Wnt signaling. Three SNPs of the LRP5 gene and one in
the LRP6 gene showed marginally significant differences in allelic frequencies
across the patient groups, but they did not resist multiple-test adjustment.
CONCLUSIONS: Genes in the Wnt pathway are upregulated in the osteoarthritic bone,
suggesting their involvement not only in cartilage distortion but also in
subchondral bone changes.

PMID: 19373426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Oncogene. 2009 May 21;28(20):2112-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.71. Epub 2009 Apr 13.

Regulation by phosphorylation of the relative affinities of the N-terminal
transactivation domains of p53 for p300 domains and Mdm2.

Teufel DP(1), Bycroft M, Fersht AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, MRC Centre for Protein Engineering and Cambridge
University, MRC Centre, Cambridge, UK.

The transcriptional activity of the tumour suppressor, p53, requires direct
binding between its transactivation domain (TAD, 1-57) and the transcriptional
coactivator, p300. We systematically assessed the role of TAD phosphorylation on 
binding of the p300 domains CH3, Taz1, Kix and IBiD. Thr18 phosphorylation
increased the affinity up to sevenfold for CH3 and Taz1, with smaller increases
from phosphorylation of Ser20, Ser15, Ser37, Ser33, Ser46 and Thr55. Binding of
Kix and IBiD was less sensitive to phosphorylation. Strikingly,
hepta-phosphorylation of all Ser and Thr residues increased binding 40- and
80-fold with CH3 and Taz1, respectively, but not with Kix or IBiD. Substitution
of all phospho-sites with aspartates partially mimicked the effects of
hepta-phosphorylation. Mdm2, the main negative regulator of p53, competes with
p300 for binding to TAD. Binding of Mdm2 to TAD was reduced significantly only on
phosphorylation of Thr18 (sevenfold) or by hepta-phosphorylation (24-fold). The
relative affinities of Mdm2 and p300 for p53 TAD can thus be changed by up to
three orders of magnitude by phosphorylation. Accordingly, phosphorylation of
Thr18 and hepta-phosphorylation dramatically shifts the balance towards favouring
the binding of p300 with p53, and is thus likely to be an important factor in its
regulation.

PMCID: PMC2685776
PMID: 19363523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 12;284(24):16308-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807725200. Epub 2009
Apr 8.

Enhancer of polycomb1 acts on serum response factor to regulate skeletal muscle
differentiation.

Kim JR(1), Kee HJ, Kim JY, Joung H, Nam KI, Eom GH, Choe N, Kim HS, Kim JC, Kook 
H, Seo SB, Kook H.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Center for Gene Regulation, Department of Pharmacology,
Chonnam National University Medical School, and Department of Surgery, Chonnam
National University Hospital, Gwangju, South Korea.

Skeletal muscle differentiation is well regulated by a series of transcription
factors. We reported previously that enhancer of polycomb1 (Epc1), a chromatin
protein, can modulate skeletal muscle differentiation, although the mechanisms of
this action have yet to be defined. Here we report that Epc1 recruits both serum 
response factor (SRF) and p300 to induce skeletal muscle differentiation. Epc1
interacted physically with SRF. Transfection of Epc1 to myoblast cells
potentiated the SRF-induced expression of skeletal muscle-specific genes as well 
as multinucleation. Proximal CArG box in the skeletal alpha-actin promoter was
responsible for the synergistic activation of the promoter-luciferase. Epc1
knockdown caused a decrease in the acetylation of histones associated with serum 
response element (SRE) of the skeletal alpha-actin promoter. The Epc1.SRF complex
bound to the SRE, and the knockdown of Epc1 resulted in a decrease in SRF binding
to the skeletal alpha-actin promoter. Epc1 recruited histone acetyltransferase
activity, which was potentiated by cotransfection with p300 but abolished by
si-p300. Epc1 directly bound to p300 in myoblast cells. Epc1+/- mice showed
distortion of skeletal alpha-actin, and the isolated myoblasts from the mice had 
impaired muscle differentiation. These results suggest that Epc1 is required for 
skeletal muscle differentiation by recruiting both SRF and p300 to the SRE of
muscle-specific gene promoters.

PMCID: PMC2713522
PMID: 19359245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 May;149A(5):997-1000. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32771.

Further case of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome due to a deletion in EP300.

Foley P(1), Bunyan D, Stratton J, Dillon M, Lynch SA.

Author information: 
(1)Our Lady's Childrens Hospital, National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin,
Crumlin, Ireland.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a heterogeneous disorder with approximately
45-55% of patients showing mutations in the CREB binding protein and a further 3%
of patients having mutations in EP300. We report a male child with a deletion of 
exons 3-8 of the EP300 gene who has RSTS. He has a milder skeletal phenotype, a
finding that has been described in other cases with EP300 mutations. The mother
suffered from pre-eclampsia and HELLP syndrome in the pregnancy. She subsequently
developed a mullerian tumor of her cervix 6 years after the birth of her son.

PMID: 19353645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Neurosci. 2009 Apr 1;29(13):4312-21. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0126-09.2009.

A SnoN-Ccd1 pathway promotes axonal morphogenesis in the mammalian brain.

Ikeuchi Y(1), Stegmüller J, Netherton S, Huynh MA, Masu M, Frank D, Bonni S,
Bonni A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

The transcriptional corepressor SnoN is a critical regulator of axonal
morphogenesis, but how SnoN drives axonal growth is unknown. Here, we report that
gene-profiling analyses in cerebellar granule neurons reveal that the large
majority of genes altered upon SnoN knockdown are surprisingly downregulated,
suggesting that SnoN may activate transcription in neurons. Accordingly, we find 
that the transcriptional coactivator p300 interacts with SnoN, and p300 plays a
critical role in SnoN-induced axon growth. We also identify the gene encoding the
signaling scaffold protein Ccd1 as a critical target of SnoN in neurons. Ccd1
localizes to the actin cytoskeleton, is enriched at axon terminals in neurons,
and activates the axon growth-promoting kinase JNK (c-Jun N-terminal protein
kinase). Knockdown of Ccd1 in neurons reduces axonal length and suppresses the
ability of SnoN to promote axonal growth. Importantly, Ccd1 knockdown in rat pups
profoundly impairs the formation of granule neuron parallel fiber axons in the
rat cerebellar cortex in vivo. These findings define a novel SnoN-Ccd1 link that 
promotes axonal growth in the mammalian brain, with important implications for
axonal development and regeneration.

PMCID: PMC2853192
PMID: 19339625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 29;284(22):15193-205. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M900776200. Epub
2009 Mar 30.

c-Myc-induced aberrant DNA synthesis and activation of DNA damage response in
p300 knockdown cells.

Sankar N(1), Kadeppagari RK, Thimmapaya B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

We previously showed that in quiescent cells, p300/CBP (CREB-binding
protein)family coactivators repress c-myc and prevent premature induction of DNA 
synthesis. p300/CBP-depleted cells exit G(1) early and continue to accumulate in 
S phase but do not progress into G(2)/M, and eventually they die of apoptosis.
Here, we show that the S-phase arrest in these cells is because of an
intra-S-phase block. The inappropriate DNA synthesis that occurs as a result of
forced expression of c-myc leads to the activation of the DNA damage response as 
evidenced by the phosphorylation of several checkpoint related proteins and the
formation of foci containing gamma-H2AX. The activation of checkpoint response is
related to the induction of c-myc, as the phosphorylation of checkpoint proteins 
can be reversed when cells are treated with a c-Myc inhibitor or when Myc
synthesis is blocked by short hairpin RNA. Using the DNA fiber assay, we show
that in p300-depleted cells initiation of replication occurs from multiple
replication origins. Chromatin loading of the Cdc45 protein also indicates
increased origin activity in p300 knockdown cells. Immunofluorescence experiments
indicate that c-Myc colocalizes with replication foci, consistent with the
recently reported direct role of c-Myc in the initiation of DNA synthesis. Thus, 
the inappropriate S-phase entry of p300 down-regulated cells is likely to be
because of c-Myc-induced deregulated replication origin activity, which results
in replicative stress, activation of a DNA damage response, and S-phase arrest.
Our results point to an important role for p300 in maintaining genomic integrity 
by negatively regulating c-myc.

PMCID: PMC2685700
PMID: 19332536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jun;23(6):759-71. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0277. Epub 2009 Mar
26.

The orphan nuclear receptor RORalpha restrains adipocyte differentiation through 
a reduction of C/EBPbeta activity and perilipin gene expression.

Ohoka N(1), Kato S, Takahashi Y, Hayashi H, Sato R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, The University of Tokyo, Japan.

The nuclear receptor-type transcription factor retinoic acid receptor-related
orphan receptor alpha (RORalpha) is a multifunctional molecule involved in tissue
development and cellular function, such as inflammation, metabolism, and
differentiation; however, the role of RORalpha during adipocyte differentiation
has not yet been fully understood. Here we show that RORalpha inhibits the
transcriptional activity of CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta)
without affecting its expression, thereby blocking the induction of both
PPARgamma and C/EBPalpha, resulting in the suppression of C/EBPbeta-dependent
adipogenesis. RORalpha interacted with C/EBPbeta so as to repress both the
C/EBPbeta-p300 association and the C/EBPbeta-dependent recruitment of p300 to
chromatin. In addition to the inhibitory effect on C/EBPbeta function, RORalpha
also prevents the expression of the lipid droplet coating protein gene perilipin 
by peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma), acting through 
the specific mechanism of its promoter. We identified a suppressive
ROR-responsive element overlapping the PPAR-responsive element in the perilipin
promoter and verified that RORalpha competitively antagonizes the binding of
PPARgamma. RORalpha inhibits PPARgamma-dependent adipogenesis along with the
repression of perilipin induction. These findings suggest that RORalpha is a
novel negative regulator of adipocyte differentiation that acts through dual
mechanisms.

PMID: 19324970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 22;284(21):14211-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808345200. Epub 2009 
Mar 26.

The orphan nuclear receptor estrogen receptor-related receptor gamma negatively
regulates BMP2-induced osteoblast differentiation and bone formation.

Jeong BC(1), Lee YS, Park YY, Bae IH, Kim DK, Koo SH, Choi HR, Kim SH, Franceschi
RT, Koh JT, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)Dental Science Research Institute and Hormone Research Center, School of
Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757,
Republic of Korea.

Estrogen receptor-related receptor gamma (ERRgamma/ERR3/NR3B3) is a member of the
orphan nuclear receptor with important functions in development and homeostasis. 
Recently it has been reported that ERRalpha is involved in osteoblast
differentiation and bone formation. In the present study we examined the role of 
ERRgamma in osteoblast differentiation. Here, we showed that ERRgamma is
expressed in osteoblast progenitors and primary osteoblasts, and its expression
is increased temporarily by BMP2. Overexpression of ERRgamma reduced BMP2-induced
alkaline phosphatase activity and osteocalcin production as well as calcified
nodule formation, whereas inhibition of ERRgamma expression significantly
enhanced BMP2-induced osteogenic differentiation and mineralization, suggesting
that endogenous ERRgamma plays an important role in osteoblast differentiation.
In addition, ERRgamma significantly repressed Runx2 transactivity on osteocalcin 
and bone sialoprotein promoters. We also observed that ERRgamma physically
interacts with Runx2 in vitro and in vivo and competes with p300 to repress Runx2
transactivity. Notably, intramuscular injection of ERRgamma strongly inhibited
BMP2-induced ectopic bone formation in a dose-dependent manner. Taken together,
these results suggest that ERRgamma is a novel negative regulator of osteoblast
differentiation and bone formation via its regulation of Runx2 transactivity.

PMCID: PMC2682869
PMID: 19324883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Cell Sci. 2009 Apr 15;122(Pt 8):1258-67. doi: 10.1242/jcs.037747. Epub 2009 Mar
19.

p300-mediated acetylation of the Rothmund-Thomson-syndrome gene product RECQL4
regulates its subcellular localization.

Dietschy T(1), Shevelev I, Pena-Diaz J, Hühn D, Kuenzle S, Mak R, Miah MF, Hess
D, Fey M, Hottiger MO, Janscak P, Stagljar I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Terrence Donnelly Centre for 
Cellular and Biomolecular Research (dCCBR), University of Toronto, Toronto ON,
Canada M5S 3E1.

Erratum in
    J Cell Sci. 2009 May 15;122(Pt 10):1701.

RECQL4 belongs to the conserved RecQ family of DNA helicases, members of which
play important roles in the maintenance of genome stability in all organisms that
have been examined. Although genetic alterations in the RECQL4 gene are reported 
to be associated with three autosomal recessive disorders (Rothmund-Thomson,
RAPADILINO and Baller-Gerold syndromes), the molecular role of RECQL4 still
remains poorly understood. Here, we show that RECQL4 specifically interacts with 
the histone acetyltransferase p300 (also known as p300 HAT), both in vivo and in 
vitro, and that p300 acetylates one or more of the lysine residues at positions
376, 380, 382, 385 and 386 of RECQL4. Furthermore, we report that these five
lysine residues lie within a short motif of 30 amino acids that is essential for 
the nuclear localization of RECQL4. Remarkably, the acetylation of RECQL4 by p300
in vivo leads to a significant shift of a proportion of RECQL4 protein from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm. This accumulation of the acetylated RECQL4 is a result 
of its inability to be imported into the nucleus. Our results provide the first
evidence of a post-translational modification of the RECQL4 protein, and suggest 
that acetylation of RECQL4 by p300 regulates the trafficking of RECQL4 between
the nucleus and the cytoplasm.

PMID: 19299466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 8;284(19):13033-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M901248200. Epub 2009 
Mar 17.

The F-box protein beta-TrCp1/Fbw1a interacts with p300 to enhance beta-catenin
transcriptional activity.

Kimbrel EA(1), Kung AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Children's
Hospital Boston and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Hyperactivated beta-catenin is a commonly found molecular abnormality in colon
cancer, and its nuclear accumulation is thought to promote the expression of
genes associated with cellular proliferation and transformation. The p300
transcriptional co-activator binds to beta-catenin and facilitates transcription 
by recruiting chromatin remodeling complexes and general transcriptional
apparatus. We have found that beta-TrCp1/Fbw1a, a member of the
Skp1/Cullin/Rbx1/F-box E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, binds directly to p300 and
co-localizes with it to beta-catenin target gene promoters. Our data show that
Fbw1a, which normally targets beta-catenin for degradation, works together with
p300 to enhance the transcriptional activity of beta-catenin, whereas other
F-box/WD40 proteins do not. Fbw1a also cooperates with p300 to co-activate
transcription by SMAD3, another Fbw1a ubiquitylation target, but not p53 or
HIF-1alpha, which are substrates for other ubiquitin ligase complexes. These
results suggest that, although Fbw1a is part of a negative feedback loop for
controlling beta-catenin levels in normal cells, its overexpression and binding
to p300 may contribute to hyperactivated beta-catenin transcriptional activity in
colon cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2676036
PMID: 19297328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2009 May;296(5):H1213-4. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00244.2009. Epub 2009 Mar 13.

CBP and p300 in renin homeostasis: can they drive the fate?

Mendez M.

Comment on
    Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2009 May;296(5):H1255-62.

PMCID: PMC2685357
PMID: 19286957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jun;23(6):794-808. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0236. Epub 2009 Mar 
12.

The PPARgamma2 A/B-domain plays a gene-specific role in transactivation and
cofactor recruitment.

Bugge A(1), Grøntved L, Aagaard MM, Borup R, Mandrup S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense M, Denmark.

We have previously shown that adenoviral expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) leads to rapid establishment of
transcriptionally active complexes and activation of target gene expression
within 5-8 h after transduction. Here we have used the adenoviral delivery system
combined with expression array analysis to identify novel putative PPARgamma
target genes in murine fibroblasts and to determine the role of the A/B-domain in
PPARgamma-mediated transactivation of genomic target genes. Of the 257 genes
found to be induced by PPARgamma2 expression, only 25 displayed A/B-domain
dependency, i.e. significantly reduced induction in the cells expressing the
truncated PPARgamma lacking the A/B-domain (PPARgammaCDE). Nine of the 25
A/B-domain-dependent genes were involved in lipid storage, and in line with this,
triglyceride accumulation was considerably decreased in the cells expressing
PPARgammaCDE compared with cells expressing full-length PPARgamma2. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation, we demonstrate that PPARgamma binding to genomic
target sites and recruitment of the mediator component TRAP220/MED1/PBP/DRIP205
is not affected by the deletion of the A/B-domain. By contrast, the
PPARgamma-mediated cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein
(CBP) and p300 recruitment to A/B-domain-dependent target genes is compromised by
deletion of the A/B-domain. These results indicate that the A/B-domain of
PPARgamma2 is specifically involved in the recruitment or stabilization of CBP-
and p300-containing cofactor complexes to a subset of target genes.

PMID: 19282365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Virol. 2009 May;83(10):4810-22. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02145-08. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

Adenovirus transforming protein E1A induces c-Myc in quiescent cells by a novel
mechanism.

Kadeppagari RK(1), Sankar N, Thimmapaya B.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Microbiology and
Immunology Department, 303 East Chicago Ave., Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Previously we showed that the E1A binding proteins p300 and CBP negatively
regulate c-Myc in quiescent cells and that binding of E1A to p300 results in the 
induction of c-Myc and thereby induction of S phase. We demonstrated that p300
and HDAC3 cooperate with the transcription factor YY1 at an upstream YY1 binding 
site and repress the Myc promoter. Here we show that the small E1A protein
induces c-Myc by interfering with the protein-protein interaction between p300,
YY1, and HDAC3. Wild-type E1A but not the E1A mutants that do not bind to p300
interfered in recruitment of YY1, p300, and HDAC3 to the YY1 binding site. As E1A
started to accumulate after infection, it transiently associated with
promoter-bound p300. Subsequently, YY1, p300, and HDAC3 began to dissociate from 
the promoter. Later in infection, E1A dissociated from the promoter as well as
p300, YY1, and HDAC3. Removal of HDAC3 from the promoter correlated with
increased acetylation of Myc chromatin and induction. In vivo E1A stably
associated with p300 and dissociated YY1 and HDAC3 from the trimolecular complex.
In vitro protein-protein interaction studies indicated that E1A initially binds
to the p300-YY1-HDAC3 complex, briefly associates with it, and then dissociates
the complex, recapitulating somewhat the in vivo situation. Thus, E1A binding to 
the C-terminal region of p300 disrupts the important corepressor function
provided by p300 in repressing c-Myc. Our results reveal a novel mechanism by
which a viral oncoprotein activates c-Myc in quiescent cells and raise the
possibility that the oncoproteins encoded by the small-DNA tumor viruses may use 
this mechanism to induce c-Myc, which may be critical for cell transformation.

PMCID: PMC2682075
PMID: 19279113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biomed Sci. 2009 Feb 23;16:24. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-16-24.

Spatiotemporal expression of histone acetyltransferases, p300 and CBP, in
developing embryonic hearts.

Chen G(1), Zhu J, Lv T, Wu G, Sun H, Huang X, Tian J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, PR China. chenguozhen7954@yahoo.com.cn

Histone acetyltransferases (HATs), p300 and cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB)-binding protein (CBP) are two structurally related transcriptional
co-activators that activate expression of many eukaryotic genes involved in
cellular growth and signaling, muscle differentiation and embryogenesis. However,
whether these proteins play important and different roles in mouse cardiogenesis 
is not clear. Here, we investigate the protein distributions and mRNA expression 
of the two HATs in embryonic and adult mouse heart during normal heart
development by using immunohistochemical and RT-PCR techniques. The data from
immunohistochemical experiments revealed that p300 was extensively present in
nearly every region of the hearts from embryonic stages to the adulthood.
However, no CBP expression was detected in embryonic hearts at day E7.5. CBP
expression appeared at the later stages, and the distribution of CBP was less
than that of p300. In the developmental hearts after E10.5, both for p300 and
CBP, the mRNA expression levels reached a peak on day E10.5, and then were
gradually decreased afterwards. These results reveal that both p300 and CBP are
related to embryonic heart development. The dynamic expression patterns of these 
two enzymes during mouse heart development indicate that they may play an
important role on heart development. However, there is a difference in
spatiotemporal expression patterns between these two enzymes during heart
development. The expression of p300 is earlier and more predominate, suggesting
that p300 may play a more important role in embryonic heart development
especially during cardiac precursor cell induction and interventricular septum
formation.

PMCID: PMC2653528
PMID: 19272189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nature. 2009 May 7;459(7243):113-7. doi: 10.1038/nature07861. Epub 2009 Mar 8.

CBP/p300-mediated acetylation of histone H3 on lysine 56.

Das C(1), Lucia MS, Hansen KC, Tyler JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, PO Box 6511, Aurora Colorado 80045, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2009 Aug 27;460(7259):1164.

Acetylation within the globular core domain of histone H3 on lysine 56 (H3K56)
has recently been shown to have a critical role in packaging DNA into chromatin
following DNA replication and repair in budding yeast. However, the function or
occurrence of this specific histone mark has not been studied in multicellular
eukaryotes, mainly because the Rtt109 enzyme that is known to mediate acetylation
of H3K56 (H3K56ac) is fungal-specific. Here we demonstrate that the histone
acetyl transferase CBP (also known as Nejire) in flies and CBP and p300 (Ep300)
in humans acetylate H3K56, whereas Drosophila Sir2 and human SIRT1 and SIRT2
deacetylate H3K56ac. The histone chaperones ASF1A in humans and Asf1 in
Drosophila are required for acetylation of H3K56 in vivo, whereas the histone
chaperone CAF-1 (chromatin assembly factor 1) in humans and Caf1 in Drosophila
are required for the incorporation of histones bearing this mark into chromatin. 
We show that, in response to DNA damage, histones bearing acetylated K56 are
assembled into chromatin in Drosophila and human cells, forming foci that
colocalize with sites of DNA repair. Furthermore, acetylation of H3K56 is
increased in multiple types of cancer, correlating with increased levels of ASF1A
in these tumours. Our identification of multiple proteins regulating the levels
of H3K56 acetylation in metazoans will allow future studies of this critical and 
unique histone modification that couples chromatin assembly to DNA synthesis,
cell proliferation and cancer.

PMCID: PMC2756583
PMID: 19270680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nutrition. 2009 Sep;25(9):964-72. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2008.12.007. Epub 2009 Mar
5.

Curcumin prevents diabetes-associated abnormalities in the kidneys by inhibiting 
p300 and nuclear factor-kappaB.

Chiu J(1), Khan ZA, Farhangkhoee H, Chakrabarti S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada.

Comment in
    Nutrition. 2009 Sep;25(9):973-4; author reply 975-6.

OBJECTIVE: Diabetic nephropathy is a debilitating disease that leads to end-stage
renal failure in the Western world. Hyperglycemia is the initiating factor in
several chronic diabetic complications which mediates increased oxidative stress 
and eventually the increased production of vasoactive factors and extracellular
matrix proteins. We hypothesized that curcumin, a potent antioxidant, might be
beneficial in preventing the development of diabetic nephropathy because this
compound has been shown to inhibit p300, a histone acetyltransferase that plays a
role in regulating gene expression through its interaction with the transcription
factor nuclear factor-kappaB.
METHODS: To test this hypothesis, male Sprague-Dawley rats were injected with
streptozotocin to induce diabetes. These animals were subsequently treated with
curcumin for a period of 1 mo.
RESULTS: Real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analyses
showed that diabetes-induced upregulation of vasoactive factors (endothelial
nitric oxide synthase and endothelin-1), transforming growth factor-beta1 and
extracellular matrix proteins (fibronectin and extradomain-B-containing
fibronectin) in the kidneys. These changes were associated with increased
oxidative stress, mesangial expansion, and p300 and nuclear factor-kappaB
activity that were prevented with curcumin treatment.
CONCLUSION: These beneficial effects of curcumin were mediated through the
inhibition of p300 and nuclear factor-kappaB.

PMID: 19268536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Apr;39(4):1157-66. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838732.

Analyses of TGF-beta1-inducible Ig germ-line gamma2b promoter activity:
involvement of Smads and NF-kappaB.

Seo GY(1), Park SR, Kim PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Bioscience, School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Kangwondo, Republic of Korea.

TGF-beta1 directs class switch recombination to IgG2b as well as IgA. We have
shown that Smad3/4, Runx3, and p300 mediate TGF-beta1-induced germ-line (GL)
gamma2b transcription and that there is a potential Smad-binding element (SBE,
CAGAC, -38/-34) and Runx-binding element (TGTGGGT, +41/+47) in the promoter
region. Here, we have characterized more putative transcription factor-binding
elements in the promoter. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that two more
putative SBE (GTCTG, -67/-63 and +38/+42) are relevant to TGF-beta1-induced
GLgamma2b promoter activity, a finding that was confirmed by EMSA. However,
neither overexpression of Ets (i.e. Elf-1, Fli-1, or Pu.1) nor a mutation
deleting a putative Ets-binding element (CAGGAA, -4/+2) affected basal or
TGF-beta1-induced promoter activity. On the other hand, NF-kappaB repressed
promoter activity without direct binding to two putative NF-kappaB-binding
elements (GGACTCCCC, -63/-55; GGGCCTTTCC,+237/+246). Instead, NF-kappaB
overexpression increased the expression of Smad7 transcripts. Moreover, p300
overexpression failed to rescue the inhibitory effect of NF-kappaB on GLgamma2b
promoter activity. These results indicate that there are multiple SBE relevant to
GLgamma2b promoter activity and that NF-kappaB acts in cooperation with p300 to
downregulate promoter activity through increasing the gene expression of
inhibitory Smad7.

PMID: 19266485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Blood. 2009 May 28;113(22):5599-604. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-12-195255. Epub 2009
Feb 27.

Mutational inhibition of c-Myb or p300 ameliorates treatment-induced
thrombocytopenia.

Hilton DJ(1), Kile BT, Alexander WS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Australia.

The transcription factor c-Myb and coregulator p300 have a key role in
maintaining production of controlled numbers of megakaryocytes and platelets. In 
mice, mutations in c-Myb or p300 cause thrombocytosis in otherwise wild-type
animals and can ameliorate the thrombocytopenia in mice lacking the
thrombopoietin receptor, c-Mpl, a model for human congenital amegakaryocytic
thrombocytopenia. To examine whether inhibition of c-Myb/p300 is effective in
other models of thrombocytopenia, the effect of the c-Myb(Plt4) mutation on
thrombocytopenia associated with reduced platelet life span in Bcl-X(Plt20/Plt20)
mice was assessed, as were responses in c-Myb(Plt4) and/or p300(Plt6) mutant mice
to thrombocytopenia associated with antiplatelet antibodies, chemotherapy, or
bone marrow transplantation. Homozygosity of the c-Myb(Plt4) allele ameliorated
thrombocytopenia associated with reduced platelet life span, and c-Myb(Plt4/+)
mice exhibited more rapid than normal recovery from thrombocytopenia caused by
antiplatelet serum or bone marrow transplantation. Recovery to pretreatment
platelet levels was unaltered in 5-fluorouracil-treated c-Myb(Plt4/+) mice
relative to wild-type controls, but enhanced platelet production during
subsequent thrombocytosis was evident. More modest enhancement of platelet
recovery after 5-fluorouracil or bone marrow transplantation was also evident in 
p300(Plt6/+) animals. The data suggest potential utility of c-Myb/p300 as a
target for therapeutic intervention in thrombocytopenia of diverse origins.

PMCID: PMC2689056
PMID: 19252138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2009 May;296(5):H1255-62. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.01266.2008. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

CBP and p300 are essential for renin cell identity and morphological integrity of
the kidney.

Gomez RA(1), Pentz ES, Jin X, Cordaillat M, Sequeira Lopez ML.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pediatrics, Univ. of Virginia School of Medicine, 409 Lane Rd., MR4
2001, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. rg@virginia.edu

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2009 May;296(5):H1213-4.

The mechanisms that govern the identity of renin cells are not well understood.
We and others have identified cAMP as an important pathway in the regulation of
renin synthesis and release. Recently, experiments in cells from the renin
lineage led us to propose that acquisition and maintenance of renin cell identity
are mediated by cAMP and histone acetylation at the cAMP responsive element (CRE)
of the renin gene. Ultimately, the transcriptional effects of cAMP depend on
binding of the appropriate transcription factors to CRE. It has been suggested
that access of transcription factors to this region of the promoter is
facilitated by the coactivators CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300, which
possess histone acetyltransferase activity and may be, in turn, responsible for
the remodeling of chromatin underlying expression of the renin gene. We
hypothesized that CBP and p300 are therefore required for expression of the renin
gene and maintenance of the renin cell. Because mice homozygous for the deletion 
of CBP or p300 die before kidney organogenesis begins, no data on kidney or
juxtaglomerular cell development in these mice are available. Therefore, to
define the role of these histone acetyltransferases in renin cell identity in
vivo, we used a conditional deletion approach, in which floxed CBP and p300 mice 
were crossed with mice expressing cre recombinase in renin cells. Results show
that the histone acetyltransferases CBP and p300 are necessary for maintenance of
renin cell identity and structural integrity of the kidney.

PMCID: PMC2685333
PMID: 19252086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cell Cycle. 2009 Mar 1;8(5):693-6. Epub 2009 Mar 2.

Cockayne syndrome B protein (CSB): linking p53, HIF-1 and p300 to robustness,
lifespan, cancer and cell fate decisions.

Frontini M(1), Proietti-De-Santis L.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London,
London, UK.

Our recent data demonstrate that the CSB protein, besides its role in DNA repair,
functions also as a master switch factor that can selectively influence the
transcription of specific sets of genes, after DNA damage or hypoxia, by
influencing the biological functions of p53. It is likely that the CSB protein,
by modulating p53 activity after different cellular stresses would re-equilibrate
the physiological response towards cell proliferation and survival instead of
cell cycle arrest and cell death. Some important implications of these findings
are discussed here.

PMID: 19221478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. EMBO J. 2009 Apr 8;28(7):948-58. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.30. Epub 2009 Feb 12.

Structural basis for recruitment of CBP/p300 coactivators by STAT1 and STAT2
transactivation domains.

Wojciak JM(1), Martinez-Yamout MA, Dyson HJ, Wright PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

CBP/p300 transcriptional coactivators mediate gene expression by integrating
cellular signals through interactions with multiple transcription factors. To
elucidate the molecular and structural basis for CBP-dependent gene expression,
we determined structures of the CBP TAZ1 and TAZ2 domains in complex with the
transactivation domains (TADs) of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 2 (STAT2) and STAT1, respectively. Despite the topological
similarity of the TAZ1 and TAZ2 domains, subtle differences in helix packing and 
surface grooves constitute major determinants of target selectivity. Our results 
suggest that TAZ1 preferentially binds long TADs capable of contacting multiple
surface grooves simultaneously, whereas smaller TADs that are restricted to a
single contiguous binding surface form complexes with TAZ2. Complex formation for
both STAT TADs involves coupled folding and binding, driven by intermolecular
hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions. Phosphorylation of S727, required for
maximal transcriptional activity of STAT1, does not enhance binding to any of the
CBP domains. Because the different STAT TADs recognize different regions of
CBP/p300, there is a potential for multivalent binding by STAT heterodimers that 
could enhance the recruitment of the coactivators to promoters.

PMCID: PMC2670858
PMID: 19214187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Virology. 2009 Mar 30;386(1):68-78. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.12.043. Epub 2009
Feb 5.

Acetylation of the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax oncoprotein by p300
promotes activation of the NF-kappaB pathway.

Lodewick J(1), Lamsoul I, Polania A, Lebrun S, Burny A, Ratner L, Bex F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Microbiological Research J-M Wiame and Laboratory of
Microbiology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1, Avenue Emile Gryson, B-1070
Brussels, Belgium.

The oncogenic potential of the HTLV-1 Tax protein involves activation of the
NF-kappaB pathway, which depends on Tax phosphorylation, ubiquitination and
sumoylation. We demonstrate that the nuclei of Tax-expressing cells, including
HTLV-1 transformed T-lymphocytes, contain a pool of Tax molecules acetylated on
lysine residue at amino acid position 346 by the transcriptional coactivator
p300. Phosphorylation of Tax on serine residues 300/301 was a prerequisite for
Tax localization in the nucleus and correlated with its subsequent acetylation by
p300, whereas sumoylation, resulting in the formation of Tax nuclear bodies in
which p300 was recruited, favored Tax acetylation. Overexpression of p300
markedly increased Tax acetylation and the ability of a wild type HTLV-1
provirus, but not of a mutant provirus carrying an acetylation deficient Tax
gene, to activate gene expression from an integrated NF-kappaB-controlled
promoter. Thus, Tax acetylation favors NF-kappaB activation and might play an
important role in HTLV-1-induced cell transformation.

PMCID: PMC2834172
PMID: 19200568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Apr;29(7):1749-59. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01476-08. Epub 2009 Feb
2.

Estrogen receptor alpha represses transcription of early target genes via p300
and CtBP1.

Stossi F(1), Madak-Erdogan Z, Katzenellenbogen BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801-3704, USA.

The regulation of gene expression by nuclear receptors controls the phenotypic
properties and diverse biologies of target cells. In breast cancer cells,
estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) is a master regulator of transcriptional
stimulation and repression, yet the mechanisms by which agonist-bound ERalpha
elicits repression are poorly understood. We analyzed early estrogen-repressed
genes and found that ERalpha is recruited to ERalpha binding sites of these
genes, albeit more transiently and less efficiently than for estrogen-stimulated 
genes. Of multiple cofactors studied, only p300 was recruited to ERalpha binding 
sites of repressed genes, and its knockdown prevented estrogen-mediated gene
repression. Because p300 is involved in transcription initiation, we tested
whether ERalpha might be trying to stimulate transcription at repressed genes,
with ultimately failure and a shift to a repressive program. We found that
estrogen increases transcription in a rapid but transient manner at early
estrogen-repressed genes but that this is followed by recruitment of the
corepressor CtBP1, a p300-interacting partner that plays an essential role in the
repressive process. Thus, at early estrogen-repressed genes, ERalpha initiates
transient stimulation of transcription but fails to maintain the transcriptional 
process observed at estrogen-stimulated genes; rather, it uses p300 to recruit
CtBP1-containing complexes, eliciting chromatin modifications that lead to
transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC2655624
PMID: 19188451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMC Cancer. 2009 Jan 30;9:43. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-43.

Screening and association testing of common coding variation in steroid hormone
receptor co-activator and co-repressor genes in relation to breast cancer risk:
the Multiethnic Cohort.

Haiman CA(1), Garcia RR, Hsu C, Xia L, Ha H, Sheng X, Le Marchand L, Kolonel LN, 
Henderson BE, Stallcup MR, Greene GL, Press MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, California, 
USA. haiman@usc.edu

BACKGROUND: Only a limited number of studies have performed comprehensive
investigations of coding variation in relation to breast cancer risk. Given the
established role of estrogens in breast cancer, we hypothesized that coding
variation in steroid receptor coactivator and corepressor genes may alter
inter-individual response to estrogen and serve as markers of breast cancer risk.
METHODS: We sequenced the coding exons of 17 genes (EP300, CCND1, NME1, NCOA1,
NCOA2, NCOA3, SMARCA4, SMARCA2, CARM1, FOXA1, MPG, NCOR1, NCOR2, CALCOCO1, PRMT1,
PPARBP and CREBBP) suggested to influence transcriptional activation by steroid
hormone receptors in a multiethnic panel of women with advanced breast cancer (n 
= 95): African Americans, Latinos, Japanese, Native Hawaiians and European
Americans. Association testing of validated coding variants was conducted in a
breast cancer case-control study (1,612 invasive cases and 1,961 controls) nested
in the Multiethnic Cohort. We used logistic regression to estimate odds ratios
for allelic effects in ethnic-pooled analyses as well as in subgroups defined by 
disease stage and steroid hormone receptor status. We also investigated effect
modification by established breast cancer risk factors that are associated with
steroid hormone exposure.
RESULTS: We identified 45 coding variants with frequencies > or = 1% in any one
ethnic group (43 non-synonymous variants). We observed nominally significant
positive associations with two coding variants in ethnic-pooled analyses (NCOR2: 
His52Arg, OR = 1.79; 95% CI, 1.05-3.05; CALCOCO1: Arg12His, OR = 2.29; 95% CI,
1.00-5.26). A small number of variants were associated with risk in disease
subgroup analyses and we observed no strong evidence of effect modification by
breast cancer risk factors. Based on the large number of statistical tests
conducted in this study, the nominally significant associations that we observed 
may be due to chance, and will need to be confirmed in other studies.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that common coding variation in these candidate 
genes do not make a substantial contribution to breast cancer risk in the general
population. Cataloging and testing of coding variants in coactivator and
corepressor genes should continue and may serve as a valuable resource for
investigations of other hormone-related phenotypes, such as inter-individual
response to hormonal therapies used for cancer treatment and prevention.

PMCID: PMC2637888
PMID: 19183483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 27;284(13):8567-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808719200. Epub 2009 
Jan 28.

Phosphorylation of Activation Transcription Factor-2 at Serine 121 by Protein
Kinase C Controls c-Jun-mediated Activation of Transcription.

Yamasaki T(1), Takahashi A, Pan J, Yamaguchi N, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Engineering Division, RIKEN BioResource Center, 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-0074.

Activation transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) is phosphorylated by various protein
kinases, such as JNK/p38/ERK, calmodulin kinase IV, protein kinase A, and protein
kinase C (PKC), in response to a variety of stimuli. However, the role of the
phosphorylation of ATF-2 by PKC in vivo in the transcriptional control of genes
that include the activation protein-1 (AP-1)/cyclic AMP-response element remains 
to be defined. Using antibodies against the phosphorylated serine residue
(Ser(P)) at position 121 of ATF-2, we have demonstrated that PKC phosphorylates
ATF-2 at Ser-121 and that phosphorylation of Ser-121 (to yield ATF-2pS121)
becomes detectable at the late stage of the response of HeLa cells to
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) and is maintained for more than 2 h.
By contrast, phosphorylation of ATF-2 at threonine residues 69 and 71 (Thr-69/71,
to yield ATF-2pT69/71) and at Ser-340 and Ser-367 (to yield ATF-2pS340 and
ATF-2pS367) is detectable as an immediate early response. Unlike levels of
ATF-2pT69/71 and ATF-2pS340, the level of ATF-2pS121 increases in the nuclei of
HeLa cells in response to TPA. A serine-to-alanine mutation at position 121 of
ATF-2 represses the c-Jun-dependent transcription of AP-1/cyclic AMP-response
element reporter genes and also the p300-mediated activation of a Gal4-reporter
gene in response to TPA. Our results suggest that the phosphorylation of ATF-2 at
Ser-121 plays a key role in the c-Jun-mediated activation of transcription that
occurs in response to TPA.

PMCID: PMC2659215
PMID: 19176525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Biochemistry. 2009 Feb 17;48(6):1244-55. doi: 10.1021/bi801716h.

Two distinct motifs within the p53 transactivation domain bind to the Taz2 domain
of p300 and are differentially affected by phosphorylation.

Jenkins LM(1), Yamaguchi H, Hayashi R, Cherry S, Tropea JE, Miller M, Wlodawer A,
Appella E, Mazur SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The tumor suppressor p53 functions as a transcriptional activator for many genes,
including several key genes involved in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Following DNA damage-induced stress, p53 undergoes extensive posttranslational
modification, resulting in increased stability and activity. Two critical
cofactors for p53-mediated transactivation are the histone acetyltransferase
paralogues CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300. The N-terminal transactivation
domain of p53 interacts with several domains of CBP/p300, including the Taz2
domain. Here, we report the effects of specific p53 phosphorylations on its
interaction with the Taz2 domain of p300. Using a competitive fluorescence
anisotropy assay, we determined that monophosphorylation of p53 at Ser(15) or
Thr(18) increased the affinity of p53(1-39) for Taz2, and diphosphorylations at
Ser(15) and Ser(37) or Thr(18) and Ser(20) further increased the affinity. In
addition, we identified a second binding site for Taz2 within p53 residues 35-59.
This second site bound Taz2 with a similar affinity as the first site, but the
binding was unaffected by phosphorylation. Thus, p53 posttranslational
modification modulates only one of the two binding sites for p300 Taz2. Further
investigation of Taz2 binding to p53(1-39) or p53(35-59) by isothermal titration 
calorimetry indicated that upon complex formation, the change in heat capacity at
constant pressure, DeltaC(p), was negative for both sites, suggesting the
importance of hydrophobic interactions. However, the more negative value of
DeltaC(p) for Taz2 binding to the first (-330 cal/(mol.K)) compared to the second
site (-234 cal/(mol.K)) suggests that the importance of nonpolar and polar
interactions differs between the two sites.

PMCID: PMC2848171
PMID: 19166313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 3;284(14):9168-75. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805562200. Epub 2009
Jan 16.

Critical roles of coactivator p300 in mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation
and Nanog expression.

Zhong X(1), Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences/Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, China.

p300 is a well known histone acetyltransferase and coactivator that plays pivotal
roles in many physiological processes. Despite extensive research for the
functions of p300 in embryogenesis and transcription regulation, its roles in
regulating embryonic stem (ES) cell pluripotency are poorly understood. To
address this issue, we investigated the self-renewal ability and early
differentiation process in both wild-type mouse ES cells and ES cells derived
from p300 knock-out (p300(-/-)) mice. We found that p300 ablation did not affect 
self-renewal capacity overtly when ES cells were maintained under
undifferentiated conditions. However, the absence of p300 caused a significantly 
abnormal expression pattern of germ layer markers when differentiation was
induced by embryoid body (EB) formation. Interestingly, the expression level of
pluripotency marker Nanog but not Oct4 was markedly lower in EBs from p300(-/-)
ES cells compared with that in EBs from wild-type ES cells. Exogenous expression 
of Nanog rescued abnormal expression of extra-embryonic endoderm marker partially
but not mesoderm and ectoderm markers. Furthermore, we demonstrate that p300 was 
directly involved in modulating Nanog expression. Importantly, epigenetic
modification of histone acetylation at the distal regulatory region of Nanog was 
found to be dependent on the presence of p300, which could contribute to the
mechanism of regulating Nanog expression by p300. Collectively, our results show 
that p300 plays an important role in the differentiation process of ES cells and 
provide the first evidence for the involvement of p300 in regulating Nanog
expression during differentiation, probably through epigenetic modification of
histone on Nanog.

PMCID: PMC2666568
PMID: 19150979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Tsitologiia. 2008;50(11):964-71.

[Sodium butyrate do not induce the program of premature senescence in
transformants with JNK1,2 knockout].

[Article in Russian]

Zubova SG, Bykova TV, Zubova IuG, Romanov VS, Aksenov ND, Pospelov VA, Pospelova 
TV.

We studied the role of JNK1,2 stress-kinases in the regulation of premature
senescence program, stimulated by the inhibitor of histone deacetylase, sodium
butyrate (NaB). It was found, that the transformants EIA + cHa-ras selected from 
embryonic mouse fibroblasts with knockout jnk1,2 stress-kinase genes did not
block the cell cycle after sodium butyrate treatment. The data on the cell cycle 
distribution and cell growth curves showed that even long term (during five days)
NaB influence did not suppress proliferation. We did not also reveal any cellular
hypertrophy and increase in SA-beta-galactosidase activity after NaB treatment.
The data presented suggest that JNK stress-kinases are involved in sodium
butyrate-induced senescence in E1A + cHa-Ras mouse transformants, and they are
indicative of that JNK1,2 have tumor suppressor properties.

PMID: 19140343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Brain Res. 2009 Feb 13;1254:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.11.092. Epub 2008
Dec 10.

p300 expression is induced by oxygen deficiency and protects neuron cells from
damage.

Tan XL(1), Zhai Y, Gao WX, Fan YM, Liu FY, Huang QY, Gao YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and High Altitude Physiology, College of High
Altitude Medicine, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China.

Low oxygen level or oxygen deficiency (hypoxia) is a major factor causing
neuronal damage in many diseases. Inducing cell adaptation to hypoxia is an
effective method for neuroprotection that can be achieved by either inhibiting
the death effectors or enhancing the survival factors. Transcription coactivator 
p300 is necessary for hypoxia-induced transcriptional activation and plays an
important role in neuron survival. However, the alteration of p300 expression
under hypoxia condition and its role in hypoxia-induced neuronal damage remain
unclear. In this study, the distribution of p300 in rat brain and the alteration 
of its expression in rat hippocampus during hypobaric hypoxia exposure were
detected. In addition, the role of p300 in neuronal-like PC12 cell damage induced
by oxygen deficiency (3% oxygen) was evaluated. Our results showed that p300
protein was mainly expressed in the cells expressed beta-tubulin III in the
cerebral cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum cortex, medulla oblongata and
hypothalamus. Less or no positive signal of p300 expression was observed in
beta-tubulin III negative cells. This indicated that p300 was predominantly
expressed in neurons of rat brain. Furthermore, p300 expression was up-regulated 
in rat hippocampus during hypoxia exposure and in neuronal-like PC12 cells under 
3% oxygen condition. Interestingly, neuronal-like PC12 cell damage induced by
oxygen deficiency (3% oxygen) was increased by suppression of p300 expression
with short hairpin RNA (shRNA). These data indicate that p300 is an important
molecule for neuroprotection under hypoxia.

PMID: 19103185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 13;284(7):4073-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805055200. Epub 2008
Dec 16.

SGK1 phosphorylation of IkappaB Kinase alpha and p300 Up-regulates NF-kappaB
activity and increases N-Methyl-D-aspartate receptor NR2A and NR2B expression.

Tai DJ(1), Su CC, Ma YL, Lee EH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Academia
Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 1 (SGK1) is a downstream target of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling, and it regulates various cellular and
physiological functions, but the SGK1 substrate proteins and genes regulated by
SGK1 are less known. Here we have identified IkappaB kinase alpha (IKKalpha) as a
novel substrate of SGK1 by using biochemical and bioinformatic approaches. SGK1
directly phosphorylates IKKalpha at Thr-23 and indirectly activates IKKalpha at
Ser-180. Furthermore, SGK1 enhanced nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) activity
and up-regulated N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor NR2A and NR2B expression through
activation of IKKalpha at Thr-23 and Ser-180, and these two residues play an
equally important role in mediating these effects of SGK1. Although SGK1 does not
phosphorylate IKKbeta, IKKbeta activity is still required for IKK complex
activation and for SGK1 phosphorylation and activation of NF-kappaB. In addition,
SGK1 increased the acetylation of NF-kappaB through phosphorylation of p300 at
Ser-1834, and this also leads to NF-kappaB activation and NR2A and NR2B
expression. Moreover, an endogenous stimulus of SGK1, insulin, increased IKKalpha
and NF-kappaB phosphorylation as well as NF-kappaB acetylation and NF-kappaB
activity, but SGK1 small interfering RNA transfection blocked these effects of
insulin. In examination of the functional significance of the
SGK1-IKKalpha-NF-kappaB signaling pathway, we found that transfection of the
IKKalpha double mutant (IKKalphaT23A/S180A) to rat hippocampus antagonized
SGK-1-mediated spatial memory facilitation. Our results together demonstrated
novel substrate proteins of SGK1 and novel SGK1 signaling pathways. Activation of
these signaling pathways enhances NR2A and NR2B expression that is implicated in 
neuronal plasticity.

PMID: 19088076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Nutr. 2009 Jan;139(1):26-32. doi: 10.3945/jn.108.099259. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Targeting of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated activation of cyclooxygenase-2
expression by the indole-3-carbinol metabolite 3,3'-diindolylmethane in breast
cancer cells.

Degner SC(1), Papoutsis AJ, Selmin O, Romagnolo DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721,
USA.

Ligands of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) include the environmental
xenobiotic 2,3,7,8 tetrachlorodibenzo(p)dioxin (TCDD), polycyclic aryl
hydrocarbons, and the dietary compounds 3, 3'-diindolylmethane (DIM), a
condensation product of indol-3-carbinol found in Brassica vegetables, and the
phytoalexin resveratrol (RES). The AhR and its cofactors regulate the expression 
of target genes at pentameric (GCGTG) xenobiotic responsive elements (XRE).
Because the activation of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression by AhR ligands may 
contribute to inflammation and tumorigenesis, we investigated the epigenetic
regulation of the COX-2 gene by TCDD and the reversal effects of DIM in MCF-7
breast cancer cells. Results of DNA binding and chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) studies documented that the treatment with TCDD induced the association of
the AhR to XRE harbored in the COX-2 promoter and control CYP1A1 promoter
oligonucleotides. The TCDD-induced binding of the AhR was reduced by
small-interfering RNA for the AhR or the cotreatment with synthetic
(3-methoxy-4-naphthoflavone) or dietary AhR antagonists (DIM, RES). In time
course ChIP studies, TCDD induced the rapid (15 min) occupancy by the AhR, the
histone acetyl transferase p300, and acetylated histone H4 (AcH4) at the COX-2
promoter. Conversely, the cotreatment of MCF-7 cells with DIM (10 micromol/L)
abrogated the TCDD-induced recruitment of the AhR and AcH4 to the COX-2 promoter 
and the induction of COX-2 mRNA and protein levels. Taken together, these data
suggest that naturally occurring modulators of the AhR such as DIM may be
effective agents for dietary strategies against epigenetic activation of COX-2
expression by AhR agonists.

PMCID: PMC2646210
PMID: 19056653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Microb Pathog. 2009 Feb;46(2):88-97. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2008.10.011. Epub
2008 Nov 13.

The IFNgamma-induced STAT1-CBP/P300 association, required for a normal response
to the cytokine, is disrupted in Brucella-infected macrophages.

Bouhet S(1), Lafont V, Billard E, Gross A, Dornand J.

Author information: 
(1)Université Montpellier1, Centre d'étude d'Agents Pathogènes et Biotechnologies
pour la Santé (CPBS), France.

To develop intracellularly within phagocytes and cause chronic infection,
Brucella must overcome different steps of the host immune responses. IFNgamma is 
a key mediator of the innate and adaptive responses produced during Brucella
infection. Therefore, Brucella would control host defenses by impairing
macrophage responses to IFNgamma. We first showed that in infected human
macrophages (VD3-differentiated THP-1 cells) Brucella escaped the microbicidal
environment generated by IFNgamma. We then analyzed the IFNgamma-mediated
signaling in Brucella-infected cells. We observed no decrease in STAT1 tyrosine
or serine phosphorylation, or in dimerization of phosphorylated STAT1 (P-STAT1)
and P-STAT1 translocation to the nucleus or in P-STAT1 binding to GAS, a minimal 
IFNgamma-response DNA sequence. In contrast, immuno-precipitation experiments
indicated that the IFNgamma-mediated association of P-STAT1 with CBP/P300
transactivators was markedly reduced in infected macrophages, demonstrating that 
P-STAT1 was unable to normally recruit these transactivators. The host cell cAMP 
pathway triggered by Brucella could be responsible for this defect, CBP/P300
mobilization by phosphorylated CREB (P-CREB) disrupting the IFNgamma-induced
STAT1-CBP/P300 association, required for a normal response of macrophages to
IFNgamma. In any case, the inhibition of an essential protein-protein interaction
probably lead to a deteriorated response to IFNgamma and thus participated in the
pathogen's establishment within its host.

PMID: 19041714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Growth Factors. 2009 Feb;27(1):1-11. doi: 10.1080/08977190802547357.

Cross-talk between IFN-alpha and TGF-beta1 signaling pathways in preneoplastic
rat liver.

Alvarez Mde L(1), Quiroga AD, Parody JP, Ronco MT, Francés DE, Carnovale CE,
Carrillo MC.

Author information: 
(1)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientificas y Tecnicas (CONICET), Facultad
de Ciencias Bioquimicas y Farmaceuticas, Instituto de Fisiologia Experimental,
Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Rosario, Argentina.

Interferon-gamma/transforming growth factor-beta (IFN-gamma/TGF-beta) pathways
have opposite effects on diverse cellular functions. However, little is known
about interactions between IFN-alpha/TGF-beta. In previous studies, we showed
that IFN-alpha2b increases TGF-beta(1) production and secretion in hepatocytes
from preneoplastic rat livers. Here, the interaction between
IFN-alpha/TGF-beta(1) pathways was explored. We observed a positive cross-talk
between IFN-alpha and TGF-beta(1) signaling, with activation of both pathways.
p300 protein levels in hepatocytes from preneoplastic livers were enough to
interact with both activated Stat1 and Smad2/3. Besides, Smad7 was not directly
related with TGF-beta(1) and IFN-alpha signals. Interestingly, we reported the
novel finding that the autocrine TGF-beta(1) up-regulates TGF-betaRII at protein 
and mRNA levels. In conclusion, the intracellular signals triggered by
IFN-alpha2b and by autocrine TGF-beta(1) are integrated at the nuclear level,
where activated Stat1 and Smad2/3 are capable of interact with p300, present in
no restrictive cellular amounts.

PMID: 19003557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Oncogene. 2009 Jan 22;28(3):445-60. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.388. Epub 2008 Oct 13.

Deacetylation of cortactin by SIRT1 promotes cell migration.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang M, Dong H, Yong S, Li X, Olashaw N, Kruk PA, Cheng JQ, Bai W,
Chen J, Nicosia SV, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, University of
South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Cortactin binds F-actin and promotes cell migration. We showed earlier that
cortactin is acetylated. Here, we identify SIRT1 (a class III histone
deacetylase) as a cortactin deacetylase and p300 as a cortactin acetylase. We
show that SIRT1 deacetylates cortactin in vivo and in vitro and that the SIRT1
inhibitor EX-527 increases amounts of acetylated cortactin in ovarian cancer
cells. We also show that p300 acetylates cortactin in vivo and that cells lacking
or depleted of p300 express less-acetylated cortactin than do control cells.
Deletion analysis mapped the SIRT1-binding domain of cortactin to its repeat
region, which also binds F-actin. Mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) lacking
sir2alpha (the mouse homolog of SIRT1) migrated more slowly than did wild-type
cells. The expression of SIRT1 in sir2alpha-null cells restored migratory
capacity, as did expression of a deacetylation-mimetic mutant of cortactin. SIRT1
and cortactin were more abundant in breast tumor tissue than in their normal
counterparts, whereas SIRT1 expression inversely correlates with the ratio of
acetylation cortactin versus total cortactin. These data suggest that
deacetylation of cortactin is associated with high levels of SIRT1 and
tumorigenesis. Finally, breast and ovarian cancer cell lines expressing an
acetylation mimetic mutant of cortactin are less motile than that of control
cells, whereas cells expressing the deacetylation mimetic mutant of cortactin
migrate faster than that of control cells in Transwell migration assays. In
summary, our results suggest that cortactin is a novel substrate for SIRT1 and
p300 and, for the first time, a possible role for SIRT1 in cell motility through 
deacetylation of cortactin.

PMID: 18850005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2009 Mar;16(1):123-37. doi: 10.1677/ERC-08-0124. Epub 2008
Oct 9.

Expression and significance of androgen receptor coactivators in urothelial
carcinoma of the bladder.

Boorjian SA(1), Heemers HV, Frank I, Farmer SA, Schmidt LJ, Sebo TJ, Tindall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Urothelial carcinoma (UC) of the bladder is approximately three times more common
in men than women. While the etiology for this gender difference in incidence
remains unknown, a role for androgen receptor (AR) signaling has been suggested. 
The mechanisms by which AR activity is regulated in UC cells, however, are
largely elusive. Here, we explore the significance of coregulators that are
critical for the formation of a functional AR transcriptional complex, in UC
cells. Using two AR-positive UC cell lines, TCC-SUP and UMUC3, we demonstrate the
expression of the coactivators NCOA1, NCOA2, NCOA3, CREBBP, and EP300 in UC
cells. small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of the AR or any of these
coactivators markedly impacted cell viability and abrogated androgen-dependent
cell proliferation. Noteworthy, contrary to AR-positive prostate cancer cells,
expression of these AR-associated coactivators was not androgen regulated in UC
cells. To assess the clinical relevance of coactivator expression, we performed
immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded sections from 55 patients with UC of
the bladder. We found that while 24 out of 55 (44%) of tumors expressed the AR,
each of the coactivators was expressed by 85-100% of the bladder cancers.
Moreover, we noted a significant downregulation of NCOA1 expression in tumors
versus adjacent, non-tumor bladder urothelium, with a mean of 68% (range 0-100)
of tumor cells demonstrating NCOA1 staining versus a mean of 81% (range 0-90) of 
non-tumor cells (P=0.03). Taken together, our data suggest an important role for 
AR-associated coactivators in UC and point toward differences in the regulation
of AR activity between bladder and prostate cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2674368
PMID: 18845648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Artif Organs. 2008;11(3):134-40. doi: 10.1007/s10047-008-0414-7. Epub 2008 Oct 
5.

Comparison of mRNA expression of transcriptional factors and intercalated disk
constituent proteins between in vivo and cultured cardiomyocytes.

Nakamura T(1), Feng Z, Honda T, Nomura Y, Kitajima T, Umezu M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science, Yamagata University, 2-2-2 Iida-Nishi,
Yamagata, 990-9585, Japan. task-n@yz.yamagata-u.ac.jp

The weak contractile force exerted by engineered cardiac muscle is a big problem 
in cardiac muscle tissue engineering, even though the field has made great
progress over the past decade. We believe that one major reason for the weak
contractile force is that the expression of genes regulating cardiomyocyte
differentiation and cardiac tissue syncytium may be different for in vivo and
cultured cells. In the present study, we investigated the difference of mRNA
expression under in vivo and culture conditions in order to seek a target for
further gene transfer treatment in the process of cardiac tissue construction. To
this end, mRNA expression of four major transcriptional factors (SRF, p300,
Nkx2.5, and myocardin) and two intercalated disk constituent proteins (N-cadherin
and connexin43) in rat cardiomyocytes was measured by means of ratiometric
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. Cardiomyocytes were harvested
from the hearts of 18-day (about 3 days before birth) Wistar-rat embryos
(embryonic cells), 12-day neonatal rat hearts (neonatal cells), or 14-day
successive dish culture of the embryonic cells harvested from 18-day embryos
(cultured cells). The results indicated that, except for SRF, the mRNAs had a
lower expression tendency in cultured cells than in embryonic and in neonatal
cells; in particular, the mRNA expression of myocardin, N-cadherin, and
connexin43 of cultured cardiomyocytes was significantly lower than that of
neonatal cells. Therefore, myocardin is a candidate for forced gene up-expression
during the construction of engineered cardiac tissue; in addition, a plausible
reason for the weak contractile force of engineered cardiac tissue is the weak
constitution of intercalated disk, because it was elucidated that mRNA expression
of proteins related to intercalated disk were lower in culture.

PMID: 18836874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Leukemia. 2009 Jan;23(1):85-94. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.257. Epub 2008 Sep 25.

Genome profiling of acute myelomonocytic leukemia: alteration of the MYB locus in
MYST3-linked cases.

Murati A(1), Gervais C, Carbuccia N, Finetti P, Cervera N, Adélaïde J, Struski S,
Lippert E, Mugneret F, Tigaud I, Penther D, Bastard C, Poppe B, Speleman F,
Baranger L, Luquet I, Cornillet-Lefebvre P, Nadal N, Nguyen-Khac F, Pérot C,
Olschwang S, Bertucci F, Chaffanet M, Lessard M, Mozziconacci MJ, Birnbaum D;
Groupe Francophone de Cytogénétique Hématologique.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Oncologie Moléculaire, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de
Marseille, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

The t(8;16)(p11;p13) is a rare translocation involved in de novo and
therapy-related myelomonocytic and monocytic acute leukemia. It fuses two genes
encoding histone acetyltransferases (HATs), MYST3 located at 8p11 to CREBBP
located at 16p13. Variant translocations involve other HAT-encoding genes such as
EP300, MYST4, NCOA2 or NCOA3. MYST3-linked acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs) share
specific clinical and biological features and a poor prognosis. Because of its
rarity, the molecular biology of MYST3-linked AMLs remains poorly understood. We 
have established the genome and gene expression profiles of a multicentric series
of 61 M4/M5 AMLs including 18 MYST3-linked AMLs by using array comparative genome
hybridization (aCGH) (n=52) and DNA microarrays (n=44), respectively. We show
that M4/5 AMLs have a variety of rare genomic alterations. One alteration, a gain
of the MYB locus, was found recurrently and only in the MYST3-linked AMLs (7/18
vs 0/34). MYST3-AMLs have also a specific a gene expression profile, which
includes overexpression of MYB, CD4 and HOXA genes. These features, reminiscent
of T-cell acute lymphoid leukemia (ALL), suggest the targeting of a common
T-myeloid progenitor.

PMID: 18818702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Virol. 2008 Dec;82(23):11939-47. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01356-08. Epub 2008 Sep 24.

The proto-oncogene Bcl3, induced by Tax, represses Tax-mediated transcription via
p300 displacement from the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 promoter.

Kim YM(1), Sharma N, Nyborg JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Campus Box 1870, Colorado
State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1870, USA.

The etiology of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1)-induced adult T-cell 
leukemia is linked to the expression of the viral oncoprotein Tax. Although the
mechanism of retroviral transformation is unknown, Tax interferes with
fundamental cellular processes, including proliferation and apoptosis, and these 
events may directly link Tax to early steps in malignant progression. In this
study, we examined the interplay between Tax and the potent proto-oncogene B-cell
chronic leukemia protein 3 (Bcl3). Bcl3 is a critical regulator of cell survival 
and proliferation and is overexpressed in HTLV-1-infected cells. We found that
Tax induced Bcl3 expression through stimulation of the NF-kappaB pathway. An
intronic NF-kappaB binding site within the Bcl3 gene served as the primary target
of Tax-induced NF-kappaB activation. We next considered the consequence of Bcl3
overexpression on Tax function. Interestingly, we found that Bcl3 formed a stable
complex with Tax and that this complex potently inhibited Tax-dependent HTLV-1
transcription. Importantly, Bcl3 associated with the HTLV-1 promoter in a
Tax-dependent manner and inhibited the binding of the critical cellular
coactivator p300. The conserved ankyrin repeat domain of Bcl3 mediated both Tax
binding and inhibition of p300 recruitment to the HTLV-1 promoter. Together,
these data suggest that Tax-induced Bcl3 overexpression benefits the virus in two
important ways. First, Bcl3 may promote cell division and thus clonal
proliferation of the virus. Second, Bcl3 may attenuate virion production,
facilitating immune evasion. One consequence of this regulatory loop may be
Bcl3-induced malignant transformation of the host cell.

PMCID: PMC2583681
PMID: 18815299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Pathol. 2008 Dec;216(4):521-32. doi: 10.1002/path.2404.

Transcription factor Egr1 acts as an upstream regulator of beta-catenin
signalling through up-regulation of TCF4 and p300 expression during
trans-differentiation of endometrial carcinoma cells.

Saegusa M(1), Hashimura M, Kuwata T, Hamano M, Watanabe J, Kawaguchi M, Okayasu
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. msaegusa@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

The beta-catenin/TCF4/p300 pathway is involved in early signalling for
trans-differentiation towards the morular phenotype of endometrial carcinoma
cells, but little is known about the upstream regulators. Here we show that
transcription factor early growth response 1 (Egr1) acts as an initial mediator
through up-regulating the expression of TCF4 and p300. In an endometrial
carcinoma cell line with abundant oestrogen receptor alpha, Egr1 expression at
both mRNA and protein levels was significantly increased by serum and
17beta-oestradiol stimuli. Serum-stimulated cells also showed increased
expression of TCF4 and p300, while inhibition of Egr1 by specific siRNAs resulted
in decreased expression. Transfection of Egr1 led to transactivation of TCF4 as
well as p300 genes, through specific binding to a promoter region, and thus in
turn resulted in nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin mediated by the
up-regulating TCF4. The overexpression also caused inhibition of
beta-catenin/TCF4/p300-mediated transcription, probably through sequestration of 
p300. Egr1 promoter activity was increased by serum but not 17beta-oestradiol, in
contrast to the marked repression associated with TCF4, p300, and Egr1 itself,
indicating that the regulation involves several feedback loops. In clinical
samples, cells immunopositive for nuclear Egr1, as well as beta-catenin and TCF4,
were found to be sporadically distributed in glandular components of endometrial 
carcinoma with morules. A significant positive correlation between nuclear
beta-catenin and TCF4 was observed, but no such link was evident for Egr1,
probably due to the existence of negative feedback regulation. Together, these
data indicate that Egr1 may participate in modulation of the
beta-catenin/TCF4/p300 signalling pathway as an initial event during
trans-differentiation of endometrial carcinoma cells, through its impact on
several signalling networks.

PMID: 18798221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2008 Aug;54(4):298-302.

PPAR alpha and PPAR delta transactivity and p300 binding activity induced by
arachidonic acid in colorectal cancer cell line Caco-2.

Mochizuki K(1), Suzuki T, Goda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School and Nutritional Sciences, The University of
Shizuoka, 51-1 Yada, Suruga, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan.

It is reported that arachidonic acid strongly induces the conformational change
in vitro and transactivity of PPAR alpha in colorectal cancer cell line Caco-2.
In this study, we demonstrated that the induction of conformational change and
transactivity of PPAR delta by arachidonic acid, as well as other polyunsaturated
fatty acids, was considerably lower than that of PPAR alpha. Mammalian two-hybrid
assay showed that arachidonic acid enhanced binding of one of the coactivators,
p300, to PPAR alpha but not to PPAR delta. Additionally, arachidonic acid induced
in vitro binding of both PPAR alpha-RXR alpha and PPAR delta-RXR alpha
heterodimers to several PPREs on CRBPII, L-FABP and ACO genes. Our results
suggest that the lower transactivity of PPAR delta for arachidonic acid in Caco-2
cells, compared with PPAR alpha, is associated with the binding activity of p300 
to the receptor.

PMID: 18797151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Oct 1;146A(19):2512-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32424.

Genotype-phenotype correlations in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome.

Schorry EK(1), Keddache M, Lanphear N, Rubinstein JH, Srodulski S, Fletcher D,
Blough-Pfau RI, Grabowski GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. elizabeth.schorry@cchmc.org

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare multiple congenital
anomaly/intellectual impairment syndrome. Loss of function in CREBBP or EP300
genes has been found in about 50% of patients with RTS. Genotype-phenotype
correlations were investigated in 93 patients meeting diagnostic criteria for RTS
during 2 international RTS family conferences. Mutation analysis of CREBBP was
performed on all 31 coding exons and exon-intron junctions; a subset of patients 
had FISH analysis for large deletions. A total of 64 different variations were
observed in the DNA sequence, and determined to be definitive mutations in 52
patients (56%). Mutations detected included: 10 missense mutations; 36 truncating
or splice-site mutations; and 6 large deletions detectable by FISH. Fourteen
patients had synonymous changes of unknown significance. The majority of
mutations affected the HAT domain of CREBBP or predicted termination of the
protein before the HAT region. Extensive phenotypic data were collected on each
patient and analyzed to determine correlations with mutation types, that is,
truncating, large deletions, single amino acid substitutions, or no CREBBP
mutation. All four groups displayed the characteristic facial and thumb
dysmorphology. Growth retardation in height and weight was seen more frequently
in patients with no CREBBP mutation; seizure disorder was more frequent in those 
with CREBBP mutations. Degree of mental retardation was similar in all groups,
although there was a trend toward lower IQ and autistic features in patients with
large deletions. Similarity in phenotype between the groups implies that the
several genes involved in causing RTS likely have effects through the same
pathway.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18792986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Mol Biol. 2008 Nov 28;383(5):945-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.08.071. Epub 2008 
Sep 4.

Transcriptional activation of human matrix metalloproteinase-9 gene expression by
multiple co-activators.

Zhao X(1), Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-0005, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), a proteolytic enzyme for matrix proteins,
chemokines and cytokines, is a major target in cancer and autoimmune diseases,
since it is aberrantly upregulated. To control MMP-9 expression in pathological
conditions, it is necessary to understand the regulatory mechanisms of MMP-9
expression. MMP-9 gene expression is regulated primarily at the transcriptional
level. In this study, we investigated the role of multiple co-activators in
regulating MMP-9 transcription. We demonstrate that multiple transcriptional
co-activators are involved in MMP-9 promoter activation, including CBP/p300,
PCAF, CARM1 and GRIP1. Furthermore, enhancement of MMP-9 promoter activity
requires the histone acetyltransferase activity of PCAF but not that of CBP/p300,
and the methyltransferase activity of CARM1. More importantly, these
co-activators are able to activate MMP-9 promoter activity independently, and
function in a synergistic manner. Significant synergy was observed among CARM1,
p300 and GRIP1, which is dependent on the interaction of p300 and CARM1 with the 
AD1 and AD2 domains of GRIP1, respectively. This suggests the formation of a
ternary co-activator complex on the MMP-9 promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays demonstrate that these co-activators associate with the endogenous MMP-9
promoter, and that siRNA knockdown of expression of these co-activators reduces
endogenous MMP-9 expression. Taken together, these studies demonstrate a new
level of transcriptional regulation of MMP-9 expression by the cooperative action
of co-activators.

PMCID: PMC2748421
PMID: 18790699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;28(21):6632-45. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00697-08. Epub 2008 Sep 
8.

The ING4 tumor suppressor attenuates NF-kappaB activity at the promoters of
target genes.

Nozell S(1), Laver T, Moseley D, Nowoslawski L, De Vos M, Atkinson GP, Harrison
K, Nabors LB, Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-0005, USA. snozell@uab.edu

The NF-kappaB family mediates immune and inflammatory responses. In many cancers,
NF-kappaB is constitutively activated and induces the expression of genes that
facilitate tumorigenesis. ING4 is a tumor suppressor that is absent or mutated in
several cancers. Herein, we demonstrate that in human gliomas, NF-kappaB is
constitutively activated, ING4 expression is negligible, and NF-kappaB-regulated 
gene expression is elevated. We demonstrate that an ING4 and NF-kappaB
interaction exists but does not prevent NF-kappaB activation, nuclear
translocation, or DNA binding. Instead, ING4 and NF-kappaB bind simultaneously at
NF-kappaB-regulated promoters, and this binding correlates with reductions in p65
phosphorylation, p300, and the levels of acetylated histones and H3-Me3K4, while 
enhancing the levels of HDAC-1 at these promoters. Using a knockdown approach, we
correlate reductions in ING4 protein levels with increased basal and inducible
NF-kappaB target gene expression. Collectively, these data suggest that ING4 may 
specifically regulate the activity of NF-kappaB molecules that are bound to
target gene promoters.

PMCID: PMC2573235
PMID: 18779315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 1;68(17):7120-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0047.

Malignant pleural mesothelioma-targeted CREBBP/EP300 inhibitory protein 1
promoter system for gene therapy and virotherapy.

Fukazawa T(1), Matsuoka J, Naomoto Y, Maeda Y, Durbin ML, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
FukazawaT@aol.com

Gene therapy and virotherapy are one of the approaches used to treat malignant
pleural mesothelioma. To improve the efficiency of targeting malignant
mesothelioma cells, we designed a novel system using the promoter of the
CREBBP/EP300 inhibitory protein 1 (CRI1), a gene specifically expressed in
malignant pleural mesothelioma. Four tandem repeats of the CRI1 promoter
(CRI1(-138 4x)) caused significantly high promoter activity in malignant pleural 
mesothelioma cells but little promoter activity in normal mesothelial cells and
normal fibroblasts. The recombinant adenoviral vector expressing proapoptotic
BH3-interacting death agonist or early region 1A driven by the CRI1(-138 4x)
promoter induced cell death in malignant mesothelioma cells but not in normal
cells. Moreover, these viruses showed antitumor effects in a mesothelioma
xenograft mouse model. Here, we describe a novel strategy to target malignant
mesothelioma using the CRI1(-138 4x) promoter system.

PMID: 18757427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Immunol. 2008 Sep 1;181(5):3503-14.

PKCbetaII augments NF-kappaB-dependent transcription at the CCL11 promoter via
p300/CBP-associated factor recruitment and histone H4 acetylation.

Clarke DL(1), Sutcliffe A, Deacon K, Bradbury D, Corbett L, Knox AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, University of Nottingham, City Hospital,
Nottingham, United Kingdom.

The transcription factor NF-kappaB plays a pivotal role in regulating
inflammatory gene expression. Its effects are optimized by various coactivators, 
including histone acetyltransferases (HATs) such as CREB-binding protein/p300 and
p300/CBP-associated factor (p/CAF). The molecular mechanisms regulating cofactor 
recruitment are poorly understood. In this study, we describe a novel role for
protein kinase C (PKC) betaIotaIota in augmenting NF-kappaB-mediated
TNF-alpha-induced transcription of the target gene CCL11 in human airway smooth
muscle cells by phosphorylating the HAT p/CAF. Studies using reporters,
overexpression strategies, kinase-dead and HAT-defective mutants, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that PKCbetaII activation was not involved in
NF-kappaB translocation, but facilitated NF-kappaB-mediated CCL11 transcription
by colocalizing with and phosphorylating p/CAF, and thereby acetylating histone
H4 and promoting p65 association with the CCL11 promoter. The effect was
dependent on p/CAF's HAT activity. Furthermore, mouse embryonic fibroblasts from 
PKCbeta knockout mice showed markedly reduced TNF-alpha-induced CCL11 expression 
and NF-kappaB reporter activity that was restored on PKCbetaII overexpression,
suggesting a critical role for this pathway. These data suggest a novel important
biological role for PKCbetaIotaIota in NF-kappaB-mediated CCL11 transcription by 
p/CAF activation and histone H4 acetylation.

PMID: 18714023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2008 Aug;8(5):421-30.

NUPR1 interacts with p53, transcriptionally regulates p21 and rescues breast
epithelial cells from doxorubicin-induced genotoxic stress.

Clark DW(1), Mitra A, Fillmore RA, Jiang WG, Samant RS, Fodstad O, Shevde LA.

Author information: 
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL, USA.

Nuclear protein 1 (NUPR1/com1/p8) has been shown to interact with transcriptional
regulators such as p300, PTIP, estrogen receptor-beta, and SMAD. NUPR1 also has
been implicated in the regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis. An increase in
NUPR1 expression has been seen with serum starvation and in response to compounds
such as cycloheximide, ceramide, and staurosporine. There are several overtly
conflicting reports about the exact role of NUPR1 in tumor biology. This work
investigates the nature of the relationship between NUPR1 and the cdk-inhibitor
p21 (Waf1/Cip1) expression. We show that the expression of resident and
doxorubicin-induced p21 paralleled that of endogenous NUPR1 levels. NUPR1 formed 
a complex with p53 and p300 and bound the p21 promoter and transcriptionally
upregulated p21 expression. Moreover, NUPR1 allowed cells to progress through
cell cycle in presence of doxorubicin. Since NUPR1 upregulated p21, concomitant
with phosphorylation of Rb and upregulation of the anti-apoptotic protein,
Bcl-x(L) we propose that NUPR1 expression imparts a cell growth and survival
advantage. Importantly, we also report that NUPR1 conferred resistance to two
chemotherapeutic drugs, Taxol and doxorubicin.

PMID: 18690848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Blood. 2008 Oct 15;112(8):3148-53. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-119677. Epub 2008
Aug 6.

Point mutation in the gene encoding p300 suppresses thrombocytopenia in Mpl-/-
mice.

Kauppi M(1), Murphy JM, de Graaf CA, Hyland CD, Greig KT, Metcalf D, Hilton AA,
Nicola NA, Kile BT, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Haematology, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Australia.

In an N-nitroso-N-ethylurea (ENU) mutagenesis screen using Mpl(-/-) mice, we
isolated a semidominant suppressor of thrombocytopenia, termed Plt6. The gene
mutated in Plt6 mice encodes the transcriptional coregulator p300, and the
mutation, a tyrosine to asparagine substitution at amino acid 630 (Y630N),
disrupts the interaction between p300 and c-Myb. Mpl(-/-) p300(Plt6/+) mice
displayed elevated platelet counts relative to Mpl(-/-) p300(+/+) controls,
whereas mice homozygous for the Plt6 mutation produced supraphysiological levels 
of circulating platelets. On a wild-type genetic background, mice homozygous for 
the p300(Plt6) mutation, or recipients of Mpl(+/+) p300(Plt6/Plt6) bone marrow,
also exhibited thrombocytosis as well as deficiencies in B-lymphoid cells.
Increased platelet numbers in Plt6 mutant mice were accompanied by significant
increases in megakaryocyte progenitor cells within the bone marrow and spleen
with concomitantly elevated numbers of megakaryocytes. The expansion of
megakaryocytopoiesis and suppression of Mpl(-/-) thrombocytopenia in Plt6 mutants
is highly reminiscent of that observed in mice with mutations affecting the p300 
partner protein c-Myb, suggesting an indispensable repressive role for the
c-Myb/p300 transcriptional regulatory complex in megakaryocyte development, the
inhibition of which allows substantial thrombopoietin (TPO)-independent platelet 
production.

PMCID: PMC2569170
PMID: 18684867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;28(18):5764-76. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01262-07. Epub 2008 Jul 
21.

Different functional modes of p300 in activation of RNA polymerase III
transcription from chromatin templates.

Mertens C(1), Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
1230 York Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Transcriptional coactivators that regulate the activity of human RNA polymerase
III (Pol III) in the context of chromatin have not been reported. Here, we
describe a completely defined in vitro system for transcription of a human tRNA
gene assembled into a chromatin template. Transcriptional activation and histone 
acetylation in this system depend on recruitment of p300 by general initiation
factor TFIIIC, thus providing a new paradigm for recruitment of histone-modifying
coactivators. Beyond its role as a chromatin-modifying factor, p300 displays an
acetyltransferase-independent function at the level of preinitiation complex
assembly. Thus, direct interaction of p300 with TFIIIC stabilizes binding of
TFIIIC to core promoter elements and results in enhanced transcriptional activity
on histone-free templates. Additional studies show that p300 is recruited to the 
promoters of actively transcribed tRNA and U6 snRNA genes in vivo. These studies 
identify TFIIIC as a recruitment factor for p300 and thus may have important
implications for the emerging concept that tRNA genes or TFIIIC binding sites act
as chromatin barriers to prohibit spreading of silenced heterochromatin domains.

PMCID: PMC2546916
PMID: 18644873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Biochem J. 2008 Nov 1;415(3):477-82. doi: 10.1042/BJ20081025.

Chromium(VI) inhibits mouse metallothionein-I gene transcription by preventing
the zinc-dependent formation of an MTF-1-p300 complex.

Kimura T(1), Li Y, Okumura F, Itoh N, Nakanishi T, Sone T, Isobe M, Andrews GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Setsunan
University, Hirakata, Osaka, Japan. tomoki@pharm.setsunan.ac.jp

Mouse MT-I (metallothionein-I) transcription is regulated by MTF-1
(metal-response-element-binding transcription factor-1) which is recruited to the
promoter in response to zinc. Cr(VI) [chromium(VI)] pretreatment blocks
zinc-activation of the endogenous MT-I gene and attenuates zinc-activation of
MT-I-promoter-driven luciferase reporter genes in transient transfection assays. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that Cr(VI) only modestly reduces
recruitment of MTF-1 to the MT-I promoter in response to zinc, but drastically
reduces the recruitment of RNA polymerase II. These results suggest that Cr(VI)
inhibits the ability of MTF-1 to transactivate this gene in response to zinc.
Zinc has recently been shown to induce the formation of a co-activator complex
containing MTF-1 and the histone acetyltransferase p300 which plays an essential 
role in the activation of MT-I transcription. In the present study,
co-immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that Cr(VI) pretreatment blocks the
zinc-induced formation of this co-activator complex. Thus Cr(VI) inhibits mouse
MT-I gene expression in response to zinc by interfering with the ability of MTF-1
to form a co-activator complex containing p300 and recruiting RNA polymerase II
to the promoter.

PMID: 18605988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Eur J Pharmacol. 2008 Sep 4;591(1-3):36-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.06.041.
Epub 2008 Jun 15.

Attenuation of c-Jun and Sp1 expression and p300 recruitment to gene promoter
confers the trichostatin A-induced inhibition of 12(S)-lipoxygenase expression in
EGF-treated A431 cells.

Chen CJ(1), Chang WC, Chen BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Technology, College of Medicine and Life Science, Chung 
Hwa University of Medical Technology, Taiwan. charles2@ms34.url.com.tw

The mechanism by which the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A
inhibits epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced human 12(S)-lipoxygenase
expression was studied. Trichostatin A treatment of human epidermoid carcinoma
A431 cells inhibited the EGF-induced 12(S)-lipoxygenase enzymatic activity in a
dose-dependent manner that was consistent with the expression of
12(S)-lipoxygenase mRNA and protein. Confocal microscopy indicated that
trichostatin A treatment of cells resulted in downregulation of EGF-induced c-Jun
expression. Western blotting revealed that trichostatin A treatment of cells
resulted in downregulation of EGF-induced c-Jun and constitutively Sp1
expression. Results of a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that
trichostatin A treatment of cells also upregulated Sp1 acetylation and attenuated
the recruitment of Sp1, c-Jun, and p300 to the 12(S)-lipoxygenase gene promoter. 
These results suggested that trichostatin A inhibited EGF-induced
12(S)-lipoxygenase expression by multiple mechanisms, including the attenuation
of c-Jun and Sp1 expression and p300 recruitment to the 12(S)-lipoxygenase gene
promoter.

PMID: 18590721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cell Cycle. 2008 Jun 15;7(12):1884-6. Epub 2008 Jun 8.

An old HAT in human p300/CBP and yeast Rtt109.

Bazan JF.

The crystal structure of the human p300 histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain
reveals a familiar alpha + beta fold with unique structural elaborations that
merit its classification as a third divergent HAT branch alongside the
GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase (GNAT) and MYST (MOZ, Ybf2/Sas3, Sas2, Tip60)
families. Two key departures from the core GNAT/MYST HAT fold--a long
unstructured chain (or "flap") overlaying the acetyl-CoA (AcCoA) binding groove, 
and a four-alpha-helix "tower" excursion from the main beta-sheet--critically
contribute to the recognition and presumptive catalytic machinery of p300/CBP HAT
enzymes. Kinetic and mutant analysis of this enlarged residue constellation in
p300 (which is distinct from functional fingerprints drawn from GNAT or MYST
complexes) led Liu et al., to suggest that p300/CBP works with an unorthodox "hit
and run" mechanism that enlists Tyr1467 as the critical catalytic residue. In
order to extend the evolutionary testbed for this variant HAT mechanism beyond
the thin roll of p300/CBP orthologs, I propose that Rtt109, a novel yeast HAT
that has so far eluded classification, is the prototype of a fungal clan of
p300-related enzymes that preserve the embellished HAT fold, but further
diversify its catalytic options.

PMID: 18583929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Oncogene. 2008 Sep 25;27(43):5717-28. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.181. Epub 2008 Jun 9.

p300 provides a corepressor function by cooperating with YY1 and HDAC3 to repress
c-Myc.

Sankar N(1), Baluchamy S, Kadeppagari RK, Singhal G, Weitzman S, Thimmapaya B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

We showed earlier that p300/CBP plays an important role in G1 progression by
negatively regulating c-Myc and thereby preventing premature G1 exit. Here, we
have studied the mechanism by which p300 represses c-Myc and show that in
quiescent cells p300 cooperates with histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) to repress
transcription. p300 and HDAC3 are recruited to the upstream YY1-binding site of
the c-Myc promoter resulting in chromatin deacetylation and repression of c-Myc
transcription. Consistent with this, ablation of p300, YY1 or HDAC3 expression
results in chromatin acetylation and induction of c-Myc. These three proteins
exist as a complex in vivo and form a multiprotein complex with the YY1-binding
site in vitro. The C-terminal region of p300 is both necessary and sufficient for
the repression of c-Myc. These and other results suggest that in quiescent cells 
the C-terminal region of p300 provides corepressor function and facilitates the
recruitment of p300 and HDAC3 to the YY1-binding site and represses the c-Myc
promoter. This corepressor function of p300 prevents the inappropriate induction 
of c-Myc and S phase.

PMID: 18542060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Hepatology. 2008 Jul;48(1):240-51. doi: 10.1002/hep.22304.

The molecular mechanism regulating 24-hour rhythm of CYP2E1 expression in the
mouse liver.

Matsunaga N(1), Ikeda M, Takiguchi T, Koyanagi S, Ohdo S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacy, Department of Medico-Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) is clinically and toxicologically important and
exhibits 24-hour periodicity in its activity. In the present study, we
investigated whether hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) and clock genes
with a striking 24-hour rhythm in mouse liver contributed to the 24-hour
regulation of CYP2E1 expression. The results demonstrated that the expression of 
CYP2E1 messenger RNA (mRNA) in the liver was affected by HNF-1alpha and the
circadian organization of molecular clocks. The mRNA levels of CYP2E1 in the
liver increased from the late light phase to the early dark phase. Luciferase
reporter gene analysis revealed that HNF-1alpha activated CYP2E1 promoter
activity, which was restricted by CRY1, a member of the circadian organization of
molecular clocks. Repressor activity of CRY1 was observed on the HNF-1alpha
binding site of the CYP2E1 promoter region with mutated E-box. Serum shock
induced approximately 24-hour oscillation in CYP2E1 mRNA in HepG2. Transfection
of HNF-1alpha and CRY1 small interfering RNA dampened the oscillation of CYP2E1
mRNA in HepG2. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay in the CYP2E1 promoter
indicated that HNF-1alpha binding to the CYP2E1 promoter increased from the late 
light phase to the early dark phase. Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation
reimmunoprecipitation assay, time-dependent differences were demonstrated for
CRY1 protein interaction with HNF-1alpha transcriptional complexes, including
coactivator p300 on the HNF-1alpha binding site in the CYP2E1
promoter.CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the transcription activator of
HNF-1alpha acts periodically and the negative limbs of molecular clocks
periodically inhibit CYP2E1 transcription, resulting in the 24-hour rhythm of its
mRNA expression.

PMID: 18537186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Virology. 2008 Jul 20;377(1):151-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2008.04.006. Epub 2008
May 21.

E2 and the co-activator p300 can cooperate in activation of the human
papillomavirus type 16 early promoter.

Krüppel U(1), Müller-Schiffmann A, Baldus SE, Smola-Hess S, Steger G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Cologne, Fürst-Pückler-Strasse 56, 50935 
Cologne, Germany.

In addition to cellular transcription factors, the E2 protein encoded by human
papillomaviruses (HPV) modulates the viral gene expression to support the life
cycle of HPV, which depends on the differentiation of the infected keratinocytes.
The role of E2 as activator of viral transcription still remains unsolved. We
show here that low amounts of E2 encoded by HPV16 efficiently activated the early
promoter P(97) of HPV16. In addition to the long control region, this activation 
required high amounts of the cellular co-activator p300 and a novel binding site 
for CCAAT enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) located downstream of the
P(97) at position 480. The expression of C/EBPalpha was shown previously to
increase during keratinocyte differentiation. By immunohistochemistry we
demonstrate that the expression of p300 is induced in suprabasal epithelial cells
of HPV16 positive and negative squamous epithelium. Our data suggest that high
levels of p300 and C/EBPalpha in suprabasal layers of HPV16 positive cervical
lesions allow the viral E2 protein to activate HPV16 early gene expression.

PMID: 18495195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008 May;49(5):1814-26. doi: 10.1167/iovs.07-1057.

Gene expression of the mouse corneal crystallin Aldh3a1: activation by Pax6,
Oct1, and p300.

Davis J(1), Davis D, Norman B, Piatigorsky J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. davisj@nei.nih.gov

PURPOSE: Aldehyde dehydrogenase 3a1 (Aldh3a1) represents approximately 50% of the
water-soluble protein of the mouse corneal epithelial cells and thus, by analogy 
with the abundant lens crystallins, is considered a corneal crystallin. This
study was conducted to examine the developmental pattern and transcriptional
activation of Aldh3a1 gene expression in the mouse cornea.
METHODS: Aldh3a1 mRNA and protein were analyzed by quantitative (Q)-PCR and
Western immunoblot analysis. Functional promoter analysis was examined by
cotransfecting plasmids containing variable portions of the Aldh3a1 promoter
fused to the luciferase reporter gene into COS-7 cells with selected
transcription factors. Transcription factor binding sites were identified by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays (ChIP). In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry were used to assess
expression of Aldh3a1, Pax6, and Oct1 in the cornea.
RESULTS: Aldh3a1 expression is temporally regulated in the cornea beginning at
birth and increasing 100-fold by 6 weeks of age. Pax6, Oct1, and p300
synergistically activate the Aldh3a1 promoter approximately 116-fold. One Pax6
and two Oct1 binding sites were identified in vitro and in vivo in the Aldh3a1
promoter fragment analyzed. Pax6 and Oct1 are both present in the nuclei of
corneal epithelial cells of the 6-week-old mouse. Finally, a reduction of Aldh3a1
correlated with reduced Pax6 in the corneas of heterozygous Small eye Pax6(+/-)
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Pax6, Oct1, and p300 activate gene expression of the corneal
crystallin Aldh3a1 in the mouse. These transcription factors are also implicated 
in the high expression of crystallin genes in the lens, consistent with the
"refracton hypothesis" unifying many aspects of the lens and cornea.

PMID: 18436815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Oncogene. 2008 Jul 24;27(32):4446-55. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.85. Epub 2008 Apr 14.

The transcription-repression domain of the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein targets
p300 at the promoter.

Green M(1), Panesar NK, Loewenstein PM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine,
St Louis, MO 63104, USA. green@slu.edu

Extensive mutational/functional analysis of the transcription-repression domain
encoded in the N-terminal 80 amino acids of the adenovirus E1A 243R oncoprotein
suggests a model for the molecular mechanism of E1A repression: E1A accesses
transcriptional co-activators such as p300 on specific promoters and then
interacts with TBP to disrupt the TBP-TATA complex. In support of this model, as 
reported here, a basal core promoter activated by tethering p300 is repressible
by E1A at the promoter level as shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
analysis. Sequestration of p300 by E1A does not play a significant role, as
indicated by dose-response measurements. Furthermore, when the core promoter is
transcriptionally activated by tethering activation domains of several
transcription factors that can recruit p300 (p65, MyoD, cMyb and TFE3),
transcription is repressible by E1A. However, when the core promoter is activated
by factors not known to recruit p300 (USF1 and USF2), transcription is resistant 
to E1A repression. Finally, tethering p300 to the non-repressible adenovirus
major late promoter (MLP) renders it repressible by E1A. ChIP analysis shows that
E1A occupies the repressed MLP. These findings provide support for the hypothesis
that p300 can serve as a scaffold for the E1A repression domain to access
specific cellular gene promoters involved in growth regulation.

PMID: 18408753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2008 Jul-Aug;24(5):404-12. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.842.

PARP activation and the alteration of vasoactive factors and extracellular matrix
protein in retina and kidney in diabetes.

Xu B(1), Chiu J, Feng B, Chen S, Chakrabarti S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Science, Kunming Medical College, Kunming, Yunnan, PR
China.

AIMS: The development of diabetic complications is associated with increased
oxidative stress which may damage DNA leading to the activation of nuclear enzyme
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). PARP overactivation may further exacerbate
the oxidative state of the cell through its consumption of nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide. In diabetic retinopathy and nephropathy, early characteristic
features include increased production of vasoactive factors such as endothelin 1 
(ET-1) and increased synthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as
fibronectin (FN) and its splice variant extra domain B containing (EDB(+)) FN. We
investigated the role of PARP in the development of diabetic retinopathy and
nephropathy.
METHODS: Two models of diabetic complications were used. PARP-1 knockout mice and
their respective wild type controls were fed a 30% galactose diet for 2 months.
The rats were given injections of PARP inhibitor 3-aminobenzamide (30 mg/kg/day).
RESULTS: Analysis of the retinal and kidney tissues showed hyperhexosemia-induced
oxidative stress and increased expression of ET-1, FN and EDB(+) FN in
association with increased transcriptional co-activator p300 along with
p300-dependent transcription factors, myocyte enhancing factors 2A and 2C.
Furthermore, we showed increased PARP expression in the kidneys and retina of the
diabetic rats. PARP blockade in both animal models prevented these
hyperhexosemia-induced effects.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggests that hyperhexosemia and diabetes causes
upregulation of ET-1, FN and EDB(+) FN at the transcriptional level in the retina
and kidney via a signaling pathway mediated by PARP and an epigenetic mechanism
involving p300 and MEF2 transcription factors. Understanding these mechanisms is 
important in identifying novel treatment targets.

PMID: 18351623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 4;283(14):9113-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M708205200. Epub 2008
Feb 7.

Isolation and characterization of a novel H1.2 complex that acts as a repressor
of p53-mediated transcription.

Kim K(1), Choi J, Heo K, Kim H, Levens D, Kohno K, Johnson EM, Brock HW, An W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

Linker histone H1 has been generally viewed as a global repressor of
transcription by preventing the access of transcription factors to sites in
chromatin. However, recent studies suggest that H1 can interact with other
regulatory factors for its action as a negative modulator of specific genes. To
investigate these aspects, we established a human cell line expressing H1.2, one 
of the H1 subtypes, for the purification of H1-interacting proteins. Our results 
showed that H1.2 can stably associate with sets of cofactors and ribosomal
proteins that can significantly repress p53-dependent, p300-mediated chromatin
transcription. This repressive action of H1.2 complex involves direct interaction
of H1.2 with p53, which in turn blocks p300-mediated acetylation of chromatin.
YB1 and PURalpha, two factors present in the H1.2 complex, together with H1.2 can
closely recapitulate the repressive action of the entire H1.2 complex in
transcription. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and RNA interference analyses
further confirmed that the recruitment of YB1, PURalpha, and H1.2 to the p53
target gene Bax is required for repression of p53-induced transcription.
Therefore, these results reveal a previously unrecognized function of H1 as a
transcriptional repressor as well as the underlying mechanism involving specific 
sets of factors in this repression process.

PMCID: PMC2431041
PMID: 18258596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 11;283(15):9828-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707391200. Epub 2008 
Feb 5.

Identification of p300-targeted acetylated residues in GATA4 during hypertrophic 
responses in cardiac myocytes.

Takaya T(1), Kawamura T, Morimoto T, Ono K, Kita T, Shimatsu A, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research and Clinical Research Institute, Kyoto
Medical Center, National Hospital Organization, 1-1 Mukaihata-cho, Fukakusa,
Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

A zinc finger protein, GATA4, is one of the hypertrophy-responsive transcription 
factors and increases its DNA binding and transcriptional activities in response 
to hypertrophic stimuli in cardiac myocytes. Activation of GATA4 during this
process is mediated, in part, through acetylation by intrinsic histone
acetyltransferases such as a transcriptional coactivator p300. However,
p300-targeted acetylated sites of GATA4 during myocardial cell hypertrophy have
not been identified. By mutational analysis, we showed that 4 lysine residues
located between amino acids 311 and 322 are required for synergistic activation
of atrial natriuretic factor and endothelin-1 promoters by GATA4 and p300. A
tetra-mutant GATA4, in which these 4 lysine residues were simultaneously mutated,
retained the ability to localize in nuclei and to interact with cofactors
including FOG-2, GATA6, and p300 but lacked p300-induced acetylation, DNA
binding, and transcriptional activities. Furthermore, coexpression of the
tetra-mutant GATA4 with wild-type GATA4 impaired the p300-induced acetylation,
DNA binding, and transcriptional activities of the wild type. When we expressed
the tetra-mutant GATA4 in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes using a lentivirus
vector, this mutant suppressed phenylephrine-induced increases in cell size,
protein synthesis, and expression of hypertrophy-responsive genes. However, its
expression did not affect the basal state. Thus, we have identified the most
critical lysine residues acting as p300-mediated acetylation targets in GATA4
during hypertrophic responses in cardiac myocytes. The results also demonstrate
that GATA4 with simultaneous mutation of these sites specifically suppresses
hypertrophic responses as a dominant-negative form, providing further evidence
for the acetylation of GATA4 as one of critical nuclear events in myocardial cell
hypertrophy.

PMID: 18252717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cancer Res. 2008 Feb 1;68(3):783-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0008.

BCL6 represses Smad signaling in transforming growth factor-beta resistance.

Wang D(1), Long J, Dai F, Liang M, Feng XH, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) controls a wide spectrum of cellular
processes. Deregulation of TGF-beta signaling contributes to the pathogenesis of 
many diseases including cancer and autoimmune diseases. TGF-beta signaling is
generally mediated through intracellular signal transducers and transcription
factors called Smads. Herein, we have identified the oncoprotein BCL6 as a
transcriptional corepressor of tumor suppressor Smad4. BCL6 physically interacts 
with Smad3 and Smad4, disrupts the Smad-p300 interaction, and represses the
transcriptional activity of Smad4. In accordance, B-cell lymphoma cells with a
high expression level of BCL6 were found to be refractory to TGF-beta
antiproliferative response, whereas knockdown of BCL6 expression in B-cell
lymphoma cells partially restores the TGF-beta responses. This study provides
strong evidence that overexpression of BCL6 contributes to TGF-beta resistance in
B-cell lymphoma.

PMID: 18245479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Cell. 2008 Feb 1;29(2):217-31. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.11.036.

Skp2 suppresses p53-dependent apoptosis by inhibiting p300.

Kitagawa M(1), Lee SH, McCormick F.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94115, USA.

The F box protein Skp2 is oncogenic, and its frequent amplification and
overexpression correlate with the grade of malignancy of certain tumors.
Conversely, depletion of Skp2 decreases cell growth and increases apoptosis.
Here, we show that Skp2 counteracts the transactivation function of p53 and
suppresses apoptosis mediated by DNA damage or p53 stabilization. We demonstrate 
that Skp2 forms a complex with p300 through the CH1 and the CH3 domains of p300
to which p53 is thought to bind and antagonizes the interaction between p300 and 
p53 in cells and in vitro. As Skp2 antagonizes the interaction between p300 and
p53, Skp2 suppresses p300-mediated acetylation of p53 and the transactivation
ability of p53. Conversely, ectopic expression of p300 rescues the
transactivation function of p53 in cells overexpressing Skp2. Taken together, our
results indicate that Skp2 controls p300-p53 signaling pathways in cancer cells, 
making Skp2 a potential molecular target for cancer therapy.

PMID: 18243116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Pharmacol. 2008 May;73(5):1454-64. doi: 10.1124/mol.107.038091. Epub 2008 Jan
28.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha enhances neutrophil adhesiveness: induction of
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 via activation of Akt and CaM kinase II and
modifications of histone acetyltransferase and histone deacetylase 4 in human
tracheal smooth muscle cells.

Lee CW(1), Lin CC, Luo SF, Lee HC, Lee IT, Aird WC, Hwang TL, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Chang Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa 
1st Road, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

Up-regulation of vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) involves adhesions
between both circulating and resident leukocytes and the human tracheal smooth
muscle cells (HTSMCs) during airway inflammatory reaction. We have demonstrated
previously that tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-induced VCAM-1 expression is
regulated by mitogen-activated protein kinases, nuclear factor-kappaB, and p300
activation in HTSMCs. In addition to this pathway, phosphorylation of Akt and CaM
kinase II has been implicated in histone acetyltransferase and histone
deacetylase 4 (HDAC4) activation. Here, we investigated whether these different
mechanisms participated in TNF-alpha-induced VCAM-1 expression and enhanced
neutrophil adhesion. TNF-alpha significantly increased HTSMC-neutrophil
adhesions, and this effect was associated with increased expression of VCAM-1 on 
the HTSMCs and was blocked by the selective inhibitors of Src
[4-amino-5-(4-methylphenyl)-7-(t-butyl)pyrazolo[3,4-d]-pyrimidine (PP1)],
epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR;
4-(3'-chloroanilino)-6,7-dimethoxy-quinazoline, (AG1478)], phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K) [2-(4-morpholinyl)-8-phenyl-1(4H)-benzopyran-4-one
hydrochloride(LY294002) and wortmannin],calcium[1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)
ethane-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid-acetoxymethyl ester; BAPTA-AM],
phosphatidylinositol-phospholipase C (PLC)
[1-[6-[[17beta-methoxyestra-1,3,5(10)-trien-17-yl]amino]hexyl]-1H-pyrrole-2,5-dio
ne (U73122)], protein kinase C (PKC) [12-(2-cyanoethyl)-6,7,12,
13-tetrahydro-13-methyl-5-oxo-5H-indolo(2,3-a)pyrrolo(3,4-c)-carbazole (Gö6976), 
rottlerin, and
3-1-[3-(amidinothio)propyl-1H-indol-3-yl]-3-(1-methyl-1H-indol-3-yl) maleimide
(bisindolylmaleimide IX) (Ro 31-8220)], CaM (calmidazolium chloride), CaM kinase 
II
[(8R(*),9S(*),11S(*))-(-)-9-hydroxy-9-methoxycarbonyl-8-methyl-14-n-propoxy-2,3,9
, 10-tetrahydro-8,11-epoxy, 1H,8H,
11H-2,7b,11a-triazadibenzo[a,g]cycloocta[cde]trinden-1-one (KT5926) and
1-[N,O-bis(5-isoquinolinesulfonyl)-N-methyl-l-tyrosyl]-4-phenylpiperazine
(KN62)], p300 (curcumin), and HDAC (trichostatin A) or transfection with short
interfering RNAs for Src, Akt, PKCalpha, PKCmu, and HDAC4. At gene regulation
level, reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and promoter assays
revealed that expression of VCAM-1 was also attenuated by these signaling
molecule inhibitors. Moreover, TNF-alpha induced Akt and CaM kinase II
phosphorylation via cascades through Src/EGFR/PI3K and PLC/calcium/CaM,
respectively. Finally, activation of Akt and CaM kinase II may eventually lead to
the acetylation of histone residues and phosphorylation of histone deacetylase.
These findings revealed that TNF-alpha induced VCAM-1 expression via multiple
signaling pathways. Blockade of these pathways may be selectively targeted to
reduce neutrophil adhesion via VCAM-1 suppression and attenuation of the
inflammatory responses in airway diseases.

PMID: 18227124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Retrovirology. 2008 Jan 28;5:8. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-5-8.

The histone chaperone protein Nucleosome Assembly Protein-1 (hNAP-1) binds HIV-1 
Tat and promotes viral transcription.

Vardabasso C(1), Manganaro L, Lusic M, Marcello A, Giacca M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Padriciano 99, 34012 Trieste, Italy.
vardabas@icgeb.org

BACKGROUND: Despite the large amount of data available on the molecular
mechanisms that regulate HIV-1 transcription, crucial information is still
lacking about the interplay between chromatin conformation and the events that
regulate initiation and elongation of viral transcription. During transcriptional
activation, histone acetyltransferases and ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling
complexes cooperate with histone chaperones in altering chromatin structure. In
particular, human Nucleosome Assembly Protein-1 (hNAP-1) is known to act as a
histone chaperone that shuttles histones H2A/H2B into the nucleus, assembles
nucleosomes and promotes chromatin fluidity, thereby affecting transcription of
several cellular genes.
RESULTS: Using a proteomic screening, we identified hNAP-1 as a novel cellular
protein interacting with HIV-1 Tat. We observed that Tat specifically binds
hNAP1, but not other members of the same family of factors. Binding between the
two proteins required the integrity of the basic domain of Tat and of two
separable domains of hNAP-1 (aa 162-290 and 290-391). Overexpression of hNAP-1
significantly enhanced Tat-mediated activation of the LTR. Conversely, silencing 
of the protein decreased viral promoter activity. To explore the effects of
hNAP-1 on viral infection, a reporter HIV-1 virus was used to infect cells in
which hNAP-1 had been either overexpressed or knocked-down. Consistent with the
gene expression results, these two treatments were found to increase and inhibit 
viral infection, respectively. Finally, we also observed that the overexpression 
of p300, a known co-activator of both Tat and hNAP-1, enhanced hNAP-1-mediated
transcriptional activation as well as its interaction with Tat.
CONCLUSION: Our study reveals that HIV-1 Tat binds the histone chaperone hNAP-1
both in vitro and in vivo and shows that this interaction participates in the
regulation of Tat-mediated activation of viral gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2266780
PMID: 18226242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 21;283(12):7590-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709707200. Epub 2008
Jan 17.

Regulation of WRN protein cellular localization and enzymatic activities by
SIRT1-mediated deacetylation.

Li K(1), Casta A, Wang R, Lozada E, Fan W, Kane S, Ge Q, Gu W, Orren D, Luo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and the Cancer Center, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Werner syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder associated with premature
aging and cancer predisposition caused by mutations of the WRN gene. WRN is a
member of the RecQ DNA helicase family with functions in maintaining genome
stability. Sir2, an NAD-dependent histone deacetylase, has been proven to extend 
life span in yeast and Caenorhabditis elegans. Mammalian Sir2 (SIRT1) has also
been found to regulate premature cellular senescence induced by the tumor
suppressors PML and p53. SIRT1 plays an important role in cell survival promoted 
by calorie restriction. Here we show that SIRT1 interacts with WRN both in vitro 
and in vivo; this interaction is enhanced after DNA damage. WRN can be acetylated
by acetyltransferase CBP/p300, and SIRT1 can deacetylate WRN both in vitro and in
vivo. WRN acetylation decreases its helicase and exonuclease activities, and
SIRT1 can reverse this effect. WRN acetylation alters its nuclear distribution.
Down-regulation of SIRT1 reduces WRN translocation from nucleoplasm to nucleoli
after DNA damage. These results suggest that SIRT1 regulates WRN-mediated
cellular responses to DNA damage through deacetylation of WRN.

PMID: 18203716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Apr 15;228(2):256-68. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2007.11.026. Epub 2007 Dec 8.

Lipopolysaccharide induces VCAM-1 expression and neutrophil adhesion to human
tracheal smooth muscle cells: involvement of Src/EGFR/PI3-K/Akt pathway.

Lin WN(1), Luo SF, Wu CB, Lin CC, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Chang Gung University, 259 Wen-Hua 
1st Road, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

In our previous study, LPS has been shown to induce vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1(VCAM-1) expression through MAPKs and NF-kappaB in human tracheal
smooth muscle cells (HTSMCs). In addition to these pathways, the non-receptor
tyrosine kinases (Src), EGF receptor (EGFR), and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K) have been shown to be implicated in the expression of several inflammatory
target proteins. Here, we reported that LPS-induced up-regulation of VCAM-1
enhanced the adhesion of neutrophils onto HTSMC monolayer, which was inhibited by
LY294002 and wortmannin. LPS stimulated phosphorylation of protein tyrosine
kinases including Src, PYK2, and EGFR, which were further confirmed using
specific anti-phospho-Src, PYK2, or EGFR Ab, respectively, revealed by Western
blotting. LPS-stimulated Src, PYK2, EGFR, and Akt phosphorylation and VCAM-1
expression were attenuated by the inhibitors of Src (PP1), EGFR (AG1478), PI3-K
(LY294002 and wortmannin), and Akt (SH-5), respectively, or transfection with
siRNAs of Src or Akt and shRNA of p110. LPS-induced VCAM-1 expression was also
blocked by pretreatment with curcumin (a p300 inhibitor) or transfection with
p300 siRNA. LPS-stimulated Akt activation translocated into nucleus and
associated with p300 and VCAM-1 promoter region was further confirmed by
immunofluorescence, immunoprecipitation, and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays. This association of Akt and p300 to VCAM-1 promoter was inhibited by
pretreatment with PP1, AG1478, wortmannin, and SH-5. LPS-induced p300 activation 
enhanced VCAM-1 promoter activity and VCAM-1 mRNA expression. These results
suggested that in HTSMCs, Akt phosphorylation mediated through transactivation of
Src/PYK2/EGFR promoted the transcriptional p300 activity and eventually led to
VCAM-1 expression induced by LPS.

PMID: 18182168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Arthritis Res Ther. 2008;10(1):R3. doi: 10.1186/ar2349. Epub 2008 Jan 9.

Regulation of Sox9 activity by crosstalk with nuclear factor-kappaB and retinoic 
acid receptors.

Rockel JS(1), Kudirka JC, Guzi AJ, Bernier SM.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institutes of Health Research Group in Skeletal Development and
Remodeling, Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine &
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.
jeff.dixon@schulich.uwo.ca

INTRODUCTION: Sox9 and p300 cooperate to induce expression of cartilage-specific 
matrix proteins, including type II collagen, aggrecan and link protein. Tumour
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, found in arthritic joints, activates nuclear
factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), whereas retinoic acid receptors (RARs) are activated
by retinoid agonists, including all-trans retinoic acid (atRA). Like Sox9, the
activity of NF-kappaB and RARs depends upon their association with p300.
Separately, both TNF-alpha and atRA suppress cartilage matrix gene expression. We
investigated how TNF-alpha and atRA alter the expression of cartilage matrix
genes.
METHODS: Primary cultures of rat chondrocytes were treated with TNF-alpha and/or 
atRA for 24 hours. Levels of transcripts encoding cartilage matrix proteins were 
determined by Northern blot analyses and quantitative real-time PCR. Nuclear
protein levels, DNA binding and functional activity of transcription factors were
assessed by immunoblotting, electrophoretic mobility shift assays and reporter
assays, respectively.
RESULTS: Together, TNF-alpha and atRA diminished transcript levels of cartilage
matrix proteins and Sox9 activity more than each factor alone. However, neither
agent altered nuclear levels of Sox9, and TNF-alpha did not affect protein
binding to the Col2a1 48-base-pair minimal enhancer sequence. The effect of
TNF-alpha, but not that of atRA, on Sox9 activity was dependent on NF-kappaB
activation. Furthermore, atRA reduced NF-kappaB activity and DNA binding. To
address the role of p300, we over-expressed constitutively active
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase (caMEKK)1 to increase p300
acetylase activity. caMEKK1 enhanced basal NF-kappaB activity and atRA-induced
RAR activity. Over-expression of caMEKK1 also enhanced basal Sox9 activity and
suppressed the inhibitory effects of TNF-alpha and atRA on Sox9 function. In
addition, over-expression of p300 restored Sox9 activity suppressed by TNF-alpha 
and atRA to normal levels.
CONCLUSION: NF-kappaB and RARs converge to reduce Sox9 activity and cartilage
matrix gene expression, probably by limiting the availability of p300. This
process may be critical for the loss of cartilage matrix synthesis in
inflammatory joint diseases. Therefore, agents that increase p300 levels or
activity in chondrocytes may be useful therapeutically.

PMCID: PMC2374456
PMID: 18182117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cell Immunol. 2007 Oct;249(2):94-100. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2007.11.008. Epub
2008 Jan 3.

Sphingosine kinase, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, Akt, NF-kappaB, and p300 are
required for CCL5 production in Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guérin
(BCG)-infected epithelial cells.

Méndez-Samperio P(1), Pérez A, Trejo A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunología, Escuela Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, IPN,
Prol. Carpio y Plan de Ayala, México, D.F. 11340, Mexico.
pmendezs@bios.encb.ipn.mx

CCL5 is a key in limiting mycobacterial infection. Although NF-kappaB has been
implicated, signaling cascades involved in CCL5 production by epithelial cells
following infection with Mycobacterium bovis BCG are still not defined. Here we
show that using pharmacological inhibition of sphingosine kinase (SPK), striking 
inhibition of M. bovis BCG-induced CCL5 protein was observed.
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt were also important for CCL5
production by epithelial cells infected with M. bovis BCG. Moreover, there was
increased activation of PI3K, IKK/alphabeta and NF-kappaB in A549 cells infected 
with M. bovis BCG. Importantly, the PI3K activation was dependent on SPK.
Finally, M. bovis BCG increases the recruitment of p300 with NF-kappaB in A549
cells. Together, these studies are the first to show that M. bovis BCG-induced
CCL5 secretion is dependent on the SPK/PI3K/Akt/NF-kappaB and p300 signaling
pathway. The regulatory pathways of M. bovis BCG-induced CCL5 production can
potentially be exploited therapeutically.

PMID: 18177634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Mar;1783(3):503-17. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Lyl1 interacts with CREB1 and alters expression of CREB1 target genes.

San-Marina S(1), Han Y, Suarez Saiz F, Trus MR, Minden MD.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret Hospital, 610 University Avenue
9-111, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 2M9.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor family contains key
regulators of cellular proliferation and differentiation as well as the suspected
oncoproteins Tal1 and Lyl1. Tal1 and Lyl1 are aberrantly over-expressed in
leukemia as a result of chromosomal translocations, or other genetic or
epigenetic events. Protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions described so far 
are mediated by their highly homologous bHLH domains, while little is known about
the function of other protein domains. Hetero-dimers of Tal1 and Lyl1 with E2A or
HEB, decrease the rate of E2A or HEB homo-dimer formation and are poor activators
of transcription. In vitro, these hetero-dimers also recognize different binding 
sites from homo-dimer complexes, which may also lead to inappropriate activation 
or repression of promoters in vivo. Both mechanisms are thought to contribute to 
the oncogenic potential of Tal1 and Lyl1. Despite their bHLH structural
similarity, accumulating evidence suggests that Tal1 and Lyl1 target different
genes. This raises the possibility that domains flanking the bHLH region, which
are distinct in the two proteins, may participate in target recognition. Here we 
report that CREB1, a widely-expressed transcription factor and a suspected
oncogene in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) was identified as a binding partner 
for Lyl1 but not for Tal1. The interaction between Lyl1 and CREB1 involves the N 
terminal domain of Lyl1 and the Q2 and KID domains of CREB1. The histone
acetyl-transferases p300 and CBP are recruited to these complexes in the absence 
of CREB1 Ser 133 phosphorylation. In the Id1 promoter, Lyl1 complexes direct
transcriptional activation. We also found that in addition to Id1, over-expressed
Lyl1 can activate other CREB1 target promoters such as Id3, cyclin D3, Brca1,
Btg2 and Egr1. Moreover, approximately 50% of all gene promoters identified by
ChIP-chip experiments were jointly occupied by CREB1 and Lyl1, further
strengthening the association of Lyl1 with Cre binding sites. Given the newly
recognized importance of CREB1 in AML, the ability of Lyl1 to modulate promoter
responses to CREB1 suggests that it plays a role in the malignant phenotype by
occupying different promoters than Tal1.

PMID: 18160048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hepatology. 2008 Jan;47(1):215-24.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma protects against hepatic
ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice.

Kuboki S(1), Shin T, Huber N, Eismann T, Galloway E, Schuster R, Blanchard J,
Zingarelli B, Lentsch AB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Trauma, Sepsis & Inflammation Research, Department of Surgery,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0558, USA.

The function of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) in
hepatic inflammation and injury is unclear. In this study, we sought to determine
the role of PPARgamma in hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice. Male mice
were subjected to 90 minutes of partial hepatic ischemia followed by up to 8
hours of reperfusion. PPARgamma was found to be constitutively activated in
hepatocytes but not in nonparenchymal cells. Upon induction of ischemia, hepatic 
PPARgamma activation rapidly decreased and remained suppressed throughout the
8-hour reperfusion period. This reduced activation was not a result of decreased 
protein availability as hepatic nuclear PPARgamma, retinoid X receptor-alpha
(RXRalpha), and PPARgamma/RXRalpha heterodimer expression was maintained.
Accompanying the decrease in PPARgamma activation was a decrease in the
expression of the natural ligand 15-deoxy-Delta(12,14)-prostaglandin J(2). This
was associated with reduced interaction of PPARgamma and the coactivator, p300.
To determine whether PPARgamma activation is hepatoprotective during hepatic
ischemia/reperfusion injury, mice were treated with the PPARgamma agonists,
rosiglitazone and connecting peptide. These treatments increased PPARgamma
activation and reduced liver injury compared to untreated mice. Furthermore,
PPARgamma-deficient mice had more liver injury after ischemia/reperfusion than
their wild-type counterparts.CONCLUSION: These data suggest that PPARgamma is an 
important endogenous regulator of, and potential therapeutic target for, ischemic
liver injury.

PMID: 18085707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Oncogene. 2008 May 22;27(23):3345-59. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Array painting reveals a high frequency of balanced translocations in breast
cancer cell lines that break in cancer-relevant genes.

Howarth KD(1), Blood KA, Ng BL, Beavis JC, Chua Y, Cooke SL, Raby S, Ichimura K, 
Collins VP, Carter NP, Edwards PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hutchison-MRC Research Centre, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Chromosome translocations in the common epithelial cancers are abundant, yet
little is known about them. They have been thought to be almost all unbalanced
and therefore dismissed as mostly mediating tumour suppressor loss. We present a 
comprehensive analysis by array painting of the chromosome translocations of
breast cancer cell lines HCC1806, HCC1187 and ZR-75-30. In array painting,
chromosomes are isolated by flow cytometry, amplified and hybridized to DNA
microarrays. A total of 200 breakpoints were identified and all were mapped to 1 
Mb resolution on bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) arrays, then 40 selected
breakpoints, including all balanced breakpoints, were further mapped on
tiling-path BAC arrays or to around 2 kb resolution using oligonucleotide arrays.
Many more of the translocations were balanced at 1 Mb resolution than expected,
either reciprocal (eight in total) or balanced for at least one participating
chromosome (19 paired breakpoints). Second, many of the breakpoints were at genes
that are plausible targets of oncogenic translocation, including balanced breaks 
at CTCF, EP300/p300 and FOXP4. Two gene fusions were demonstrated, TAX1BP1-AHCY
and RIF1-PKD1L1. Our results support the idea that chromosome rearrangements may 
play an important role in common epithelial cancers such as breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2423006
PMID: 18084325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 8;283(6):3433-44. Epub 2007 Dec 14.

EP2 and EP4 receptors regulate aromatase expression in human adipocytes and
breast cancer cells. Evidence of a BRCA1 and p300 exchange.

Subbaramaiah K(1), Hudis C, Chang SH, Hla T, Dannenberg AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York
10065, USA. ksubba@me.cornell.edu

Cytochrome P450 aromatase (aromatase), a product of the CYP19 gene, catalyzes the
synthesis of estrogens from androgens. Because aromatase-dependent estrogen
biosynthesis has been linked to hormone-dependent breast carcinogenesis, it is
important to elucidate the mechanisms that regulate CYP19 gene expression. The
main objective of this study was to identify the receptors (EP) for prostaglandin
E(2) (PGE(2)) that mediate the induction of CYP19 transcription in human
adipocytes and breast cancer cells. Treatment with PGE(2) induced aromatase, an
effect that was mimicked by either EP(2) or EP(4) agonists. Antagonists of EP(2) 
or EP(4) or small interference RNA-mediated down-regulation of these receptors
suppressed PGE(2)-mediated induction of aromatase. PGE(2) via EP(2) and EP(4)
stimulated the cAMP-->protein kinase A pathway resulting in enhanced interaction 
between P-CREB, p300, and the aromatase promoter I.3/II. Overexpressing a mutant 
form of p300 that lacks histone acetyltransferase activity suppressed
PGE(2)-mediated induction of aromatase promoter activity. PGE(2) via EP(2) and
EP(4) also caused a reduction in both the amounts of BRCA1 and the interaction
between BRCA1 and the aromatase promoter I.3/II. Activation of the aromatase
promoter by PGE(2) was suppressed by overexpressing wild-type BRCA1. Silencing of
EP(2) or EP(4) also blocked PGE(2)-mediated induction of the progesterone
receptor, a prototypic estrogen-response gene. In a mouse model, overexpressing
COX-2 in the mammary gland, a known inducer of PGE(2) synthesis, led to increased
aromatase mRNA and activity and reduced amounts of BRCA1; these effects were
reversed by knocking out EP(2). Taken together, these results suggest that PGE(2)
via EP(2) and EP(4) activates the cAMP-->PKA-->CREB pathway leading to enhanced
CYP19 transcription and increased aromatase activity. Reciprocal changes in the
interaction between BRCA1, p300, and the aromatase promoter I.3/II contributed to
the inductive effects of PGE(2).

PMID: 18083712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Immunol. 2008 Apr;45(7):1995-2006. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

MicroRNA targets in immune genes and the Dicer/Argonaute and ARE machinery
components.

Asirvatham AJ(1), Gregorie CJ, Hu Z, Magner WJ, Tomasi TB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Department of Immunology, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

We studied 613 genes which regulate immunity and, utilizing predictive
algorithms, identified 285 genes as microRNA (miRNA or miR) targets. Of these,
approximately 250 are newly predicted gene-miR interactions. The frequency of
predicted miRNA binding sites in immune gene 3'UTRs indicated preferential
targeting of immune genes compared to the genome. Major targets include
transcription factors, cofactors and chromatin modifiers whereas upstream
factors, such as ligands and receptors (cytokines, chemokines and TLRs), were, in
general, non-targets. About 10% of the immune genes were 'hubs' with eight or
more different miRNAs predicted to target their 3'UTRs. Hubs were focused on
certain key immune genes, such as BCL6, SMAD7, BLIMP1, NFAT5, EP300 and others.
NF-kappaB and p53 do not themselves have binding sites for miRNAs but rather
these pathways are targeted by miRNAs at downstream sites. MHC class II genes
lacked miRNA targets but binding sites were identified in the CIITA gene and were
shown experimentally to repress IFN-gamma-induced MHC class II activation.
Unexpectedly, factors involved in regulating message stability via AU-rich
elements (ARE) were heavily targeted. Moreover, multiple components involved in
the generation and effector functions of miRNAs (Dicer and Argonautes) were
themselves miRNA targets suggesting that a subset of miRNAs may indirectly
control their own production as well as other miRNAs.

PMCID: PMC2678893
PMID: 18061676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. FEBS Lett. 2007 Dec 22;581(30):5904-10. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

A role for CITED2, a CBP/p300 interacting protein, in colon cancer cell invasion.

Bai L(1), Merchant JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-2200, USA.

A thorough understanding of histone acetyltransferase CBP/p300-mediated
regulation of gene expression and cell growth is essential to identify mechanisms
relevant to the development of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor-based
preventive and therapeutic strategies. We found that knockdown of CBP/p300
interacting coactivator with glutamic acid/aspartic acid-rich tail 2 (CITED2)
increased colon cancer cell invasiveness in vitro. Gene expression profiling
revealed that CITED2 knockdown induced matrix metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13) gene 
expression in colon cancer cells. Butyrate, a naturally occurring HDAC inhibitor,
induced CITED2 expression and downregulated MMP-13 expression in RKO cells.
Additionally, ectopic expression of CITED2 arrested RKO cell growth. Thus, CITED2
regulates colon cancer invasion and might be a target for HDAC inhibitor-based
intervention of colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC2211427
PMID: 18054336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Clin Pathol. 2007 Nov;60(11):1249-53.

p300 expression repression by hypermethylation associated with tumour invasion
and metastasis in oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Zhang C(1), Li K, Wei L, Li Z, Yu P, Teng L, Wu K, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Molecular Epidemiology, Shantou University Medical
College, Shantou, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant promoter methylation is an important mechanism for gene
silencing.
AIMS: To evaluate the promoter methylation status of p300 gene in patients with
oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
METHODS: The methylation status of p300 promoter was analysed by
methylation-specific PCR (MSP) in 50 OSCC tissues and the matching non-cancerous 
tissues. Oesophageal cancer cell lines (ECa-109 and TE-10) were treated with the 
demethylation agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-CdR), and p300 mRNA expression 
was detected by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: p300 methylation was found in 42% (21/50) of the OSCC tissues, but in
only 20% (10/50) of the corresponding non-cancerous tissues (p = 0.017). In OSCC 
samples, 65% of those with deep tumour invasion (adventitia) and 63% samples with
metastasis revealed p300 promoter methylation (p<0.05). p300 mRNA expression was 
observed in 19.0% (4/21) of methylated tumours and 58.6% (17/29) of unmethylated 
tumours (p = 0.005). In addition, p300 mRNA expression was observed in 40% (4/10)
of methylated non-neoplastic tissues and 87.5% (35/40) of unmethylated
non-tumours (p = 0.001). The demethylation caused by 5-Aza-CdR increased the p300
mRNA expression levels in oesophageal cancer cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: p300 transcription silenced by promoter hypermethylation could play 
a role in the pathogenesis of oesophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2095476
PMID: 17965222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Cell. 2007 Oct 26;28(2):200-13.

Functional interdependence at the chromatin level between the MKK6/p38 and
IGF1/PI3K/AKT pathways during muscle differentiation.

Serra C(1), Palacios D, Mozzetta C, Forcales SV, Morantte I, Ripani M, Jones DR, 
Du K, Jhala US, Simone C, Puri PL.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La 
Jolla, CA 92037-1062, USA.

During muscle regeneration, the mechanism integrating environmental cues at the
chromatin of muscle progenitors is unknown. We show that inflammation-activated
MKK6-p38 and insulin growth factor 1 (IGF1)-induced PI3K/AKT pathways converge on
the chromatin of muscle genes to target distinct components of the muscle
transcriptosome. p38 alpha/beta kinases recruit the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling 
complex; AKT1 and 2 promote the association of MyoD with p300 and PCAF
acetyltransferases, via direct phosphorylation of p300. Pharmacological or
genetic interference with either pathway led to partial assembly of discrete
chromatin-bound complexes, which reflected two reversible and distinct cellular
phenotypes. Remarkably, PI3K/AKT blockade was permissive for chromatin
recruitment of MEF2-SWI/SNF complex, whose remodeling activity was compromised in
the absence of MyoD and acetyltransferases. The functional interdependence
between p38 and IGF1/PI3K/AKT pathways was further established by the evidence
that blockade of AKT chromatin targets was sufficient to prevent the activation
of the myogenic program triggered by deliberate activation of p38 signaling.

PMCID: PMC2693200
PMID: 17964260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2007 Aug 20;9(23):1-16.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: clinical and molecular overview.

Roelfsema JH(1), Peters DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden
University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome is characterised by mental retardation, growth
retardation and a particular dysmorphology. The syndrome is rare, with a
frequency of approximately one affected individual in 100,000 newborns. Mutations
in two genes - CREBBP and EP300 - have been identified to cause the syndrome.
These two genes show strong homology and encode histone acetyltransferases
(HATs), which are transcriptional co-activators involved in many signalling
pathways. Loss of HAT activity is sufficient to account for the phenomena seen in
Rubinstein-Taybi patients. Although some mutations found in CREBBP are
translocations, inversions and large deletions, most are point mutations or small
deletions and insertions. Mutations in EP300 are comparatively rare. Extensive
screening of patients has revealed mutations in CREBBP and EP300 in around 50% of
cases. The cause of the syndrome in the remaining patients remains to be
identified, but other genes could also be involved. Here, we describe the
clinical presentation of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, review the mutation spectrum 
and discuss the current understanding of causative molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 17942008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2007 Dec;101(6):427-33. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Curcumin, both histone deacetylase and p300/CBP-specific inhibitor, represses the
activity of nuclear factor kappa B and Notch 1 in Raji cells.

Chen Y(1), Shu W, Chen W, Wu Q, Liu H, Cui G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. yanchen@public.wh.hb.cn

Curcumin, the active chemical of the Asian spice turmeric, exhibits anticancer
activity in several human cancer cell lines. We previously have proved that
curcumin was a new member of the histone deacetylases (HDAC) inhibitors, while
constitutive nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) is believed to be a crucial event
for enhanced proliferation and survival of malignant cells. Here, we investigate 
the effect of curcumin on the activation of NF-kappaB signal molecule in Raji
cells to explore its relationship with HDACs or p300/CREB binding protein (CBP). 
Curcumin presented striking proliferation inhibition potency on Raji cells in
vitro, with the IC(50) value for 24 hr being 25 micromol/l. Significant decreases
in the amounts of p300, HDAC1 and HDAC3 were detected after treatment with
curcumin. These suppressing effects were more pronounced when the administered
dose increased. The protection degradation of HDAC1 and p300 by MG-132 could be
partially reversed by curcumin. Furthermore, curcumin could also prevent
degradation of I kappaB alpha and inhibit nuclear translocation of the
NF-kappaB/p65 subunit, as well as expression of Notch 1, induced by tumour
necrosis factor-alpha. The results suggest that the depressive effect of curcumin
on NF-kappaB signal transduction pathway may be mediated via the various
components of the HDACs and p300/Notch 1 signal molecules, and may represent a
new remedy for acute leukaemia.

PMID: 17927689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Br J Nutr. 2008 Mar;99(3):481-6. Epub 2007 Oct 5.

Fatty acids in component of milk enhance the expression of the
cAMP-response-element-binding-protein-binding protein (CBP)/p300 gene in
developing rats.

Mochizuki K(1), Kawai H, Mochizuki H, Shimada M, Takase S, Goda T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Food and Nutritional Sciences, The University of Shizuoka, 52-1
Yada, Shizuoka-shi, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan.

Fatty acids in milk are thought to play an important role in intestinal
maturation and gene expression in the rat small intestine during the
suckling-weaning period. In the present study, we determined the jejunal mRNA
level of the cAMP-response-element-binding-protein-binding protein (CBP)/p300,
which is one of the chromatin remodelling factors and regulates histone
acetylation, during the postnatal period in rats. The mRNA level of CBP/p300 was 
high during the suckling and middle of the weaning period (day 5 to 20) and then 
declined sharply to a low level at the end of the weaning period and after
weaning. In situ hybridisation also showed that CBP/p300 mRNA levels in the
villus as well as the basal membrane clearly decreased after weaning. Rat pups at
age 17 d, weaned to a high-fat diet, showed higher levels of CBP/p300 mRNA than
those weaned to a low-fat diet. Oral administration of caprylic acid, oleic acid 
and linoleic acid, which are major fatty acid components in milk, induced jejunal
CBP/p300 gene expression. The present results suggest that fatty acids in
components of milk enhance expression of the CBP/p300 genes in the small
intestine.

PMID: 17916272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Nov 30;363(4):895-900. Epub 2007 Sep 10.

ZNF307, a novel zinc finger gene suppresses p53 and p21 pathway.

Li J(1), Wang Y, Fan X, Mo X, Wang Z, Li Y, Yin Z, Deng Y, Luo N, Zhu C, Liu M,
Ma Q, Ocorr K, Yuan W, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Heart Development, Key Lab of MOE for Development Biology and
Protein Chemistry, College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha,
410081 Hunan, People's Republic of China.

We have cloned a novel KRAB-related zinc finger gene, ZNF307, encoding a protein 
of 545aa. ZNF307 is conserved across species in evolution and is differentially
expressed in human adult and fetal tissues. The fusion protein of EGFP-ZNF307
localizes in the nucleus. Transcriptional activity assays show ZNF307 suppresses 
transcriptional activity of L8G5-luciferase. Overexpressing ZNF307 in different
cell lines also inhibits the transcriptional activities of p53 and p21. Moreover,
ZNF307 works by reducing the p53 protein level and p53 protein reduction is
achieved by increasing transcription of MDM2 and EP300. ZNF307 might suppress
p53-p21 pathway through activating MDM2 and EP300 expression and inducing p53
degradation.

PMID: 17910948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 20;27(13):1894-904. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

P300 plays a role in p16(INK4a) expression and cell cycle arrest.

Wang X(1), Pan L, Feng Y, Wang Y, Han Q, Han L, Han S, Guo J, Huang B, Lu J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, Changchun,
China.

As a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p16(INK4a) plays a key role in cell cycle
progression and cellular differentiation, and its expression is frequently
altered in human cancers through epigenetically mediated transcriptional
silencing. In this report, we demonstrate that p300 was able to induce cell cycle
arrest, and this process was reversed by p16(INK4a) silencing by RNA interference
in HeLa cells. We also show that p300 was involved in activation of p16(INK4a)
expression in 293T cells. Specifically, p300 cooperated with Sp1 to stimulate
both p16(INK4a) promoter activity and mRNA expression. Co-immunoprecipitation and
mammalian two-hybrid assays revealed that p300 and Sp1 formed a complex through
interaction between the Q domain of p300 and the N-terminal domain of Sp1. The
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays verified that p300 was recruited to
p16(INK4a) promoter, and the histone acetyltransferase domain of p300
participated in p16(INK4a) activation through inducing hyperacetylation of
histone H4 at p16(INK4a) gene. These data suggest that p300 plays a critical role
in transcriptional regulation of p16(INK4a) and in cell cycle arrest.

PMID: 17906698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 20;27(13):1939-44. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

CITED2 mediates the paradoxical responses of HIF-1alpha to proteasome inhibition.

Shin DH(1), Li SH, Chun YS, Huang LE, Kim MS, Park JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28 
Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul, Korea.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) is destabilized via the
ubiquitin-proteasome system. Thus HIF-1alpha expression is robustly upregulated
by proteasome inhibition, but paradoxically its activity is reduced. In the
present study, we investigated the mechanism underlying the paradoxical response 
of HIF-1alpha to proteasome inhibition. In both Hep3B and HEK293 cells, a
proteasome inhibitor MG132 noticeably attenuated hypoxic induction of
erythropoietin and VEGF mRNAs. MG132 inactivated HIF-1alpha C-terminal
transactivation domain (CAD), independently of factor inhibiting HIF-1 (FIH) and 
inhibited p300 recruitment by HIF-1alpha. We next tested the possibility that
CITED2 is involved in the HIF-1 inactivation. CITED2 was found to be degraded via
the ubiquitin-proteasome system and thus was stabilized by proteasome inhibition.
Both the activity and the p300 binding of HIF-1alpha were inhibited by CITED2
expression and recovered by CITED2 siRNA in the presence of MG132. These results 
suggest that CITED2 is stabilized by proteasome inhibition and inactivates HIF-1 
by interfering with the HIF-1alpha-p300 interaction. This may be an important
mode-of-action for proteasome inhibition-based cancer therapy.

PMID: 17906695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Genomics. 2007 Nov;90(5):567-73. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

High frequency of mosaic CREBBP deletions in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome patients
and mapping of somatic and germ-line breakpoints.

Gervasini C(1), Castronovo P, Bentivegna A, Mottadelli F, Faravelli F,
Giovannucci-Uzielli ML, Pessagno A, Lucci-Cordisco E, Pinto AM, Salviati L,
Selicorni A, Tenconi R, Neri G, Larizza L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, San Paolo School of Medicine, University of
Milan, 20142 Milan, Italy.

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a rare malformation disorder caused by
mutations in the closely related CREBBP and EP300 genes, accounting respectively 
for up to 60 and 3% of cases. About 10% of CREBBP mutations are whole gene
deletions often extending into flanking regions. Using FISH and microsatellite
analyses as a first step in the CREBBP mutation screening of 42 Italian RSTS
patients, we identified six deletions, three of which were in a mosaic condition 
that has not been previously reported in RSTS. The use of region-specific BAC
clones and small CREBBP probes allowed us to assess the extent of all of the
deletions by mapping their endpoints to genomic intervals of 5-10 kb. Four of our
five intragenic breakpoints cluster at the 5' end of CREBBP, where there is a
peak of breakpoints underlying rearrangements in RSTS patients and tumors. The
search for genomic motifs did not reveal any low-copy repeats (LCRs) or any
greater density of repetitive sequences. In contrast, the percentage of
interspersed repetitive elements (mainly Alu and LINEs in the CREBBP exon 2
region) is significantly higher than that in the entire gene or the average in
the genome, thus suggesting that this characteristic may be involved in the
region's vulnerability to breaking and nonhomologous pairing. The FISH analysis
extended to the EP300 genomic region did not reveal any deletions. The clinical
presentation was typical in all cases, but more severe in the three patients
carrying constitutional deletions, raising a question about the possible
underdiagnosis of a few cases of mild RSTS.

PMID: 17855048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Psychophysiol. 2007 Dec;66(3):231-7. Epub 2007 Aug 11.

The P300 is sensitive to concealed face recognition.

Meijer EH(1), Smulders FT, Merckelbach HL, Wolf AG.

Author information: 
(1)Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
eh.meijer@psychology.unimaas.nl

In two experiments, we investigated whether a P300 based Concealed Information
Test (CIT) can be used to detect concealed face recognition. The results show
that detection of concealed face recognition is highly successful when stimuli
depict persons who are personally highly familiar, and instructions to conceal
recognition are given. When pictures depict recognized, but personally less
familiar faces, and no specific instructions to conceal recognition are given,
detection is unsuccessful. These findings indicate that pictures of faces can be 
used in a P300 based CIT, and that mere recognition is not sufficient for
successful detection of concealed information.

PMID: 17825933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Dec;21(12):2877-89. Epub 2007 Aug 30.

Orphan receptor TR3 attenuates the p300-induced acetylation of retinoid X
receptor-alpha.

Zhao WX(1), Tian M, Zhao BX, Li GD, Liu B, Zhan YY, Chen HZ, Wu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Cell Biology and Tumor Cell
Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian
Province, China.

Acetylation modification regulates the functions of histone and nonhistone
proteins, including transcriptional activity, protein interaction, and
subcellular localization. Although many nuclear receptors have been shown to be
modified by acetylation, whether retinoid X receptors (RXRs) are acetylated and
how the acetylation is regulated remains unknown. Here, we provide the first
evidence of RXRalpha acetylation by p300 on lysine 145. Acetylation of RXRalpha
by p300 facilitated its DNA binding and subsequently increased its
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, we discovered that TR3, an orphan
receptor, exerted a negative regulation on p300-induced RXRalpha acetylation. TR3
significantly reduced the p300-induced RXRalpha acetylation and transcriptional
activity, and such inhibition required the interaction of TR3 with RXRalpha.
Binding of TR3 to RXRalpha resulted in the sequestration of RXRalpha from p300.
9-cis retinoic acid, a ligand for RXRalpha, enhanced the association of RXRalpha 
with TR3, rather than acetylation of RXRalpha by p300. Biological function
analysis revealed that the mitogenic activity of RXRalpha stimulated by p300 was 
acetylation dependent and could be repressed by TR3. Upon the treatment of 9-cis 
retinoic acid, RXRalpha was translocated with TR3 from the nucleus to the
mitochondria, and apoptosis was induced. Taken together, our data demonstrate the
distinct regulatory mechanisms of p300 and TR3 on RXRalpha acetylation and reveal
a previously unrecognized role for orphan receptor in the transcriptional control
of retinoid receptors.

PMID: 17761950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Learn Mem. 2007 Aug 29;14(9):564-72. Print 2007 Sep.

Transgenic mice expressing an inhibitory truncated form of p300 exhibit long-term
memory deficits.

Oliveira AM(1), Wood MA, McDonough CB, Abel T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19104, USA.

The formation of many forms of long-term memory requires several molecular
mechanisms including regulation of gene expression. The mechanisms directing
transcription require not only activation of individual transcription factors but
also recruitment of transcriptional coactivators. CBP and p300 are
transcriptional coactivators that interact with a large number of transcription
factors and regulate transcription through multiple mechanisms, including an
intrinsic histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. HAT activity mediates
acetylation of lysine residues on the amino-terminal tails of histone proteins,
thereby increasing DNA accessibility for transcription factors to activate gene
expression. CBP has been shown to play an important role in long-term memory
formation. We have investigated whether p300 is also required for certain forms
of memory. p300 shares a high degree of homology with CBP and has been shown to
interact with transcription factors known to be critical for long-term memory
formation. Here we demonstrate that conditional transgenic mice expressing an
inhibitory truncated form of p300 (p300Delta1), which lacks the carboxy-terminal 
HAT and activation domains, have impaired long-term recognition memory and
contextual fear memory. Thus, our study demonstrates that p300 is required for
certain forms of memory and that the HAT and carboxy-terminal domains play a
critical role.

PMCID: PMC1994075
PMID: 17761541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Clin Pathol. 2007 Nov;60(11):1205-10. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

Expression of HDAC1 and CBP/p300 in human colorectal carcinomas.

Ishihama K(1), Yamakawa M, Semba S, Takeda H, Kawata S, Kimura S, Kimura W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: The histone-modifying enzymes histone deacetylase (HDAC) and histone 
acetyltransferase (HAT) control gene transcriptional activation and repression in
human malignancies.
AIMS: To analyse the expression of HDAC/HAT-associated molecules such as HDAC1,
CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 in human colorectal carcinomas, and
investigate the relationship between their expression levels and
clinicopathological parameters.
METHODS: Expression levels of HDAC1, CBP, and p300 in human colorectal cancer
were investigated by immunohistochemistry. In situ hybridisation (ISH) and
reverse transcription (RT)-PCR analyses were also carried out to confirm mRNA
expression levels of these genes. Immunoreactivity was evaluated
semi-quantitatively using a staining index (SI). The relationships between the
SIs and clinicopathological findings were analysed and survival curves were
calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method and log-rank tests.
RESULTS: The mean SIs for HDAC1, CBP, and p300 in this series of tumours were
much higher than those in normal colonic mucosa. The presence of HDAC1 and CBP
mRNAs on colorectal carcinoma cells as well as normal epithelial cells was
confirmed by ISH analysis. A marked increase in p300 mRNA levels was detected in 
a majority of cases by RT-PCR. Among the patients with colorectal cancer,
overexpression of p300 (SI>11.9) correlated with a poor prognosis, whereas high
CBP expression levels (SI>16.6) indicated long-term survival.
CONCLUSION: Results showed the up-regulation of these three histone-modifying
molecules in this series of colorectal cancers and suggested that monitoring of
CBP and p300 may assist prediction of the prognosis in patients with colorectal
adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2095491
PMID: 17720775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cancer Res. 2007 Aug 15;67(16):7731-7.

Epigenetic modulation of estrogen receptor-alpha by pRb family proteins: a novel 
mechanism in breast cancer.

Macaluso M(1), Montanari M, Noto PB, Gregorio V, Bronner C, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center of
Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA. macaluso@temple.edu

Estrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) plays a crucial role in normal breast
development and has also been linked to mammary carcinogenesis and clinical
outcome in breast cancer patients. However, ER-alpha gene expression can change
during the course of disease and, consequently, therapy resistance can occur. The
molecular mechanism governing ER-alpha transcriptional activity and/or silencing 
is still unclear. Here, we showed that the presence of a specific pRb2/p130
multimolecular complex on the ER-alpha promoter strongly correlates with the
methylation status of this gene. Furthermore, we suggested that pRb2/p130 could
cooperate with ICBP90 (inverted CCAAT box binding protein of 90 kDa) and DNA
methyltransferases in maintaining a specific methylation pattern of ER-alpha
gene. The sequence of epigenetic events for establishing and maintaining the
silenced state of ER-alpha gene can be locus- or pathway- specific, and the local
remodeling of ER-alpha chromatin structure by pRb2/p130 multimolecular complexes 
may influence its susceptibility to specific DNA methylation. Our novel
hypothesis could provide a basis for understanding how the complex pattern of
ER-alpha methylation and transcriptional silencing is generated and for
understanding the relationship between this pattern and its function during the
neoplastic process.

PMID: 17699777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cell Signal. 2007 Nov;19(11):2317-28. Epub 2007 Jul 13.

Ultrasound induces cyclooxygenase-2 expression through integrin, integrin-linked 
kinase, Akt, NF-kappaB and p300 pathway in human chondrocytes.

Hsu HC(1), Fong YC, Chang CS, Hsu CJ, Hsu SF, Lin JG, Fu WM, Yang RS, Tang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.

It has been shown that ultrasound (US) stimulation accelerates fracture healing
in the animal models and in clinical studies. However, the precise molecular
events generated by US in chondrocytes have not been clarified well. Here we
found that US stimulation transiently increased the surface expression of alpha2,
alpha5, beta1 or beta3 but not alpha3 or alpha4 integrins in human chondrocytes, 
as shown by flow cytometric analysis. US stimulation increased prostaglandin E(2)
formation as well as the protein and mRNA levels of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). At 
the mechanistic level, anti-integrin beta1 and beta3 antibodies or beta1 and
beta3 integrin small interference RNA attenuated the US-induced COX-2 expression.
Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) inhibitor (KP-392), Akt inhibitor, NF-kappaB
inhibitor (PDTC) or IkappaB protease inhibitor (TPCK) also inhibited the
potentiating action of US. US stimulation promotes kinase activity of ILK,
phosphorylation of Akt. In addition, US stimulation also induces IKKalpha/beta
phosphorylation, IkappaBalpha phosphorylation, IkappaBalpha degradation, p65
phosphorylation at Ser(276), p65 and p50 translocation from the cytosol to the
nucleus, and kappaB-luciferase activity. The binding of p65 to the NF-kappaB
element, as well as the recruitment of p300 and the enhancement of p50
acetylation on the COX-2 promoter was enhanced by US. Taken together, our results
provide evidence that US stimulation increases COX-2 expression in chondrocytes
via the integrin/ILK/Akt/NF-kappaB and p300 signaling pathway.

PMID: 17692505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 14;282(37):27215-28. Epub 2007 Jul 9.

ERK2-mediated C-terminal serine phosphorylation of p300 is vital to the
regulation of epidermal growth factor-induced keratin 16 gene expression.

Chen YJ(1), Wang YN, Chang WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of
Medicine, Center for Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction Research, National
Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.

We previously reported that the epidermal growth factor (EGF) regulates the gene 
expression of keratin 16 by activating the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
1 and 2 (ERK1/2) signaling which in turn enhances the recruitment of p300 to the 
keratin 16 promoter. The recruited p300 functionally cooperates with Sp1 and
c-Jun to regulate the gene expression of keratin 16. This study investigated in
detail the molecular events incurred upon p300 whereby EGF caused an enhanced
interaction between p300 and Sp1. EGF apparently induced time- and dose-dependent
phosphorylation of p300, both in vitro and in vivo, through the activation of
ERK2. The six potential ERK2 phosphorylation sites, including three threonine and
three serine residues as revealed by sequential analysis, were first identified
in vitro. Confirmation of these six sites in vivo indicated that these three
serine residues (Ser-2279, Ser-2315, and Ser-2366) on the C terminus of p300 were
the major signaling targets of EGF. Furthermore, the C-terminal serine
phosphorylation of p300 stimulated its histone acetyltransferase activity and
enhanced its interaction with Sp1. These serine phosphorylation sites on p300
controlled the p300 recruitment to the keratin 16 promoter. When all three serine
residues on p300 were replaced by alanine, EGF could no longer induce the gene
expression of keratin 16. Taken together, these results strongly suggested that
the ERK2-mediated C-terminal serine phosphorylation of p300 was a key event in
the regulation of EGF-induced keratin 16 expression. These results also
constituted the first report identifying the unique p300 phosphorylation sites
induced by ERK2 in vivo.

PMID: 17623675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Cell Sci. 2007 Jul 1;120(Pt 13):2259-71.

Stabilization and activation of p53 induced by Cdk5 contributes to neuronal cell 
death.

Lee JH(1), Kim HS, Lee SJ, Kim KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Division of Molecular and Life Science,
Systems-Biodynamics NCRC, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang,
790-784, Republic of Korea.

The p53 tumor suppressor protein is a key regulator of cellular functions
including responses to numerous stress signals, and triggers apoptosis in many
cell types, including neurons. The major mechanisms known to regulate p53
stabilization and activation include phosphorylation and ubiquitin
ligase-mediated proteasomal degradation. Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5), a
proline-directed serine/threonine kinase, is most active in the central nervous
system and plays a variety of roles in neuronal degeneration. Here, we
demonstrate for the first time that Cdk5 interacts with p53 and increases its
stability through posttranslational regulation, leading to accumulation of p53,
particularly in the nucleus. We show that Cdk5 phosphorylates p53 on Ser15, Ser33
and Ser46 in vitro, and that increased Cdk5 activity in the nucleus mediates
these phosphorylation events in response to genotoxic and oxidative stresses.
Cdk5 mediates disruption of the interaction between p53 and Hdm2 (also known as
Mdm2), and prevents Hdm2-induced p53 ubiquitylation and downregulation. Cdk5
additionally enhances phosphorylation-dependent binding of the p300 coactivator, 
inducing acetylation of p53. Cdk5-stabilized p53 protein is transcriptionally
active, resulting in the induction of pro-apoptotic genes and subsequent
mitochondria-mediated apoptosis in response to genotoxic or oxidative stress.
Collectively, these novel findings help define the mechanisms underlying neuronal
apoptosis occurring as a result of Cdk5-mediated p53 stabilization and
transcriptional activation.

PMID: 17591690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Aug;27(16):5819-34. Epub 2007 Jun 11.

PML-retinoic acid receptor alpha inhibits PML IV enhancement of PU.1-induced
C/EBPepsilon expression in myeloid differentiation.

Yoshida H(1), Ichikawa H, Tagata Y, Katsumoto T, Ohnishi K, Akao Y, Naoe T,
Pandolfi PP, Kitabayashi I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Tsukiji 5-Chome, Chuo-Ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. hityoshi@gan2.res.ncc.go.jp

PML and PU.1 play important roles in myeloid differentiation. PML-deficient mice 
have an impaired capacity for terminal maturation of their myeloid precursor
cells. This finding has been explained, at least in part, by the lack of PML
action to modulate retinoic acid-differentiating activities. In this study, we
found that C/EBPepsilon expression is reduced in PML-deficient mice. We showed
that PU.1 directly activates the transcription of the C/EBPepsilon gene that is
essential for granulocytic differentiation. The type IV isoform of PML interacted
with PU.1, promoted its association with p300, and then enhanced PU.1-induced
transcription and granulocytic differentiation. In contrast to PML IV, the
leukemia-associated PML-retinoic acid receptor alpha fusion protein dissociated
the PU.1/PML IV/p300 complex and inhibited PU.1-induced transcription. These
results suggest a novel pathogenic mechanism of the PML-retinoic acid receptor
alpha fusion protein in acute promyelocytic leukemia.

PMCID: PMC1952121
PMID: 17562868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Dec;213(3):663-71.

The transcriptional coactivator and acetyltransferase p300 in fibroblast biology 
and fibrosis.

Ghosh AK(1), Varga J.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Division of
Rheumatology, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. a-ghosh2@northwestern.edu

The transcriptional coactivator p300 is a ubiquitous nuclear phosphoprotein and
transcriptional cofactor with intrinsic acetyltransferase activity. p300 controls
the expression of numerous genes in cell-type and signal-specific manner, and
plays a pivotal role in cellular proliferation, apoptosis, and embryogenesis. By 
catalyzing acetylation of histones and transcription factors, p300 plays a
significant role in epigenetic regulation. Recent evidence suggests that abnormal
p300 function is associated with deregulated target gene expression, and is
implicated in inflammation, cancer, cardiac hypertrophy, and genetic disorders
such as the Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. The activity of p300 is regulated at
multiple levels, including developmental stage-specific expression,
post-translational modifications, subcellular localization, and cell-type and
gene-specific interactions with transcription factors. Although p300 has been
investigated extensively in epithelial and hematopoietic cells, its role in
fibroblast biology and tissue repair has received little attention to date.
Recent studies implicate p300 in the regulation of collagen synthesis by
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta). Both the acetyltransferase activity
of p300 and its inducible interaction with Smad3 are essential for mediating
TGF-beta-induced stimulation of collagen synthesis. As a signal integrator whose 
availability for intracellular interactions with transcription factors is
strictly limiting, p300 mediates the antagonistic regulation of TGF-beta-induced 
collagen synthesis by IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha via intracellular competition for
limiting amount of p300. Significantly, p300 is itself a direct transcriptional
target of TGF-beta in normal fibroblasts, and its levels are significantly
elevated in fibrotic lesions as well as in experimental models of fibrosis. The
emerging appreciation of the importance of p300 in extracellular matrix (ECM)
remodeling and fibrosis and novel insights concerning the regulation, mechanism
of action, and significance of p300 in fibroblast biology are discussed in this
minireview.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17559085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Blood. 2007 Sep 1;110(5):1570-7. Epub 2007 May 24.

ATF2 impairs glucocorticoid receptor-mediated transactivation in human CD8+ T
cells.

Li LB(1), Leung DY, Strand MJ, Goleva E.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, National Jewish Medical and
Research Center, Denver, CO 80206, USA.

Chronic inflammatory diseases often have residual CD8(+) T-cell infiltration
despite treatment with systemic corticosteroids, which suggests divergent steroid
responses between CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells. To examine steroid sensitivity,
dexamethasone (DEX)-induced histone H4 lysine 5 (K5) acetylation and
glucocorticoid receptor alpha (GCR alpha) translocation were evaluated. DEX
treatment for 6 hours significantly induced histone H4 K5 acetylation in normal
CD4(+) cells (P = .001) but not in CD8(+) cells. DEX responses were functionally 
impaired in CD8(+) compared with CD4(+) cells when using mitogen-activated
protein kinase phosphatase (1 hour; P = .02) and interleukin 10 mRNA (24 hours; P
= .004) induction as a readout of steroid-induced transactivation. Normal
DEX-induced GCR alpha nuclear translocation and no significant difference in GCR 
alpha and GCR beta mRNA expression were observed in both T-cell types. In
addition, no significant difference in SRC-1, p300, or TIP60 expression was
found. However, activating transcription factor-2 (ATF2) expression was
significantly lower in CD8(+) compared with CD4(+) cells (P = .009). Importantly,
inhibition of ATF2 expression by small interfering RNA in CD4(+) cells resulted
in inhibition of DEX-induced transactivation in CD4(+) cells. The data indicate
refractory steroid-induced transactivation but similar steroid-induced
transrepression of CD8(+) cells compared with CD4(+) cells caused by decreased
levels of the histone acetyltransferase ATF2.

PMCID: PMC1975841
PMID: 17525285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 1;178(11):6941-8.

p300 protein acetyltransferase activity suppresses systemic lupus
erythematosus-like autoimmune disease in mice.

Forster N(1), Gallinat S, Jablonska J, Weiss S, Elsässer HP, Lutz W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research, University of Marburg,
Marburg, Germany.

Conditional knock-in mice expressing a histone acetyltransferase-deficient
version of the transcriptional coregulator p300 exclusively in B lymphocytes die 
prematurely with full penetrance. The mice develop an autoimmune disease similar 
to systemic lupus erythematosus in its pathological manifestations, such as
splenomegaly, glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, deposition of immune complexes, and
production of autoantibodies against dsDNA. Aged mice show a severe reduction of 
transitional and marginal zone B cells and generate aberrant mature B cells.
These B cells show diminished proliferation in response to stimulation of the
BCR, but respond normally to other stimuli. Yet, the mice mount a normal primary 
immune response against a T-dependent Ag. In contrast, the memory response is
impaired. In addition, serum Ig levels, in particular IgG2b, are increased. We
conclude that p300 acetyltransferase activity is essential for maintaining
self-tolerance of B lymphocytes. These findings support the concept of treating
lupus with inhibitors of protein deacetylases and point to B cells as a critical 
target of these drugs.

PMID: 17513743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Jul;27(7):1528-34. Epub 2007 May 10.

Cooperation of SRC-1 and p300 with NF-kappaB and CREB in angiotensin II-induced
IL-6 expression in vascular smooth muscle cells.

Sahar S(1), Reddy MA, Wong C, Meng L, Wang M, Natarajan R.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Beckman Research Institute of City of 
Hope, 1500 E. Duarte Rd, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the role of coactivator
histone acetyltransferases (HATs) p300 and SRC-1 in angiotensin II (Ang
II)-induced interleukin-6 (IL-6) gene expression in vascular smooth muscle cells 
(VSMCs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Ang II increased IL-6 mRNA expression via NF-kappaB and CREB
in an extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-dependent manner in rat VSMCs. 
It was also significantly enhanced by the histone deacetylase inhibitor,
Trichostatin A. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays showed that Ang II
increased Histone H3 Lysine (K9/14) acetylation on the IL-6 promoter. Ang
II-induced IL-6 promoter transactivation was significantly enhanced by p300 and
SRC-1, with maximal activation in cells cotransfected with NF-kappaB (p65) and
SRC-1. Nucleofection of VSMCs with either an ERK phosphorylation site mutant of
SRC-1 or p300/CBP HAT deficient mutants significantly blocked Ang II-induced IL-6
expression. ChIP assays revealed that Ang II enhanced coordinate occupancy of
p65, CREB, p300, and SRC-1 at the IL-6 promoter. An ERK pathway inhibitor blocked
Ang-induced IL-6 promoter SRC-1 occupancy and histone acetylation.
CONCLUSIONS: Ang II-induced IL-6 expression requires NF-kappaB and CREB as well
as ERK-dependent histone acetylation mediated by p300 and SRC-1. These results
provide new insights into nuclear chromatin mechanisms by which Ang II regulates 
inflammatory gene expression.

PMID: 17495236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Oncogene. 2007 Oct 18;26(48):6863-74. Epub 2007 May 7.

p400 function is required for the adenovirus E1A-mediated suppression of EGFR and
tumour cell killing.

Flinterman MB(1), Mymryk JS, Klanrit P, Yousef AF, Lowe SW, Caldas C, Gäken J,
Farzaneh F, Tavassoli M.

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Oncology Group, King's College London, London, UK.

We have recently shown that E1A protein of human adenovirus downregulates
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression and induces apoptosis in head 
and neck (HNSCC) and lung cancer cells independently of their p53 status. E1A has
five isoforms of which the major ones E1A12S and E1A13S regulate transcription of
cellular genes by binding to transcriptional modulators such as pRB, CtBP, p300
and p400. In this study, we have identified E1A12S isoform to have the highest
effect on EGFR suppression and induction of apoptosis in HNSCC cells. Similar to 
Ad5, E1A12S from human adenovirus types 2, 3, 9 and 12 suppressed EGFR, whereas
E1A12S of adenovirus types 4 and 40 had no effect on EGFR expression. Using
deletion mutants of E1A12S we have shown that interaction of E1A with p400, but
not p300 or pRB, is required for EGFR suppression and apoptosis. Inhibition of
p400 by short hairpin RNA confirmed that HNSCC cells with reduced p400 expression
were less sensitive to E1A-induced suppression of EGFR and apoptosis. p300
function was shown to be dispensable, as cells expressing E1A mutants that are
unable to bind p300, or p300 knockout cells, remained sensitive to E1A-induced
apoptosis. In summary, this study identifies p400 as an important mediator of
E1A-induced downregulation of EGFR and apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4591001
PMID: 17486071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2007 May;104(3-5):220-7. Epub 2007 Mar 24.

Opposite effects of CBP and p300 in glucocorticoid signaling in astrocytes.

Fonte C(1), Trousson A, Grenier J, Schumacher M, Massaad C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR788, University Paris-Sud (Paris XI), 80 rue du Général Leclerc,
94276 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre Cedex, France.

In the nervous system, glucocorticoid hormones play a major role during
development, and they continue to affect functional and structural plasticity
throughout life. Glucocorticoid actions are mediated by their cognate nuclear
receptor, the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). The transcriptional activity of the
GR is enhanced by the recruitment of one of the transcriptional coactivators of
the p160 family (SRCs), which are a docking platform for secondary coactivators
like CBP, or its close homologue p300. Here, we investigated the implication of
CBP and p300 coactivators in glial cells of the central and peripheral nervous
system, namely in primary cultures of astrocytes and in Schwann cells. We show
that both coregulators behave differently in either cell type. CBP enhances GR
transcriptional activation in astrocytes, and has no effect in Schwann cells,
whereas p300 exerts an inhibitory effect in both glial cells. Studies with p300
deletion mutants show that the repressive capacity of p300 is related to its
acetyltransferase activity. This work shows striking differences between CBP and 
p300 actions in astrocytes. Moreover, in astrocytes the opposite effects of CBP
and p300 could lead to a balance in the transactivation potency of the GR, in
order to fine tune the action of glucocorticoids.

PMID: 17475479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 May;56(5):1694-705.

Involvement of the constitutive complex formation of c-Ski/SnoN with Smads in the
impaired negative feedback regulation of transforming growth factor beta
signaling in scleroderma fibroblasts.

Jinnin M(1), Ihn H, Mimura Y, Asano Y, Tamaki K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The principal effect of transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1) on
mesenchymal cells is its stimulation of extracellular matrix synthesis. Previous 
reports indicated the significance of the autocrine TGFbeta loop in the
pathogenesis of scleroderma. The aim of this study was to examine c-Ski and SnoN,
principal molecules in the negative regulation of TGFbeta signaling, to further
understand the autocrine TGFbeta loop in scleroderma.
METHODS: Levels of expression of c-Ski/SnoN on cultured normal and scleroderma
fibroblasts were determined by Western blotting, Northern blotting, and
immunohistochemical staining. To determine the protein-protein interaction
between c-Ski/SnoN, Smads, and p300, immunoprecipitation was performed. A
transient transfection assay was performed to measure promoter activity of the
alpha2(I) collagen gene and the 3TP-Lux plasmid construct.
RESULTS: Scleroderma fibroblasts exhibited increased c-Ski/SnoN levels compared
with normal fibroblasts, both in vivo and in vitro. Although c-Ski/SnoN
constitutively formed a complex with Smads by immunoprecipitation, the inhibitory
effect of c-Ski/SnoN on the promoter activity of human alpha2(I) collagen and
3TP-Lux was impaired in scleroderma fibroblasts. Immunoprecipitation analyses
also revealed that overexpressed c-Ski/SnoN could not compete with p300 in these 
cells.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that impaired competition with p300 is the
possible cause of dysfunction of c-Ski/SnoN in scleroderma fibroblasts and that
this might contribute to maintenance of the autocrine TGFbeta loop in this
disease.

PMID: 17469184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 24;104(17):7009-14. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Four domains of p300 each bind tightly to a sequence spanning both
transactivation subdomains of p53.

Teufel DP(1), Freund SM, Bycroft M, Fersht AR.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Protein Engineering and Department of Chemistry, Cambridge
University, MRC Centre, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK.

The transcriptional coactivator p300 binds to and mediates the transcriptional
functions of the tetrameric tumor suppressor p53. Both proteins consist of
independently folded domains linked by intrinsically disordered sequences. A well
studied short sequence of the p53 transactivation domain, p53(15-29), binds
weakly to four folded domains of p300 [Taz1/cysteine-histidine-rich region 1
(CH1), Kix, Taz2/CH3, IBiD], with dissociation constants (K(D)) in the 100 muM
region. However, we found that a longer N-terminal transactivation domain
construct p53(1-57) bound tightly to each p300 domain. Taz2/CH3 had the greatest 
affinity (K(D) = 27 nM) and competes with the N-terminal domain of Mdm2 for the
p53 N terminus. p300 thus can protect the N terminus of p53 against the binding
of other proteins. Mutations of p53 that abrogate transactivation (L22Q/W23S,
W53Q/F54S) greatly weakened binding to each p300 domain, linking phenotypic
defects to weakened coactivator binding. We propose a complex between tetrameric 
p53 and p300 in which four domains of p300 wrap around the four transactivation
domains of p53.

PMCID: PMC1855428
PMID: 17438265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. EMBO J. 2007 May 2;26(9):2284-94. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

CBP/p300 are bimodal regulators of Wnt signaling.

Li J(1), Sutter C, Parker DS, Blauwkamp T, Fang M, Cadigan KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1048, USA.

Many Wnts influence cell behavior by a conserved signaling cascade that promotes 
the stabilization and nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin (beta-cat), which then
associates with TCF family members to activate target genes. The histone
acetyltransferase CREB binding protein (CBP) can bind to TCF and inhibit Wnt
signaling in Drosophila. In contrast, studies in vertebrates indicate a positive 
role for CBP and the closely related protein p300 as beta-cat binding
transcriptional co-activators. We address this discrepancy by demonstrating that 
in addition to its negative role, CBP has an essential positive role in Wnt
signaling in flies. CBP binds directly to the C-terminus of Armadillo (Arm, the
fly beta-cat) and is recruited to a Wnt-regulated enhancer (WRE) in a Wnt- and
Arm-dependent manner. In a human colorectal cancer cell line, we show that CBP
and p300 can inhibit Wnt signaling and demonstrate that human p300 can bind
directly to TCF4 in vitro. Our results argue that CBP/p300 has an evolutionarily 
conserved role as a buffer regulating TCF-beta-cat/Arm binding. Subsequent to
this interaction, it also has an essential role in mediating the transactivation 
activity of beta-cat/Arm.

PMCID: PMC1864967
PMID: 17410209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 1;67(7):3422-30.

Androgen deprivation increases p300 expression in prostate cancer cells.

Heemers HV(1), Sebo TJ, Debes JD, Regan KM, Raclaw KA, Murphy LM, Hobisch A,
Culig Z, Tindall DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Urology/Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Laboratory
Medicine/Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Standard therapy for nonorgan confined prostate cancer aims to block the
production or action of androgens. Although initially successful, antiandrogen
therapy eventually fails and androgen depletion independent (ADI) disease
emerges. Remarkably, ADI prostate cancers still rely on a functional androgen
receptor (AR). Aberrant expression of coregulatory proteins required for the
formation of productive AR transcriptional complexes is critical for ADI AR
activation. Previously, we have shown that the transcriptional coactivator p300
is required for ADI activation of the AR and is up-regulated in prostate cancer, 
in which its expression is associated with cell proliferation and predicts
aggressive tumor features. The mechanism responsible for the deregulated
expression of p300, however, remains elusive. Here, we show that p300 expression 
in prostate cancer cells is subject to androgen regulation. In several prostate
cancer model systems, addition of synthetic and natural androgens led to
decreased expression of p300 in a time-dependent and dose-dependent manner.
Experiments using AR antagonists or small interfering RNA targeting the AR
revealed that down-regulation of p300 depends entirely on the presence of a
functional AR. It is noteworthy that androgens down-regulated p300 protein
expression while leaving messenger levels unaltered. Conversely, both short-term 
and long-term androgen deprivation resulted in marked up-regulation of p300
expression. The androgen deprivation-induced increase in p300 expression was not 
affected by the addition of cytokines or growth factors or by cotreatment with
antiandrogens. Moreover, increased p300 expression upon androgen starvation is
crucial for prostate cancer cell proliferation, as loss of p300 expression
severely reduces expression of cyclins governing G(1)-S and G(2)-M cell cycle
transition and decreases 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation.

PMID: 17409453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 25;282(21):15476-83. Epub 2007 Apr 1.

Isolation and characterization of proteins associated with histone H3 tails in
vivo.

Heo K(1), Kim B, Kim K, Choi J, Kim H, Zhan Y, Ranish JA, An W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California 
Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

The histone H3 amino-terminal tails play an important role in regulating
chromatin transcription. Although the mechanisms by which the H3 tail modulates
transcription are not well understood, recent discoveries of specific
interactions of regulatory factors with H3 tails suggest that H3 tails are a key 
player in the precise regulation of transcription activity. To investigate the
recruitment-based action of H3 tails in chromatin transcription, we purified H3
tail-associated proteins from HeLa cells that stably express epitope-tagged H3
tails. This approach resulted in the identification of multiple histone
methyltransferase activities and transcription regulatory factors that are
specifically associated with expressed H3 tail domains. Point mutations of Lys-9 
and Lys-27 to block cellular modifications of the tail domains completely
abolished the association of specific factors, including HP1 and several
repressors. Importantly, our transcription analysis revealed that the purified
factors can significantly stimulate p300-mediated transcription from chromatin
templates. These results implicate that the H3 tail, when accessible in relaxed
chromatin, acts as a transcriptional regulator by mediating recruitment of
specific sets of cofactors.

PMID: 17403666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. FEBS Lett. 2007 Apr 17;581(8):1542-8. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Modulation of p300 binding by posttranslational modifications of the C-terminal
activation domain of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha.

Cho H(1), Ahn DR, Park H, Yang EG.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

Posttranslational modifications of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha)
influence HIF-mediated transcription, likely by affecting binding to
p300/cAMP-response element-binding protein (CBP). To systematically analyze the
HIF-1alpha-p300/CBP interaction, we developed a fluorescence polarization-based
binding assay, employing fluorescein-labeled peptides derived from the C-terminal
transactivation domain (C-TAD) of HIF-1alpha. After optimized for effectively
capturing p300/CBP, the assay was utilized for evaluating direct effects of
posttranslational modifications of the HIF-1alpha C-TAD on p300 binding. The
results demonstrated that asparagine hydroxylation and S-nitrosylation of
HIF-1alpha decrease p300 binding, while its phosphorylation does not affect p300 
binding, which was reconfirmed by competitive inhibition analyses using mutant
peptides.

PMID: 17382325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 May 1;16(9):1030-8. Epub 2007 Mar 20.

A heterozygous c-Maf transactivation domain mutation causes congenital cataract
and enhances target gene activation.

Perveen R(1), Favor J, Jamieson RV, Ray DW, Black GC.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service Department of 
Clinical Genetics, Central Manchester and Manchester Children's University
Hospitals NHS Trust, St Mary's Hospital, Hathersage Road, Manchester M13 0JH, UK.

MAF, one of a family of large Maf bZIP transcription factors, is mutated in human
developmental ocular disorders that include congenital cataract, microcornea,
coloboma and anterior segment dysgenesis. Expressed early in the developing lens 
vesicle, it is central to regulation of lens crystallin gene expression. We
report a semi-dominant mouse c-Maf mutation recovered after ENU mutatgenesis
which results in the substitution, D90V, at a highly conserved residue within the
N-terminal 35 amino-acid minimal transactivation domain (MTD). Unlike null and
loss-of-function c-Maf mutations, which cause severe runting and renal
abnormalities, the phenotype caused by the D90V mutation is isolated cataract. In
reporter assays, D90V results in increased promoter activation, a situation
similar to MTD mutations of NRL that also cause human disease. In contrast to
wild-type protein, the c-Maf D90V mutant protein is not inhibited by protein
kinase A-dependent pathways. The MTD of large Maf proteins has been shown to
interact with the transcriptional co-activator p300 and we demonstrate that c-Maf
D90V enhances p300 recruitment in a cell-type dependent manner. We observed the
same for the pathogenic human NRL MTD mutation S50T, which suggests a common
mechanism of action.

PMID: 17374726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 23;26(39):5733-40. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

The MN1-TEL myeloid leukemia-associated fusion protein has a dominant-negative
effect on RAR-RXR-mediated transcription.

van Wely KH(1), Meester-Smoor MA, Janssen MJ, Aarnoudse AJ, Grosveld GC,
Zwarthoff EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus MC, CA
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The translocation t(12;22)(p13;q11) creates an MN1-TEL fusion gene leading to
acute myeloid leukemia. MN1 is a transcription coactivator of the retinoic acid
and vitamin D receptors, and TEL (ETV6) is a member of the
E26-transformation-specific family of transcription factors. In MN1-TEL, the
transactivating domains of MN1 are combined with the DNA-binding domain of TEL.
We show that MN1-TEL inhibits retinoic acid receptor (RAR)-mediated
transcription, counteracts coactivators such as p160 and p300, and acts as a
dominant-negative mutant of MN1. Compared to MN1, the same transactivation
domains in MN1-TEL are poorly stimulated by p160, p300 or histone deacetylase
inhibitors, indicating that the block of RAR-mediated transcription by MN1-TEL is
caused by dysfunctional transactivation domains rather than by recruitment of
corepressors. The mechanism leading to myeloid leukemia in t(12;22) thus differs 
from the translocations that involve RAR itself.

PMID: 17369854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Mol Biol. 2007 Apr 27;368(2):388-97. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Inhibition of NF-kappaB acetylation and its transcriptional activity by Daxx.

Park J(1), Lee JH, La M, Jang MJ, Chae GW, Kim SB, Tak H, Jung Y, Byun B, Ahn JK,
Joe CO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Daejeon, 305-701, South Korea.

We propose a biochemical mechanism by which Daxx modulates NF-kappaB
transcriptional activity. Both chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) have confirmed Daxx-mediated
repression of transcriptional competence of NF-kappaB in HeLa cells.
Overexpression of Daxx repressed the expression of NF-kappaB-regulated genes such
as I kappa B alpha and IL8. Co-immunoprecipitation assay revealed the existence
of intermolecular association between endogenous Daxx and p65 subunit of
NF-kappaB stimulated by TNFalpha. Here, we suggest that Daxx-mediated repression 
of NF-kappaB transactivation correlates with the inhibition of p65 acetylation by
Daxx. Based on the finding that the Daxx binding N-terminal side of p65 includes 
the major sites of acetylation mediated by p300/CBP, we further propose that the 
physical interaction between Daxx and p65 provides a functional framework for the
inhibition of p65 acetylation by p300/CBP and subsequent repression of NF-kappaB 
transcriptional activity.

PMID: 17362989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 11;282(19):13994-4005. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

The chromatin remodeling factor Mi-2alpha acts as a novel co-activator for human 
c-Myb.

Saether T(1), Berge T, Ledsaak M, Matre V, Alm-Kristiansen AH, Dahle O, Aubry F, 
Gabrielsen OS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

The c-Myb protein belongs to a group of early hematopoietic transcription factors
that are important for progenitor generation and proliferation. These factors
have been hypothesized to participate in establishing chromatin patterns specific
for hematopoietic genes. In a two-hybrid screening we identified the chromatin
remodeling factor Mi-2alpha as an interaction partner for human c-Myb. The main
interacting domains were mapped to the N-terminal region of Mi-2alpha and the
DNA-binding domain of c-Myb. Surprisingly, functional analysis revealed that
Mi-2alpha, previously studied as a subunit in the NuRD co-repressor complex,
enhanced c-Myb-dependent reporter activation. Consistently, knock-down of
endogenous Mi-2alpha in c-Myb-expressing K562 cells, led to down-regulation of
the c-Myb target genes NMU and ADA. When wild-type and helicase-dead Mi-2alpha
were compared, the Myb-Mi-2alpha co-activation appeared to be independent of the 
ATPase/DNA helicase activity of Mi-2alpha. The rationale for the unexpected
co-activator function seems to lie in a dual function of Mi-2alpha, by which this
factor is able to repress transcription in a helicase-dependent and activate in a
helicase-independent fashion, as revealed by Gal4-tethering experiments.
Interestingly, desumoylation of c-Myb potentiated the Myb-Mi-2alpha
transactivational co-operation, as did co-transfection with p300.

PMID: 17344210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 15;67(4):1735-43.

Suppression of the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 response in cervical carcinoma
xenografts by proteasome inhibitors.

Birle DC(1), Hedley DW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied Molecular Oncology, Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess
Margaret Hospital and University of Toronto, 610 University Avenue, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Experimental data suggest therapeutic advantage from selective disruption of the 
hypoxia response. We recently found that the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib
decreases tumor carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) expression in colon cancer patients 
and herein report a companion laboratory study to test if this effect was the
result of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) inhibition. Human cervical (SiHa and
Me180) and colon (RKO) carcinoma cell lines were treated with bortezomib or the
structurally unrelated proteasome inhibitor MG132 in normoxic and hypoxic
conditions in vitro. Two different in vivo experiments investigated bortezomib
effects after single dose (2 mg/kg, 24 h) or longer exposure in severe combined
immunodeficient mice bearing SiHa xenografts. Treatment with either drug produced
accumulation of HIF-1alpha in vitro but strongly inhibited the production of CAIX
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) under hypoxia. This correlated with
more than 10-fold reduction in HIF-1 transcriptional activity under hypoxic
conditions. A similar effect of bortezomib was seen in vivo, using the
nitroimidazole probe EF5 to define regions of tumor hypoxia and a triple
immunofluorescence technique to measure the spatial distributions of HIF-1alpha
and CAIX. Plasma VEGF levels decreased by approximately 90% during treatment with
bortezomib, indicating that this agent can potently inhibit the hypoxia response 
in tumors.

PMID: 17308115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Eur J Hum Genet. 2007 Aug;15(8):837-42. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Confirmation of EP300 gene mutations as a rare cause of Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome.

Zimmermann N(1), Acosta AM, Kohlhase J, Bartsch O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany.

The Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS, MIM 180849), a dominant Mendelian disorder
with typical face, short stature, skeletal abnormalities, and mental retardation,
is usually caused by heterozygous mutations of the CREBBP gene, but recently,
EP300 gene mutations were reported in three individuals. Using quantitative PCR
(for the CREBBP and EP300 genes) and genomic sequencing (for the EP300 gene), we 
studied here 13 patients who had shown no mutation after genomic sequencing of
the CREBBP gene in a previous investigation. Two new disease-causing mutations
were identified, including a partial deletion of CREBBP and a 1-bp deletion in
EP300, c.7100delC (p.P2366fsX2401). The 1-bp deletion represents the fourth EP300
mutation reported to date and was identified in a patient with non-classical
RSTS. Based on the very similar structure of the CREBBP and EP300 genes and the
higher rate of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in EP300 (2.23 per individual) as 
compared to CREBBP (0.71 per individual) (P>0.001, Wilcoxon test), it may be
assumed that EP300 gene mutations should be as frequent as CREBBP gene mutations.
Based on the location of the EP300 gene mutations identified so far (outside the 
histone acetyl transferase domain) and the observed (although not very striking) 
phenotypical differences with the EP300 mutations, we propose that most EP300
mutations could be associated with other phenotypes, not classical RSTS.

PMID: 17299436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Aug 1;101(5):1252-65.

Concerted activation of the Mdm2 promoter by p72 RNA helicase and the
coactivators p300 and P/CAF.

Shin S(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

A scarcely studied and under-recognized feature of RNA helicases is their ability
to regulate gene transcription. In particular, very little is known about the
role of p72 RNA helicase in gene regulation. Here, we have analyzed how this
helicase may enhance promoter activity. We demonstrate that p72 RNA helicase
forms complexes with the homologous coactivators p300 and CBP in vitro and in
vivo, especially leading to an enhancement of the transactivation potential of
their C-termini. In addition, we show that the p300/CBP-associated protein
(P/CAF) also interacts with p72 RNA helicase, and both this interaction and the
binding to p300/CBP are mediated by the N-terminal 63 amino acids of p72 RNA
helicase. p300, P/CAF and p72 RNA helicase synergize to stimulate selected
promoters, including the Mdm2 one. Notably, downregulation of p72 RNA helicase
leads to reduced Mdm2 transcription. Furthermore, our data suggest that p72 RNA
helicase activates the Mdm2 promoter in a p53 dependent and independent manner.
Collectively, our results have unraveled a mechanism of how p72 RNA helicase can 
regulate gene transcription, namely by cooperating with p300/CBP and P/CAF.
Thereby, p72 RNA helicase may not only be involved in the p53-Mdm2 regulatory
loop, but also profoundly impact on the transcriptome through various CBP/p300
and P/CAF interacting proteins.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17226766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Med Genet. 2007 May;44(5):327-33. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Genetic heterogeneity in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: delineation of the phenotype 
of the first patients carrying mutations in EP300.

Bartholdi D, Roelfsema JH, Papadia F, Breuning MH, Niedrist D, Hennekam RC,
Schinzel A, Peters DJ.

BACKGROUND: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a congenital disorder
characterised by growth retardation, facial dysmorphisms, skeletal abnormalities 
and mental retardation. Broad thumbs and halluces are the hallmarks of the
syndrome. RSTS is associated with chromosomal rearrangements and mutations in the
CREB-binding protein gene (CREBBP), also termed CBP, encoding the CREB-binding
protein. Recently, it was shown that mutations in EP300, coding for the p300
protein, also cause RSTS. CBP and EP300 are highly homologous genes, which play
important roles as global transcriptional coactivators.
OBJECTIVE: To report the phenotype of the presently known patients with RSTS (n =
4) carrying germline mutations of EP300.
RESULTS: The patients with EP300 mutations displayed the typical facial gestalt
and malformation pattern compatible with the diagnosis of RSTS. However, three
patients exhibited much milder skeletal findings on the hands and feet than
typically observed in patients with RSTS.
CONCLUSIONS: Part of the clinical variability in RSTS is explained by genetic
heterogeneity. The diagnosis of RSTS must be expanded to include patients without
broad thumbs or halluces.

PMCID: PMC2597984
PMID: 17220215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Feb 14;413(2):137-40. Epub 2007 Jan 2.

p300 activation by Presenilin 1 but not by its M146L mutant.

Francis YI(1), Diss JK, Kariti M, Stephanou A, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Molecular Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

The transcriptional co-activator p300 plays an important role in regulating gene 
expression in a number of different cell types. We have shown that wild type (WT)
Presenilin 1 (PS1) stimulates the transcriptional activity ability of CREB
Binding Protein (CBP), a close homolog of p300, whereas the Alzheimer's disease
(AD) associated mutant of PS1 does not have this effect. A recent report has
suggested that mutant PS1 can also disrupt the TCF/beta-catenin/CBP interaction
but has no effect on the TCF/beta-catenin/p300 interaction. This suggests that
the malregulation of CBP, but not of p300, caused by mutation in PS1 may be
involved in the disease process. Here we show that wild type PS1 stimulates the
transcriptional activity ability of p300 whereas an Alzheimer's
disease-associated mutant of PS1 did not produce this effect. To our knowledge,
this is the first report that shows regulation of p300 activity by WT PS1 and not
by mutant PS1, indicating that like CBP, p300 can be differentially regulated by 
WT PS1 compared to its AD-associated mutant.

PMID: 17197080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007 Jun;66(6):782-9. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

Inhibition of interleukin 1-induced matrix metalloproteinase 13 expression in
human chondrocytes by interferon gamma.

Ahmad R(1), Qureshi HY, El Mabrouk M, Sylvester J, Ahmad M, Zafarullah M.

Author information: 
(1)K-5255 Mailloux, Hôpital Notre-Dame du CHUM, 1560 Sherbrooke East, Montréal,
Québec, Canada H2L 4M1. muhammad.zafarullah@umontreal.ca

BACKGROUND: Despite well-documented immunomodulation by interferon gamma
(IFNgamma), its role and mechanism of regulation of matrix metalloproteinase 13
(MMP13) gene expression in human chondrocytes is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the ability and mechanism of IFNgamma to suppress
interleukin 1 (IL1)-induced MMP13 expression in articular chondrocytes.
METHODS: Human chondrocytes were treated with IFNgamma or IL1beta alone or in
combination. MMP13 mRNA was analysed by semiquantitative reverse
transcriptase-PCR. MMP13 protein, phospho-signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 (STAT1) and p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase levels were
measured by western blotting. MMP13 promoter luciferase, cytomegalovirus cyclic
AMP response element-binding protein (CBP)/p300 plasmids and STAT1 small
interfering RNA (siRNA) were transfected by the calcium phosphate method.
IFNgamma receptor was also neutralised. Activator protein (AP) 1 activity was
monitored by the TransAM transcription factor kit. STAT1-CBP/p300 interaction was
studied by immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: IFNgamma potently suppressed IL1-induced expression of MMP13 and
promoter activity. Blockade with neutralising IFNgamma R1 antibody revealed that 
MMP13 inhibition by IFNgamma is mediated by the IFN receptor. IFNgamma-stimulated
activation of STAT1 was directly correlated with MMP13 suppression. Knockdown of 
the STAT1 gene by specific siRNA or its inhibition with fludarabine partially
restored the IL1beta induction of MMP13 expression and promoter activity.
IFNgamma did not alter AP1 binding ability but promoted physical interaction of
STAT1 and CBP/p300 coactivator. p300 overexpression reversed IFNgamma inhibition 
of endogenous MMP13 mRNA expression and exogenous MMP13 promoter activity.
CONCLUSION: IFNgamma, through its receptor, activates STAT1, which binds with
CBP/p300 coactivator, sequesters it from the cell system, and thus inhibits
transcriptional induction of the MMP13 gene in chondrocytes. IFNgamma and its
signalling pathways could be targeted therapeutically for diminishing IL1-induced
cartilage degradation by MMP13 in patients with arthritis.

PMCID: PMC1954643
PMID: 17179173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cell Cycle. 2006 Nov;5(22):2626-38. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

The role of Vpr in the regulation of HIV-1 gene expression.

Cui J(1), Tungaturthi PK, Ayyavoo V, Ghafouri M, Ariga H, Khalili K, Srinivasan
A, Amini S, Sawaya BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience & Center for Neurovirology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

Expression of the viral protein R, Vpr, of HIV-1 affects many biological events
in host cells including cell cycle progression, and modulates HIV-1 gene
transcription. Earlier studies implicating the cellular protein p21(WAF1) (p21)
in regulation of HIV-1 transcription, led us to investigate the functional and
physical interaction of Vpr and p21. Our results show that Vpr modestly activated
HIV-LTR in cells lacking p21 gene. Here, we describe the mechanisms by which p21 
and Vpr leading to stimulation of HIV-1 transcription. Data from the
protein-protein interaction experiments revealed the ability of Vpr, p21 and p300
to form a complex. Further, we show that, Vpr interacts with the N- and the
C-terminal domains of p21. Furthermore, in cells expressing Vpr, p21 localizes to
both the cytoplasm and the nucleus. Interestingly, expression of Vpr alleviates
p21-mediated inhibition of cell departure from G1 phase. Expression of a mutant
Vpr, with arginine 73 altered to serine, did not affect the ability of p21 to
cause cells arrest or its sub-cellular localization. These observations reveal a 
new cellular partner for Vpr, and provide a new therapeutic avenue for
controlling HIV-1 expression.

PMID: 17172832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2007 Mar;292(3):L799-812. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

TNF-alpha induces MMP-9 expression via activation of Src/EGFR, PDGFR/PI3K/Akt
cascade and promotion of NF-kappaB/p300 binding in human tracheal smooth muscle
cells.

Lee CW(1), Lin CC, Lin WN, Liang KC, Luo SF, Wu CB, Wang SW, Yang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang
Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Rd., Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.

TNF-alpha has been shown to induce matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) expression,
which, in turn, degrades extracellular matrix in the inflammatory responses.
However, the inductive mechanisms of the MMP-9 by TNF-alpha remain unclear. In
human tracheal smooth muscle cells, TNF-alpha induced MMP-9 expression and Akt
phosphorylation in a time-dependent manner, which was attenuated by the
inhibitors of Src (PP1), epidermal growth factor receptor (AG1478), PDGFR
(AG1296), and PI3K (LY294002), respectively, revealed by reporter gene assay,
RT-PCR, zymographic, and Western blot analyses. Transfection with the dominant
negative mutants of c-Src (KM, K295M [kinase inactive mutant]), p85, and Akt (KA,
K179A) also reduced MMP-9 expression. These findings indicated that MMP-9
expression was regulated by PI3K/Akt via the transactivation of growth factor
receptors. Furthermore, LY294002 or wortmannin inhibited Akt phosphorylation but 
had no effect on NF-kappaB translocation, which was blocked by helenalin. Mutated
NF-kappaB DNA binding element in the MMP-9 promoter and helenalin also attenuated
MMP-9 expression, suggesting that PI3K/Akt and NF-kappaB independently regulated 
MMP-9 expression. To support this notion, immunofluorescence staining and
immunoprecipitation were applied to characterize the transcription factors
involved in these responses. The results showed that LY294002 and curcumin
blocked Akt translocation into nucleus. In contrast, p300, acetyl-histone (H3),
and NF-kappaB p65 were found to be coimmunoprecipitated with the phosphorylated
Akt, indicating that these components associated with the MMP-9 promoter are
revealed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Thus, our study provides a new
insight into the molecular mechanisms that TNF-alpha-stimulated Akt
phosphorylation mediated through transactivation of Src and growth factor
receptors may stimulate the recruitment of p300, assemble transcription factor
(p65), and then lead to MMP-9 expression.

PMID: 17158602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10824-32.

Oncogenic serine-threonine kinase receptor-associated protein modulates the
function of Ewing sarcoma protein through a novel mechanism.

Anumanthan G(1), Halder SK, Friedman DB, Datta PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center and 
Mass Spectrometry Research Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Although much is known about the oncogenic functions of chimeric Ewing sarcoma
(EWS) fusion proteins that result from chromosomal translocations, the cellular
role of the normal EWS protein is not well characterized. We have previously
identified a WD domain-containing protein, serine-threonine kinase
receptor-associated protein (STRAP), which inhibits transforming growth factor
beta (TGF-beta) signaling through interaction with receptors and Smad7 and
promotes growth and enhances tumorigenicity. Here, we report the interaction
between STRAP and EWS using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization,
time-of-flight and tandem mass spectrometry. Although STRAP is localized in both 
cytoplasm and nucleus, nuclear STRAP colocalizes and associates specifically with
EWS in the nucleus through its NH(2) and COOH termini. We have found that normal 
EWS protein is up-regulated in human cancers, which correlates with the
up-regulation of STRAP in 71% of colorectal cancers and 54% of lung cancers,
suggesting a cooperative role of these two proteins in human cancers. TGF-beta
has no effect on STRAP and EWS interaction. However, EWS, like STRAP, attenuates 
TGF-beta-dependent transcription. STRAP inhibits EWS-dependent p300-mediated
transactivation of EWS target genes, such as ApoCIII and c-fos, in a
TGF-beta-independent manner. Interestingly, we have shown that STRAP blocks the
interaction between EWS and p300, whereas the complex formation between STRAP and
EWS is not affected by p300. These results suggest that STRAP inhibits the
transactivation function of EWS by displacing p300 from the functional
transcriptional complex. Thus, this study provides a novel TGF-beta-independent
function of STRAP and describes a mechanism by which STRAP regulates the function
of oncogenic EWS protein.

PMID: 17108118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Mar 1;100(4):929-40.

The interaction of adenovirus E1A with p300 family members modulates cellular
gene expression to reduce tumorigenicity.

Miura TA(1), Cook JL, Potter TA, Ryan S, Routes JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Aurora, CO, USA.

The use of adenovirus serotype 2 or 5 (Ad2/5) E1A as therapy for human malignancy
requires an understanding of the mechanisms involved in E1A-induced tumor
suppression. The prevailing use of E1A in the treatment of human malignancy
stresses the non-immunologically mediated, anti-tumorigenic activities of E1A.
However, the capacity of E1A to elicit a NK-cell and T-cell anti-tumor immune
response and to sensitize tumor cells to lysis by immune effector molecules
utilized by NK cells and T cells is also an important component of the
anti-tumorigenic activity of E1A. This immune-mediated anti-tumorigenic activity 
of E1A is not shared by functionally similar viral oncoproteins such as the human
papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) E7 oncoprotein and is dependent on the capacity of
E1A to interact with transcriptional coadapter, p300. To further define the
molecular mechanisms whereby E1A reduces tumorigenicity, we compared total
cellular gene expression in H4 cells, a human fibrosarcoma cell line, to gene
expression in H4 cells stably expressing E1A, E7, or mutant forms of E1A that do 
not bind p300. The expression of E1A, but not E7, in H4 cells modulated the
expression of cellular genes that may promote apoptosis, enhance immunogenicity
and reduce tumor cell metastasis. The difference in the ability of E1A and E7 to 
modulate the expression of cellular genes that may influence tumorigenicity was
largely attributable to distinct interactions of E1A and E7 with p300. Results of
this study will be useful in designing novel strategies to augment the
anti-tumorigenic activities of E1A.

PMID: 17063489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Feb;81(2):557-66. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Mechanisms underlying TGF-beta1-induced expression of VEGF and Flk-1 in mouse
macrophages and their implications for angiogenesis.

Jeon SH(1), Chae BC, Kim HA, Seo GY, Seo DW, Chun GT, Kim NS, Yie SW, Byeon WH,
Eom SH, Ha KS, Kim YM, Kim PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Bioscience, School of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Kangwon National University, Chunchon, Korea.

TGF-beta induces vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a potent angiogenic
factor, at the transcriptional and protein levels in mouse macrophages. VEGF
secretion in response to TGF-beta1 is enhanced by hypoxia and by overexpression
of Smad3/4 and hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha/beta (HIF-1alpha/beta). To examine
the transcriptional regulation of VEGF by TGF-beta1, we constructed mouse
reporters driven by the VEGF promoter. Overexpression of HIF-1alpha/beta or
Smad3/4 caused a slight increase of VEGF promoter activity in the presence of
TGF-beta1, whereas cotransfection of HIF-1alpha/beta and Smad3/4 had a marked
effect. Smad2 was without effect on this promoter activity, whereas Smad7
markedly reduced it. Analysis of mutant promoters revealed that the one putative 
HIF-1 and two Smad-binding elements were critical for TGF-beta1-induced VEGF
promoter activity. The relevance of these elements was confirmed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. p300, which has histone acetyltransferase activity,
augmented transcriptional activity in response to HIF-1alpha/beta and Smad3/4,
and E1A, an inhibitor of p300, inhibited it. TGF-beta1 also increased the
expression of fetal liver kinase-1 (Flk-1), a major VEGF receptor, and TGF-beta1 
and VEGF stimulated pro-matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) and active-MMP-9
expression, respectively. The results from the present study indicate that
TGF-beta1 can activate mouse macrophages to express angiogenic mediators such as 
VEGF, MMP-9, and Flk-1.

PMID: 17053163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Pathol. 2006 Dec;210(4):390-7.

The presence of an intronic deletion in p73 and high levels of ZEB1 alter the
TAp73/DeltaTAp73 ratio in colorectal carcinomas.

Domínguez G(1), Peña C, Silva J, García JM, García V, Rodríguez R, Cantos B,
Citores MJ, España P, Bonilla F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro,
Madrid, Spain. domingg@hotmail.com

TAp73 variants largely mimic p53 suppressor activities, while DeltaTAp73 forms
act as oncogenes through the inactivation of p53 and TAp73. The present study
analysed how TAp73 and DeltaTAp73 levels might be affected by the presence of a
73 bp deletion in a regulatory region of p73. The clinical relevance of this
deletion was also examined. ZEB1 can bind to the region repressing p73
transcription in vitro. The relationship between ZEB1 and p73 variant expression 
levels was studied in the context of this deletion and the levels of the ZEB1
cofactors p300 and CtBP. Tumour and normal tissue from 81 colorectal cancer
patients was analysed to evaluate firstly the levels of TAp73, DeltaTAp73
(DeltaEx2p73, DeltaEx2/3p73, and DeltaNp73), ZEB1, p300, and CtBP by quantitative
real-time RT-PCR, and secondly the presence of the 73 bp deletion. Tumour
characteristics were examined in each patient. Suppressor and oncogenic isoforms 
of p73 were co-up-regulated in tumour tissues. Overexpression of p73 variants was
associated with adverse tumour features. The 73 bp deletion was present in 40% of
the patients and was associated with adverse pathological parameters of the
tumours and also with TAp73 down-regulation. In those cases harbouring the
deletion, the levels of ZEB1 and those of DeltaEx2p73, DeltaEx2/3p73, and
DeltaNp73 correlated directly. Variations in the concentration of p300 affected
the observed correlations between ZEB1 and the different p73 variants. In
conclusion, in colorectal cancer, the 73 bp deletion in the first intron of the
p73 gene and different expression levels of ZEB1 and p300 may act in concert to
affect the ratio of TAp73/DeltaTAp73 forms, favouring p73 oncogenic variants. In 
addition, up-regulation of p73 oncogenic isoforms predicts a poor prognosis based
on its relationship with advanced tumour stage.

PMID: 17029218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006 Nov 1;41(9):1392-403. Epub 2006 Jul 27.

8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine suppresses NO production and COX-2 activity via
Rac1/STATs signaling in LPS-induced brain microglia.

Kim HS(1), Ye SK, Cho IH, Jung JE, Kim DH, Choi S, Kim YS, Park CG, Kim TY, Lee
JW, Chung MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Chungno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

Free 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (oh(8)dG), a nucleoside of 8-hydroxyguanine
(oh(8)Gua), present in cytosol is not incorporated into DNA. However, nothing is 
known about its biological function when it presents in cytosol as a free form.
We demonstrate here for the first time that oh(8)dG inhibits lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced nitric oxide (NO) production and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) activity,
and both gene transcriptions in microglia. Furthermore, oh(8)dG reduced mRNA
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokine, such as IL-1beta, IL-6, and TNF-alpha, in
activated BV2 cells. We also found that oh(8)dG suppressed reactive oxygen
species (ROS) production through reduction of NADPH oxidase activity and blocked 
Rac1/STATs signal cascade. Finally, oh(8)dG suppressed recruitment of STATs and
p300 to the iNOS and COX-2 promoters, and inhibited H3 histone acetylation. Taken
together, these results provide new aspects of oh(8)dG as an anti-inflammatory
agent.

PMID: 17023266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2006 Dec;29(5):355-60. Epub 2006 Jul 18.

A simple method to screen ligands of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
delta.

Cho MC(1), Yoon HE, Kang JW, Park SW, Yang Y, Hong JT, Song EY, Paik SG, Kim SH, 
Yoon DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience & Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701,
Republic of Korea.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are transcription factors
that belong to the nuclear receptor superfamily directly modulating gene
expression by binding to specific ligands. Recently, it has been reported that
PPARdelta ligands play an essential role in improvement of metabolic disorders
and skin disorders. We introduce an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to 
screen new PPARdelta ligands. This method is based on the activation mechanism of
PPARdelta where the ligand binding to PPARdelta induces the interaction of the
receptor with transcriptional co-activators. We optimized a simple ELISA method
for screening PPARdelta ligands. Among co-activators such as SRC-1, TIF-2, and
p300, PPARdelta had more strong binding with SRC-1 in an ELISA system. GW501516
and linoleic acid, the well-known ligands of PPARdelta, increased the binding
between PPARdelta and co-activators in a ligand dose-dependent manner. The
recruitment of co-activator SRC-1 was also more effective than those of TIF-2 and
p300. We optimized and developed a novel and useful ELISA system for the mass
screening of PPARdelta ligands. This screening system may be useful in the
development of drugs for metabolic disorders and skin disorders.

PMID: 16930961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Hum Pathol. 2006 Aug;37(8):1085-92. Epub 2006 Jun 19.

p300 and p53 levels determine activation of HIF-1 downstream targets in invasive 
breast cancer.

Vleugel MM(1), Shvarts D, van der Wall E, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3508 GA Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

In previous studies, we noted that overexpression of hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-1alpha in breast cancer, especially the diffuse form, does not always lead 
to functional activation of its downstream genes. Transcriptional activity of
HIF-1 may be repressed by p53 through competition for transcriptional
coactivators such as p300. The aim of this study was therefore to explore the
role of p53 and p300 in relation to overexpression of HIF-1alpha and activation
of HIF-1 downstream genes in invasive breast cancer. p300 immunohistochemistry
was performed in a group of 183 early-stage invasive breast cancers, and related 
to p53 accumulation, overexpression of HIF-1alpha, and several HIF-1 downstream
genes. p300 was expressed in varying degrees in 84% of invasive breast cancers.
p300 staining intensity correlated positively with HIF-1alpha expression (P =
.04), p53 accumulation (P = .001), and overexpression of glucose transporter 1
(GLUT-1) (P < .001), a glucose transporter downstream target gene of HIF-1.
GLUT-1 levels were significantly associated with p300 in HIF-1alpha positive
patients (P = .02). p53 accumulation significantly positively correlated with
carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX)/GLUT-1 coexpression in HIF-1alpha-positive patients 
(P = .007). p53 accumulation/high p300 levels, the most favorable situation for
HIF-1 downstream activation, were significantly associated with GLUT-1
overexpression (P = .01) and coexpression of CAIX/GLUT-1 (P = .03), compared with
low p53/low p300 levels, the most unfavorable situation for HIF-1 downstream
activation. p300 is a cofactor highly associated with p53 accumulation and
HIF-1alpha levels in invasive breast cancer. Furthermore, low levels of p300 may 
explain absence of downstream effects in HIF-1alpha-overexpressing cancers, an
effect that seems to be enhanced by wild-type levels of p53. This underlines the 
importance of p300 levels and p53 accumulation in the HIF-1-regulated response
toward hypoxia.

PMID: 16867872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Oncogene. 2007 Feb 1;26(5):781-7. Epub 2006 Jul 24.

Relationship between E1A binding to cellular proteins, c-myc activation and
S-phase induction.

Baluchamy S(1), Sankar N, Navaraj A, Moran E, Thimmapaya B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

We recently showed that p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP) plays an important role
in maintaining cells in G0/G1 phase by keeping c-myc in a repressed state.
Consistent with this, adenovirus E1A oncoprotein induces c-myc in a
p300-dependent manner, and the c-myc induction is linked to S-phase induction.
The induction of S phase by E1A is dependent on its binding to and inactivating
several host proteins including p300/CBP. To determine whether there is a
correlation between the host proteins binding to the N-terminal region of E1A,
activation of c-myc and induction of S phase, we assayed the c-myc and S-phase
induction in quiescent human cells by infecting them with Ad N-terminal E1A
mutants with mutations that specifically affect binding to different
chromatin-associated proteins including pRb, p300, p400 and p300/CBP-associated
factor (PCAF). We show that the mutants that failed to bind to p300 or pRb were
severely defective for c-myc and S-phase induction. The induction of c-myc and S 
phase was only moderately affected when E1A failed to bind to p400. Furthermore, 
analysis of the E1A mutants that fail to bind to p300, and both p300 and PCAF
suggests that PCAF may also play a role in c-myc repression, and that the two
chromatin-associated proteins may repress c-myc independently. In summary, these 
results suggest that c-myc deregulation by E1A through its interaction with these
chromatin-associated proteins is an important step in the E1A-mediated cell cycle
deregulation and possibly in cell transformation.

PMID: 16862175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jul;26(14):5544-57.

Multitasking C2H2 zinc fingers link Zac DNA binding to coordinated regulation of 
p300-histone acetyltransferase activity.

Hoffmann A(1), Barz T, Spengler D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuroendocrinology, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry,
Kraepelinstrasse 2-10, D-80804 Munich, Germany.

Zac is a C(2)H(2) zinc finger protein that regulates apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest through DNA binding and transactivation. The coactivator proteins p300/CBP
enhance transactivation through their histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity by
modulating chromatin structure. Here, we show that p300 increases Zac
transactivation in a strictly HAT-dependent manner. Whereas the classic
recruitment model proposes that coactivation simply depends on the capacity of
the activator to recruit the coactivator, we demonstrate that coordinated binding
of Zac zinc fingers and C terminus to p300 regulates HAT function by increasing
histone and acetyl coenzyme A affinities and catalytic activity. This concerted
regulation of HAT function is mediated via the KIX and CH3 domains of p300 in an 
interdependent manner. Interestingly, Zac zinc fingers 6 and 7 simultaneously
play key roles in DNA binding and p300 regulation. Our findings demonstrate, for 
the first time, that C(2)H(2) zinc fingers can link DNA binding to HAT signaling 
and suggest a dynamic role for DNA-binding proteins in the enzymatic control of
transcription.

PMCID: PMC1592709
PMID: 16809786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. FEBS Lett. 2006 Jul 10;580(16):3787-93. Epub 2006 Jun 9.

Leucine zipper-like domain is required for tumor suppressor ING2-mediated
nucleotide excision repair and apoptosis.

Wang Y(1), Wang J, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science, Jack Bell Research Centre,
Vancouver Coastal Health Research Institute, University of British Columbia, 2660
Oak Street, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6H 3Z6.

The plant homodomain (PHD) of ING2 was shown to regulate p53-dependent apoptosis 
through phosphoinositides signaling. However, the role of a predicted leucine
zipper-like (LZL) motif in N-terminus of ING2 is unclear. Here, we show that LZL 
motif is critical for the proper functions of ING2 in DNA repair, apoptosis and
chromatin remodeling after UV irradiation. Deletion of LZL domain also abrogated 
the association between ING2 and p53, but not between ING2 and p300, suggesting
that ING2 modulates p53-dependent chromatin remodeling, apoptosis and DNA repair 
by functioning as a scaffold protein to mediate the interaction between p53 and
p300.

PMID: 16782091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Carcinogenesis. 2006 Nov;27(11):2201-8. Epub 2006 May 15.

Associations of genetic variants in the estrogen receptor coactivators PPARGC1A, 
PPARGC1B and EP300 with familial breast cancer.

Wirtenberger M(1), Tchatchou S, Hemminki K, Schmutzhard J, Sutter C, Schmutzler
RK, Meindl A, Wappenschmidt B, Kiechle M, Arnold N, Weber BH, Niederacher D,
Bartram CR, Burwinkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, Helmholtz-University Group
Molecular Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg, Germany.
m.wirtenberger@dkfz.de

The mitogen effect of the ovarian steroid estrogen is a strong risk factor for
breast cancer development. This effect is mainly mediated by the estrogen
receptor alpha, a hormone inducible transcription factor, which activates gene
expression through recruiting multiple coactivators, such as PPARGC1A, PPARGC1B
and EP300. We tested the hypothesis that non-conservative, putative functional
amino acid exchanges in PPARGC1A, PPARGC1B and EP300 act as low-penetrance
familial breast cancer risk factors. The analysis of 816 BRCA1/2
mutation-negative familial breast cancer patients and 1012 controls revealed an
association of the PPARGC1A Thr612Met polymorphism with familial breast cancer
(OR = 1.35, 95% CI 1.00-1.81, P = 0.049), high-risk familial breast cancer (OR = 
1.51, 95% CI 1.08-2.12, P = 0.017) and bilateral familial breast cancer (OR =
2.30, 95% CI 1.24-4.28, P = 0.009). Logistic regression analyses of the PPARGC1B 
Ala203Pro variant showed an increased familial breast cancer risk of heterozygous
and homozygous variant allele carriers (OR = 1.48, 95% CI 1.15-1.91, P = 0.002). 
The genotype-combination analysis of the associated PPARGC1A Thr612Met variant
and the associated PPARGC1B Ala203Pro variant suggests an allele dose-dependent
breast cancer risk (P(trend) = 0.0004). Our results indicate for the first time
the importance of inherited variants in the estrogen receptor coactivator genes
PPARGC1A and PPARGC1B for familial breast cancer susceptibility. Owing to their
impact on estrogen signaling, these polymorphisms might also influence adjuvant
anti-estrogen therapy, using agents such as tamoxifen and raloxifen, and outcome 
of breast cancer patients.

PMID: 16704985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. FEBS Lett. 2006 May 29;580(13):3217-22. Epub 2006 May 4.

Regulation of histone acetyltransferase activity of p300 and PCAF by
proto-oncogene protein DEK.

Ko SI(1), Lee IS, Kim JY, Kim SM, Kim DW, Lee KS, Woo KM, Baek JH, Choo JK, Seo
SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Sciences, Chung-Ang University,
Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea.

The proto-oncogene protein DEK has been implicated in the t(6;9) chromosomal
translocation associated with a subtype of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML),
which results in the formation of a DEK-CAN fusion protein. Histone acetylation
is an important post-translational modification which is involved in
transcriptional regulation. In this study, we report that the acidic domain
containing protein DEK interacts with histones and exerts a potent inhibitory
effect on both p300 and PCAF-mediated histone acetyltransferase activity and
transcription. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, we have demonstrated
that the recruitment of DEK to the appropriate promoter induces the histone H3
and H4 hypoacetylation of chromatin. Collectively, our data illustrate the
important regulatory role played by protein DEK in transcriptional regulation,
and suggest that transcription-regulating acidic domain regions may play a role
in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 16696975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 30;345(2):623-30. Epub 2006 May 2.

Functional cross-talk between p73beta and NF-kappaB mediated by p300.

Ryou SM(1), Kang KH, Jeong MH, Kim JW, An JH, Lee SY, Jang S, Song PI, Choi KH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, College of Natural
Sciences, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

p73beta is associated with induction of apoptosis or cellular growth arrest,
while NF-kappaB is closely related with promotion of resistance to programmed
cell death. These biologically opposing activities between p73beta and NF-kappaB 
propose a regulatory mechanism of critical turning on/off in cellular apoptotic
or survival responses. In this study, we demonstrate that NF-kappaB-mediated
transactivation is specifically downregulated by p73beta; conversely,
p73beta-transactivation is negatively regulated by functional expression of p65, 
NF-kappaB RelA subunit. The p73beta transactivation domain (TA) and p65
NH2-terminus are crucial for their negative regulation of p65- and
p73beta-mediated transactivation, respectively. Furthermore, p65- or
p73beta-interaction with p300 is reciprocally inhibited by their competitive
binding to p300 in a restrict amount-dependent manner. Likewise, both
p73beta-activated apoptosis and p65-dependent increase of cell viability are
reciprocally repressed by p65 and p73beta, respectively. These results have
important implications for p300-mediated regulatory mechanism between p73beta-
and p65-transactivation, by which both p73beta and NF-kappaB could mutually
affect on their biological activities. Therefore, we propose that p300 is a
transactivational regulator of competitively balanced cross-talk between p73beta 
and p65.

PMID: 16696941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006 Oct;291(4):C699-709. Epub 2006 May 3.

Muscle cell survival mediated by the transcriptional coactivators p300 and PCAF
displays different requirements for acetyltransferase activity.

Kuninger D(1), Wright A, Rotwein P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239-3098, USA.

Normal skeletal muscle development requires the proper orchestration of genetic
programs by myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs). The actions of the MRF protein
MyoD are enhanced by the transcriptional coactivators p300 and the
p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF). We previously described C2 skeletal myoblasts 
lacking expression of insulin-like growth factor-II (IGF-II) that underwent
progressive apoptotic death when incubated in differentiation-promoting medium.
Viability of these cells was sustained by addition of IGF analogs or unrelated
peptide growth factors. We now show that p300 or PCAF maintains myoblast
viability as effectively as added growth factors through mechanisms requiring the
acetyltransferase activity of PCAF but not of p300. The actions of p300 to
promote cell survival were not secondary to increased expression of known MyoD
targets, as evidenced by results of gene microarray experiments, but rather
appeared to be mediated by induction of other genes, including fibroblast growth 
factor-1 (FGF-1). Conditioned culture medium from cells expressing p300 increased
myoblast viability, and this was blocked by pharmacological inhibition of FGF
receptors. Our results define a role for p300 in promoting cell survival, which
is independent of its acetyltransferase activity and acts at least in part
through FGF-1.

PMID: 16672693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Apr;14(2):293-7.

[Regulatory effect of curcumin on p300 and HDAC1 in B-NHL cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu Q(1), Chen Y, Li XG, Tang YY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of curcumin on
proliferation of B-NHL Raji cell line and explore the relationship between this
effect and regulatory expression of p300 and HDAC1 transcription. The in vitro
cultured Raji cells were treated with curcumin at various concentrations (6.25-50
micromol/L) and at different time points (0, 6, 12, 24 and 48 hours), the
inhibitory ratio of cell growth was measured by MTT assay, the cell apoptosis
rate was detected by flow cytometry with Annexin V-FITC/PI double staining, the
changes of p300 and HDAC1 mRNA expression and protein level in Raji cells were
determined by RT-PCR and Western blot. The results showed that the curcumin could
inhibit Raji cell proliferation in significant time-and concentration-dependent
manners, IC50 at 24 hours was 25 micromol/L; the curcumin could induce apoptosis 
of Raji cells in concentration-dependent manner, apoptosis rate was
14.38%-61.18%. The curcumin significantly inhibited activity and expression of
p300 and HDAC1. At IC50 concentration, expression of p300 and HDAC1 mRNA and
protein level decreased with time-dependent manner, difference between tested and
control groups was significant (P < 0.05). It is concluded that the curcumin can 
inhibit proliferation of B-NHL Raji cells and promote apoptosis of those cells.
Curcumin can inhibit the activity and expression of the transcriptional
co-activator p300 and HDAC1, which may be involved in its pharmacological
mechanisms on B lymphoma cells.

PMID: 16638200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. BMC Genomics. 2006 Apr 25;7:90.

Differential expression of selected histone modifier genes in human solid
cancers.

Ozdag H(1), Teschendorff AE, Ahmed AA, Hyland SJ, Blenkiron C, Bobrow L,
Veerakumarasivam A, Burtt G, Subkhankulova T, Arends MJ, Collins VP, Bowtell D,
Kouzarides T, Brenton JD, Caldas C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hutchison/MRC Research Centre, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2XZ, UK. hilalozdag@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Post-translational modification of histones resulting in chromatin
remodelling plays a key role in the regulation of gene expression. Here we report
characteristic patterns of expression of 12 members of 3 classes of chromatin
modifier genes in 6 different cancer types: histone acetyltransferases (HATs)-
EP300, CREBBP, and PCAF; histone deacetylases (HDACs)- HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC4,
HDAC5, HDAC7A, and SIRT1; and histone methyltransferases (HMTs)- SUV39H1and
SUV39H2. Expression of each gene in 225 samples (135 primary tumours, 47 cancer
cell lines, and 43 normal tissues) was analysedby QRT-PCR, normalized with 8
housekeeping genes, and given as a ratio by comparison with a universal reference
RNA.
RESULTS: This involved a total of 13,000 PCR assays allowing for rigorous
analysis by fitting a linear regression model to the data. Mutation analysis of
HDAC1, HDAC2, SUV39H1, and SUV39H2 revealed only two out of 181 cancer samples
(both cell lines) with significant coding-sequence alterations. Supervised
analysis and Independent Component Analysis showed that expression of many of
these genes was able to discriminate tumour samples from their normal
counterparts. Clustering based on the normalized expression ratios of the 12
genes also showed that most samples were grouped according to tissue type. Using 
a linear discriminant classifier and internal cross-validation revealed that with
as few as 5 of the 12 genes, SIRT1, CREBBP, HDAC7A, HDAC5 and PCAF, most samples 
were correctly assigned.
CONCLUSION: The expression patterns of HATs, HDACs, and HMTs suggest these genes 
are important in neoplastic transformation and have characteristic patterns of
expression depending on tissue of origin, with implications for potential
clinical application.

PMCID: PMC1475574
PMID: 16638127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Br J Cancer. 2006 May 8;94(9):1326-32.

Absence of p300 induces cellular phenotypic changes characteristic of epithelial 
to mesenchyme transition.

Krubasik D(1), Iyer NG, English WR, Ahmed AA, Vias M, Roskelley C, Brenton JD,
Caldas C, Murphy G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.

Erratum in
    Br J Cancer. 2006 Jul 17;95(2):245.

p300 is a transcriptional cofactor and prototype histone acetyltransferase
involved in regulating multiple cellular processes. We generated p300 deficient
(p300-) cells from the colon carcinoma cell line HCT116 by gene targeting.
Comparison of epithelial and mesenchymal proteins in p300- with parental HCT116
cells showed that a number of genes involved in cell and extracellular matrix
interactions, typical of 'epithelial to mesenchyme transition' were
differentially regulated at both the RNA and protein level. p300- cells were
found to have aggressive 'cancer' phenotypes, with loss of cell-cell adhesion,
defects in cell-matrix adhesion and increased migration through collagen and
matrigel. Although migration was shown to be metalloproteinase mediated, these
cells actually showed a downregulation or no change in the level of key
metalloproteinases, indicating that changes in cellular adhesion properties can
be critical for cellular mobility.

PMCID: PMC2361417
PMID: 16622451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Blood. 2006 Jul 15;108(2):518-24. Epub 2006 Apr 11.

Melatonin suppresses macrophage cyclooxygenase-2 and inducible nitric oxide
synthase expression by inhibiting p52 acetylation and binding.

Deng WG(1), Tang ST, Tseng HP, Wu KK.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Research Center, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Division
of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at Houston, 77030, USA.

Melatonin has been shown to be produced by nonpineal cells and possess
anti-inflammatory actions in animal models. In the present study, we tested the
hypothesis that melatonin suppresses the expression of proinflammatory genes such
as cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) and inducible nitric oxide synthase (INOS) by a common
transcriptional mechanism. Melatonin but not tryptophan or serotonin inhibited
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced COX-2 and iNOS protein levels and promoter
activities in RAW 264.7 cells in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. LPS 
or LPS plus interferon-gamma (IFNgamma) increased binding of all 5 isoforms of
NF-kappaB to COX-2 and iNOS promoters. Melatonin selectively inhibited p52
binding without affecting p100 expression, p52 generation from p100, or p52
nuclear translocation. p52 acetylation was enhanced by LPS, which was abrogated
by melatonin. Melatonin inhibited p300 histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity
and abrogated p300-augmented COX-2 and iNOS expression. HAT inhibitors suppressed
LPS-induced p52 binding and acetylation to an extent similar to melatonin, and
melatonin did not potentiate the effect of HAT inhibitors. These results suggest 
that melatonin inhibits COX-2 and iNOS transcriptional activation by inhibiting
p300 HAT activity, thereby suppressing p52 acetylation, binding, and
transactivation.

PMCID: PMC1895491
PMID: 16609073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Blood. 2006 Feb 15;107(4):1733-5; author reply 1735.

More on Myb in myelofibrosis: molecular analyses of MYB and EP300 in 55 patients 
with myeloproliferative disorders.

Steensma DP, Pardanani A, Stevenson WS, Hoyt R, Kiu H, Grigg AP, Szer J, Juneja
S, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS, Roberts AW.

Comment on
    Blood. 2005 May 1;105(9):3480-7.

PMCID: PMC1895422
PMID: 16461764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;26(3):789-809.

Conditional knockout mice reveal distinct functions for the global
transcriptional coactivators CBP and p300 in T-cell development.

Kasper LH(1), Fukuyama T, Biesen MA, Boussouar F, Tong C, de Pauw A, Murray PJ,
van Deursen JM, Brindle PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 N.
Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The global transcriptional coactivators CREB-binding protein (CBP) and the
closely related p300 interact with over 312 proteins, making them among the most 
heavily connected hubs in the known mammalian protein-protein interactome. It is 
largely uncertain, however, if these interactions are important in specific cell 
lineages of adult animals, as homozygous null mutations in either CBP or p300
result in early embryonic lethality in mice. Here we describe a Cre/LoxP
conditional p300 null allele (p300flox) that allows for the temporal and
tissue-specific inactivation of p300. We used mice carrying p300flox and a CBP
conditional knockout allele (CBPflox) in conjunction with an Lck-Cre transgene to
delete CBP and p300 starting at the CD4- CD8- double-negative thymocyte stage of 
T-cell development. Loss of either p300 or CBP led to a decrease in CD4+ CD8+
double-positive thymocytes, but an increase in the percentage of CD8+
single-positive thymocytes seen in CBP mutant mice was not observed in p300
mutants. T cells completely lacking both CBP and p300 did not develop normally
and were nonexistent or very rare in the periphery, however. T cells lacking CBP 
or p300 had reduced tumor necrosis factor alpha gene expression in response to
phorbol ester and ionophore, while signal-responsive gene expression in CBP- or
p300-deficient macrophages was largely intact. Thus, CBP and p300 each supply a
surprising degree of redundant coactivation capacity in T cells and macrophages, 
although each gene has also unique properties in thymocyte development.

PMCID: PMC1347027
PMID: 16428436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cell Death Differ. 2006 Sep;13(9):1495-505. Epub 2005 Dec 9.

Notch1 confers thymocytes a resistance to GC-induced apoptosis through Deltex1 by
blocking the recruitment of p300 to the SRG3 promoter.

Jang J(1), Choi YI, Choi J, Lee KY, Chung H, Jeon SH, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Institute of Molecular Biology of Genetics,
and Center for Functional Cellulomics, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, 
Korea.

One notable phenotypic change during the differentiation of immature thymocytes
into either mature CD4 or CD8 single-positive lineages is the acquisition of a
resistance to glucocorticoid (GC)-induced apoptosis. We have previously reported 
that SRG3 is critical in determining the sensitivity for the GC-induced apoptosis
in developing thymocytes. We report here that Notch signaling downregulates the
transcriptional activation of SRG3 through N-box and/or E-box elements on its
promoter. RBP-J represses SRG3 transcription through the N-box motif. On the
other hand, Deltex1 competitively inhibits the binding of p300 to E2A/HEB protein
bound to the E-box elements and represses the SRG3 promoter activity. Moreover,
enforced expression of Deltex1 restored double-positive (DP) thymocyte survival
from the GC-induced apoptosis. Our results suggest that Notch signaling confers
differentiating DP thymocytes resistance to GCs by regulating the SRG3 expression
through Deltex1, and that Deltex1 and SRG3 may play a significant role during DP 
thymocyte maturation.

PMID: 16341126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Aug 31;85(33):2344-8.

[Inhibition of the in vitro interaction between hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha
and p300 by mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 1].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu CJ(1), Shi YQ, Du YL, Pan YL, Liang J, Han S, Fan DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, General Hospital of Jinan Military Region,
Jinan 250031, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of mitogen-activated protein kinase
phosphatase-1 (MKP-1) on the interaction between hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-1alpha and coactivator p300.
METHODS: Prokaryotic expression vector PGEX-4T1 was constructed based on DNA
recombination technology. GST fusion proteins were purified by
glutathione-agarose beads and transfected into Escherichia coli BL-21. Effects of
MKP-1 or PD98059 on in vitro interaction between HIF-1alpha and p300 was
determined by Pull-down assay coupled with Western bloting. Effects of MKP-1 on
the p300 expression level was detected using Western bloting.
RESULTS: (1) GST fusion proteins were expressed in BL-21 Escherichia coli and
purified proteins were obtained. (2) Less amount of p300 was pulled down by GST
fusion protein from SGC7901-MKP-1 cells than from control cells after 12 hours of
exposure to hypoxia. (3) 12 hours after hypoxia, Less amount of p300 was pulled
down by GST fusion protein from PD98059 treated cells than from DMSO treated
cells or SGC7901 cells. (4) There were no significant differences in p300
expression levels between recombinant MKP-1 transfected cells and control cells
after 12 hours of exposure to hypoxia.
CONCLUSION: MKP-1 inhibits the in vitro interaction between HIF-1alpha and p300.

PMID: 16321228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2006 Feb;45(2):157-65. Epub 2005 Nov 30.

Constitutively phosphorylated Smad3 interacts with Sp1 and p300 in scleroderma
fibroblasts.

Ihn H(1), Yamane K, Asano Y, Jinnin M, Tamaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. IN-DER@h.u-tokyo.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the role of transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta)/Smad signalling in the increased expression of the collagen gene in
systemic sclerosis (SSc) fibroblasts.
METHODS: Dermal fibroblasts from seven patients with diffuse SSc of recent onset 
and from seven healthy individuals were studied. The expression levels of Smad2, 
Smad3 and Smad4 proteins were determined by immunoblotting. Smad3 phosphorylation
and the interaction of Smad3 with Sp1 or p300 were analysed using
immunoprecipitation. The effects of overexpression of Smad proteins or Sp1 on the
human alpha2(I) collagen gene transcription were investigated with
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) assays using the -772 COL1A2/CAT
construct.
RESULTS: Constitutive increased Smad3 phosphorylation was detected in SSc
fibroblasts compared with normal fibroblasts. Increased interaction of Smad3 with
Sp1 as well as p300 was also detected in SSc fibroblasts. The overexpression of
Smad3 caused an increase of up to 5-fold in COL1A2 promoter activity in normal
fibroblasts, while Smad3 caused a small increase in COL1A2 promoter activity in
SSc fibroblasts. However, neither Smad2 nor Smad4 caused significant effects in
COL1A2 promoter activity in normal fibroblasts or SSc fibroblasts. The
overexpression of Sp1 caused further increase in COL1A2 promoter activity
stimulated by TGF-beta in normal fibroblasts, but did not change COL1A2 promoter 
activity in the presence of TGF-beta in SSc fibroblasts. The combined
overexpression of Smad3 and Sp1 significantly enhanced TGF-beta response in
normal fibroblasts, but less markedly in SSc fibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggested that SSc fibroblasts are less sensitive to
exogenous TGF-beta stimulation because they are already activated by the
autocrine TGF-beta loop.

PMID: 16319104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Exp Med. 2005 Dec 5;202(11):1477-82. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

Adenovirus serotype 5 E1A sensitizes tumor cells to NKG2D-dependent NK cell lysis
and tumor rejection.

Routes JM(1), Ryan S, Morris K, Takaki R, Cerwenka A, Lanier LL.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research
Center and the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262,
USA. routesj@njc.org

The expression of the Adenovirus serotype 5 (Ad5) E1A oncogene sensitizes tumor
cells to natural killer (NK) cell-mediated killing and tumor rejection in vivo.
These effects are dependent on the ability of E1A to bind the transcriptional
coadaptor protein p300. To test the hypothesis that E1A up-regulates ligands
recognized by the NKG2D-activating receptor, we stably transfected the highly
tumorigenic mouse fibrosarcoma cell line MCA-205 with Ad5-E1A or a mutant form of
E1A that does not interact with p300 (E1A-Deltap300). Ad5-E1A, but not
E1A-Deltap300, up-regulated the expression of the NKG2D ligand retinoic acid
early inducible (RAE)-1, but not murine ULBP-like transcript 1, another NKG2D
ligand, in four independently derived MCA-205 transfectants. The up-regulation of
RAE-1 by E1A targeted MCA-205 tumor cells to lysis by NK cells, resulting in
NKG2D-dependent tumor rejection in vivo. Moreover, the up-regulation of NKG2D
ligands by E1A was not limited to mouse tumor cells, as E1A also increased the
expression of NKG2D ligands on primary baby mouse kidney cells, human MB435S
breast cancer cells, and human H4 fibrosarcoma cells.

PMCID: PMC2213342
PMID: 16314433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Hum Mutat. 2005 Dec;26(6):575-82.

Identification and functional analysis of CITED2 mutations in patients with
congenital heart defects.

Sperling S(1), Grimm CH, Dunkel I, Mebus S, Sperling HP, Ebner A, Galli R,
Lehrach H, Fusch C, Berger F, Hammer S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
sperling@molgen.mpg.de

Recent reports have demonstrated that mice lacking the transcription factor
Cited2 die in utero showing various cardiac malformations. We present for the
first time functionally relevant mutations of CITED2 in patients with congenital 
heart defects (CHDs). CITED2 encodes a CREBBP/EP300 interacting transcriptional
modulator of HIF1A and TFAP2. To study the potential impact of sequence
variations in CITED2 for CHDs in humans, we screened a cohort of 392
well-characterized patients and 192 control individuals using DHPLC, sequencing, 
and Amplifluor genotyping techniques. We identified 15 CITED2 nucleotide
alterations. Seven of these alterations were found only in CHD patients and were 
not detected in controls, including three mutations leading to alterations of the
amino acid sequence (p.Ser170_Gly178del, p.Gly178_Ser179ins9, and
p.Ser198_Gly199del). All three of these amino acid changing mutations cluster in 
the serine-glycine-rich junction of the protein, to which no functionality had
heretofore been assigned. Here we show that these mutations significantly reduce 
the capacity of CITED2 to transrepress HIF1A, and that the p.Ser170_Gly178del
mutation significantly diminishes TFAP2C coactivation. This reveals a modifying
role for the serine-glycine-rich region in CITED2 function. In summary, the
observation of these mutations in patients with septal defects indicates that
CITED2 has a causative impact in the development of CHD in humans.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16287139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 9;280(49):40650-9. Epub 2005 Oct 10.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma suppresses proximal alpha1(I)
collagen promoter via inhibition of p300-facilitated NF-I binding to DNA in
hepatic stellate cells.

Yavrom S(1), Chen L, Xiong S, Wang J, Rippe RA, Tsukamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California 90033-9141, USA.

Depletion of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma)
represents one of the key molecular changes that underlie transdifferentiation
(activation) of hepatic stellate cells in the genesis of liver fibrosis
(Miyahara, T., Schrum, L., Rippe, R., Xiong, S., Yee, H. F., Jr., Motomura, K.,
Anania, F. A., Willson, T. M., and Tsukamoto, H. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275,
35715-35722; Hazra, S., Xiong, S., Wang, J., Rippe, R. A., Krishna, V.,
Chatterjee, K., and Tsukamoto, H. (2004) J. Biol. Chem. 279, 11392-11401). In
support of this notion, ectopic expression of PPARgamma suppresses hepatic
stellate cells activation markers, most notably expression of alpha1(I)
procollagen. However, the mechanisms underlying this antifibrotic effect are
largely unknown. The present study utilized deletion-reporter gene constructs of 
proximal 2.2-kb alpha1(I) procollagen promoter to demonstrate that a region
proximal to -133 bp is where PPARgamma exerts its inhibitory effect. Within this 
region, two DNase footprints with Sp1 and reverse CCAAT box sites exist. NF-I,
but not CCAAT DNA-binding factor/NF-Y, binds to the proximal CCAAT box in hepatic
stellate cells. A mutation of this site almost completely abrogates the promoter 
activity. NF-I mildly but independently stimulates the promoter activity and
synergistically promotes Sp1-induced activity. PPARgamma inhibits NF-I binding to
the most proximal footprint (-97/-85 bp) and inhibits its transactivity. The
former effect is mediated by the ability of PPARgamma to inhibit p300-facilitated
NF-I binding to DNA as demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.

PMID: 16216869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Blood. 2006 Feb 1;107(3):916-23. Epub 2005 Sep 27.

Amphotericin B blunts erythropoietin response to hypoxia by reinforcing
FIH-mediated repression of HIF-1.

Yeo EJ(1), Ryu JH, Cho YS, Chun YS, Huang LE, Kim MS, Park JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

Amphotericin B (AmB) is widely used for treating severe systemic fungal
infections. However, long-term AmB treatment is invariably associated with
adverse effects such as anemia. The erythropoietin (EPO) suppression by AmB has
been proposed to contribute to the development of anemia. However, the mechanism 
whereby EPO is suppressed remains obscure. In this study, we investigated the
possibility that AmB inhibits the transcription of the EPO gene by inactivating
HIF-1, which is a known key transcription factor and regulator of EPO expression.
EPO mRNA levels were markedly attenuated by AmB treatment both in rat kidneys and
in Hep3B cells. AmB inactivated the transcriptional activity of HIF-1alpha, but
did not affect the expression or localization of HIF-1 subunits. Moreover, AmB
was found to specifically repress the C-terminal transactivation domain (CAD) of 
HIF-1alpha, and this repression by AmB required Asn803, a target site of the
factor-inhibiting HIF-1 (FIH); moreover, this repressive effect was reversed by
FIH inhibitors. Furthermore, AmB stimulated CAD-FIH interaction and inhibited the
p300 recruitment by CAD. We propose that this mechanism underlies the unexplained
anemia associated with AmB therapy.

PMID: 16189267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 4;280(44):36986-93. Epub 2005 Sep 2.

Macromolecular translocation inhibitor II (Zn(2+)-binding protein, parathymosin) 
interacts with the glucocorticoid receptor and enhances transcription in vivo.

Okamoto K(1), Isohashi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Sugao,
Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 216-8511, Japan. k2oka@marianna-u.ac.jp

Macromolecular translocation inhibitor II (MTI-II), which was first identified as
an in vitro inhibitor of binding between the highly purified glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) and isolated nuclei, is an 11.5-kDa Zn(2+)-binding protein that is 
also known as ZnBP or parathymosin. MTI-II is a small nuclear acidic protein that
is highly conserved in rats, cows, and humans and widely distributed in mammalian
tissues, yet its physiological function is unknown. To elucidate its in vivo
function in relation to GR, we transiently transfected mammalian cells with an
expression plasmid encoding MTI-II. Unexpectedly, we found that the expression of
MTI-II enhances the transcriptional activity of GR. The magnitude of the
transcriptional enhancement induced by MTI-II is comparable with that induced by 
the steroid receptor coactivator SRC-1. In contrast, MTI-II had little effect on 
the transcriptional activity of estrogen receptor. Immunoprecipitation analysis
showed that in the presence of glucocorticoid hormone, GR coprecipitates with
MTI-II, and, vice versa, MTI-II coprecipitates with GR. The expression of various
deletion mutants of MTI-II revealed that the central acidic domain is essential
for the enhancement of GR-dependent transcription. Microscopic analysis of MTI-II
fused to green fluorescent protein and GR fused to red fluorescent protein in
living HeLa cells showed that MTI-II colocalizes with GR in discrete subnuclear
domains in a hormone-dependent manner. Coexpression of MTI-II with the
coactivator SRC-1 or p300 further enhances GR-dependent transcription.
Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that in the presence of glucocorticoid
hormone, p300 and CREB-binding protein are coprecipitated with MTI-II.
Furthermore, the knockdown of endogenous MTI-II by RNAi reduces the
transcriptional activity of GR in cells. Moreover, expression of MTI-II enhances 
the glucocorticoid-dependent transcription of the endogenous
glucocorticoid-inducible enzyme in cells. Taken together, these results indicate 
that MTI-II enhances GR-dependent transcription via a direct interaction with GR 
in vivo. Thus, MTI-II is a new member of the GR-coactivator complex.

PMID: 16150697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(18):7966-75.

NF-kappaB RelA phosphorylation regulates RelA acetylation.

Chen LF(1), Williams SA, Mu Y, Nakano H, Duerr JM, Buckbinder L, Greene WC.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology and Immunology, 1650 Owens St., San Francisco,
CA 94158, USA. lchen@gladstone.ucsf.edu

The nuclear functions of NF-kappaB p50/RelA heterodimers are regulated in part by
posttranslational modifications of its RelA subunit, including phosphorylation
and acetylation. Acetylation at lysines 218, 221, and 310 differentially
regulates RelA's DNA binding activity, assembly with IkappaBalpha, and
transcriptional activity. However, it remains unclear whether the acetylation is 
regulated or simply due to stimulus-coupled nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB.
Using anti-acetylated lysine 310 RelA antibodies, we detected p300-mediated
acetylation of RelA in vitro and in vivo after stimulation of cells with tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha). Coexpression of catalytically inactive mutants
of the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A/mitogen- and stress-activated kinase
1 or IKK1/IKK2, which phosphorylate RelA on serine 276 or serine 536,
respectively, sharply inhibited RelA acetylation on lysine 310. Furthermore,
phosphorylation of RelA on serine 276 or serine 536 increased assembly of
phospho-RelA with p300, which enhanced acetylation on lysine 310. Reconstitution 
of RelA-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts with RelA S276A or RelA S536A
decreased TNF-alpha-induced acetylation of lysine 310 and expression of the
endogenous NF-kappaB-responsive E-selectin gene. These findings indicate that the
acetylation of RelA at lysine 310 is importantly regulated by prior
phosphorylation of serines 276 and 536. Such phosphorylated and acetylated forms 
of RelA display enhanced transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC1234328
PMID: 16135789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 7;280(40):34306-15. Epub 2005 Aug 17.

Modification of the Stat1 SH2 domain broadly improves interferon efficacy in
proportion to p300/CREB-binding protein coactivator recruitment.

Zhang Y(1), Takami K, Lo MS, Huang G, Yu Q, Roswit WT, Holtzman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

A normal level of interferon (IFN) responsiveness via the Stat1 transcription
factor is critical to the host, since decreased Stat1 signaling causes immune
compromise and increased signaling is associated with inflammatory and neoplastic
disease. Here we report how this balance may be influenced by novel alterations
in the efficiency of Stat1 signaling. To enable disulfide-dependent and
spontaneous formation of active Stat1 homodimer (as was done previously for
Stat3), we engineered Stat1-CC with double-cysteine substitutions in the Src
homology 2 (SH2)-homodimerization domain (at Ala-656 and Asn-658). In this case, 
however, mutant and wild-type Stat1 exhibited no difference
inspontaneousdimerization. Moreover, Stat1-CC still required ligand-dependent
Tyr-701 phosphorylation for function and exhibited hyperresponsiveness to
IFN-beta (that depends on Stat1/Stat2 heterodimerization) as well as IFN-gamma
(that depends on Stat1/Stat1 homodimerization). Hyperresponsivenss of Stat1-CC
was accompanied by increased capacities for Tyr-701 phosphorylation and DNA
binding, but these features were also found in a similarly substituted serine
mutant (Stat1-SS) that showed no hyperresponsiveness to IFN-gamma. This finding
raised the possibility that SH2 domain mutations also influence downstream
transcriptional efficiency. Indeed, each of these mutations also enhanced
recruitment of the normally rate-limiting p300/CREB-binding Protein (CBP)
coactivator to the transcriptional complex in proportion to the level of
IFN-driven transactivation and gene expression. Additional modifications
indicated that the mutant residues in the SH2 domain appeared to cooperate with
Ser-727 in the C-terminal domain to regulate p300/CBP interaction with Stat1. The
profile of IFN responsiveness translated into the same progressive increase in
the level of viral clearance from Stat1- to Stat1-SS- to Stat1-CC-expressing
cells. Thus, SH2 domain determinants may be modified to direct better Stat1
phosphorylation, DNA binding, and coactivator recruitment to fully improve IFN
efficacy.

PMID: 16107341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Aug;25(16):7069-77.

Transcriptional networks in the liver: hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 function is
largely independent of Foxa2.

Rubins NE(1), Friedman JR, Le PP, Zhang L, Brestelli J, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

A complex network of hepatocyte nuclear transcription factors, including HNF6 and
Foxa2, regulates the expression of liver-specific genes. The current model, based
on in vitro studies, suggests that HNF6 and Foxa2 interact physically. This
interaction is thought to synergistically stimulate Foxa2-dependent transcription
through the recruitment of p300/CBP by HNF6 and to inhibit HNF6-mediated
transcription due to the interference of Foxa2 with DNA binding by HNF6. To test 
this model in vivo, we utilized hepatocyte-specific gene ablation to study the
binding of HNF6 to its targets in the absence of Foxa2. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation using anti-HNF6 antibodies was performed on chromatin
isolated from Foxa2(loxP/loxP) Alfp.Cre and control mouse livers, and HNF6
binding to its target, Glut2, was determined by quantitative PCR. In contrast to 
the current model, we found no significant difference in HNF6 occupancy at the
Glut2 promoter between Foxa2-deficient and control livers. In order to evaluate
the Foxa2/HNF6 interaction model on a global scale, we performed a location
analysis using a microarray with 7,000 mouse promoter fragments. Again, we found 
no evidence that HNF6 binding to its targets in chromatin is reduced in the
presence of Foxa2. We also examined the mRNA levels of HNF6 targets in the liver 
using a cDNA array and found that their expression was similar in Foxa2-deficient
and control mice. Overall, our studies demonstrate that HNF6 binds to and
regulates its target promoters in vivo in the presence and absence of Foxa2.

PMCID: PMC1190247
PMID: 16055718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Hum Genet. 2005 Sep;117(5):485-93. Epub 2005 Jul 14.

DNA sequencing of CREBBP demonstrates mutations in 56% of patients with
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) and in another patient with incomplete RSTS.

Bartsch O(1), Schmidt S, Richter M, Morlot S, Seemanová E, Wiebe G, Rasi S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Klinikum, Universität Mainz, 55101, Mainz, Germany.
bartsch@humgen.klinik.uni-mainz.de

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a distinct dominant disorder characterized by
short stature, typical face, broad angulated thumbs and halluces, and mental
retardation. The RSTS can be caused by chromosomal microdeletions and molecular
mutations in the CREBBP gene; however, relatively few mutations have been
reported to date. Here, we aimed to determine the rate of point mutations and
other small molecular lesions in true RSTS and possible mild variants, by using
genomic DNA sequencing. A consecutive series of patients including 17 patients
from our previous study was investigated. We identified 19 causative mutations of
CREBBP in a total of 45 patients representing three different diagnostic groups: 
(a) 17 mutations in 30 patients with unequivocal RSTS (detection rate 56.6%), (b)
two mutations in eight patients with features suggestive of RSTS ("moderate or
incomplete RSTS", detection rate 25%), and (c) no mutation in seven patients with
undiagnosed syndromes and isolated features of RSTS. In general, the mutations
were distributed without hot spots and most were unique; however, three recurrent
mutations (R370X, R1664H, and N1978S) were identified. Furthermore, we detected
15 different intragenic polymorphisms, including two non-synonymous coding
polymorphisms, L551I and Q2208H. We report not only the highest detection rate
(56.6%) of CREBBP mutations in patients with RSTS to date, but also the second
missense mutation (N1978S) in a patient with moderate or incomplete RSTS.
Previous studies have identified cytogenetic deletions in the CREBBP gene in
eight to 12% of patients and very recently, Roelfsema et al. reported EP300 gene 
mutations in three of 92 (3.3%) patients with either true RSTS or different
syndromes resembling RSTS. Our 56.6% detection rate of molecular mutations in
CREBBP in patients with unequivocal RSTS supports the new concept that RSTS is a 
genetically heterogeneous disorder and furthermore, indicates that RSTS may be
caused by gene/s other than CREBBP in up to 30% of cases.

PMID: 16021471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Neurochem. 2005 Sep;94(5):1288-96. Epub 2005 Jul 5.

Hypoxia-activated metabolic pathway stimulates phosphorylation of p300 and CBP in
oxygen-sensitive cells.

Zakrzewska A(1), Schnell PO, Striet JB, Hui A, Robbins JR, Petrovic M, Conforti
L, Gozal D, Wathelet MG, Czyzyk-Krzeska MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Science, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension,
University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0505, USA.

Transcription co-activators and histone acetyltransferases, p300 and cyclic AMP
responsive element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP), participate in hypoxic 
activation of hypoxia-inducible genes. Here, we show that exposure of PC12 and
cells to 1-10% oxygen results in hyperphosphorylation of p300/CBP. This response 
is fast, long lasting and specific for hypoxia, but not for hypoxia-mimicking
agents such as desferioxamine or Co2+ ions. It is also cell-type specific and
occurs in pheochromocytoma PC12 cells and the carotid body of rats but not in
hepatoblastoma cells. The p300 hyperphosphorylation specifically depends on the
release of intracellular calcium from inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3)-sensitive
stores. However, it is not inhibited by pharmacological inhibitors of any of the 
kinases traditionally known to be directly or indirectly calcium regulated. On
the other hand, p300 hyperphosphorylation is inhibited by several different
inhibitors of the glucose metabolic pathway from generation of NADH by
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, through the transfer of NADH through
the glycerol phosphate shuttle to ubiquinone and complex III of the mitochondrial
respiratory chain. Inhibition of IP3-sensitive calcium stores decreases
generation of ATP, and this inhibition is significantly stronger in hypoxia than 
in normoxia. We propose that the NADH glycerol phosphate shuttle participates in 
generating a pool of ATP that serves either as a co-factor or a modulator of the 
kinases involved in the phosphorylation of p300/CBP during hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC1411962
PMID: 16000154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jul 12;102(28):9896-900. Epub 2005 Jul 5.

The binding of the ubiquitous transcription factor Sp1 at the locus control
region represses the expression of beta-like globin genes.

Feng D(1), Kan YW.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Laboratory Medicine,
University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

To investigate the function of transcription factor Sp1 in beta-like globin gene 
activation, we analyzed the recruitment of Sp1, fetal Krüppel-like factor 2
(FKLF2), and related factors at the human beta-globin locus in a human fetal
liver and mouse erythroleukemia hybrid cell (A181gamma cell) that contains a
single copy of human chromosome 11. Sp1 binds at the GT boxes of the cis-elements
throughout the beta-locus, but it is phosphorylated and lost over DNase I
hypersensitive site (HS)2, HS3, HS4, and the human beta-globin gene promoter
after A181gamma cell differentiation. The binding of FKLF2 at HS2 and HS3 was
unchanged. Histone deacetylase 1, which could be recruited by Sp1, is also lost
over HS2 and HS3 after differentiation, resulting in the acetylation of histones 
3 and 4 across the human beta-globin locus. We previously detected in vivo GT
footprints over the beta-globin locus after A181gamma differentiation. Here, we
report that after differentiation, the p300/CREB-binding protein-associated
factor is recruited by FKLF2 to the locus control region to acetylate histones 3 
and 4 at the human beta-globin gene locus. Our results suggest that Sp1 is an
inhibitor of beta-like globin gene transcription during erythroid terminal
differentiation. Its phosphorylation and release allow the erythroid-specific
FKLF2 or erythroid Krüppel-like factor to interact with other erythroid-specific 
transcription factors to initiate the transcription of beta-like globin genes.

PMCID: PMC1174987
PMID: 15998736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Sep;30(1):12-23.

Mutant huntingtin represses CBP, but not p300, by binding and protein
degradation.

Cong SY(1), Pepers BA, Evert BO, Rubinsztein DC, Roos RA, van Ommen GJ, Dorsman
JC.

Author information: 
(1)CBG-Center of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Dec;30(4):559.

Corrected and republished in
    Mol Cell Neurosci. 2005 Dec;30(4):560-71.

Huntington's disease can be used as a model to study neurodegenerative disorders 
caused by aggregation-prone proteins. It has been proposed that the entrapment of
transcription factors in aggregates plays an important role in pathogenesis. We
now report that the transcriptional activity of CBP is already repressed in the
early time points by soluble mutant huntingtin, whereas the histone acetylase
activity of CBP/p300 is gradually diminished over time. Mutant huntingtin bound
much stronger to CBP than normal huntingtin, possibly contributing to repression.
Especially at the later time points, CBP protein level was gradually reduced via 
the proteasome pathway. In sharp contrast, p300 was unaffected by mutant
huntingtin. This selective degradation of CBP was absent in spinocerebellar
ataxia 3. Thus, mutant huntingtin specifically affects CBP and not p300 both at
the early and later time points, via multiple mechanisms. In addition to the
reduction of CBP, also the altered ratio of these closely related histone
acetyltransferases may affect chromatin structure and transcription and thus
contribute to neurodegeneration.

PMID: 15994095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Genes Dev. 2005 Jun 15;19(12):1485-95.

p21WAF1/Cip1 is a negative transcriptional regulator of Wnt4 expression
downstream of Notch1 activation.

Devgan V(1), Mammucari C, Millar SE, Brisken C, Dotto GP.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

In keratinocytes, the cyclin/CDK inhibitor p21(WAF1/Cip1) is a direct
transcriptional target of Notch1 activation; loss of either the p21 or Notch1
genes expands stem cell populations and facilitates tumor development. The Notch1
tumor-suppressor function was associated with down-regulation of Wnt signaling.
Here, we show that suppression of Wnt signaling by Notch1 activation is mediated,
at least in part, by down-modulation of Wnts gene expression. p21 is a negative
regulator of Wnts transcription downstream of Notch1 activation, independently of
effects on the cell cycle. More specifically, expression of the Wnt4 gene is
under negative control of endogenous p21 both in vitro and in vivo. p21
associates with the E2F-1 transcription factor at the Wnt4 promoter and causes
curtailed recruitment of c-Myc and p300, and histone hypoacetylation at this
promoter. Thus, p21 acts as a selective negative regulator of transcription and
links the Notch and Wnt signaling pathways in keratinocyte growth control.

PMCID: PMC1151665
PMID: 15964998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. EMBO J. 2004 Apr 7;23(7):1598-608.

Transrepression by a liganded nuclear receptor via a bHLH activator through
co-regulator switching.

Murayama A(1), Kim MS, Yanagisawa J, Takeyama K, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Yayoi,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Retraction in
    EMBO J. 2014 Dec 1;33(23):2880.

Vitamin D receptor (VDR) is essential for ligand-induced gene repression of
25(OH)D3 1alpha-hydroxylase (1alpha(OH)ase) in mammalian kidney, while this gene 
expression is activated by protein kinase A (PKA) signaling downstream of the
parathyroid hormone action. The mapped negative vitamin D response element
(1alphanVDRE) in the human 1alpha(OH)ase gene promoter (around 530 bp) was
distinct from those of the reported DR3-like nVDREs, composed of two E-box-like
motifs. Unlike the reported nVDREs, no direct binding of VDR/RXR heterodimer to
1alphanVDRE was detected. A bHLH-type factor, designated VDIR, was identified as 
a direct sequence-specific activator of 1nVDRE. The transactivation function of
VDIR was further potentiated by activated-PKA signaling through phosphorylation
of serine residues in the transactivation domains, with the recruitment of a p300
histone acetyltransferase co-activator. The ligand-dependent association of
VDR/RXR heterodimer with VDIR bound to 1alphanVDRE caused the dissociation of
p300 co-activators from VDIR, and the association of HDAC co-repressor complex
components resulting in ligand-induced transrepression. Thus, the present study
deciphers a novel mechanism of ligand-induced transrepression by nuclear receptor
via co-regulator switching.

PMCID: PMC391066
PMID: 15934135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cancer Sci. 2005 May;96(5):274-82.

Notch1 oncoprotein antagonizes TGF-beta/Smad-mediated cell growth suppression via
sequestration of coactivator p300.

Masuda S(1), Kumano K, Shimizu K, Imai Y, Kurokawa M, Ogawa S, Miyagishi M, Taira
K, Hirai H, Chiba S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

The Notch proteins constitute a family of transmembrane receptors that play a
pivotal role in cellular differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis. Although
it has been recognized that excess Notch signaling is potentially tumorigenic,
little is known about precise mechanisms through which dysregulated Notch
signaling induces neoplastic transformation. Here we demonstrate that Notch
signaling has a transcriptional cross-talk with transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta) signaling, which is well characterized by its antiproliferative
effects. TGF-beta-mediated transcriptional responses are suppressed by
constitutively active Notch1, and this inhibitory effect is canceled by
introduction of transcriptional coactivator p300. We further show that this
blockade of TGF-beta signaling is executed by the sequestration of p300 from
Smad3. Moreover, in a human cervical carcinoma cell line, CaSki, in which Notch1 
is spontaneously activated, suppression of Notch1 expression with small
interfering RNA significantly restores the responsiveness to TGF-beta. Taken
together, we propose that Notch oncoproteins promote cell growth and cancer
development partly by suppressing the growth inhibitory effects of TGF-beta
through sequestrating p300 from Smad3.

PMID: 15904468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cancer Res. 2005 Apr 15;65(8):3462-9.

The retinoid X receptor-selective retinoid, LGD1069, down-regulates
cyclooxygenase-2 expression in human breast cells through transcription factor
crosstalk: implications for molecular-based chemoprevention.

Kong G(1), Kim HT, Wu K, DeNardo D, Hilsenbeck SG, Xu XC, Lamph WW, Bissonnette
R, Dannenberg AJ, Brown PH.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Center, Departments of Medicine and Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Retinoids and their derivatives can suppress the development of cancer in animals
and in humans. We and others have shown that retinoid X receptor (RXR)-selective 
retinoids or "rexinoids" suppress the development of breast cancer in several
animal models with minimal toxicity. LGD1069 (Bexarotene) is a potent
RXR-selective retinoid with reduced toxicity compared with naturally occurring
retinoids. In this study, we investigated the expression of LGD1069-modulated
biomarkers. We previously did cDNA array analysis of LGD1069-treated breast cells
using Affymetrix microarrays. These studies identified many LGD1069-regulated
genes, one of which was cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). Because COX-2 inhibitors have
been shown to prevent cancer in other model systems, we investigated whether
LGD1069 inhibits the expression of COX-2 in mammary tissue and in normal human
mammary epithelial cells (HMEC). In mouse mammary tumor virus-erbB2 mice treated 
with LGD1069, there was a marked decrease of COX-2 expression in both normal and 
malignant mammary tissues. The effect of LGD1069 on COX-2 expression was also
investigated in normal human breast cells. COX-2 expression was markedly reduced 
by treatment with LGD1069 at the RNA and protein level in normal HMECs; LGD1069
suppressed COX-2 promoter activity. We also showed that LGD1069 inhibited
activator protein (AP-1)-dependent transcription in these breast cells, and that 
suppression of COX-2 expression was due to sequestration of CBP/p300. These
results from in vivo and in vitro studies suggest that LGD1069, an RXR-selective 
retinoid, inhibits COX-2 expression by suppression of COX-2 transcription in part
through transrepression of the AP-1 transcription factor. Thus, RXR-selective
retinoids that inhibit AP-1 activity and suppress COX-2 expression may be
particularly promising drugs for breast cancer prevention. Furthermore, such
RXR-selective retinoids may be most useful in combination with antiestrogens for 
more effective prevention of breast cancer in women at high risk of this disease.

PMID: 15833882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2005;100(3):e124-31. Epub 2005 Apr 11.

STAT1-independent down-regulation of interferon-gamma-induced class II
transactivator and HLA-DR expression by transforming growth factor beta-1 in
human glomerular endothelial cells.

Yang WS(1), Han NJ, Kim CS, Ahn H, Lee SK, Lee KU, Park SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Asan Medical Center, College of Medicine,
University of Ulsan, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The competition between STAT1 and Smad3 for a limiting amount of the 
nuclear protein p300, a transcriptional coactivator, was suggested to be a
mechanism for the antagonism between interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and
transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1). We investigated the effect of
TGF-beta1 on IFN-gamma-induced HLA-DR production in cultured human glomerular
endothelial cells (HGECs), and the involvement of p300 in this process.
METHODS: Cell surface expression of HLA-DR and mRNA levels of HLA-DR and class II
transactivator (CIITA), the master regulator of HLA-DR gene transcription, were
measured by cellular ELISA and Northern blot, respectively. The levels of STAT1
and Smad3 protein were analyzed by Western blot. Nuclear binding activity of
STAT1 was assessed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
RESULTS: IFN-gamma increased the cell surface expression of HLA-DR along with
increases in the mRNA levels of CIITA and HLA-DR, while these stimulatory effects
of IFN-gamma were down-regulated by TGF-beta1. IFN-gamma increased
phosphorylation of STAT1 and this activation was not inhibited by TGF-beta1.
IFN-gamma increased binding of p-STAT1 to p300, while TGF-beta1 increased binding
of Smad3 to p300. TGF-beta1-induced Smad3 binding to p300 was inhibited by
IFN-gamma, whereas IFN-gamma-induced p-STAT1 binding to p300 was not inhibited by
TGF-beta1. IFN-gamma increased DNA binding activity of STAT1. Inhibition of
interaction between STAT1 and p300 by addition of anti-p300 antibody to nuclear
extract down-regulated DNA binding activity of STAT1. In contrast, TGF-beta1 did 
not inhibit IFN-gamma-induced STAT1 binding to DNA.
CONCLUSIONS: TGF-beta1 down-regulated IFN-gamma-induced CIITA and HLA-DR
expression in HGECs. Though there was an antagonism between IFN-gamma and
TGF-beta1, the competition for p300 between p-STAT1 and Smad3 was not the
mechanism for it.

PMID: 15824515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Oncogene. 2005 May 19;24(22):3619-31.

Differential roles for the coactivators CBP and p300 on TCF/beta-catenin-mediated
survivin gene expression.

Ma H(1), Nguyen C, Lee KS, Kahn M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Chemical Genomics, 600
Broadway, Suite 580, Seattle, WA 98122, USA.

The inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP) protein survivin is highly expressed in cancers,
but not in normal differentiated tissues. TCF/beta-catenin signaling has been
reported to participate in the regulation of survivin transcription in colon
cancer. We have recently characterized ICG-001, a small molecule specific
inhibitor of the beta-catenin/Creb-binding protein (CBP) interaction. Inhibition 
of the beta-catenin/CBP interaction represses a subset of
TCF/beta-catenin-mediated transcription. ICG-001 potently inhibits survivin gene 
transcription and expression. ICG-001-mediated downregulation of survivin
expression enhanced caspase-3 activity and apoptosis, which was rescued by
overexpression of wild type but not mutant (C84A) survivin. Small interfering RNA
and genetic reduction of CBP also decreased survivin expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay confirmed that CBP is the crucial coactivator for
TCF/beta-catenin-mediated survivin transcription. Furthermore, ICG-001-induced
recruitment of p300 to the survivin promoter led to concomitant recruitment of
SUMO-1, HDAC6 and PML proteins, which have been associated with transcriptional
repression. These findings demonstrate that CBP and p300 play very distinct roles
in survivin gene transcription.

PMID: 15782138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;25(7):2673-87.

Phosphorylation-dependent degradation of p300 by doxorubicin-activated p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase in cardiac cells.

Poizat C(1), Puri PL, Bai Y, Kedes L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetic Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 2250 Alcazar St., CSC 245, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.
poizat@usc.edu

p300 and CBP are general transcriptional coactivators implicated in different
cellular processes, including regulation of the cell cycle, differentiation,
tumorigenesis, and apoptosis. Posttranslational modifications such as
phosphorylation are predicted to select a specific function of p300/CBP in these 
processes; however, the identification of the kinases that regulate p300/CBP
activity in response to individual stimuli and the physiological significance of 
p300 phosphorylation have not been elucidated. Here we demonstrate that the
cardiotoxic anticancer agent doxorubicin (adriamycin) induces the phosphorylation
of p300 in primary neonatal cardiomyocytes. Hyperphosphorylation precedes the
degradation of p300 and parallels apoptosis in response to doxorubicin.
Doxorubicin-activated p38 kinases alpha and beta associate with p300 and are
implicated in the phosphorylation-mediated degradation of p300, as
pharmacological blockade of p38 prevents p300 degradation. p38 phosphorylates
p300 in vitro at both the N and C termini of the protein, and enforced activation
of p38 by the constitutively active form of its upstream kinase (MKK6EE) triggers
p300 degradation. These data support the conclusion that p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase regulates p300 protein stability and function in cardiomyocytes
undergoing apoptosis in response to doxorubicin.

PMCID: PMC1061628
PMID: 15767673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 20;280(20):19682-8. Epub 2005 Mar 13.

Acetylation of GATA-4 is involved in the differentiation of embryonic stem cells 
into cardiac myocytes.

Kawamura T(1), Ono K, Morimoto T, Wada H, Hirai M, Hidaka K, Morisaki T, Heike T,
Nakahata T, Kita T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research, Kyoto Medical Center, National Hospital
Organization, Japan.

Differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells into cardiac myocytes requires
activation of a cardiac-specific gene program. Histone acetyltransferases (HATs) 
and histone deacetylases (HDACs) govern gene expression patterns by being
recruited to target genes through association with specific transcription
factors. One of the HATs, p300, serves as a coactivator of cardiac-specific
transcription factors such as GATA-4. The HAT activity of p300 is required for
acetylation and DNA binding of GATA-4 and its full transcriptional activity as
well as for promotion of a transcriptionally active chromatin configuration.
However, the roles of HATs and HDACs in post-translational modification of GATA-4
during the differentiation of ES cells into cardiac myocytes remain unknown. In
an ES cell model of developing embryoid bodies, an acetylated form of GATA-4 and 
its DNA binding increased concomitantly with the expression of p300 during the
differentiation of ES cells into cardiac myocytes. Treatment of ES cells with
trichostatin A (TSA), a specific HDAC inhibitor, induced acetylation of
histone-3/4 near GATA sites within the atrial natriuretic factor promoter. In
addition, TSA augmented the increase in an acetylated form of GATA-4 and its DNA 
binding during the ES cell differentiation. Finally, TSA facilitated the
expression of green fluorescence protein under the control of the
cardiac-specific Nkx-2.5 promoter and of endogenous cardiac beta-myosin heavy
chain during the differentiation. These findings demonstrate that acetylation of 
GATA-4 as well as of histones is involved in the differentiation of ES cells into
cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 15764815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 10;280(23):21915-23. Epub 2005 Feb 28.

p400 is required for E1A to promote apoptosis.

Samuelson AV(1), Narita M, Chan HM, Jin J, de Stanchina E, McCurrach ME, Narita
M, Fuchs M, Livingston DM, Lowe SW.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, 
USA.

The adenovirus E1A oncoprotein promotes proliferation and transformation by
binding cellular proteins, including members of the retinoblastoma protein
family, the p300/CREB-binding protein transcriptional coactivators, and the
p400-TRRAP chromatin-remodeling complex. E1A also promotes apoptosis, in part, by
engaging the ARF-p53 tumor suppressor pathway. We show that E1A induces ARF and
p53 and promotes apoptosis in normal fibroblasts by physically associating with
the retinoblastoma protein and a p400-TRRAP complex and that its interaction with
p300 is largely dispensable for these effects. We further show that E1A increases
p400 expression and, conversely, that suppression of p400 using stable RNA
interference reduces the levels of ARF, p53, and apoptosis in E1A-expressing
cells. Therefore, whereas E1A inactivates the retinoblastoma protein, it requires
p400 to efficiently promote cell death. These results identify p400 as a
regulator of the ARF-p53 pathway and a component of the cellular machinery that
couples proliferation to cell death.

PMID: 15741165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):16625-34. Epub 2005 Feb 18.

Transcriptional Co-activators CREB-binding protein/p300 increase chondrocyte
Cd-rap gene expression by multiple mechanisms including sequestration of the
repressor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein.

Imamura T(1), Imamura C, Iwamoto Y, Sandell LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine at
Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Cartilage-derived retinoic acid-sensitive protein (CD-RAP) is a small secreted
matrix protein expressed in developing and adult cartilage and by chondrocytes in
culture. We have previously shown that the expression of Cd-rap, like many other 
cartilage matrix proteins, is repressed by interleukin 1beta and that the
transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) beta plays an
important role in the interleukin 1beta-induced repression (Okazaki, K., Li, J., 
Yu, H., Fukui, N., and Sandell, L. J. (2002) J. Biol. Chem. 277, 31526-31533).
The co-activators CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 are transcriptional
co-regulators that participate in the activities of many different transcription 
factors including C/EBP. Here we show that CBP/p300 can reverse the inhibitory
effect of C/EBP and moreover can stimulate expression of Cd-rap. The mechanism of
this effect is shown to involve a unique synergy whereby CBP/p300 stimulate
Cd-rap gene expression by at least two mechanisms. First, binding of CBP/p300 to 
C/EBPbeta leads to sequestration of C/EBP eliminating DNA binding and subsequent 
repression; second, binding of CBP/p300 to the transcriptional activator Sox9
increases Sox9 DNA binding to the Cd-rap promoter leading to further stimulation 
of gene transcription. This is an example of a complementary transcriptional
network whereby two very different mechanisms act together to confer a functional
increase in transcription. This new paradigm is likely generally applicable to
cartilage genes as Col2a1 cartilage collagen gene responds similarly.

PMID: 15722556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):16456-60. Epub 2005 Feb 16.

SIRT1 functionally interacts with the metabolic regulator and transcriptional
coactivator PGC-1{alpha}.

Nemoto S(1), Fergusson MM, Finkel T.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Branch, NHLBI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-1454, USA.

In lower organisms, increased expression of the NAD-dependent deacetylase Sir2
augments lifespan. The mechanism through which this life extension is mediated
remains incompletely understood. Here we have examined the cellular effects of
overexpression of SIRT1, the closest mammalian ortholog of Sir2. In PC12 cells,
increased expression of the NAD-dependent deacetylase SIRT1 reduces cellular
oxygen consumption by approximately 25%. We further demonstrate that SIRT1
expression can alter the transcriptional activity of the mitochondrial biogenesis
coactivator PGC-1alpha. In addition, SIRT1 and PGC-1alpha directly interact and
can be co-immunoprecipitated as a molecular complex. A single amino acid mutation
in the putative ADP-ribosyltransferase domain of SIRT1 inhibits the interaction
of SIRT1 with PGC-1alpha but does not effect the interaction of SIRT1 with either
p53 or Foxo3a. We further show that PGC-1alpha is acetylated in vivo. This
acetylation is augmented by treatment with the SIRT1 inhibitor nicotinamide or by
expression of the transcriptional coactivator p300. Finally we demonstrate that
SIRT1 catalyzes PGC-1alpha deacetylation both in vitro and in vivo. These results
provide a direct link between the sirtuins, a family of proteins linked to
lifespan determination and PGC-1alpha, a coactivator that regulates cellular
metabolism.

PMID: 15716268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Apr;76(4):572-80. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

Genetic heterogeneity in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: mutations in both the CBP and
EP300 genes cause disease.

Roelfsema JH(1), White SJ, Ariyürek Y, Bartholdi D, Niedrist D, Papadia F, Bacino
CA, den Dunnen JT, van Ommen GJ, Breuning MH, Hennekam RC, Peters DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Sylvius Laboratory, Leiden, The Netherlands.

CREB-binding protein and p300 function as transcriptional coactivators in the
regulation of gene expression through various signal-transduction pathways. Both 
are potent histone acetyl transferases. A certain level of CREB-binding protein
is essential for normal development, since inactivation of one allele causes
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS). There is a direct link between loss of acetyl
transferase activity and RSTS, which indicates that the disorder is caused by
aberrant chromatin regulation. We screened the entire CREB-binding protein gene
(CBP) for mutations in patients with RSTS by using methods that find point
mutations and larger rearrangements. In 92 patients, we were able to identify a
total of 36 mutations in CBP. By using multiple ligation-dependent probe
amplification, we found not only several deletions but also the first reported
intragenic duplication in a patient with RSTS. We extended the search for
mutations to the EP300 gene and showed that mutations in EP300 also cause this
disorder. These are the first mutations identified in EP300 for a congenital
disorder.

PMCID: PMC1199295
PMID: 15706485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Dev Cell. 2005 Feb;8(2):153-66.

c-Myb and p300 regulate hematopoietic stem cell proliferation and
differentiation.

Sandberg ML(1), Sutton SE, Pletcher MT, Wiltshire T, Tarantino LM, Hogenesch JB, 
Cooke MP.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation, San Diego, California 
92121, USA.

Precise control of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) proliferation and
differentiation is needed to maintain a lifetime supply of blood cells. Using
genome-wide ENU mutagenesis and phenotypic screening, we have identified a mouse 
line that harbors a point mutation in the transactivation (TA) domain of the
transcription factor c-Myb (M303V), which reduces c-Myb-dependent TA by
disrupting its interaction with the transcriptional coactivator p300. The
biological consequences of the c-Myb(M303V/M303V) mutation include
thrombocytosis, megakaryocytosis, anemia, lymphopenia, and the absence of
eosinophils. Detailed analysis of hematopoiesis in c-Myb(M303V/M303V) mice
reveals distinct blocks in T cell, B cell, and red blood cell development, as
well as a remarkable 10-fold increase in the number of HSCs. Cell cycle analyses 
show that twice as many HSCs from c-Myb(M303V/M303V) animals are actively
cycling. Thus c-Myb, through interaction with p300, controls the proliferation
and differentiation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.

PMID: 15691758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Mar;35(3):946-56.

Analysis of transforming growth factor-beta1-induced Ig germ-line gamma2b
transcription and its implication for IgA isotype switching.

Park SR(1), Seo GY, Choi AJ, Stavnezer J, Kim PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National
University, Chunchon, S.Korea.

Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 directs class switch recombination (CSR)
to IgG2b as well as to IgA. Smad3/4, Runx3 and p300 mediate TGF-beta1-induced
germ-line (GL) alpha transcription leading to IgA expression. However, the
molecular mechanisms by which TGF-beta1 induces IgG2b CSR are unknown. We used
luciferase reporter plasmids to investigate how TGF-beta1 regulates the activity 
of the promoter for GL transcripts of IgG2b constant gene (GLgamma2b promoter).
Similarly to the GLalpha promoter, overexpression of Smad3/4 and Runx3 enhances
TGF-beta1-induced GLgamma2b promoter activity. Mutation analysis of the promoter 
identified likely Smad- and Runx3-binding sites. Also similar to the GLalpha
promoter, overexpression of p300 enhances Smad3/4-mediated promoter activity,
whereas E1A represses promoter activity. Since these regulation mechanisms
underlying both GLalpha and GLgamma2b transcription are similar, we explored the 
possibility that TGF-beta1 induces IgA CSR via transitional IgG2b CSR. TGF-beta1 
enhances the expression of both Ialpha-Cmu and Ialpha-Cgamma2b circle
transcripts, indicative of direct (Smu-->Salpha) and sequential CSR
(Smu-->Sgamma2b-->Salpha).

PMID: 15688346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Blood. 2005 May 15;105(10):3910-7. Epub 2005 Jan 27.

Regulation of endothelial thrombomodulin expression by inflammatory cytokines is 
mediated by activation of nuclear factor-kappa B.

Sohn RH(1), Deming CB, Johns DC, Champion HC, Bian C, Gardner K, Rade JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Carnegie 568, 600 N 
Wolfe St, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Inflammation and thrombosis are increasingly recognized as interrelated biologic 
processes. Endothelial cell expression of thrombomodulin (TM), a key component of
the anticoagulant protein C pathway, is potently inhibited by inflammatory
cytokines. Because the mechanism underlying this effect is largely unknown, we
investigated a potential role for the inflammatory transcription factor nuclear
factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB). Blocking NF-kappaB activation effectively prevented
cytokine-induced down-regulation of TM, both in vitro and in a mouse model of
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)-mediated lung injury. Although the TM
promoter lacks a classic NF-kappaB consensus site, it does contain tandem Ets
transcription factor binding sites previously shown to be important for both
constitutive TM gene expression and cytokine-induced repression. Using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation, we found 
that multiple Ets species bind to the TNF-alpha response element within the TM
promoter. Although cytokine exposure did not alter Ets factor binding, it did
reduce binding of p300, a coactivator required by Ets for full transcriptional
activity. Overexpression of p300 also prevented TM repression by cytokines. We
conclude that NF-kappaB is a critical mediator of TM repression by cytokines.
Further evidence suggests a mechanism involving competition by NF-kappaB for
limited pools of the transcriptional coactivator p300 necessary for TM gene
expression.

PMID: 15677570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Apr 1;94(5):1058-67.

Dexamethasone upregulates the expression of the nuclear cofactor p300 and its
interaction with C/EBPbeta in cultured myotubes.

Yang H(1), Menconi MJ, Wei W, Petkova V, Hasselgren PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Muscle wasting during sepsis and other catabolic conditions is, at least in part,
mediated by glucocorticoids and is associated with upregulated transcription of
multiple genes in the ubiquitin-proteasome proteolytic pathway. In addition to
transcription factors, nuclear cofactors, including p300, regulate gene
transcription. We tested the hypothesis that glucocorticoids upregulate the
expression of p300 in muscle cells. Treatment of cultured L6 myotubes, a rat
skeletal muscle cell line, with dexamethasone resulted in a dose- and
time-dependent increase in p300 protein and mRNA levels. Surprisingly, the effect
of dexamethasone on p300 levels was not inhibited by the glucocorticoid receptor 
(GR) antagonist RU38486 and RU38486 exerted an agonist effect on p300, increasing
its expression. Co-immunoprecipitation showed that treatment of the myotubes with
dexamethasone resulted in protein-protein interaction between p300 and C/EBPbeta,
but not C/EBPdelta. The present results suggest that glucocorticoids upregulate
the expression of p300 and its interaction with C/EBPbeta in skeletal muscle.
Increased expression and activity of p300 may be involved in the regulation of
gene transcription in glucocorticoid-dependent muscle wasting.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15669015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Cell. 2005 Jan 21;17(2):251-64.

E6 oncoprotein represses p53-dependent gene activation via inhibition of protein 
acetylation independently of inducing p53 degradation.

Thomas MC(1), Chiang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The mechanism employed by DNA tumor viruses to inhibit p53-dependent
transcription from chromatin is poorly understood. Here, we use in
vitro-reconstituted chromatin and UV-irradiated cells to define the mechanism of 
human papillomavirus E6 oncoprotein in repressing p53-dependent transcription. We
demonstrate that E6 does not prevent p53 or p300 recruitment to the chromatin but
inhibits p300-mediated acetylation on p53 and nucleosomal core histones. This
suppression of protein acetylation requires the E6-interacting regions of p300.
Moreover, E6 mutants unable to interact with p53 or p300, but not deficient in
inducing p53 degradation, fail to inhibit p53-mediated activation, indicating
that a p53-E6-p300-containing protein complex is critical for repressing
p53-targeted gene activation. That E6 acts as a molecular switch converting
p53-p300 from an activating complex to a repressing entity on the chromatin,
which occurs independently of E6AP-mediated protein degradation pathway, may
represent a general mechanism for gene regulation.

PMID: 15664194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):14240-51. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

Activity of hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha is regulated by association with the 
NF-kappaB essential modulator.

Bracken CP(1), Whitelaw ML, Peet DJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Biomedical Science and the Centre for the Molecular
Genetics of Development, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, 5005,
Australia.

The hypoxia-inducible factors 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and 2alpha (HIF-2alpha) are key
regulators of the transcriptional response to low oxygen and are closely related 
in domain architecture, DNA binding, and activation mechanisms. Despite these
similarities, targeted disruption of the HIF-alpha genes in mice results in
distinctly different phenotypes demonstrating nonredundancy of function, although
the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here we report on the novel and
specific interaction of HIF-2alpha, but not HIF-1alpha, with the NF-kappaB
essential modulator (NEMO) using immunoprecipitation, mammalian two-hybrid, and
in vitro protein interaction assays. Reporter gene assays demonstrate that this
interaction specifically enhances normoxic HIF-2alpha transcriptional activity,
independently of the HIF-2alpha transactivation domain, consistent with a model
by which NEMO aids CBP/p300 recruitment to HIF-2alpha. In contrast, HIF-2alpha
overexpression does not alter NF-kappaB signaling, suggesting that the functional
consequence of the HIF-2alpha/NEMO interaction is limited to the HIF pathway. The
specificity of NEMO for HIF-2alpha represents one of the few known differential
protein-protein interactions between the HIF-alpha proteins, which has important 
implications for the activity of HIF-2alpha and is also the first postulated
NF-kappaB-independent role for NEMO.

PMID: 15653678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Bone Miner Res. 2005 Feb;20(2):305-17. Epub 2004 Nov 16.

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 stimulates cyclic vitamin D receptor/retinoid X receptor
DNA-binding, co-activator recruitment, and histone acetylation in intact
osteoblasts.

Kim S(1), Shevde NK, Pike JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53706, USA.

1,25(OH)2D3 induces gene expression through the VDR. We used chromatin
immunoprecipitation techniques to explore this 1,25(OH)2D3-induced process on the
25-hydroxyvitamin D3-24-hydroxylase (Cyp24) and Opn gene promoters in intact
osteoblasts. Our studies show that 1,25(OH)2D3-induced transactivation is a
dynamic process that involves promoter-specific localization of VDR and RXR,
recruitment of histone acetyltransferase complexes, and in the case of the Cyp24 
gene, modification of histone 4.INTRODUCTION: The vitamin D receptor (VDR) binds 
as a retinoid X receptor (RXR) heterodimer to target DNA sequences and
facilitates the recruitment of protein complexes that are essential for
transcriptional modulation. These complexes include an acetyltransferase
component that contains members of the p160 family and p300/CBP as well as human 
mediator that contains D receptor interacting protein (DRIP205). The objective of
this study was to investigate the kinetics of VDR/RXR binding to
25-hydroxyvitamin D3-24-hydroxylase (Cyp24) and osteopontin (Opn) target gene
promoters and to explore the recruitment and subsequent activities of
co-activator complexes on these target genes in intact cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mouse osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells and mouse primary
calvarial osteoblasts (MOBs) were cultured in alphaMEM medium supplemented with
10% FBS. Confluent cells were treated with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D3]
or the vitamin D antagonist ZK159222, and the ability of these compounds to
induce localization of VDR and RXR to specific regions of Cyp24 and Opn target
genes was examined using chromatin immunoprecipitation techniques. The ability of
both compounds to induce the recruitment of co-activator proteins such as p160
family members, CBP and DRIP205, and to increase the level of histone acetylation
on the two gene promoters in MC3T3-E1 cells was also examined.
RESULTS: 1,25(OH)2D3 induces rapid association of the VDR and RXR with both the
Cyp24 and the Opn gene promoters in both MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts and MOBs,
interactions that are both rapid and cyclic in nature. 1,25(OH)2D3 treatment also
induces rapid recruitment of co-regulators such as SRC-1, -2, and -3, CBP, and
p300 to both promoters, recruitment that leads to acetylation of histone 4 on
Cyp24 but not the Opn. DRIP205 is also recruited to the two promoters in response
to hormonal stimulation, an appearance that correlates directly with entry of RNA
pol II. Studies with the vitamin D antagonist ZK159222 suggest a complex mode of 
action of this compound in blocking 1,25(OH)2D3-induced transcription. Our
studies indicate that 1,25(OH)2D3-induced transactivation in intact osteoblasts
is a dynamic process that involves promoter-specific localization of VDR and RXR 
as well as the recruitment of a number of co-regulators essential to
1,25(OH)2D3-induced transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that co-regulators essential for the transcriptional
activity of the steroid receptor gene family are indeed critical for the actions 
of 1,25(OH)2D3. Selective use of co-regulators by target genes, however, may
provide a mechanism for the unique and perhaps gene-selective responses observed 
with synthetic analogs such as ZK159222.

PMID: 15647825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biochemistry. 2005 Jan 18;44(2):490-7.

CBP/p300 TAZ1 domain forms a structured scaffold for ligand binding.

De Guzman RN(1), Wojciak JM, Martinez-Yamout MA, Dyson HJ, Wright PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The
Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

The transcriptional coactivator protein CBP and its paralog p300 each contain two
homologous zinc-containing TAZ domains, which constitute the interaction sites
for a number of transcription factors. Previous reports of the three-dimensional 
structures of TAZ1 in complex with binding partners and of the isolated CBP TAZ2 
domain show a distinctive topology composed of four amphipathic helices,
organized by three zinc-binding clusters with HCCC-type coordination. The
isolated CBP TAZ2 domain forms a stable three-dimensional structure in solution, 
but a recent report [Dial, R., Sun, Z., and Freedman, S. J. (2003) Biochemistry
42, 9937] suggested that the isolated p300 TAZ1 domain lacks a well-defined
structure and behaves like a molten globule, even in the presence of Zn(2+), and 
that the formation of a stable three-dimensional structure requires binding of a 
protein partner. In marked contrast to this result, we find that both the CBP and
p300 TAZ domains in the presence of stoichiometric concentrations of Zn(2+) adopt
a well-defined structure in solution in the absence of binding partners. We have 
determined the three-dimensional structure of the isolated CBP TAZ1 domain by NMR
methods and show that it has the same structure in the presence and absence of
binding partners. This is an important finding: whether the free TAZ1 domain
forms a folded structure or behaves as a molten globule will have a significant
bearing on the mechanism of protein-protein recognition. Although TAZ1 and TAZ2
share many structural similarities, there is a major structural difference: the
fourth helix is oriented in opposite directions in the TAZ1 and TAZ2 domains. The
structure of the free TAZ1 domain suggests that this difference is an inherent
feature that determines binding specificity and facilitates discrimination
between different subsets of transcription factors by the two TAZ domains.

PMID: 15641773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 18;280(11):10264-76. Epub 2005 Jan 4.

SIRT1 deacetylation and repression of p300 involves lysine residues 1020/1024
within the cell cycle regulatory domain 1.

Bouras T(1), Fu M, Sauve AA, Wang F, Quong AA, Perkins ND, Hay RT, Gu W, Pestell 
RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, 3970 Reservoir Rd.,Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The SIR2 family of nicotinamide adenosine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent
deacetylases modulates diverse biological functions in different species,
including longevity, apoptosis, cell cycle exit, and cellular differentiation.
SIRT1, the closest mammalian ortholog of the yeast SIR2 (silent information
regulator 2) gene, represses several transcription factors, including p53,
NFkappaB and forkhead proteins. The p300 protein serves as a rate-limiting
transcriptional cointegrator of diverse transcription factors either to activate 
or to repress transcription through modular subdomains. Herein, SIRT1 physically 
interacted with and repressed p300 transactivation, requiring the NAD-dependent
deacetylase activity of SIRT1. SIRT1 repression involved the CRD1 transcriptional
repression domain of p300. Two residues within the CRD1 domain (Lys-1020 and
Lys-1024) were required for SIRT1 repression and served as substrates for SIRT1
deacetylation. These residues also serve as acceptor lysines for modification by 
the ubiquitin-like SUMO protein. The SUMO-specific protease SSP3 relieved SIRT1
repression of p300. SSP3 antagonism of SIRT1 required the SUMO-deconjugating
function of SSP3. Thus, p300 serves as a deacetylase substrate for SIRT1 through 
a conserved SUMO consensus motif. Because p300 is a limiting transcriptional
cofactor, deacetylation and repression of p300 by SIRT1 may serve an important
integration point during metabolism and cellular differentiation.

PMID: 15632193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. EMBO J. 2005 Jan 12;24(1):85-96. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Arginine methyltransferase CARM1 is a promoter-specific regulator of
NF-kappaB-dependent gene expression.

Covic M(1), Hassa PO, Saccani S, Buerki C, Meier NI, Lombardi C, Imhof R, Bedford
MT, Natoli G, Hottiger MO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) plays an important role in the transcriptional 
regulation of genes involved in inflammation and cell survival. Here, we show
that coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase CARM1/PRMT4 is a novel
transcriptional coactivator of NF-kappaB and functions as a promoter-specific
regulator of NF-kappaB recruitment to chromatin. Carm1 knockout cells showed
impaired expression of a subset of NF-kappaB-dependent genes upon TNFalpha or LPS
stimulation. CARM1 forms a complex with p300 and NF-kappaB in vivo and interacts 
directly with the NF-kappaB subunit p65 in vitro. CARM1 seems to act in a
gene-specific manner mainly by enhancing NF-kappaB recruitment to cognate sites. 
Moreover, CARM1 synergistically coactivates NF-kappaB-mediated transactivation,
in concert with the transcriptional coactivators p300/CREB-binding protein and
the p160 family of steroid receptor coactivators. For at least a subset of
CARM1-dependent NF-kappaB target genes, the enzymatic activities of both CARM1
and p300 are necessary for the observed synergy between CARM1 and p300. Our
results suggest that the cooperative action between protein arginine
methyltransferases and protein lysine acetyltransferases regulates
NF-kappaB-dependent gene activation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC544912
PMID: 15616592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biochem. 2004 Sep;136(3):313-9.

Transcriptional coactivators CBP and p300 cooperatively enhance
HNF-1alpha-mediated expression of the albumin gene in hepatocytes.

Dohda T(1), Kaneoka H, Inayoshi Y, Kamihira M, Miyake K, Iijima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Nagoya
University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8603, Japan.

Transcriptional coactivators, CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300, exhibit high
homology in structure and similar functions. In the present study, we analyzed
the function of CBP and p300 proteins as transcriptional coactivators in the
expression of albumin in hepatocytes. The expression levels of CBP and p300 were 
high in fetal hepatocytes, but low in adult ones. Immunoprecipitation assays
showed that both CBP and p300 interacted with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) in primary hepatocytes. Furthermore, CBP and p300 were
co-precipitated without HNF-1alpha. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
revealed that both CBP and p300 are located in the albumin promoter region in
hepatocytes. These results suggested that HNF-1alpha, CBP and p300 were
incorporated into a preinitiation complex of RNA polymerase II at the albumin
promoter. Luciferase reporter assays showed that CBP and p300 cooperatively
triggered HNF-1alpha-mediated transcription of the albumin promoter. In addition,
inhibition of CBP or p300 using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) resulted in a
reduction in albumin expression. These results suggest that both CBP and p300 are
required for enhanced expression of albumin.

PMID: 15598887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Chembiochem. 2005 Jan;6(1):162-70.

The transcriptional coactivator p300 plays a critical role in the hypertrophic
and protective pathways induced by phenylephrine in cardiac cells but is specific
to the hypertrophic effect of urocortin.

Davidson SM(1), Townsend PA, Carroll C, Yurek-George A, Balasubramanyam K, Kundu 
TK, Stephanou A, Packham G, Ganesan A, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London, 30 Guilford Street,
London WC1N 1EH, UK. s.davidson@ucl.ac.uk

Anacardic acid is an alkylsalicylic acid obtained from cashew-nut-shell liquid,
and is a potent inhibitor of p300 histone acetyl-transferase (HAT) activity. We
have used anacardic acid to prevent the induction of hypertrophy in isolated
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. Hypertrophy was detected as an increase in cell
size, the rearrangement of sarcomeres into a striated pattern, and the induction 
of embryonic genes beta-MHC and ANF. p300 inhibition was equally effective at
preventing hypertrophy whether it was induced by treatment with the
alpha1-adrenergic agonist, phenylephrine, or by treatment with urocortin, a
member of the corticotrophin-releasing-factor family, which stimulates specific G
protein-coupled receptors. Spiruchostatin A is a natural-product inhibitor of
histone deacetylases (HDAC) similar to the depsipeptide FK228 molecule. We have
recently synthesized spiruchostatin A and now show that, although HDACs act in
opposition to HATs, spiruchostatin A has the same effect as anacardic acid, that 
is, it prevents the induction of hypertrophy in response to phenylephrine or
urocortin. Pretreatment with either phenylephrine or urocortin reduced the extent
of death observed after the exposure of isolated cardiomyocytes to simulated
ischaemia and reoxygenation. Inhibition of p300 or HDAC activity eliminated the
protection conferred by phenylephrine; however, it did not affect the protection 
conferred by urocortin. Therefore, it might eventually be possible to use
chemical inhibitors such as these in a therapeutic setting to dissociate the
protective effect and hypertrophic effect of urocortin, enhancing the survival of
cardiomyocytes exposed to transient ischemia, while inhibiting the hypertrophic
pathway that would otherwise be induced concurrently.

PMID: 15593114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Horm Behav. 2005 Jan;47(1):29-38.

Expression of nuclear receptor coactivators in androgen-responsive and
-unresponsive motoneurons.

O'Bryant EL(1), Jordan CL.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program and Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

Adult rat lumbar motoneurons in the spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus (SNB)
respond to androgens with an increase in soma size. This response is mediated by 
the androgen receptor (AR) in these motoneurons. Interestingly, other lumbar
motoneurons in the rat possess the AR, yet do not respond to androgens in this
fashion. This paradox suggests the existence and participation of nuclear
receptor coregulators in conferring direct androgen-responsiveness to select
motoneurons in the adult rat spinal cord. Nuclear receptor coregulators have
received much attention recently for their proposed role in enhancing or
repressing the transcriptional activity of steroid hormone receptors. The present
study used immunocytochemistry to identify a number of nuclear receptor
coactivators that are expressed by adult lumbar motoneurons: SRC-1, SRC-2, CBP,
p300, and cJUN. Results of this study indicate that all five of these
coactivators are abundantly expressed in the androgen-responsive SNB, and in two 
adjacent motor pools, the androgen-responsive dorsolateral nucleus (DLN), and the
androgen-unresponsive retrodorsolateral nucleus (RDLN). While we detected
significant regional differences for only SRC-1 and cJUN, the SNB consistently
contained the highest percentage of immunoreactive motoneurons for all five
cofactors examined. Our results indicate five different putative cofactors have
the potential to participate in motoneuronal responses to androgens, since their 
distribution overlaps well with the distribution of ARs in these motoneurons.

PMID: 15579263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):6204-14. Epub 2004 Dec 2.

Cell cycle-mediated regulation of smooth muscle alpha-actin gene transcription in
fibroblasts and vascular smooth muscle cells involves multiple adenovirus
E1A-interacting cofactors.

Wang SX(1), Elder PK, Zheng Y, Strauch AR, Kelm RJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Vermont, 208 South Park Dr., Burlington,
VT 05405, USA.

Expression of smooth muscle alpha-actin in growth factor-induced myofibroblasts
and in differentiated vascular smooth muscle cells is transcriptionally
controlled by multiple positive or negative trans-acting factors interacting with
distinct cis-elements in the 5'-flanking region of the gene. Because none of the 
transcriptional regulators reported to date is smooth muscle cell- or
myofibroblast-specific per se, the dynamic interplay among many factors
interacting at specific sites along the promoter appears to be a signature
feature of smooth muscle alpha-actin gene regulation in these cell types. Herein,
the ability of the adenovirus E1A 12 S protein to bind and functionally
inactivate specific cell regulatory factors has been exploited to identify
several previously unknown coactivators of the mouse smooth muscle alpha-actin
promoter in rodent fibroblasts and vascular smooth muscle cells. In transient
cotransfection assays, ectopic expression of wild type E1A suppressed promoter
activity in a dose- and cis-element-dependent manner. In asynchronous cells,
N-terminal E1A mutants defective in CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 binding
capacity exhibited markedly reduced inhibitory activity toward a smooth muscle
alpha-actin promoter driven by a composite TEF-1-, SRF-, and Sp1/3-regulated
enhancer. In synchronized cells, however, a more complex mutant E1A inhibitory
pattern indicated that collaboration between CBP/p300 and the retinoblastoma
family of pocket proteins was required to produce a fully functional enhancer.
Cotransfection experiments conducted with Rb(-/-) fibroblasts demonstrated the
necessity of pRB in augmenting smooth muscle alpha-actin enhancer/promoter
activity. Physical interaction studies with the use of purified wild type and
mutant E1A proteins confirmed that CBP, p300, and pRB were targets of E1A binding
in nuclear extracts of vascular smooth muscle cells and/or fibroblasts.
Collectively, these results suggest that a repertoire of E1A-interacting
proteins, namely CBP/p300 and pRB, serve to integrate the activities of multiple 
trans-acting factors to control smooth muscle alpha-actin gene transcription in a
cell type- and cell cycle-dependent manner.

PMID: 15576380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4321-8. Epub 2004 Nov 29.

Ca2+/calmodulin kinase-dependent activation of hypoxia inducible factor 1
transcriptional activity in cells subjected to intermittent hypoxia.

Yuan G(1), Nanduri J, Bhasker CR, Semenza GL, Prabhakar NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, School of Medicine, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Intermittent hypoxia (IH) occurs in many pathological conditions. However, very
little is known about the molecular mechanisms associated with IH.
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) mediates transcriptional responses to
continuous hypoxia. In the present study, we investigated whether IH activates
HIF-1 and, if so, which signaling pathways are involved. PC12 cells were exposed 
to either to 20% O2 (non-hypoxic control) or to 60 cycles consisting of 30 s at
1.5% O2, followed by 4 min at 20% O2 (IH). Western blot analysis revealed
significant increases in HIF-1alpha protein in nuclear extracts of cells
subjected to IH. Expression of a HIF-1-dependent reporter gene was increased
3-fold in cells subjected to IH. Although IH induced the activation of ERK1,
ERK2, JNK, PKC-alpha, and PKC-gamma, inhibitors of these kinases and of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase did not block HIF-1-mediated reporter gene
expression induced by IH, indicating that signaling via these kinases was not
required. In contrast, addition of the intracellular Ca2+ chelator BAPTA-AM or
the Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent (CaM) kinase inhibitor KN93 blocked reporter gene
activation in response to IH. CaM kinase activity was increased 5-fold in cells
subjected to IH. KN 93 prevented IH-induced transactivation mediated by
HIF-1alpha, and its coactivator p300, which was phosphorylated by CaM kinase II
in vitro. Expression of the HIF-1-regulated gene encoding tyrosine hydroxylase
was induced by IH and this effect was blocked by KN93. These observations suggest
that IH induces HIF-1 transcriptional activity via a novel signaling pathway
involving CaM kinase.

PMID: 15569687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4929-39. Epub 2004 Nov 24.

Notch signals inhibit the development of erythroid/megakaryocytic cells by
suppressing GATA-1 activity through the induction of HES1.

Ishiko E(1), Matsumura I, Ezoe S, Gale K, Ishiko J, Satoh Y, Tanaka H, Shibayama 
H, Mizuki M, Era T, Enver T, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The effects of Notch signals on the erythroid/megakaryocytic differentiation of
hematopoietic cells were examined. Activation of Notch signals by the
intracellular Notch1 or an estradiol-inducible form of Notch1/ER suppressed the
expression of the erythroid marker glycophorin A in an erythroid/megakaryocytic
cell line K562. Although Mock-transfected K562 cells underwent megakaryocytic
differentiation in response to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA),
estradiol-activated Notch1/ER induced apoptosis during TPA treatment in the
transfectant, which was accompanied by the reduced expression of an antiapoptotic
molecule Bcl-XL. Even when apoptosis was prevented by the overexpression of
Bcl-XL, activated Notch signals still inhibited TPA-induced megakaryocytic
differentiation. As for this mechanism, Notch1/recombination signal binding
protein J-kappa-induced HES1 but not HES5 was found to inhibit the function of an
erythroid/megakaryocytic lineage-specific transcription factor GATA-1. Although
HES1 did not affect the DNA binding activity of GATA-1 in gel shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, it directly bound to GATA-1 and dissociated a
critical transcriptional cofactor, p300, from GATA-1. Furthermore, overexpressed 
HES1 inhibited the development of erythroid and megakaryocytic cells in colony
assays. Also, the Notch ligand Jagged1 expressed on NIH3T3 cells suppressed the
development of erythroid and megakaryocytic cells from cocultured Lin-Sca-1+
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. These results suggest that Notch1 inhibits
the development of erythroid/megakaryocytic cells by suppressing GATA-1 activity 
through HES1.

PMID: 15563463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(23):10416-24.

Stage-specific repression by the EKLF transcriptional activator.

Chen X(1), Bieker JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Brookdale Department of Molecular, Cell and
Developmental Biology, Box 1020, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029,
USA.

Dynamic changes in transcription factor function can be mediated by switching its
interaction with coactivators and corepressors. Erythroid Kruppel-like factor
(EKLF) is an erythroid cell-specific transcription factor that plays a critical
role in beta-globin gene activation via its interactions with CBP/p300 and
SWI/SNF proteins. Unexpectedly, it also interacts with Sin3A and histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) corepressors via its zinc finger domain. We now find that
selected point mutants can uncouple activation and repression and that an intact 
finger structure is not required for interactions with Sin3A/HDAC1 or for
transrepression. Most intriguingly, EKLF repression exhibits stage specificity,
with reversible EKLF-Sin3A interactions playing a key role in this process.
Finally, we have located a key lysine residue that is both a substrate for CBP
acetylation and required for Sin3A interaction. These data suggest a model
whereby the stage of the erythroid cell alters the acetylation status of EKLF and
plays a critical role in directing its coactivator-corepressor interactions and
downstream transcriptional effects.

PMCID: PMC529052
PMID: 15542849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 10;325(2):541-8.

Region 752-761 of STAT3 is critical for SRC-1 recruitment and Ser727
phosphorylation.

Zhao H(1), Nakajima R, Kunimoto H, Sasaki T, Kojima H, Nakajima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Osaka City University Graduate School of Medicine,
1-4-3 Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

STAT3 regulates many target genes in response to cytokines and growth factors. To
study the mechanisms of STAT3-dependent transcription, we established several
cell lines in which HepG2-STAT3-knockdown cells were reconstituted with a variety
of STAT3 mutants. Using these cell lines, we found that truncated STAT3(1-750),
but not STAT3(1-761), could not recruit SRC-1/NcoA-1 and was not phosphorylated
on Ser727. Furthermore, mutation of STAT3 L755 and F757 to alanines caused the
loss of STAT3-dependent SRC-1 recruitment, leaving Ser727 phosphorylation intact.
Consistent with this, the STAT3-L755A/F757A mutant showed no increase in
acetylated histone H3 at Lys14 and a decreased level of RNA polymerase II
recruited to the target gene promoter, although p300 recruitment and histone H4
acetylation were intact. This mutant also lost responsiveness to co-expressed
SRC-1. Thus, the conserved STAT3 region from 752 to 761, called STAT3 CR2, plays 
critical roles in STAT3-dependent transcription by recruiting SRC-1 and allowing 
Ser727 phosphorylation.

PMID: 15530426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;24(22):10083-98.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 binding to p300 stimulates DNA-dependent
acetylation of p53.

Dornan D(1), Eckert M, Wallace M, Shimizu H, Ramsay E, Hupp TR, Ball KL.

Author information: 
(1)CRUK Interferon and Cell Signalling Group, Cell Signalling Unit, Cancer
Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road
South, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, United Kingdom.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and p53 control distinct sets of
downstream genes; however, these two antioncogenic transcription factors converge
to regulate p21 gene expression and to inhibit tumor formation. Here we
investigate the mechanism by which IRF-1 and p53 synergize at the p21 promoter
and show that stimulation of p21 transcription by IRF-1 does not require its
DNA-binding activity but relies on the ability of IRF-1 to bind the coactivator
p300 and to stimulate p53-dependent transcription by an allosteric mechanism.
Deletion of the p300-binding sites in IRF-1 eliminates the ability of IRF-1 to
stimulate p53 acetylation and associated p53 activity. Complementing this, small 
peptides derived from the IRF-1-p300 interface can bind to p300, stabilize the
binding of p300 to DNA-bound p53, stimulate p53 acetylation in trans, and
up-regulate p53-dependent activity from the p21 promoter. The nonacetylatable p53
mutant (p53-6KR) cannot be stimulated by IRF-1, further suggesting that p53
acetylation is the mechanism whereby IRF-1 modifies p53 activity. These data
expand the core p300-p53 protein LXXLL and PXXP interface by including an
IRF-1-p300 interface as an allosteric modifier of DNA-dependent acetylation of
p53 at the p21 promoter.

PMCID: PMC525491
PMID: 15509808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 31;279(53):55362-71. Epub 2004 Oct 26.

E2A-PBX1 interacts directly with the KIX domain of CBP/p300 in the induction of
proliferation in primary hematopoietic cells.

Bayly R(1), Chuen L, Currie RA, Hyndman BD, Casselman R, Blobel GA, LeBrun DP.

Author information: 
(1)Queen's University Cancer Research Institute, Department of Pathology and
Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6, Canada.

The E2A gene encodes DNA-binding transcription factors, called E12 and E47,
involved in cell specification and maturation. E2A is also involved in a
chromosomal translocation that leads to the expression of an oncogenic
transcription factor called E2A-PBX1 in cases of acute leukemia. In the work
described here, we elucidate the interaction between E2A-PBX1 and transcriptional
co-activators. We confirm that the E2A portion can interact with CBP and PCAF and
map required elements on E2A and CBP. On CBP, the interaction involves the KIX
domain, a well characterized domain that mediates interactions with several other
oncogenic transcription factors. On E2A, the interaction with CBP requires
conserved alpha-helical domains that reside within activation domains 1 and 2
(AD1 and AD2, respectively). Using purified, recombinant proteins, we show that
the E2A-CBP interaction is direct. Notwithstanding the previously demonstrated
ability of AD1 and AD2 to function independently, some of our findings suggest
functional cooperativity between these two domains. Finally, we show that the
CBP/p300-interactive helical domains of E2A are important in the induction of
proliferation in cultured primary bone marrow cells retrovirally transduced with 
E2A-PBX1. Our findings suggest that some aspects of E2A-PBX1 oncogenesis involve 
a direct interaction with the KIX domain of CBP/p300.

PMID: 15507449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Immunol. 2004 Oct 15;173(8):5196-208.

The 15-deoxy-delta12,14-prostaglandin J2 inhibits the inflammatory response in
primary rat astrocytes via down-regulating multiple steps in phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase-Akt-NF-kappaB-p300 pathway independent of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma.

Giri S(1), Rattan R, Singh AK, Singh I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston
29425, USA.

Ligands for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma), such as
15-deoxy-12,14-PGJ2 (15d-PGJ2), have been proposed as a new class of
anti-inflammatory compounds because 15d-PGJ2 was able to inhibit the induction of
inflammatory response genes such as inducible NO synthase (iNOS) and TNF
(TNF-alpha) in a PPAR-dependent manner in various cell types. In primary
astrocytes, the anti-inflammatory effects (inhibition of TNF-alpha, IL-1beta,
IL-6, and iNOS gene expression) of 15d-PGJ2 are observed to be independent of
PPARgamma. Overexpression (wild-type and dominant-negative forms) of PPARgamma
and its antagonist (GW9662) did not alter the 15d-PGJ2-induced inhibition of
LPS/IFN-gamma-mediated iNOS and NF-kappaB activation. The 15d-PGJ2 inhibited the 
inflammatory response by inhibiting IkappaB kinase activity, which leads to the
inhibition of degradation of IkappaB and nuclear translocation of p65, thereby
regulating the NF-kappaB pathway. Moreover, 15d-PGJ2 also inhibited the
LPS/IFN-gamma-induced PI3K-Akt pathway. The 15d-PGJ2 inhibited the recruitment of
p300 by NF-kappaB (p65) and down-regulated the p300-mediated induction of iNOS
and NF-kappaB luciferase reporter activity. Coexpression of constitutive active
Akt and PI3K (p110) reversed the 15d-PGJ2-mediated inhibition of p300-induced
iNOS and NF-kappaB luciferase activity. This study demonstrates that 15d-PGJ2
suppresses inflammatory response by inhibiting NF-kappaB signaling at multiple
steps as well as by inhibiting the PI3K/Akt pathway independent of PPARgamma in
primary astrocytes.

PMID: 15470065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 12;279(46):47455-63. Epub 2004 Sep 1.

The tumor suppressor p53 abrogates Smad-dependent collagen gene induction in
mesenchymal cells.

Ghosh AK(1), Bhattacharyya S, Varga J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, University of Illinois at Chicago, College of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

The pleiotropic cytokine transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) is a potent
inducer of collagen synthesis and is implicated in the pathogenesis of fibrosis. 
Acting in concert with transcriptional coactivators p300/CBP, the Smads mediate
TGF-beta stimulation of collagen synthesis in human dermal fibroblasts. Little
information exists regarding positive and negative modulation of physiological
TGF-beta responses. Because the tumor suppressor p53 is implicated in connective 
tissue homeostasis, here we examined the regulation of collagen gene expression
by p53. Forced expression of ectopic p53 in dermal fibroblasts repressed basal
and TGF-beta-stimulated collagen gene expression, whereas the absence of cellular
p53 was associated with significantly enhanced transcriptional activity of the
Type I collagen gene (COL1A2) and collagen synthesis. Ectopic expression of p53
also repressed TGF-beta stimulation of promoter activity driven by minimal
Smad-binding elements, suggesting that p53 modulated Smad-dependent intracellular
signaling. Inhibition was not due to altered levels, phosphorylation, or nuclear 
translocation of cellular Smads. Treatment of fibroblasts with etoposide, a
potent inducer of cellular p53, abrogated TGF-beta stimulation of COL1A2 promoter
activity and collagen synthesis in a p53-dependent manner. Overexpression of the 
transcriptional coactivator p300 rescued TGF-beta stimulation of COL1A2 promoter 
activity in fibroblasts overexpressing p53. Furthermore, the ligand-induced
interaction of cellular Smad3 with p300 or with its cognate Smad-binding DNA
element and recruitment of p300 to the DNA-protein complex assembled on the
Smad-binding element were markedly reduced in p53-overexpressing fibroblasts.
Collectively, these results indicate, for the first time, that p53 is a potent
and selective endogenous repressor of TGF-beta-regulated collagen gene expression
in dermal fibroblasts. The ligand-dependent interaction of Smad3 with p300 may be
one of the targets of p53-mediated inhibition of TGF-beta responses. These
findings suggest that a novel and important physiologic function for the tumor
suppressor p53 is the regulation of fibrotic cellular responses.

PMID: 15345715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Blood. 2005 Jan 1;105(1):292-300. Epub 2004 Aug 26.

Physical and functional link of the leukemia-associated factors AML1 and PML.

Nguyen LA(1), Pandolfi PP, Aikawa Y, Tagata Y, Ohki M, Kitabayashi I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1 
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

The AML1-CBFbeta transcription factor complex is the most frequent target of
specific chromosome translocations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The
promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene is also frequently involved in AML-associated
translocation. Here we report that a specific isoform PML I forms a complex with 
AML1. PML I was able to recruit AML1 and coactivator p300 in PML nuclear bodies
and enhance the AML1-mediated transcription in the presence of p300. A specific
C-terminal region of PML I and a C-terminal region of AML1 were found to be
required for both their association and colocalization in the nuclear bodies.
Overexpression of PML I stimulates myeloid cells to differentiate. These results 
suggest that PML I could act as a mediator for AML1 and its coactivator p300/CBP 
to assemble into functional complexes and, consequently, activate AML1-dependent 
transcription and myeloid cell differentiation.

PMID: 15331439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 22;279(43):44294-302. Epub 2004 Aug 11.

Transcriptional regulation of dentin matrix protein 1 by JunB and p300 during
osteoblast differentiation.

Narayanan K(1), Srinivas R, Peterson MC, Ramachandran A, Hao J, Thimmapaya B,
Scherer PE, George A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, College of Dentistry, University of Illinois,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) is an acidic noncollagenous protein localized
specifically in the mineralized matrix of bone and dentin. Expression analyses
demonstrate that DMP1 is differentially regulated in osteoblasts and
odontoblasts. Earlier we have reported on the transcriptional regulation of DMP1 
by c-Fos and c-Jun (AP-1) transcription factors. Results from earlier study
indicate that c-Fos and c-Jun play an important role in early osteoblast
differentiation, whereas they do not have a significant effect on the terminally 
differentiated osteoblasts. In this paper, we demonstrate a regulatory mechanism 
by which JunB transcriptionally controls the expression of DMP1 during osteoblast
differentiation. The cooperative interaction of JunB with p300 has been shown to 
dramatically modulate the DMP1 promoter activity during mineralization.
Immunoprecipitation and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrate the
interaction of JunB and p300 in vivo. Further, phosphorylation of JunB at Ser-79 
was found to be essential for its interaction with p300. Intrinsic histone
acetyltransferase activity of p300 also plays a critical role in regulating DMP1 
gene expression.

PMID: 15308641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Aug 10;101(32):11593-8. Epub 2004 Aug 2.

In vitro transcription system delineates the distinct roles of the coactivators
pCAF and p300 during MyoD/E47-dependent transactivation.

Dilworth FJ(1), Seaver KJ, Fishburn AL, Htet SL, Tapscott SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, and
Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 1100
Fairview Avenue North C3-168, P.O. Box 19024, Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA.
jdilworth@ohri.ca

The transcriptional coactivators p300 and pCAF are necessary for the myogenic
factor MyoD to initiate the expression of skeletal muscle genes. In addition to
mediating histone acetylation, both of these factors can acetylate MyoD; however,
the complexity of cellular systems used to study MyoD has impeded delineation of 
the specific roles of these two acetyltransferases. Therefore, we established a
MyoD-dependent in vitro transcription system that permits us to determine the
roles of p300 and pCAF during MyoD-dependent transcriptional activation.
Consistent with results from cellular systems, we demonstrate that maximal levels
of transactivation in vitro require both p300 and pCAF, as well as the cofactor
acetyl CoA. Dissection of the steps leading to transcription initiation revealed 
that the activities of p300 and pCAF are not redundant. During the initial stages
of transactivation, p300 acetylates histone H3 and H4 within the promoter region 
and then recruits pCAF to MyoD. Once tethered to the promoter, pCAF acetylates
MyoD to facilitate the transactivation process. Thus, we have established that
pCAF and p300 carry out sequential and functionally distinct events on a promoter
leading to transcriptional activation. Further dissection of this in vitro
transcription system should be highly useful toward elucidating the mechanism by 
which coactivators facilitate differential gene expression by MyoD.

PMCID: PMC511026
PMID: 15289617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cancer Cell. 2004 Jul;6(1):33-43.

Small molecule blockade of transcriptional coactivation of the hypoxia-inducible 
factor pathway.

Kung AL(1), Zabludoff SD, France DS, Freedman SJ, Tanner EA, Vieira A,
Cornell-Kennon S, Lee J, Wang B, Wang J, Memmert K, Naegeli HU, Petersen F, Eck
MJ, Bair KW, Wood AW, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA. andrew_kung@dfci.harvard.edu

Homeostasis under hypoxic conditions is maintained through a coordinated
transcriptional response mediated by the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathway
and requires coactivation by the CBP and p300 transcriptional coactivators.
Through a target-based high-throughput screen, we identified chetomin as a
disrupter of HIF binding to p300. At a molecular level, chetomin disrupts the
structure of the CH1 domain of p300 and precludes its interaction with HIF,
thereby attenuating hypoxia-inducible transcription. Systemic administration of
chetomin inhibited hypoxia-inducible transcription within tumors and inhibited
tumor growth. These results demonstrate a therapeutic window for pharmacological 
attenuation of HIF activity and further establish the feasibility of disrupting a
signal transduction pathway by targeting the function of a transcriptional
coactivator with a small molecule.

PMID: 15261140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Immunol. 2004 Jul 15;173(2):962-8.

TGF-beta1 disrupts endotoxin signaling in microglial cells through Smad3 and MAPK
pathways.

Le Y(1), Iribarren P, Gong W, Cui Y, Zhang X, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunoregulation, Center for Cancer Research, and
Basic Research Program, Science Applications International Corporation-Frederick,
National Cancer Institute-Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Human formyl peptide receptor-like 1 and its mouse homologue formyl peptide
receptor 2 (FPR2) are G protein-coupled receptors used by a number of exogenous
and host-derived chemotactic peptides, including the 42 aa form of beta amyloid
peptide, a causative factor of Alzheimer's disease. Functional FPR2 was induced
by bacterial LPS in murine microglial cells, the resident phagocytic cells that
play a pivotal role in inflammatory and immunological diseases in the CNS. To
identify agents that may suppress microglial cell activation under
proinflammatory conditions, we investigated the effect of TGF-beta1 on the
expression of functional FPR2 by microglial cells activated by LPS. TGF-beta1
dose-dependently inhibited the mRNA expression and function of FPR2 in
LPS-activated microglial cells. The inhibitory effect of TGF-beta1 was mediated
by Smad3, a key signaling molecule coupled to the TGF-beta receptor, and the
transcription coactivator, p300. Also, TGF-beta1 activates MAPKs in microglial
cells that became refractory to further stimulation by LPS. These effects of
TGF-beta1 culminate in the inhibition of LPS-induced activation of NF-kappaB and 
the up-regulation of FPR2 in microglial cells. Thus, TGF-beta1 may exert a
protective role in CNS diseases characterized by microglial cell activation by
proinflammatory stimulants.

PMID: 15240683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mol Cell. 2004 Jul 2;15(1):83-94.

Coactivating factors p300 and CBP are transcriptionally crossregulated by Egr1 in
prostate cells, leading to divergent responses.

Yu J(1), de Belle I, Liang H, Adamson ED.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, Cancer Research Center, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Related coactivators p300 and CBP affect the transcriptional activities of many
transcription factors (TF), producing multiple downstream effects. Here we show
that immediate early response TF, Egr1, acts upstream of p300/CBP to induce or to
repress transcription, depending on the stimulus. Cells induced with serum to
increase endogenous Egr1 increase the transcription of p300/CBP only when Egr1
binding sites in the promoter are not mutated, causing the expression of
downstream targets of Egr1 which leads to survival and growth. Induction of
p300/CBP by Egr1 results in acetylation and stabilization of Egr1 and
transactivation of survival genes but repression of Egr1 and p300/CBP in negative
feedback loops. In contrast, induction of Egr1 by UV-C irradiation leads to
repression of p300/CBP transcription: Egr1 is preferentially phosphorylated,
leading to regulation of target genes that cause cell death. This complex balance
of opposing effects appears to finely modulate important cellular life and death 
responses.

PMID: 15225550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 3;279(36):37640-50. Epub 2004 Jun 25.

FOG-2 competes with GATA-4 for transcriptional coactivator p300 and represses
hypertrophic responses in cardiac myocytes.

Hirai M(1), Ono K, Morimoto T, Kawamura T, Wada H, Kita T, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

A multizinc finger protein, FOG-2, associates with a cardiac transcription
factor, GATA-4, and represses GATA-4-dependent transcription. GATA-4 is required 
not only for normal heart development but is also involved in hypertrophic
responses in cardiac myocytes; however, the effects of FOG-2 on these responses
are unknown. The interaction of GATA-4 with a transcriptional coactivator p300 is
required for its full transcriptional activity and the activation of the
embryonic program during myocardial cell hypertrophy. We show here that exogenous
FOG-2 represses phenylephrine-induced hypertrophic responses such as myofibrillar
organization, increases in cell size, and hypertrophy-associated gene
transcription. Using immunoprecipitation Western blotting, we demonstrate that
FOG-2 physically interacted with p300 and reduced the binding of GATA-4 to p300. 
In addition, in COS7 cells, in which the function of endogenous p300 is
disrupted, FOG-2 is unable to repress the GATA-4-dependent transcriptional
activities; however, FOG-2 markedly repressed the p300-mediated increase in the
DNA-binding and transcriptional activities of GATA-4 in these cells. Similarly,
FOG-2 inhibited a phenylephrine-induced increase in the p300/GATA-4 interaction, 
the GATA-4/DNA-binding, and transcriptional activities of GATA-4-dependent
promoters in cardiac myocytes as well. These findings demonstrate that FOG-2
represses hypertrophic responses in cardiac myocytes and that p300 is involved in
these repressive effects.

PMID: 15220332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Breast Cancer Res. 2004;6(4):R366-71. Epub 2004 May 14.

No germline mutations in the histone acetyltransferase gene EP300 in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 negative families with breast cancer and gastric, pancreatic, or colorectal
cancer.

Campbell IG(1), Choong D, Chenevix-Trench G; Kathleen Cuningham Foundation
Consortium for Research into Familial Breast Cancer.

Author information: 
(1)Victorian Breast Cancer Research Consortium Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Peter 
MacCallum Cancer Centre, Victoria, Australia. ian.campbell@petermac.org

INTRODUCTION: Mutations in BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM, TP53, CHK2 and PTEN account for
many, but not all, multiple-case breast and ovarian cancer families. The histone 
acetyltransferase gene EP300 may function as a tumour suppressor gene because it 
is sometimes somatically mutated in breast, colorectal, gastric and pancreatic
cancers, and is located on a region of chromosome 22 that frequently undergoes
loss of heterozygosity in many cancer types. We hypothesized that germline
mutations in EP300 may account for some breast cancer families that include cases
of gastric, pancreatic and/or colorectal cancer.
METHODS: We screened the entire coding region of EP300 for mutations in the
youngest affected members of 23 non-BRCA1/BRCA2 breast cancer families with at
least one confirmed case of gastric, pancreatic and/or colorectal cancer. These
families were ascertained in Australia through the Kathleen Cuningham Foundation 
Consortium for Research into Familial Breast Cancer.
RESULTS: Denaturing HPLC analysis identified a heterozygous alteration at codon
211, specifically a GGC to AGC (glycine to serine) alteration, in two
individuals. This conservative amino acid change was not within any known
functional domains of EP300. The frequency of the Ser211 variant did not differ
significantly between a series of 352 breast cancer patients (4.0%) and 254
control individuals (2.8%; P = 0.5).
CONCLUSION: The present study does not support a major role for EP300 mutations
in breast and ovarian cancer families with a history of gastric, pancreatic
and/or colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC468651
PMID: 15217503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 27;279(35):36828-40. Epub 2004 Jun 15.

RORalpha regulates the expression of genes involved in lipid homeostasis in
skeletal muscle cells: caveolin-3 and CPT-1 are direct targets of ROR.

Lau P(1), Nixon SJ, Parton RG, Muscat GE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Division of Molecular Genetics and
Development, School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, 
Queensland 4072, Australia.

The staggerer mice carry a deletion in the RORalpha gene and have a prolonged
humoral response, overproduce inflammatory cytokines, and are immunodeficient.
Furthermore, the staggerer mice display lowered plasma apoA-I/-II, decreased
plasma high density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycerides, and develop
hypo-alpha-lipoproteinemia and atherosclerosis. However, relatively little is
known about RORalpha in the context of target tissues, target genes, and lipid
homeostasis. For example, RORalpha is abundantly expressed in skeletal muscle, a 
major mass peripheral tissue that accounts for approximately 40% of total body
weight and 50% of energy expenditure. This lean tissue is a primary site of
glucose disposal and fatty acid oxidation. Consequently, muscle has a significant
role in insulin sensitivity, obesity, and the blood-lipid profile. In particular,
the role of RORalpha in skeletal muscle metabolism has not been investigated, and
the contribution of skeletal muscle to the ROR-/- phenotype has not been
resolved. We utilize ectopic dominant negative RORalpha expression in skeletal
muscle cells to understand the regulatory role of RORs in this major mass
peripheral tissue. Exogenous dominant negative RORalpha expression in skeletal
muscle cells represses the endogenous levels of RORalpha and -gamma mRNAs and
ROR-dependent gene expression. Moreover, we observed attenuated expression of
many genes involved in lipid homeostasis. Furthermore, we show that the muscle
carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1 and caveolin-3 promoters are directly regulated 
by ROR and coactivated by p300 and PGC-1. This study implicates RORs in the
control of lipid homeostasis in skeletal muscle. In conclusion, we speculate that
ROR agonists would increase fatty acid catabolism in muscle and suggest selective
activators of ROR may have therapeutic utility in the treatment of obesity and
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 15199055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Mol Med (Berl). 2004 Sep;82(9):621-8. Epub 2004 Jun 9.

Stimulation of c-Rel transcriptional activity by PKA catalytic subunit beta.

Yu SH(1), Chiang WC, Shih HM, Wu KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) is a eukaryotic transcription factor which
responds to different extracellular signals. It is involved in immune response,
inflammation, and cell proliferation. Increased expression of c-Rel (or its viral
homolog v-Rel), one component of the NF-kappaB factors, induces tumorigenesis in 
different systems. The activity of NF-kappaB can be regulated by protein kinase A
(PKA) in a cAMP-independent manner. Our previous results showed that c-MYC
induces the activity of PKA by inducing the transcription of the gene encoding
the PKA catalytic subunit beta (PKA-Cbeta). Constitutive expression of PKA-Cbeta 
in Rat1a cells induces their transformation. Here we show that CREB is unlikely
to be a phosphorylation target of PKA-Cbeta as characterized by different cell
lines. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that c-Rel is present as a
significant component of the NF-kappaB factors in c-MYC overexpressing status.
The transcriptional activity of c-Rel was significantly stimulated by PKA-Cbeta. 
Coactivators p300/CBP are at least partially responsible for the enhanced
activation mediated by c-Rel and PKA-Cbeta. Interaction between c-Rel and
PKA-Cbeta was demonstrated using coimmunoprecipitation assays.
Immunoprecipitation-in vitro phosphorylation assays showed the direct
phosphorylation of c-Rel by PKA-Cbeta. These results indicate that c-Rel is a
reasonable phosphorylation target of PKA-Cbeta, and that the transcriptional
activity of c-Rel is stimulated by PKA-Cbeta possibly through the interaction
with p300/CBP.

PMID: 15197457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Carcinogenesis. 2004 Oct;25(10):1991-2003. Epub 2004 Jun 10.

Insufficient p65 phosphorylation at S536 specifically contributes to the lack of 
NF-kappaB activation and transformation in resistant JB6 cells.

Hu J(1), Nakano H, Sakurai H, Colburn NH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute at Frederick, MD 21702, USA. huji@ncifcrf.gov

NF-kappaB activation is required for TNF-alpha-induced transformation of JB6
mouse epidermal cells. Deficient activation of p65 contributes to the lack of
NF-kappaB activation in transformation-resistant (P-) cells. We hypothesized that
the differential NF-kappaB activation involves differential p65 phosphorylation
arising from enzyme activity differences. Here we show that TNF-alpha induces
greater ERK-dependent p65 phosphorylation at S536 in transformation sensitive
(P+) cells than in P- cells. Our results establish that limited ERK content
contributes to a low IkappaB kinase (IKKbeta) level, in turn resulting in
insufficient p65 phosphorylation at S536 upon TNF-alpha stimulation in P- cells. 
Phosphorylation of p65 at S536 appears to play a role in TNF-alpha-induced p65
DNA binding and recruitment of p300 to the p65 complex as well as in release of
p65 bound to HDAC1 and 3. Blocking p65 phosphorylation at S536, but not at S276
or S529, abolishes p65 transactivational activity. Over-expression of p65 but not
p65 phosphorylation mutant (S536A) in transformation-resistant P- cells renders
these cells sensitive to TNF-alpha-induced transformation. Over-expression of p65
phosphorylation mimics p65-S536D or p65-S536E in P- cells and also rescues the
transformation response. These findings provide direct evidence that
phosphorylation of p65 at S536 is required for TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappaB
activation in the JB6 transformation model. The lack of NF-kappaB activation seen
in P- cells can be attributed to an insufficient level of p65 phosphorylation on 
S536 that arises from insufficient IKKbeta that in turn arises from insufficient 
ERK. Thus, p65 phosphorylation at S536 offers a potential molecular target for
cancer prevention.

PMID: 15192014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 13;279(33):34191-200. Epub 2004 May 27.

The synergistic effect of dexamethasone and all-trans-retinoic acid on hepatic
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene expression involves the coactivator p300.

Wang XL(1), Herzog B, Waltner-Law M, Hall RK, Shiota M, Granner DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-0615, USA.

Activation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene transcription in
response to all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) or a glucocorticoid such as
dexamethasone (Dex) requires a distinct arrangement of DNA-response elements and 
their cognate transcription activators on the gene promoter. Two of the accessory
factor-binding elements involved in the Dex response (gAF1 and gAF3) coincide
with the DNA-response elements involved in the RA response. We demonstrate here
that the combination of Dex/RA has a synergistic effect on endogenous PEPCK gene 
expression in rat hepatocytes and H4IIE hepatoma cells. Reporter gene studies
show that the gAF3 element and one of the two glucocorticoid receptor-binding
elements (GR1) are most important for this effect. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays revealed that when H4IIE cells were treated with Dex/RA, ligand-activated 
retinoic acid receptors (retinoic acid receptor/retinoid X receptor) and
glucocorticoid receptors are recruited to this gene promoter, as are the
transcription coregulators p300, CREB-binding protein, p/CIP, and SRC-1. Notably,
the recruitment of p300 and RNA polymerase II to the PEPCK promoter is increased 
by the combined Dex/RA treatment compared with Dex or RA treatment alone. The
functional importance of p300 in the Dex/RA response is illustrated by the
observation that selective reduction of this coactivator, but not that of
CREB-binding protein, abolishes the synergistic effect in H4IIE cells.

PMID: 15166231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biochem J. 2004 Aug 1;381(Pt 3):685-91.

The CBP/p300 TAZ1 domain in its native state is not a binding partner of MDM2.

Matt T(1), Martinez-Yamout MA, Dyson HJ, Wright PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and the Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology,
The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

Comment in
    Biochem J. 2004 Aug 1;381(Pt 3):e3-4.

The transcriptional co-activator CBP [CREB (cAMP-response-element-binding
protein)-binding protein] and its paralogue p300 play a key role in the
regulation of both activity and stability of the tumour suppressor p53.
Degradation of p53 is mediated by the ubiquitin ligase MDM2 (mouse double minute 
protein) and is also reported to be regulated by CBP/p300. Direct protein-protein
interaction between a central domain of MDM2 and the TAZ1 (transcriptional
adaptor zinc-binding domain) [C/H1 (cysteine/histidine-rich region 1)] domain of 
p300 and subsequent formation of a ternary complex including p53 have been
reported previously. We expressed and purified the proposed binding domains of
HDM2 (human homologue of MDM2) and CBP, and examined their interactions using CD 
spectroscopy. The binding studies were extended by using natively purified GST
(glutathione S-transferase)-p300 TAZ1 and GST-p53 fusion proteins, together with 
in vitro translated HDM2 fragments, under similar solution conditions to those in
previous studies, but omitting added EDTA, which causes unfolding and aggregation
of the zinc-binding TAZ1 domain. Comparing the binding properties of the known
TAZ1 interaction partners HIF-1alpha (hypoxia-inducible factor 1), CITED2
(CBP/p300-interacting transactivator with glutamic- and aspartic-rich tail) and
STAT2 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 2) with HDM2, our data
suggest that TAZ1 in its native state does not serve as a specific recognition
domain of HDM2. Rather, unfolded TAZ1 and HDM2 proteins have a high tendency to
aggregate, and non-specific protein complexes are formed under certain
conditions.

PMCID: PMC1133877
PMID: 15154850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 6;279(32):33984-91. Epub 2004 May 17.

Subcellular expression of autoimmune regulator is organized in a spatiotemporal
manner.

Akiyoshi H(1), Hatakeyama S, Pitkänen J, Mouri Y, Doucas V, Kudoh J, Tsurugaya K,
Uchida D, Matsushima A, Oshikawa K, Nakayama KI, Shimizu N, Peterson P, Matsumoto
M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Institute for Enzyme Research, University of
Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is responsible for the development of organ-specific 
autoimmune disease in a monogenic fashion. Rare and low levels of tissue
expression together with the lack of AIRE-expressing cell lines have hampered a
detailed analysis of the molecular dynamics of AIRE. Here we have established
cell lines stably transfected with AIRE and studied the regulatory mechanisms for
its subcellular expression. We found that nuclear body (NB) formation by AIRE was
dependent on the cell cycle. Biochemical fractionation revealed that a
significant proportion of AIRE is associated with the nuclear matrix, which
directs the functional domains of chromatin to provide sites for gene regulation.
Upon proteasome inhibition, AIRE NBs were increased with concomitant reduced
expression in the cytoplasm, suggesting that subcellular targeting of AIRE is
regulated by a ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. We also found that AIRE NBs compete 
for cAMP-response element-binding protein-binding protein/p300, a common
coactivator of transcription, with the promyelocytic leukemia gene product. These
results suggest that the transcriptional regulating activities of AIRE within a
cell are controlled and organized in a spatiotemporal manner.

PMID: 15150263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 23;279(30):31105-12. Epub 2004 May 15.

The transcriptional co-activator p/CIP (NCoA-3) is up-regulated by STAT6 and
serves as a positive regulator of transcriptional activation by STAT6.

Arimura A(1), vn Peer M, Schröder AJ, Rothman PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Transcriptional activation by signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 
(STAT6) has been shown to require the direct interaction not only with
co-activators such as p300 and cAMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding
protein (CBP) but also with nuclear co-activator 1, a member of the p160/steroid 
receptor co-activator family. Among the p160/steroid receptor co-activators, only
p/CIP (nuclear co-activator 3) has been shown to be up-regulated by interleukin
(IL)-4 in B cells through a STAT-6-dependent mechanism using Gene-Chip analysis. 
In this study, we have investigated the function of p/CIP in the transcriptional 
activation by STAT6. We found that p/CIP indirectly interacted with STAT6 via
p300, and overexpression of the CBP-interacting domain of p/CIP (p/CIP(947-1084))
prevented the interaction of p/CIP with STAT6 by blocking the binding of p/CIP to
p300. Whereas expression of p/CIP(947-1084) resulted in a marked reduction of
STAT6-mediated transactivation, overexpression of wild type p/CIP resulted in
significant enhancement of it. In addition, p/CIP(947-1084) markedly reduced CD23
expression on B cells stimulated with IL-4, whereas overexpression of wild type
p/CIP enhanced it. Chromatin immunoprecipitations demonstrate that IL-4 increases
the interaction of p/CIP with the murine immunoglobulin heavy chain germ line
epsilon promoter in B cells. These results suggest that p/CIP positively
regulates STAT6 transcriptional activation through formation of a STAT6,
p300/CBP, and p/CIP complex.

PMID: 15145939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 9;279(28):29013-22. Epub 2004 Apr 30.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor displaces p300 from E2F-dependent promoters and
represses S phase-specific gene expression.

Marlowe JL(1), Knudsen ES, Schwemberger S, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics and the Department of Environmental Health, 
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0056, USA.

The environmental contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) causes a
wide range of toxic, teratogenic, and carcinogenic effects. TCDD is a ligand for 
the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor (AHR), a ligand-activated transcription factor 
believed to be the primary mediator of these effects. Activation of the AHR by
TCDD also elicits a variety of effects on cell cycle progression, ranging from
proliferation to arrest. In this report, we have characterized further the role
of the activated AHR in cell cycle regulation. In human mammary carcinoma MCF-7
and mouse hepatoma Hepa-1 cells, TCDD treatment decreased the number of cells in 
S phase and caused the accumulation of cells in G(1). In Hepa-1 cells, this
effect correlated with the transcriptional repression of several E2F-regulated
genes required for S phase progression. AHR-mediated gene repression was
dependent on its interaction with retinoblastoma protein but was independent of
its transactivation function because AHR mutants lacking DNA binding or
transactivation domains repressed E2F-dependent expression as effectively as wild
type AHR. Overexpression of p300 suppressed retinoblastoma protein-dependent gene
repression, and this effect was reversed by TCDD. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays showed that TCDD treatment caused the recruitment of AHR to E2F-dependent 
promoters and the concurrent displacement of p300. These results delineate a
novel mechanism whereby the AHR, a known transcriptional activator, also mediates
gene repression by pathways involving combinatorial interactions at
E2F-responsive promoters, leading to the repression of E2F-dependent, S
phase-specific genes. The AHR seems to act as an environmental checkpoint that
senses exposure to environmental toxicants and responds by signaling cell cycle
inhibition.

PMID: 15123621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Circ Res. 2004 Jun 11;94(11):1492-9. Epub 2004 Apr 29.

Endothelin-1-dependent nuclear factor of activated T lymphocyte signaling
associates with transcriptional coactivator p300 in the activation of the B cell 
leukemia-2 promoter in cardiac myocytes.

Kawamura T(1), Ono K, Morimoto T, Akao M, Iwai-Kanai E, Wada H, Sowa N, Kita T,
Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a potent survival factor that protects cardiac myocytes
from apoptosis. ET-1 induces cardiac gene transcription and protein expression of
antiapoptotic B cell leukemia-2 (bcl-2) in a calcineurin-dependent manner. A
cellular target of adenovirus early region 1A (E1A) oncoprotein, p300 also
activates bcl-2 transcription in cardiac myocytes and is required for their
survival. p300 acts as a calcineurin-regulated nuclear factors of activated T
lymphocytes (NFATc), downstream targets of calcineurin. In addition, the bcl-2
promoter contains multiple NFAT consensus sequences. These findings prompted us
to investigate the role of NFATc in ET-1-dependent and p300-dependent bcl-2
transcription in cardiac myocytes. In primary cardiac myocytes prepared from
neonatal rats, mutation of 2 NFAT sites within the bcl-2 promoter completely
abolished the ET-1- and p300-induced increases in the activity of this promoter. 
We show here that p300 markedly potentiates the binding of NFATc1 to the bcl-2
NFAT element by interacting with NFATc1 in an E1A-dependent manner. On the other 
hand, stimulation of cardiac myocytes with ET-1 causes nuclear translocation of
NFATc1, which interacts with p300 and increases DNA binding. Expression of E1A
did not change the cardiac nuclear localization of NFATc1 but blocked its
interaction with p300, DNA binding, and bcl-2 promoter activation. These findings
suggest that ET-1-dependent NFATc signaling associates with p300 in the
transactivation of bcl-2 gene in cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 15117818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Immunol. 2004 May 1;172(9):5528-34.

Cathepsin E: a novel target for regulation by class II transactivator.

Yee CS(1), Yao Y, Li P, Klemsz MJ, Blum JS, Chang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The aspartic proteinase cathepsin E (CatE) has been implicated in Ag processing. 
In this study we report that CatE expression is negatively regulated by the MHC
class II transactivator (CIITA). CIITA-deficient murine and human B cells
expressed greater CatE than wild-type B cells, whereas overexpression of CIITA in
a human gastric carcinoma cell line, AGS, resulted in decreased CatE mRNA and
protein. AGS cells expressing CIITA also exhibited decreased processing of OVA
Ag. Inhibition of CatE expression is specific to the type III CIITA isoform and
maps to the acidic and proline/serine/threonine-rich (PST) protein domains of
CIITA. We found that CatE expression is inducible by PU.1 and p300, and that this
induction can be reversed by CIITA. These findings demonstrate a novel
phenomenon: regulation of CatE Ag processing by CIITA in an isoform-dependent
manner.

PMID: 15100295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Aug;287(2):G352-62. Epub 2004 Apr
2.

Inhibition of lipopolysaccharide-stimulated TNF-alpha promoter activity by
S-adenosylmethionine and 5'-methylthioadenosine.

Veal N(1), Hsieh CL, Xiong S, Mato JM, Lu S, Tsukamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Keck School of Medicine of the Univ. of Southern California, 1333 San Pablo
St., MMR-402, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) is the principal biological methyl donor and precursor
for polyamines. SAM is known to be hepatoprotective in many liver disease models 
in which TNF-alpha is implicated. The present study investigated whether and how 
SAM inhibited LPS-stimulated TNF-alpha expression in Kupffer cells (hepatic
macrophages). SAM downregulated TNF-alpha expression in LPS-stimulated Kupffer
cells at the transcriptional level as suggested by a transfection experiment with
a TNF-alpha promoter-reporter gene. This inhibition was not mediated through
decreased NF-kappaB binding to four putative kappaB binding elements located
within the promoter. The inhibited promoter activity was neither prevented by
overexpression of p65 and/or its coactivator p300 nor enhanced by overexpression 
of coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase-1, an enzyme that methylates
p300 and inhibits a p65-p300 interaction. SAM did not lead to DNA methylation at 
the most common CpG target sites in the TNF-alpha promoter. Moreover,
5'-methylthioadenosine (MTA), which is derived from SAM but does not serve as a
methyl donor, recapitulated SAM's effect with more potency. These data
demonstrate that SAM inhibits TNF-alpha expression at the level downstream of
NF-kappaB binding and at the level of the promoter activity via mechanisms that
do not appear to involve the limited availability of p65 or p300. Furthermore,
our study is the first to demonstrate a potent inhibitory effect on NF-kappaB
promoter activity and TNF-alpha expression by a SAM's metabolite, MTA.

PMID: 15064230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. EMBO J. 2004 Apr 7;23(7):1609-18. Epub 2004 Mar 25.

Acetylation regulates the differentiation-specific functions of the
retinoblastoma protein.

Nguyen DX(1), Baglia LA, Huang SM, Baker CM, McCance DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester,
NY, USA.

The retinoblastoma tumor-suppressor protein (pRb) is known to induce growth
arrest and cellular differentiation. The molecular determinants of pRb function
include protein-protein interactions and post-translational modifications such as
phosphorylation. Recently, the co-activator p300 was found to acetylate pRb. The 
biological significance of pRb acetylation, however, remains unclear. In the
present study, we provide evidence that pRb undergoes acetylation upon cellular
differentiation, including skeletal myogenesis. In addition to p300, the
p300-Associated Factor (P/CAF) can mediate pRb acetylation as pRb interacts
directly with the acetyltransferase domain of P/CAF in vitro and can associate
with P/CAF in differentiated cells. Significantly, by using a C terminal
acetylation-impaired mutant of pRb, we reveal that acetylation does not affect
pRb-dependent growth arrest or the repression of E2F transcriptional activity.
Instead, acetylation is required for pRb-mediated terminal cell cycle exit and
the induction of late myogenic gene expression. Based on these results, we
propose that acetylation regulates the differentiation-specific function(s) of
pRb.

PMCID: PMC391080
PMID: 15044952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2004 May;36(5):893-9.

Distinct serine residues in CBP and p300 are necessary for their activation by
phenylephrine.

Gusterson RJ(1), Yuan LW, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London, 30 Guilford Street,
London WC1N 1EH, UK.

The ability of CREB binding protein (CBP) and p300 co-activators to stimulate
transcription has previously been shown to be enhanced by treatment of cardiac
cells with the hypertrophic agent phenylephrine (PE). This effect is dependent on
activation of the mitogen activated protein kinase pathway (p42/44 MAPK). Here,
we demonstrate the first identification of potential phosphorylation sites
targeted by PE within the proteins CBP and p300. We show that serine 2015 of CBP 
and serine 89 of p300 are necessary for PE to stimulate the transcriptional
activity of these proteins. Furthermore, we have shown that PE is capable of
mediating phosphorylation of endogenous p300 at serine 89. This phosphorylation
mediated regulation of CBP and p300 suggests a potential signal transduction
pathway for the induction of cardiac cell hypertrophy by PE.

PMID: 15006641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Endocrinology. 2004 Jun;145(6):2918-28. Epub 2004 Mar 4.

Pancreas duodenum homeobox-1 transcriptional activation requires interactions
with p300.

Stanojevic V(1), Habener JF, Thomas MK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology and Diabetes Unit, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Wellman 340, 50 Blossom Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor, pancreas duodenum homeobox (PDX)-1, is
essential for pancreas development, insulin production, and glucose homeostasis. 
Mutations in pdx-1(ipf-1) are associated both with maturity-onset diabetes of the
young and type 2 diabetes. PDX-1 interacts with multiple transcription factors
and coregulators, including the coactivator p300, to activate the transcription
of the insulin gene and other target genes within pancreatic beta-cells. In
characterizing the protein-protein interactions of PDX-1 and p300, we identified 
mutations in PDX-1 that disrupt its function and are associated with increased or
decreased interactions with p300. Several mutant PDX-1 proteins that are
associated with heritable forms of diabetes in humans, in particular the mutant
P63fsdelC, exhibited increased binding to a carboxy-terminal segment of p300 in
the setting of decreased DNA-binding activities, suggesting that sequestration of
p300 by mutant PDX-1 proteins may be an additional mechanism by which insulin
gene expression is reduced in heterozygous carriers of pdx-1(ipf-1) mutations.
The introduction of the point mutations S66A/Y68A in the highly conserved
amino-terminal PDX-1 transactivation domain reduced the ability of PDX-1 to
interact with p300, substantially diminished the transcriptional activation of
PDX-1, and reduced the synergistic activation of glucose-responsive insulin
promoter enhancer sequences by PDX-1, E12, and E47. We propose that interactions 
of PDX-1 with p300 are required for the transcriptional activation of PDX-1
target genes. Impairment of interactions between PDX-1 and p300 in pancreatic
beta-cells may limit insulin production and lead to the development of diabetes.

PMID: 15001545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Mar 12;315(3):733-8.

Expression of p300 protects cardiac myocytes from apoptosis in vivo.

Kawamura T(1), Hasegawa K, Morimoto T, Iwai-Kanai E, Miyamoto S, Kawase Y, Ono K,
Wada H, Akao M, Kita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 54 Kawara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Doxorubicin is an anti-tumor agent that represses cardiac-specific gene
expression and induces myocardial cell apoptosis. Doxorubicin depletes cardiac
p300, a transcriptional coactivator that is required for the maintenance of the
differentiated phenotype of cardiac myocytes. However, the role of p300 in
protection against doxorubicin-induced apoptosis is unknown. Transgenic mice
overexpressing p300 in the heart and wild-type mice were subjected to doxorubicin
treatment. Compared with wild-type mice, transgenic mice exhibited higher
survival rate as well as more preserved left ventricular function and cardiac
expression of alpha-sarcomeric actin. Doxorubicin induced myocardial cell
apoptosis in wild-type mice but not in transgenic mice. Expression of p300
increased the cardiac level of bcl-2 and mdm-2, but not that of p53 or other
members of the bcl-2 family. These findings demonstrate that overexpression of
p300 protects cardiac myocytes from doxorubicin-induced apoptosis and reduces the
extent of acute heart failure in adult mice in vivo.

PMID: 14975762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Oncogene. 2004 Feb 19;23(7):1392-404.

The cooperation of B-Myb with the coactivator p300 is orchestrated by cyclins A
and D1.

Schubert S(1), Horstmann S, Bartusel T, Klempnauer KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster,
Wilhelm-Klemm-Str 2, D-48149 Münster, Germany.

B-Myb is a highly conserved member of the Myb family of transcription factors
whose activity is regulated during the cell cycle. Previous work has shown that
the activity of B-Myb is stimulated by cyclin A/Cdk2-dependent phosphorylation
whereas interaction of B-Myb with cyclin D1 inhibits its activity. Here, we have 
investigated the role of p300 as a coactivator for B-Myb. We show that
B-Myb-dependent transactivation is stimulated by p300 as a result of interaction 
between B-Myb and p300. We have mapped the sequences responsible for the
interaction of B-Myb and p300 to the E1A-binding region of p300 and the
transactivation domain of B-Myb, respectively. Furthermore, our data suggest that
phosphorylation of B-Myb stimulates its acetylation by p300 and that the
acetylation of B-Myb is necessary for the full stimulation of its transactivation
potential by p300. We have also studied the effect of cyclin D1 on the
cooperation of B-Myb and p300. Based on our results we propose that cyclin D1
inhibits the activity of B-Myb by interfering with the interaction of B-Myb and
p300. The data reported here provide novel insight into the mechanisms by which
the activity of B-Myb is regulated during the cell cycle. Taken together they
suggest that the coactivator p300 plays an important role in this regulation and 
that the cooperation of B-Myb and p300 is orchestrated by cyclins A and D1.

PMID: 14973551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 7;279(19):20035-43. Epub 2004 Feb 9.

MDM2 mediates p300/CREB-binding protein-associated factor ubiquitination and
degradation.

Jin Y(1), Zeng SX, Lee H, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, 3181 Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

We recently reported that MDM2, a negative feedback regulator of the tumor
suppressor p53, inhibits p300/CREB-binding protein-associated factor
(PCAF)-mediated p53 acetylation. Our further study showed that MDM2 also
regulates the stability of PCAF. MDM2 ubiquitinated PCAF in vitro and in cells.
PCAF ubiquitination occurred at the N terminus and in the nucleus, as the nuclear
localization signal sequence-deletion mutant of MDM2, which localized in the
cytoplasm and degraded p53, was unable to degrade nuclear PCAF. Restriction of
PCAF in the nucleus by leptomycin B did not affect MDM2-mediated PCAF
degradation. Consistently, overexpression of MDM2 in p53 null cells caused the
reduction of the protein level of PCAF, but not the mRNA level. Conversely, PCAF 
levels were higher in MDM2-deficient mouse p53(-/-)/mdm2(-/-) embryonic
fibroblast (MEF) cells than that in MDM2-containing MEF cells. Furthermore, MDM2 
reduced the half-life of PCAF by 50%. These results demonstrate that MDM2
regulates the stability of PCAF by ubiquitinating and degrading this protein.

PMID: 14769800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Feb 15;91(3):633-45.

A LIM protein, Hic-5, functions as a potential coactivator for Sp1.

Shibanuma M(1), Kim-Kaneyama JR, Sato S, Nose K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Showa University School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Hatanodai 1-5-8, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Hic-5 is a LIM protein with striking similarity to paxillin, and shuttles between
focal adhesions and the nucleus. Our previous study suggested that Hic-5
participates in the transcriptional control of several genes such as the c-fos
and p21 genes. In the present study, we examined the function of Hic-5 in the
nucleus using the transcriptional promoter region of the p21 gene. When localized
to the nucleus, Hic-5 was found to transactivate the p21 promoter through two of 
five Sp1 sites in the region proximal to the TATA box. The Hic-5 effect was
mediated by a transactivation domain of Sp1 and functional interaction with p300 
through the LIM4 domain. Hic-5 was also shown to interact functionally and
physically with Smad3 through the LIM domains and to potentiate p21 promoter
activity together with Smad3 and Sp1. These properties were confirmed in an
artificial system using GAL4-fusion protein. Thus, Hic-5 was suggested to have a 
potential function as a cofactor in the transcriptional complex that contains
Sp1, playing a role in gene transcription in the nucleus as well as in integrin
signaling at focal adhesion sites.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14755691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):15630-8. Epub 2004 Jan 29.

AML1 is functionally regulated through p300-mediated acetylation on specific
lysine residues.

Yamaguchi Y(1), Kurokawa M, Imai Y, Izutsu K, Asai T, Ichikawa M, Yamamoto G,
Nitta E, Yamagata T, Sasaki K, Mitani K, Ogawa S, Chiba S, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, USA.

AML1 (RUNX1) is one of the most frequently disrupted genes in human leukemias.
AML1 encodes transcription factors, which play a pivotal role in hematopoietic
differentiation, and their inappropriate expression is associated with leukemic
transformation of hematopoietic cells. Previous studies demonstrated that the
transcription cofactor p300 binds to the C-terminal region of AML1 and stimulates
AML1-dependent transcription during myeloid cell differentiation. Here, we report
that AML1 is specifically acetylated by p300 in vitro. Mutagenesis analyses
reveal that p300 acetylates AML1 at the two conserved lysine residues (Lys-24 and
Lys-43). AML1 is subject to acetylation at the same sites in vivo, and
p300-mediated acetylation significantly augments the DNA binding activity of
AML1. Disruption of these two lysines severely impairs DNA binding of AML1 and
reduced the transcriptional activity and the transforming potential of AML1.
Taken together, these data indicate that acetylation of AML1 through p300 is a
critical manner of posttranslational modification and identify a novel mechanism 
for regulating the function of AML1.

PMID: 14752096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Apr;18(4):776-90. Epub 2004 Jan 29.

Orphan nuclear receptor small heterodimer partner, a novel corepressor for a
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor BETA2/neuroD.

Kim JY(1), Chu K, Kim HJ, Seong HA, Park KC, Sanyal S, Takeda J, Ha H, Shong M,
Tsai MJ, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Resources and Technology,
Chonnam National University, Kwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Small heterodimer partner (SHP; NR0B2) is an atypical orphan nuclear receptor
that lacks a conventional DNA binding domain (DBD) and represses the
transcriptional activity of various nuclear receptors. In this study, we examined
the novel cross talk between SHP and BETA2/NeuroD, a basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor. In vitro and in vivo protein interaction studies showed
that SHP physically interacts with BETA2/NeuroD, but not its heterodimer partner 
E47. Moreover, confocal microscopic study and immunostaining results demonstrated
that SHP colocalized with BETA2 in islets of mouse pancreas. SHP inhibited
BETA2/NeuroD-dependent transactivation of an E-box reporter, whereas SHP was
unable to repress the E47-mediated transactivation and the E-box mutant reporter 
activity. In addition, SHP repressed the BETA2-dependent activity of glucokinase 
and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 gene promoters. Gel shift and in vitro 
protein competition assays indicated that SHP inhibits neither dimerization nor
DNA binding of BETA2 and E47. Rather, SHP directly repressed BETA2
transcriptional activity and p300-enhanced BETA2/NeuroD transcriptional activity 
by inhibiting interaction between BETA2 and coactivator p300. We also showed that
C-terminal repression domain within SHP is also required for BETA2 repression.
However, inhibition of BETA2 activity was not observed by naturally occurring
human SHP mutants that cannot interact with BETA2/NeuroD. Taken together, these
results suggest that SHP acts as a novel corepressor for basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor BETA2/NeuroD by competing with coactivator p300 for binding 
to BETA2/NeuroD and by its direct transcriptional repression function.

PMID: 14752053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Leukoc Biol. 2004 Apr;75(4):689-97. Epub 2004 Jan 23.

Activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and c-Jun-N-terminal kinase cascades 
enhances NF-kappaB-dependent gene transcription in BCG-stimulated macrophages
through promotion of p65/p300 binding.

Darieva Z(1), Lasunskaia EB, Campos MN, Kipnis TL, Da Silva WD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratóire de Biologia do Reconhecer, Universisade Estadual do Norte
Fluminense, Campos, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

The proinflammatory response of infected macrophages is an important early host
defense mechanism against mycobacterial infection. Mycobacteria have been
demonstrated to induce proinflammatory gene transcription through the Toll-like
receptors, (TLR)2 and TLR 4, which initiate signaling cascades leading to nuclear
factor (NF)-kappaB activation. The main transduction pathway responsible for
NF-kappaB activation has been established and involves the MyD88, interleukin-1
receptor-associated kinase, tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor-6,
NF-kappaB-inducing kinase, and inhibitor of kappaB kinase complex. The role of
other kinase cascades triggered by mycobacteria in the NF-kappaB activation is
less clear. We herein examine the role of the mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3K) cascades in the expression of
the bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) mycobacteria-induced NF-kappaB-dependent
genes, macrophage-inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2) and inducible nitric oxide (NO) 
synthase. Specific pharmacological inhibition of the PI-3K, c-jun-N-terminal
kinase (JNK), and to a smaller extent, p38 MAPK but not extracellular-regulated
kinase (ERK), suppressed NF-kappaB-dependent reporter gene transcription and
MIP-2 and NO secretion in BCG-induced RAW264.7 macrophages. A similar effect was 
obtained following molecular inhibition of JNK via JNK-interacting protein-1
overexpression. In addition, a kinase-dead mutant of MEK kinase-1, the up-stream 
regulator of JNK, also proved to be a potent inhibitor of NF-kappaB-reporter
activity. The effect of inhibitors was mediated by the down-regulation of
NF-kappaB transcription activity and without effecting its nuclear translocation.
These data suggest an indirect mechanism of the NF-kappaB regulation by these
kinases, probably through p65 phosphorylation and improved binding to the p300
transcription coactivator. The data obtained demonstrate that PI-3K, JNK, and p38
MAPK activation by mycobacteria enhance NF-kappaB-driven gene expression
contributing to the proinflammatory macrophage response.

PMID: 14742634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Apr;18(4):1033-41. Epub 2004 Jan 15.

Distinct components of Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of
transcription signaling pathway mediate the regulation of systemic and tissue
localized renin-angiotensin system.

Guo Y(1), Mascareno E, Siddiqui MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Center for Cardiovascular and Muscle
Research, State University of New York Downstate Medical Center, 450 Clarkson
Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA.

In an attempt to demonstrate the linkage between the Janus kinase (Jak)/signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) signaling and the activity of
the systemic or local renin-angiotensin system in vivo, we produced transgenic
mice harboring angiotensinogen (ANG) promoter containing the wild-type or mutant 
STAT target site (St-domain) fused to the luciferase reporter. The
ANG-promoter-driven luciferase expression was dependent upon phosphorylation of
Jak2, as administration of tyrphostin AG490, a potent inhibitor of Jak2,
down-regulated the ANG promoter activity and abolished the stimulated endogenous 
ANG mRNA level in the liver. Administration of angiotensin II peptide to the mice
resulted in prominent expression of luciferase in the liver and heart of animals 
containing wild type St-domain, but not in transgenes with mutant St-domain.
Angiotensin II-induced signaling caused activation of STAT proteins in the liver 
(systemic), the pattern of which was distinct from that in the heart (local). The
inducible expression of ANG promoter appears to be mediated by physical
association of p300 with STAT 5B in liver and STAT 3 and STAT 5A in heart. Taken 
together, these results point to the differences in signaling mechanisms in the
circulating and localized renin-angiotensin system and identify at least two
molecular steps, the tyrosyl phosphorylation of Jak2 and the STAT/St-domain
interaction, as pivotal in the regulation of ANG gene transcription.

PMID: 14726487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Int J Cancer. 2004 Mar 1;108(6):839-44.

Fine mapping of chromosome 22q tumor suppressor gene candidate regions in
astrocytoma.

Hartmann C(1), Nümann A, Mueller W, Holtkamp N, Simon M, von Deimling A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Charité, Campus Virchow Klinikum, Humboldt
University, Augustenburgerplatz 1, D-13353 Berlin, Germany.

Astrocytomas and glioblastomas are the most frequent primary brain tumors in
adults. Mutations and altered expression of multiple genes have been found to
contribute to the genesis of these tumors. However, many factors in the genesis
of astrocytic gliomas are not resolved yet. The frequent losses on several
chromosomes indicate the role of still unidentified tumor suppressor genes. Loss 
of heterozygosity (LOH) on 22q has been described in up to 30% of astrocytic
tumors and may be associated with progression to anaplasia. In a first step,
information from the nearly finished physical sequence of chromosome 22 were used
to map LOH data from 22q deletion studies on different tumor entities to identify
potential tumor suppressor gene candidate regions. Next, a series of 153
astrocytic gliomas was examined with 11 polymorphic markers spanning these
regions. Forty-nine (32%) astrocytic gliomas exhibited LOH on 22q, 17 (35%) of
which lost heterozygosity for all markers and 32 (65%) of which carried
interstitial or partial deletions. Two regions were identified on the physical
DNA sequence. The centromeric region spans 3 Mb and the telomeric region 2.7 Mb. 
The reduced size of these regions now allows direct analysis of all genes
included. We already performed mutation analysis on 4 candidate genes from these 
regions (MYO18B, DJ1042K10.2, MKL1 and EP300), but did not find any mutations in 
astrocytic tumors.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14712485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mol Cell. 2003 Dec;12(6):1537-49.

CoCoA, a nuclear receptor coactivator which acts through an N-terminal activation
domain of p160 coactivators.

Kim JH(1), Li H, Stallcup MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
90089, USA.

The p160 coactivators bind to and potentiate transcriptional activation by
nuclear receptors by recruiting secondary coactivators such as the histone
acetyltransferases p300 and CBP and the protein methyltransferase CARM1. The
function of the highly conserved N-terminal basic-helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim
(bHLH-PAS) domain of p160 coactivators is unknown. This region is required for
coactivator synergy among p160, p300, and CARM1 coactivators. We identified a
coactivator, coiled-coil coactivator (CoCoA), which binds to this domain and
thereby enhances transcriptional activation by the estrogen receptor and other
nuclear receptors. Endogenous CoCoA was found simultaneously with p160
coactivators on the promoter of an endogenous estrogen-responsive gene. Reduction
of endogenous cellular CoCoA levels inhibited the estrogen-stimulated expression 
of transiently transfected and endogenous genes. Moreover, CoCoA cooperated
synergistically with GRIP1, CARM1, and p300 to enhance ER-mediated transcription.
Thus, the N-terminal region of p160 coactivators contains an additional
activation domain which contributes to coactivator function by recruitment of
CoCoA.

PMID: 14690606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Immunol. 2003 Dec 15;171(12):6581-8.

Regulation of inducible nitric oxide synthase expression by p300 and p50
acetylation.

Deng WG(1), Wu KK.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Research Center, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Division
of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

To determine whether p300 is involved in inducible NO synthase (iNOS)
transcriptional regulation, we evaluated the effect of p300 overexpression on
iNOS expression and characterized p300 binding to iNOS promoter in RAW 264.7
cells. p300 overexpression increased iNOS expression which was abrogated by
deletion of the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain (Delta1472-1522).
DNA-binding and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed binding of p300 to 
several DNA-bound transactivators at basal state. Following stimulation with LPS 
plus IFN-gamma, binding of p300, p50/p65 NF-kappaB, and IFN-regulatory factor-1
was increased by approximately 2-fold. Nuclear p50 was complexed with and
acetylated by p300 at the basal binding state which was increased by LPS and
IFN-gamma stimulation. p300 overexpression resulted in increased p50 acetylation 
which was reduced by HAT mutation. p50 acetylation correlated with increased
NF-kappaB binding and enhanced p300 recruitment. Co-overexpression of E1A
abolished the augmentation of p50 acetylation and p50 binding induced by p300
overexpression, and a correlative suppression of p300 recruitment to the complex.
We conclude that p300 is essential for iNOS transcription. Our results suggest
that p300 HAT acetylates the p50 subunit of NF-kappaB, thereby increasing
NF-kappaB binding and NF-kappaB mediated transactivation.

PMID: 14662860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 20;279(8):7091-7. Epub 2003 Nov 26.

Histone acetyltransferase-dependent chromatin remodeling and the vascular clock.

Curtis AM(1), Seo SB, Westgate EJ, Rudic RD, Smyth EM, Chakravarti D, FitzGerald 
GA, McNamara P.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Rhythmic gene expression is central to the circadian control of physiology in
mammals. Transcriptional activation of Per and Cry genes by heterodimeric
bHLH-PAS proteins is a key event in the feedback loop that drives rhythmicity;
however, the mechanism is not clearly understood. Here we show the
transcriptional coactivators and histone acetyltransferases, p300/CBP, PCAF, and 
ACTR associate with the bHLH-PAS proteins, CLOCK and NPAS2, to regulate
positively clock gene expression. Furthermore, Cry2 mediated repression of
NPAS2:BMAL1 is overcome by overexpression of p300 in transactivation assays.
Accordingly, p300 exhibits a circadian time-dependent association with NPAS2 in
the vasculature, which precedes peak expression of target genes. In addition, a
rhythm in core histone H3 acetylation on the mPer1 promoter in vivo correlates
with the cyclical expression of their mRNAs. Temporal coactivator recruitment and
HAT-dependent chromatin remodeling on the promoter of clock controlled genes in
the vasculature permits the mammalian clock to orchestrate circadian gene
expression.

PMID: 14645221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell. 2003 Nov;12(5):1137-49.

Coordination of p300-mediated chromatin remodeling and TRAP/mediator function
through coactivator PGC-1alpha.

Wallberg AE(1), Yamamura S, Malik S, Spiegelman BM, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10021, USA.

Transcriptional coactivators showing physical and functional interactions with
PPARgamma include the protein acetyl transferase p300, the TRAP/Mediator complex 
that interacts with the general transcription machinery, and the highly regulated
PGC-1alpha. We show that PGC-1alpha directly interacts with TRAP/Mediator,
through the PPARgamma-interacting subunit TRAP220, and stimulates
TRAP/Mediator-dependent function on DNA templates. Further, while ineffective by 
itself, PGC-1alpha stimulates p300-dependent histone acetylation and
transcription on chromatin templates in response to PPARgamma. These functions
are mediated by largely independent PPARgamma, p300, and TRAP220 interaction
domains in PGC-1alpha, whereas p300 and TRAP220 show ligand-dependent
interactions with a common region of PPARgamma. Apart from showing PGC-1alpha
functions both in chromatin remodeling and in preinitiation complex formation or 
function (transcription), these results suggest a key role for PGC-1alpha,
through concerted but dynamic interactions, in coordinating these steps.

PMID: 14636573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Eur J Immunol. 2003 Dec;33(12):3386-92.

p300 cooperates with Smad3/4 and Runx3 in TGFbeta1-induced IgA isotype
expression.

Park SR(1), Lee EK, Kim BC, Kim PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National
University, Chunchon, S. Korea.

We have shown previously that Smad3 and Smad4 mediate TGF-beta1-induced IgA
expression. In the present study, we examined the involvement of Runx3 in this
process. Overexpression of Runx3 in mice increased germ-line alpha (GLalpha)
transcription, and transcription was further augmented when B lymphoma and
LPS-activated murine spleen cells were co-transfected with Smad3/4.
Overexpression of Runx3 and Smad3/4 increased IgA secretion by both cell types in
response to TGF-beta1. p300, which has histone acetyltransferase activity,
further augmented TGF-beta1-induced GLalpha transcription promoted by Smad3/4 and
Runx3. These observations were confirmed by examining the influence of Smad3/4,
Runx3 and p300 on the expression of endogenous GLalpha and post-switch alpha
transcripts.E1A, an inhibitor of p300, blocked both GLalpha promoter activity and
the enhancement of endogenous GLalpha transcription by Smad3/4 and Runx3. We
conclude that p300 cooperates with Smad3/4 and Runx3 in stimulating
TGF-beta1-induced GLalpha transcription and subsequent IgA isotype expression,
while E1A inhibits these cooperative effects.

PMID: 14635047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 6;279(6):4110-9. Epub 2003 Nov 18.

Chromium inhibits transcription from polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-inducible
promoters by blocking the release of histone deacetylase and preventing the
binding of p300 to chromatin.

Wei YD(1), Tepperman K, Huang MY, Sartor MA, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics and Department of Environmental Health,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45220-0056, USA.

Co-contamination with complex mixtures of carcinogenic metals, such as chromium, 
and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons is a common environmental problem with
multiple biological consequences. Chromium exposure alters inducible gene
expression, forms chromium-DNA adducts and chromium-DNA cross-links, and disrupts
transcriptional activator-co-activator complexes. We have shown previously that
exposure of mouse hepatoma Hepa-1 cells to chromate inhibits the induction of the
Cyp1a1 and Nqo1 genes by dioxin. Here we have tested the hypothesis that chromium
blocks gene expression by interfering with the assembly of productive
transcriptional complexes at the promoter of inducible genes. To this end, we
have studied the effects of chromium on the expression of genes induced by
benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), another aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonist, and
characterized the disruption of Cyp1a1 transcriptional induction by chromium.
Gene expression profiling by using high density microarray analysis revealed that
the inhibitory effect of chromium on B[a]P-dependent gene induction was
generalized, affecting the induction of over 50 different genes involved in a
variety of signaling transduction pathways. The inhibitory effect of chromium on 
Cyp1a1 transcription was found to depend on the presence of promoter-proximal
sequences and not on the cis-acting enhancer sequences that bind the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator complex. By
using transient reporter assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses, we
found that chromium prevented the B[a]P-dependent release of HDAC-1 from Cyp1a1
chromatin and blocked p300 recruitment. These results provide a mechanistic
explanation for the observation that chromium inhibits inducible but not
constitutive gene expression.

PMID: 14625279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(23):8563-75.

Acetylation of androgen receptor enhances coactivator binding and promotes
prostate cancer cell growth.

Fu M(1), Rao M, Wang C, Sakamaki T, Wang J, Di Vizio D, Zhang X, Albanese C, Balk
S, Chang C, Fan S, Rosen E, Palvimo JJ, Jänne OA, Muratoglu S, Avantaggiati ML,
Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Modification by acetylation occurs at epsilon-amino lysine residues of histones
and transcription factors. Unlike phosphorylation, a direct link between
transcription factor acetylation and cellular growth or apoptosis has not been
established. We show that the nuclear androgen receptor (AR), a DNA-binding
transcriptional regulator, is acetylated in vivo. The acetylation of the AR is
induced by ligand dihydrotestosterone and by histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors in living cells. Direct AR acetylation augmented p300 binding in
vitro. Constructs mimicking neutral polar substitution acetylation (AR(K630Q),
AR(K630T)) enhanced p300 binding and reduced N-CoR/HDAC/Smad3 corepressor
binding, whereas charged residue substitution (AR(K630R)) reduced p300 binding
and enhanced corepressor binding. The AR acetylation mimics promoted cell
survival and growth of prostate cancer cells in soft agar and in nude mice and
augmented transcription of a subset of growth control target gene promoters.
Thus, transcription factor acetylation regulates coactivator/corepressor complex 
binding, altering expression of specific growth control genes to promote aberrant
cellular growth in vivo.

PMCID: PMC262657
PMID: 14612401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(23):8528-41.

Positive and negative regulation of the cardiovascular transcription factor KLF5 
by p300 and the oncogenic regulator SET through interaction and acetylation on
the DNA-binding domain.

Miyamoto S(1), Suzuki T, Muto S, Aizawa K, Kimura A, Mizuno Y, Nagino T, Imai Y, 
Adachi N, Horikoshi M, Nagai R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Here we show a novel pathway of transcriptional regulation of a DNA-binding
transcription factor by coupled interaction and modification (e.g., acetylation) 
through the DNA-binding domain (DBD). The oncogenic regulator SET was isolated by
affinity purification of factors interacting with the DBD of the cardiovascular
transcription factor KLF5. SET negatively regulated KLF5 DNA binding,
transactivation, and cell-proliferative activities. Down-regulation of the
negative regulator SET was seen in response to KLF5-mediated gene activation. The
coactivator/acetylase p300, on the other hand, interacted with and acetylated
KLF5 DBD, and activated its transcription. Interestingly, SET inhibited KLF5
acetylation, and a nonacetylated mutant of KLF5 showed reduced transcriptional
activation and cell growth complementary to the actions of SET. These findings
suggest a new pathway for regulation of a DNA-binding transcription factor on the
DBD through interaction and coupled acetylation by two opposing regulatory
factors of a coactivator/acetylase and a negative cofactor harboring activity to 
inhibit acetylation.

PMCID: PMC262669
PMID: 14612398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cell Death Differ. 2004 Feb;11(2):196-202.

Negative regulatory effect of an oligodendrocytic bHLH factor OLIG2 on the
astrocytic differentiation pathway.

Fukuda S(1), Kondo T, Takebayashi H, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Modulation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Japan.

In the developing vertebrate nervous system, multipotent neural stem cells
produce both neurons and glia. OLIG2 is a basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor that plays critical roles in oligodendrocyte and motor neuron development;
however, its role in astrocytic development remains elusive. In this study, we
analyzed an effect of OLIG2 on cytokine-induced astrocytic differentiation from
mouse telencephalic neuroepithelial cells. We show that the presence of OLIG2
protein leads to inhibition of the promoter activation of astrocyte-specific
glial fibrillary acidic protein gene. We found that OLIG2 abolishes complex
formation between a transcriptional coactivator p300 and a transcription factor, 
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), which is activated by
astrocytic differentiation-inducing cytokines, such as leukemia inhibitory factor
(LIF). The enforced expression of OLIG2 in neuroepithelial cells inhibits the
LIF-induced astrocytic differentiation. We also show that the OLIG2 protein in
the nuclei of neural precursor cells disappears in accordance with astrocytic
differentiation during culture with LIF. Together, these results reveal a novel
molecular function of OLIG2 on the astrocyte development. Cell Death and
Differentiation (2004) 11, 196-202. doi:10.1038/sj.cdd.4401332 Published online
24 October 2003

PMID: 14576772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mol Pharmacol. 2003 Nov;64(5):1169-79.

Inhibition of interleukin-4 production in CD4+ T cells by peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) ligands: involvement of
physical association between PPAR-gamma and the nuclear factor of activated T
cells transcription factor.

Chung SW(1), Kang BY, Kim TS.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Drug Development, Chonnam
National University, Kwangju 500-757, Republic of Korea.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) has been implicated
in the regulation of multiple inflammatory processes. However, little is known of
PPAR-gamma in the regulation of interleukin (IL)-4 expression in T cells. In this
study, the effects of PPAR-gamma ligands on production of IL-4, a
pro-inflammatory cytokine associated with the pathophysiology of allergic
diseases, were investigated. 15-Deoxy-Delta12,14 prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2) and 
ciglitazone, two representative PPAR-gamma ligands, significantly inhibited IL-4 
production in both antigen-stimulated primary CD4+ T cells and the phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)/ionomycin-activated EL-4 T cell line. 15d-PGJ2 and 
ciglitazone inhibited the activation of IL-4 gene promoter in EL-4 T cells
transiently transfected with IL-4 promoter/reporter constructs, and the
repressive effect mapped to a region in the IL-4 promoter containing binding
sites for nuclear factor of activated T cells (NF-AT). The activation of T cells 
by PMA/ionomycin resulted in a marked enhancement of the binding activities to
the NF-AT site that was significantly inhibited by the addition of PPAR-gamma
ligands. In cotransfected EL-4 T cells, PPAR-gamma also inhibited the activation 
of the IL-4 promoter at multiple NF-AT sites in a ligand-dependent manner.
NF-ATc1 bound PPAR-gamma both in vivo and in vitro, and the interaction
interfaces involved the Rel similarity domain of NF-ATc1. In cotransfections of
HeLa cells, PPAR-gamma inhibited the NF-ATc1 transactivation in a
ligand-dependent manner. Coexpression of p300 or AP-1 relieved the PPAR-gamma
ligand-mediated inhibition of the NF-AT transactivation. From these results, we
propose that PPAR-gamma ligand-mediated suppression of IL-4 production in CD4+ T 
cells may involve both inhibition of the NFAT-DNA interactions and competitive
recruitment of transcription integrators between NF-AT and PPAR-gamma.

PMID: 14573767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7611-27.

Quantitative analysis of CBP- and P300-induced histone acetylations in vivo using
native chromatin.

McManus KJ(1), Hendzel MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Cross Cancer Institute, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 1Z2.

In vivo, histone tails are involved in numerous interactions, including those
with DNA, adjacent histones, and other, nonhistone proteins. The amino termini
are also the substrates for a number of enzymes, including histone
acetyltransferases (HATs), histone deacetylases, and histone methyltransferases. 
Traditional biochemical approaches defining the substrate specificity profiles of
HATs have been performed using purified histone tails, recombinant histones, or
purified mononucleosomes as substrates. It is clear that the in vivo presentation
of the substrate cannot be accurately represented by using these in vitro
approaches. Because of the difficulty in translating in vitro results into in
vivo situations, we developed a novel single-cell HAT assay that provides
quantitative measurements of endogenous HAT activity. The HAT assay is performed 
under in vivo conditions by using the native chromatin structure as the
physiological substrate. The assay combines the spatial resolving power of laser 
scanning confocal microscopy with simple statistical analyses to characterize
CREB binding protein (CBP)- and P300-induced changes in global histone
acetylation levels at specific lysine residues. Here we show that CBP and P300
exhibit unique substrate specificity profiles, consistent with the developmental 
and functional differences between the two HATs.

PMCID: PMC207635
PMID: 14560007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Oct 17;310(2):312-7.

Expression of histone acetyltransferases was down-regulated in poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1-deficient murine cells.

Ota K(1), Kameoka M, Tanaka Y, Itaya A, Yoshihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Nara Medical University, Shijo 840, Kashihara,
Nara 634-8521, Japan.

NF-kappaB-dependent, as well as human immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1) long 
terminal repeat (LTR)-dependent, reporter gene expression was significantly
impaired in cells derived from poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1)-knockout
(PARP-1 -/-) mice. In addition, the level of protein acetylation was markedly
lower in PARP-1 -/- cells than control (PARP-1 +/+) cells. Surprisingly, the
expression levels of histone acetyltransferases (HATs), p300, cAMP response
element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP), and p300/CBP-associated factor
(PCAF), were significantly reduced in PARP-1 -/- cells, as compared with PARP-1
+/+ cells. These results suggest that PARP-1 is required for the proper
expression of particular HATs. Since p300 and CBP are coactivators of NF-kappaB, 
we propose here that PARP-1 participates in NF-kappaB-dependent transcription by 
means of maintaining the expression of HATs.

PMID: 14521911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2003;95(1):e36-42.

Involvement of p300 in TGF-beta/Smad-pathway-mediated alpha2(I) collagen
expression in mouse mesangial cells.

Kanamaru Y(1), Nakao A, Tanaka Y, Inagaki Y, Ushio H, Shirato I, Horikoshi S,
Okumura K, Ogawa H, Tomino Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-beta1) induces alpha2(I)
collagen gene (COL1A2) expression in mesangial cells through physical and
functional cooperation of Smad proteins and Sp1. A transcriptional coactivator,
p300, is also suggested to play an important role in TGF-beta1/Smad signal
transduction. However, the role of p300 in TGF-beta1/Smad-pathway-mediated
transcriptional activation of the COL1A2 gene in mesangial cells is still
obscure.
METHODS: Endogenous p300 expression and its modulation by TGF-beta1 were
evaluated by Western blotting and immunofluorescence. The physical interaction of
p300 with Smad2/3 was examined by immunoprecipitation followed by Western
blotting. The functional role of p300 in TGF-beta1/Smad-pathway-mediated COL1A2
transcription was investigated in cotransfection experiments using a COL1A2
promoter-luciferase reporter gene construct and p300 expression plasmids.
RESULTS: TGF-beta1 induced COL1A2 gene expression in cultured mouse mesangial
cells which was blocked by overexpression of inhibitory Smad7. In addition,
TGF-beta1-induced nuclear export of endogenous Smad7 was observed in mouse
mesangial cells. Endogenous p300 was expressed in the nucleus of the cells.
TGF-beta1 induced interaction of endogenous p300 with Smad2/3, and a dominant
negative construct of p300 inhibited the TGF-beta1-induced COL1A2 expression in
cultured mouse mesangial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: p300 may be involved in TGF-beta1/Smad-pathway-mediated type I
collagen gene transcription in mouse mesangial cells. Our findings would reveal a
molecular basis of TGF-beta1-induced type I collagen gene transcription in mouse 
mesangial cells.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14520013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Hepatology. 2003 Oct;38(4):890-9.

Interferon alfa down-regulates collagen gene transcription and suppresses
experimental hepatic fibrosis in mice.

Inagaki Y(1), Nemoto T, Kushida M, Sheng Y, Higashi K, Ikeda K, Kawada N,
Shirasaki F, Takehara K, Sugiyama K, Fujii M, Yamauchi H, Nakao A, de Crombrugghe
B, Watanabe T, Okazaki I.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Fibrosis Research Unit, Department of Community Health, Tokai University
School of Medicine, Bohseidai, Isehara 259-1193, Japan.
yutakai@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

The equilibrium between the production and degradation of collagen is rigorously 
controlled by a number of growth factors and cytokines. Interferon alfa
(IFN-alpha) is now widely used for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C, which
can improve serum levels of fibrotic markers and the degree of hepatic fibrosis, 
not only in patients who responded to therapy but also in those in whom it is
ineffective. These findings may suggest that IFN-alpha possesses direct
antifibrotic effects in addition to its antiviral activity. However, in contrast 
to IFN-gamma, which has been shown to suppress collagen gene transcription,
little is known about the mechanisms responsible for the antifibrotic effects of 
IFN-alpha. Here, we report that IFN-alpha, when administered into transgenic mice
harboring the alpha2(I) collagen gene (COL1A2) promoter sequence, significantly
repressed promoter activation and prevented the progression of hepatic fibrosis
induced by carbon tetrachloride injection. Transient transfection assays
indicated that IFN-alpha decreased the steady-state levels of COL1A2 messenger
RNA (mRNA) and inhibited basal and TGF-beta/Smad3-stimulated COL1A2 transcription
in activated hepatic stellate cells (HSC). These inhibitory effects of IFN-alpha 
on COL1A2 transcription were exerted through the interaction between
phosphorylated Stat1 and p300. Blocking of the IFN-alpha signal by overexpressing
the intracellular domain-deleted IFN receptor increased basal COL1A2
transcription and abolished the inhibitory effects of IFN-alpha. In conclusion,
our results indicate that IFN-alpha antagonizes the TGF-beta/Smad3-stimulated
COL1A2 transcription in vitro and suppresses COL1A2 promoter activation in vivo, 
providing a molecular basis for antifibrotic effects of IFN-alpha.

PMID: 14512876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Oct 1;31(19):5723-31.

Enhanced gene activation by Notch and BMP signaling cross-talk.

Takizawa T(1), Ochiai W, Nakashima K, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Modulation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

The signaling systems of Notch and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) are highly
conserved from flies to mammals and have been shown to be important in the
development of multiple organs. For instance, in the fate determination of mouse 
neuroepithelial cells, Notch signaling plays a role in keeping the progenitors
from differentiating into neurons. BMP is also known to inhibit neuronal
differentiation. In this paper, we show that BMP2 enhances Notch-induced
transcriptional activation of Hes-5 and Hesr-1 in mouse neuroepithelial cells.
BMP2 stimulation, in addition to the introduction of the intracellular domain of 
Notch (NIC), resulted in enhanced activation of the Hes-5 gene promoter.
RBP-Jkappa binding to its target sequence is important not only for Notch
signaling, but also for BMP2 signaling, to activate the Hes-5 gene promoter.
Smad1, a Smad species that is activated by BMP2, barely interacted with NIC, but 
did form a complex with NIC in the simultaneous presence of the coactivators
P/CAF and p300. Recruitment of p300 to the NIC-containing complex was facilitated
by activated Smad1, which is suggested to contribute to BMP2-mediated enhancement
of Notch-induced Hes-5 expression. These data suggest a novel functional
cooperation between Notch signaling and BMP signaling.

PMCID: PMC206475
PMID: 14500836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Int Immunol. 2003 Oct;15(10):1195-205.

Phosphorylation of class II transactivator regulates its interaction ability and 
transactivation function.

Sisk TJ(1), Nickerson K, Kwok RP, Chang CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The MHC class II transactivator (CIITA) plays a central role in adaptive immune
responses by controlling the expression of MHC class II genes. CIITA binds
DNA-binding proteins and co-activator proteins to form an enhanceosome complex
necessary for MHC class II gene expression. Here we demonstrate that CIITA
interactions depend upon the phosphorylation status of CIITA.
Hyper-phosphorylated CIITA interacts with co-activator p300, RFX5 and CIITA
itself, which in turn results in induction of MHC class II promoter activity.
Moreover, the C-terminal region of CIITA containing leucine-rich repeats (LRR) is
a regulatory domain for CIITA self-association and LRR binding to CIITA is
negatively regulated by phosphorylation. cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA)
phosphorylates CIITA, and serine residues residing in a region between the
proline/serine/threonine-rich domain and the GTP-binding domain are
phosphorylated by PKA in vitro. The maximum transactivation potential of CIITA
requires PKA phosphorylation as demonstrated by reduced transactivation
activities of the mutant bearing substitutions of serine residues at the PKA
site.

PMID: 13679389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 11;22(39):7871-81.

Interaction between the HPV E7 oncoprotein and the transcriptional coactivator
p300.

Bernat A(1), Avvakumov N, Mymryk JS, Banks L.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Padriciano 99,
I-34012 Trieste, Italy.

Infection with high-risk human papillomaviruses (HPV) can lead to the development
of cervical cancer. This process depends on the interaction of the virus-encoded 
oncoproteins, E6 and E7, with a variety of host regulatory proteins. As E7 shares
both functional and structural similarities with the Adenovirus E1a (Ad E1a)
protein, we were interested in investigating the possible interactions between E7
and the transcriptional coactivator p300, since it was originally identified as a
target of Ad E1a. Using a variety of assays, we show that E7s from both high- and
low-risk HPV types interact with p300. Mutational analysis of E7 maps the site of
the interaction to a region spanning the pRb-binding domain and the CKII
phosphorylation site. We also map the site of interaction on p300 largely to the 
CH1 domain. In addition, we demonstrate that the binding between 16E7 and p300 is
direct, and can be detected in vivo by coimmunoprecipitation and mammalian
two-hybrid assays. Finally, we show that E7 can abolish the p300-mediated E2
transactivation function, suggesting that complex formation between E7 and p300
may contribute to the regulation of E2 transcriptional activity.

PMID: 12970734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):45145-53. Epub 2003 Sep 5.

Transcriptional coactivation of nuclear factor-kappaB-dependent gene expression
by p300 is regulated by poly(ADP)-ribose polymerase-1.

Hassa PO(1), Buerki C, Lombardi C, Imhof R, Hottiger MO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

Nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) plays an important role in the transcriptional 
regulation of genes involved in inflammation and cell survival. In this study, we
demonstrated that NF-kappaB-dependent gene expression was inhibited by E1A in
poly(ADP)-ribose polymerase-1 knock out (PARP-1 (-/-)) cells complemented with
wild type PARP-1 after tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) or
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment. PARP-1 and p300 synergistically coactivated
NF-kappaB-dependent gene expression in response to TNFalpha and LPS. Furthermore,
PARP-1 interacted directly with p300 and enhanced the interaction of
NF-kappaB1/p50 to p300. The C terminus, harboring the catalytic domain of PARP-1 
but not its enzymatic activity, was required for complete transcriptional
coactivation of NF-kappaB by p300 in response to TNFalpha and LPS. Together,
these results indicate that PARP-1 acts synergistically with p300 and plays an
essential regulatory role in NF-kappaB-dependent gene expression.

PMID: 12960163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 14;278(46):45848-57. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

Induction of disease-associated keratin 16 gene expression by epidermal growth
factor is regulated through cooperation of transcription factors Sp1 and c-Jun.

Wang YN(1), Chang WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.

Overexpression of keratin 16 has been observed in keratinocytes in those skin
diseases characterized by hyperproliferation such as psoriasis. Therefore,
keratin 16 is usually referred to as a disease-associated keratin. In the present
study, we found that epidermal growth factor (EGF) increased the expression of
keratin 16 mRNA and protein synthesis in a time-dependent manner in HaCaT cells. 
Reporter assays revealed that the EGF response region was in the range of -162 to
-114 bp. Disruption of the Sp1 site (-127 to -122 bp) and the AP1 site (-148 to
-142 bp) of the keratin 16 promoter by site-directed mutagenesis significantly
inhibited keratin 16 promoter activity induced by EGF. Furthermore, keratin 16
gene expression induced by Ras activation was also regulated in the same manner
as the EGF response. By using the DNA affinity precipitation assay in HaCaT and
SL2 cells, Sp1 directly interacted with the Sp1 site of the promoter, and c-Jun
and c-Fos precipitated with the Sp1 oligonucleotide was attributable to the
interaction between the Sp1 and AP1 proteins. Moreover, cotransfection assays
revealed that Sp1 acted synergistically with c-Jun to activate keratin 16. The
coactivators p300/CBP could collaborate with Sp1 and c-Jun in the activation of
keratin 16 promoter, and EGF-induced promoter activation was blocked by the viral
oncoprotein E1A. Taken together, these results suggest that Sp1 and AP1 sites in 
the essential promoter region are critical for EGF response, and Sp1 showed a
functional cooperation with c-Jun and coactivators p300/CBP in driving the
transcriptional regulation of EGF-induced keratin 16 gene expression.

PMID: 12954631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 7;278(45):44178-87. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Reciprocal inhibition between MyoD and STAT3 in the regulation of growth and
differentiation of myoblasts.

Kataoka Y(1), Matsumura I, Ezoe S, Nakata S, Takigawa E, Sato Y, Kawasaki A,
Yokota T, Nakajima K, Felsani A, Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The development of myoblasts is regulated by various growth factors as well as by
intrinsic muscle-specific transcriptional factors. In this study, we analyzed the
roles for STAT3 in the growth and differentiation of myoblasts in terms of cell
cycle regulation and interaction with MyoD using C2C12 cells. Here we found that 
STAT3 inhibited myogenic differentiation induced by low serum or MyoD as
efficiently as the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade. As for this
mechanism, we found that STAT3 not only promoted cell cycle progression through
the induction of c-myc but also inhibited MyoD activities through direct
interaction. STAT3 inhibited not only DNA binding activities of MyoD but also its
transcriptional activities. However, the inhibited transcriptional activities
were restored by the supplement of p300/CBP and PCAF, suggesting that STAT3 might
deprive MyoD of these transcriptional cofactors. In addition, we found that MyoD 
inhibited DNA binding activities of STAT3, thereby inhibiting STAT3-dependent
cell growth and survival of Ba/F3 cells. These results suggest that the
development of muscle cells is regulated by the coordination of cytokine signals 
and intrinsic transcription factors.

PMID: 12947115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. EMBO J. 2003 Sep 1;22(17):4501-11.

p300 is involved in formation of the TBP-TFIIA-containing basal transcription
complex, TAC.

Mitsiou DJ(1), Stunnenberg HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Nijmegen, NCMLS 191, PO Box
9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

We have recently identified a novel basal transcription complex, TAC, that is
present and active in embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells but not in other adult cells
such as COS7. In the search for factors involved in TAC formation, we found that 
expression of the adenoviral 12S E1A oncoprotein abolishes TAC formation in EC
cells. This effect of E1A depends on its N-terminal domain that is essential for 
cell differentiation and that targets the transcriptional coactivators p300 and
PCAF. Expression of p300 lacking its major E1A interaction domain, CH3, restores 
TAC formation in the presence of E1A, in a bromodomain- and HAT domain-dependent 
manner. Consistently, the unprocessed TFIIAalphabeta precursor that is
selectively assembled into TAC is acetylated preferentially compared with the
processed subunits present in 'free' TFIIA. Intriguingly, expression of p300 in
COS7 cells that do not contain detectable levels of TAC instigates formation of
TAC from endogenous components. Our data suggest that p300 plays a role in
formation of the TBP-TFIIA-containing basal transcription complex, TAC.

PMCID: PMC202362
PMID: 12941701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Bone Miner Res. 2003 Aug;18(8):1419-29.

P300/CBP acts as a coactivator to cartilage homeoprotein-1 (Cart1), paired-like
homeoprotein, through acetylation of the conserved lysine residue adjacent to the
homeodomain.

Iioka T(1), Furukawa K, Yamaguchi A, Shindo H, Yamashita S, Tsukazaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Orthopaedic Pathomechanism, Department of Developmental and
Reconstructive Medicine, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

The paired-like homeoprotein, Cart1, is involved in skeletal development. We
describe here that the general coactivator p300/CBP controls the transcription
activity of Cart1 through acetylation of a lysine residue that is highly
conserved in other homeoproteins. Acetylation of this residue increases the
interaction between p300/CBP and Cart1 and enhances its transcriptional
activation.INTRODUCTION: Cart1 encodes a paired-like homeoprotein expressed
selectively in chondrocyte lineage during embryonic development. Although its
target gene remains unknown, gene disruption studies have revealed that Cart1
plays an important role for craniofacial bone formation as well as limb
development by cooperating with another homeoprotein, Alx4. In this report, we
study the functional involvement of p300/CBP, coactivators with intrinsic histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity, in the transcriptional control of Cart1.
METHODS: To study the transcription activity of Cart1, a reporter construct
containing a putative Cart1 binding site was transiently transfected with the
expression vectors of each protein. The interaction between p300/CBP and Cart1
was investigated by glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down, yeast two-hybrid, 
and immunoprecipitation assays. In vitro acetylation assay was performed with the
recombinant p300-HAT domain and Cart1 in the presence of acetyl-CoA.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: p300 and CBP stimulate Cart1-dependent transcription
activity, and this transactivation is inhibited by E1A and Tax, oncoproteins that
suppress the activity of p300/CBP. Cart1 binds to p300 in vivo and in vitro, and 
this requires the homeodomain of Cart 1 and N-terminal 139 amino acids of p300.
Confocal microscopy analysis shows that Cart1 recruits overexpressed and
endogenous p300 to a Cart1-specific subnuclear compartment. Cart1 is acetylated
in vivo and sodium butyrate and trichostatin A, histone deacetylase inhibitors,
markedly enhance the transcription activity of Cart1. Deletion and mutagenesis
analysis identifies the 131st lysine that locates immediately adjacent to the
homeodomain as a target of p300-HAT, and a point mutation to this residue
attenuates the binding affinity to p300 as well as p300-dependent transcription
activity. Together, these results indicate that p300/CBP acts as a
cotransactivator to Cart1 through a direct interaction and specific lysine
acetylation. In addition, because 131st lysine is highly conserved in other types
of homeoprotein, this lysine may be a common target for HAT of p300/CBP for these
proteins.

PMID: 12929931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Toxicol Lett. 2003 Sep 30;144(2):213-24.

p53 and its co-activator p300 are inversely regulated in the mouse colon in
response to carcinogen.

Aizu W(1), Guda K, Nambiar P, Xin T, Thibodeau M, Rosenberg DW, Giardina C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, 75 North 
Eagleville Road, U-3125, Storrs, CT 06269, USA.

We examined the p53 response following acute exposure of mice to the
colon-specific carcinogen azoxymethane (AOM). No overall induction of
p53-regulated genes was observed in the mouse colon, and only a small
subpopulation of apoptotic colonocytes showed increased Bax staining. In
contrast, the liver showed dramatic increases in p53-regulated gene expression.
Subdued p53 gene activation in the colon did not appear to result from a lack of 
p53 stabilization, but did correspond to a drop in the expression of its
transcriptional co-activator, p300. We propose that inefficient gene activation
by p53 in the colon contributes to the organotrophic effects of AOM.

PMID: 12927365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 10;278(41):39509-16. Epub 2003 Jul 29.

Concomitant increase of histone acetyltransferase activity and degradation of
p300 during retinoic acid-induced differentiation of F9 cells.

Brouillard F(1), Cremisi CE.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Propre de Recherche 9079, CNRS, Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer,
Institut Andre Lwoff, 7 rue Guy Moquet, 94800 Villejuif, France.

The p300 and closely related CBP histone acetyltransferases (HAT) function as
global transcriptional co-activators that play roles in many cell differentiation
and signal transduction pathways. Despite their similarities, p300 and CBP have
distinct functions during retinoic acid-induced differentiation of mouse F9
embryonal carcinoma cells. F9 cells constitute a well established model system
for investigating the first steps of early development and retinoic acid
signaling ex vivo. p300, but not CBP, was shown to be essential for F9
differentiation. In this study we have investigated the regulation of p300 during
F9 differentiation. We report a dramatic decrease of p300, but not CBP protein
levels, after 48 h of retinoic acid treatment. p300 is degraded via the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Although the large majority of p300 is degraded,
its global HAT activity stays constant during F9 differentiation, which means
that its specific HAT activity increases considerably. p300 is strongly
phosphorylated in both undifferentiated and differentiated F9 cells; its HAT
activity, however, is independent of phosphorylation before differentiation and
becomes dependent on phosphorylation during differentiation. Furthermore, we show
that protein kinase A affects p300 HAT activity both in vivo and in vitro as well
as p300 phosphorylation in differentiated cells. Thus, we show that p300 is
differentially phosphorylated in undifferentiated versus differentiated cells and
that the changes in phosphorylation affect its HAT activity. Moreover, our study 
suggests an explanation for the functional switch of p300-mediated repression
versus activation during F9 differentiation.

PMID: 12888559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Aug 5;100(16):9524-9. Epub 2003 Jul 25.

Repression of c-Myc and inhibition of G1 exit in cells conditionally
overexpressing p300 that is not dependent on its histone acetyltransferase
activity.

Baluchamy S(1), Rajabi HN, Thimmapaya R, Navaraj A, Thimmapaya B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, 303 East Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

p300 and cAMP response element binding protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP) are
two highly homologous, conserved transcriptional coactivators, and histone
acetyltransferases (HATs) that link chromatin remodeling with transcription. Cell
transformation by viral oncogene products such as adenovirus E1A and SV40 large T
antigen depends on their ability to inactivate p300 and CBP. To investigate the
role of p300 in cell-cycle progression, we constructed stable rat cell lines,
which conditionally overexpress p300 from a tetracycline-responsive promoter.
When p300 was induced in these cells, serum-stimulated S-phase entry was
significantly inhibited. The inhibition of S-phase induction was associated with 
down-regulation of c-Myc, but not of c-Fos or c-Jun. Simultaneous overexpression 
of c-Myc and p300 before serum stimulation reversed the inhibition of S-phase
induction to a significant level, indicating that the inhibition of c-Myc to a
large extent is responsible for the p300 inhibition of G1 exit. Similar studies
with stable rat cell lines that overexpress a mutant p300, which lacks the HAT
activity, showed that the intrinsic HAT activity of p300 is not required for the 
negative regulation of c-Myc or G1. These findings, and our previously published 
results (Kolli, S., Buchmann, A. M., Williams, J., Weitzman, S. & Thimmapaya, B. 
(2001) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 4646-4651), establish an important negative
regulatory role for p300 in c-Myc expression that may be important in maintaining
the cells in the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC170951
PMID: 12883011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):35979-87. Epub 2003 Jun 17.

M phase-specific phosphorylation of BRCA2 by Polo-like kinase 1 correlates with
the dissociation of the BRCA2-P/CAF complex.

Lin HR(1), Ting NS, Qin J, Lee WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78245, USA.

BRCA2 is a breast tumor susceptibility gene encoding a 390-kDa protein with
functions in maintaining genomic stability and cell cycle progression. Evidence
has been accumulated to support the concept that BRCA2 has a critical role in
homologous recombination of DNA double-stranded breaks by interacting with RAD51.
In addition, BRCA2 may have chromatin modifying activity through interaction with
a histone acetyltransferase protein, p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF). To
explore how the functions of BRCA2 may be regulated, the post-translational
modifications of BRCA2 throughout the cell cycle were examined. We found that
BRCA2 is hyperphosphorylated specifically in M phase and becomes dephosphorylated
as cells exit M phase and enter interphase. This specific phosphorylation of
BRCA2 was not observed in cells treated with DNA-damaging agents. Systematic
mapping of the potential mitosis specific phosphorylation sites revealed the
N-terminal 284 amino acids of BRCA2 (BR-N1) as the major region of
phosphorylation and mass spectrometric analysis identified two phosphopeptides
that contain "phosphorylation consensus motifs" for Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1).
Phosphorylation of BR-N1 with Plk1 recapitulated the electrophoretic mobility
change as seen in BR-N1 isolated from M phase cells. Plk1 interacts with BRCA2 in
vivo, and mutation of Ser193, Ser205/206, and Thr203/207 to Ala in BR-N1
abolished Plk1 phosphorylation, suggesting that BRCA2 is the substrate of Plk1.
Furthermore, both the hyperphosphorylated and hypophosphorylated forms of BRCA2
bind to RAD51, whereas the M phase hyperphosphorylated form of BRCA2 no longer
associates with the P/CAF, suggesting that the dissociation of P/CAF-BRCA2
complex is regulated by phosphorylation. Taken together, these results implicate 
a potential role of BRCA2 in modulating M phase progression.

PMID: 12815053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jul;23(13):4417-27.

Akt regulates basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor-coactivator complex
formation and activity during neuronal differentiation.

Vojtek AB(1), Taylor J, DeRuiter SL, Yu JY, Figueroa C, Kwok RP, Turner DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, USA.

Neural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors regulate neurogenesis 
in vertebrates. Signaling by peptide growth factors also plays critical roles in 
regulating neuronal differentiation and survival. Many peptide growth factors
activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and subsequently the Akt kinases,
raising the possibility that Akt may impact bHLH protein function during
neurogenesis. Here we demonstrate that reducing expression of endogenous Akt1 and
Akt2 by RNA interference (RNAi) reduces neuron generation in P19 cells
transfected with a neural bHLH expression vector. The reduction in neuron
generation from decreased Akt expression is not solely due to decreased cell
survival, since addition of the caspase inhibitor z-VAD-FMK rescues cell death
associated with loss of Akt function but does not restore neuron formation. This 
result indicates that Akt1 and Akt2 have additional functions during neuronal
differentiation that are separable from neuronal survival. We show that activated
Akt1 enhances complex formation between bHLH proteins and the transcriptional
coactivator p300. Activated Akt1 also significantly augments the transcriptional 
activity of the bHLH protein neurogenin 3 in complex with the coactivators p300
or CBP. In addition, inhibition of endogenous Akt activity by the PI3K/Akt
inhibitor LY294002 abolishes transcriptional cooperativity between the bHLH
proteins and p300. We propose that Akt regulates the assembly and activity of
bHLH-coactivator complexes to promote neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC164860
PMID: 12808085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 May 27;100(11):6464-8. Epub 2003 May 19.

Specific protein methylation defects and gene expression perturbations in
coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1-deficient mice.

Yadav N(1), Lee J, Kim J, Shen J, Hu MC, Aldaz CM, Bedford MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, P.O. Box 389, Smithville 78957, USA.

Arginine methylation has been implicated in the regulation of gene expression.
The coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1/PRMT4) binds the
p160 family of steroid receptor coactivators (SRCs). This association enhances
transcriptional activation by nuclear receptors. Here, we show that embryos with 
a targeted disruption of CARM1 are small in size and die perinatally. The
methylation of two known CARM1 substrates, poly(A)-binding protein (PABP1) and
the transcriptional cofactor p300, was abolished in knockout embryos and cells.
However, CARM1-dependent methylation of histone H3 was not observed. Furthermore,
estrogen-responsive gene expression was aberrant in Carm1-/- fibroblasts and
embryos, thus emphasizing the role of arginine methylation as a transcription
activation tag. These findings provide genetic evidence for the essential role of
CARM1 in estrogen-mediated transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC164469
PMID: 12756295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 11;278(28):25281-4. Epub 2003 May 16.

Transcriptional coactivator PRIP, the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
gamma (PPARgamma)-interacting protein, is required for PPARgamma-mediated
adipogenesis.

Qi C(1), Surapureddi S, Zhu YJ, Yu S, Kashireddy P, Rao MS, Reddy JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University, The Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611-3008, USA.

Nuclear receptor coactivator PRIP (peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor
(PPARgamma)-interacting protein) appears to serve as a linker between cAMP
response element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP/p300)anchored and PBP
(PPARgamma-binding protein)-anchored coactivator complexes involved in the
transcriptional activity of nuclear receptors. Disruption of PRIP and PBP genes
results in embryonic lethality between embryonic day 11.5 and 12.5 (postcoitum), 
indicating that PRIP and PBP are essential and nonredundant coactivators. Both
PRIP and PBP were initially identified as PPARgamma coactivators, suggesting a
role for these molecules in PPARgamma-induced adipogenesis. PBP-/- mouse
embryonic fibroblasts fail to exhibit PPARgamma-stimulated adipogenesis
indicating that PBP is a downstream regulator of PPARgamma-mediated adipogenesis.
We now show that PRIP-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts are also refractory to
PPARgamma-stimulated adipogenesis and fail to express adipogenic marker aP2, a
PPARgamma-responsive gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays reveal reduced
association in PRIP-/- cells of PIMT (PRIP-binding protein) and PBP with aP2 gene
promoter, suggesting that PRIP is required for the linking of CBP/p300-anchored
cofactor complex with PBP-anchored mediator complex. These data indicate that
PRIP, like PBP, is a downstream regulator of PPARgamma-mediated adipogenesis and 
that both these coactivators are required for the successful completion of
adipogenic program.

PMID: 12754253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jun;23(11):3837-46.

Inhibition of p300/CBP by early B-cell factor.

Zhao F(1), McCarrick-Walmsley R, Akerblad P, Sigvardsson M, Kadesch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6145, USA.

Early B-cell factor (EBF) is a DNA binding protein required for early B-cell
development. It activates transcription of several B-cell-specific genes,
including the lambda5 gene, which encodes a protein necessary for signaling by
the pre-B-cell receptor. In an effort to understand the mechanism by which EBF
activates transcription, we examined its interaction with the coactivator protein
p300/CBP. We found that two domains of EBF each bind the histone
acetyltransferase (HAT)/CH3 domain of p300/CBP both in vitro and in vivo.
Surprisingly, transcriptional activation by EBF was not sensitive to E1A, a
potent p300/CBP inhibitor. In fact, overexpressed EBF mimicked E1A by severely
repressing the activity of several other transcription factors, including E47, a 
protein that acts cooperatively with EBF to promote transcription of the lambda5 
gene. This broad inhibitory profile correlated with EBF's ability to repress the 
HAT activity of p300/CBP in vivo and in vitro. However, such a repressed complex 
is not likely to form at the lambda5 promoter in vivo since (i) EBF could not
bind p300/CBP and DNA simultaneously and (ii) the cooperativity imparted by E47
was sensitive to E1A. Our data reveal an intriguing inhibitory property of EBF-a 
property shared only by E1A, Twist, Pu.1, and the Hox family of homeodomain
proteins-and suggest that E47 and EBF play distinct roles during lambda5 promoter
activation.

PMCID: PMC155219
PMID: 12748286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 11;278(28):26102-10. Epub 2003 May 2.

Identification and characterization of BCL-3-binding protein: implications for
transcription and DNA repair or recombination.

Watanabe N(1), Wachi S, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

A putative oncogene bcl-3 was originally identified and cloned at the breakpoint 
in the recurring chromosome translocation t(14;19) found in some cases of B cell 
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Studies of bcl-3-deficient mice demonstrated a
critical role for bcl-3 in the development of a normal immune response and the
formation of germinal centers in secondary lymphoid organs. However, the
molecular mechanism that underlies B cell leukemogenesis and the knockout mouse
phenotype remains unclear. Here we have identified and characterized
BCL-3-binding protein (B3BP) as a protein interacting specifically with the bcl-3
gene product (BCL-3) by a yeast two-hybrid screen. We found that B3BP associates 
with not only BCL-3 but also p300/CBP histone acetyltransferases. The N-terminal 
region of B3BP that contains the ATP-binding site is important for the
interaction with BCL-3 and p300/CBP. Homology searches indicate that the
ATP-binding region of B3BP, which contains a typical Walker-type ATP-binding
P-loop, most resembles that of 2',3'-cyclic nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase of
mammals and polynucleotide kinase of T4 bacteriophage. In fact B3BP shows
intrinsic ATP binding and hydrolyzing activity. Furthermore, we demonstrated that
B3BP is a 5'-polynucleotide kinase. We also found a small MutS-related domain,
which is thought to be involved in the DNA repair or recombination reaction, in
the C-terminal region of B3BP, and it shows nicking endonuclease activity. These 
observations might help to gain new insights into the function of BCL-3 and
p300/CBP, especially the coupling of transcription with repair or recombination.

PMID: 12730195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(10):3593-606.

Cardiac p300 is involved in myocyte growth with decompensated heart failure.

Yanazume T(1), Hasegawa K, Morimoto T, Kawamura T, Wada H, Matsumori A, Kawase Y,
Hirai M, Kita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

A variety of stresses on the heart initiate a number of subcellular signaling
pathways, which finally reach the nuclei of cardiac myocytes and cause myocyte
hypertrophy with heart failure. However, common nuclear pathways that lead to
this state are unknown. A zinc finger protein, GATA-4, is one of the
transcription factors that mediate changes in gene expression during
myocardial-cell hypertrophy. p300 not only acts as a transcriptional coactivator 
of GATA-4, but also possesses an intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity. In
primary cardiac myocytes derived from neonatal rats, we show that stimulation
with phenylephrine increased an acetylated form of GATA-4 and its DNA-binding
activity, as well as expression of p300. A dominant-negative mutant of p300
suppressed phenylephrine-induced nuclear acetylation, activation of
GATA-4-dependent endothelin-1 promoters, and hypertrophic responses, such as
increase in cell size and sarcomere organization. In sharp contrast to the
activation of cardiac MEK-1, which phosphorylates GATA-4 and causes compensated
hypertrophy in vivo, p300-mediated acetylation of mouse cardiac nuclear proteins,
including GATA-4, results in marked eccentric dilatation and systolic
dysfunction. These findings suggest that p300-mediated nuclear acetylation plays 
a critical role in the development of myocyte hypertrophy and represents a
pathway that leads to decompensated heart failure.

PMCID: PMC154243
PMID: 12724418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 Jun;37(2):121-31.

Analysis of genetic stability at the EP300 and CREBBP loci in a panel of cancer
cell lines.

Tillinghast GW(1), Partee J, Albert P, Kelley JM, Burtow KH, Kelly K.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

EP300 (p300) and CREBBP (CBP) are highly related transcriptional co-activators
possessing histone acetyltransferase activity. These proteins have been
implicated in coordinating numerous transcriptional responses that are important 
in the processes of proliferation and differentiation. A role for EP300 and
CREBBP as tumor suppressors in cancer has been suggested by the fact that they
are targeted by viral oncogenes; there is an increased incidence of hematologic
malignancies in mice monoallelic for CREBBP; and loss, albeit at a low frequency,
of both EP300 alleles in epithelial cancers has been observed. Because the level 
of EP300/CREBBP appears to have a critical effect on integrating certain
transcriptional processes, we sought to determine whether a loss in the combined 
gene dosage of EP300 and CREBBP might play a role in cancer. Accordingly, we
screened a panel of 103 cell lines for loss of heterozygosity and found 35 and
51% LOH for the CREBBP and EP300 loci, respectively. Concordant loss of CREBBP
and EP300 was not associated with mutations in important regions of the remaining
EP300 or CREBBP genes. In addition, there did not appear to be a statistically
significant selection in cancer cells, stratified by various criteria, for the
concordant loss of EP300 and CREBBP. We conclude that EP300 and CREBBP rarely act
as classical tumor suppressors in human cancer.

PMID: 12696060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Science. 2003 Apr 11;300(5617):342-4.

Polyubiquitination of p53 by a ubiquitin ligase activity of p300.

Grossman SR(1), Deato ME, Brignone C, Chan HM, Kung AL, Tagami H, Nakatani Y,
Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA.

Rapid turnover of the tumor suppressor protein p53 requires the MDM2 ubiquitin
ligase, and both interact with p300-CREB-binding protein transcriptional
coactivator proteins. p53 is stabilized by the binding of p300 to the oncoprotein
E1A, suggesting that p300 regulates p53 degradation. Purified p300 exhibited
intrinsic ubiquitin ligase activity that was inhibited by E1A. In vitro, p300
with MDM2 catalyzed p53 polyubiquitination, whereas MDM2 catalyzed p53
monoubiquitination. E1A expression caused a decrease in polyubiquitinated but not
monoubiquitinated p53 in cells. Thus, generation of the polyubiquitinated forms
of p53 that are targeted for proteasome degradation requires the intrinsic
ubiquitin ligase activities of MDM2 and p300.

PMID: 12690203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(8):2893-906.

MyoD stimulates RB promoter activity via the CREB/p300 nuclear transduction
pathway.

Magenta A(1), Cenciarelli C, De Santa F, Fuschi P, Martelli F, Caruso M, Felsani 
A.

Author information: 
(1)CNR, Istituto Neurobiologia e Medicina Molecolare, I-00137 Rome, Italy.

The induction of RB gene transcription by MyoD is a key event in the process of
skeletal muscle differentiation, because elevated levels of the retinoblastoma
protein are essential for myoblast cell cycle arrest as well as for the terminal 
differentiation and survival of postmitotic myocytes. We previously showed that
MyoD stimulates transcription from the RB promoter independently of direct
binding to promoter sequences. Here we demonstrate that stimulation by MyoD
requires a cyclic AMP-responsive element (CRE) in the RB promoter, bound by the
transcription factor CREB in differentiating myoblasts. We also show that both
the CREB protein level and the level of phosphorylation of the CREB protein at
Ser-133 rapidly increase at the onset of muscle differentiation and that both
remain high throughout the myogenic process. Biochemical and functional evidence 
indicates that in differentiating myoblasts, MyoD becomes associated with CREB
and is targeted to the RB promoter CRE in a complex also containing the p300
transcriptional coactivator. The resulting multiprotein complex stimulates
transcription from the RB promoter. These and other observations strongly suggest
that MyoD functions by promoting the efficient recruitment of p300 by
promoter-bound, phosphorylated CREB.

PMCID: PMC152540
PMID: 12665587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(8):2749-61.

NF-kappa B-dependent assembly of an enhanceosome-like complex on the promoter
region of apoptosis inhibitor Bfl-1/A1.

Edelstein LC(1), Lagos L, Simmons M, Tirumalai H, Gélinas C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine and Graduate Program in
Biotechnology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Expression of the prosurvival Bcl-2 homologue Bfl-1/A1 is induced by NF-kappa
B-activating stimuli, while B and T cells from c-rel knockout mice show an
absolute defect in bfl-1/a1 gene activation. Here, we demonstrate NF-kappa
B-dependent assembly of an enhanceosome-like complex on the promoter region of
bfl-1. Binding of NF-kappa B subunit c-Rel to DNA nucleated the concerted binding
of transcription factors AP-1 and C/EBP beta to the 5'-regulatory region of
bfl-1. Optimal stability of the complex was dependent on proper orientation and
phasing of the NF-kappa B site. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses
demonstrated that T-cell activation triggers in vivo binding of endogenous c-Rel,
c-Jun, C/EBP beta, and HMG-IC to the bfl-1 regulatory region, coincident with
selective recruitment of coactivators TAFII250 and p300, SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling factor component BRG-1, and basal transcription factors TATA-binding
protein (TBP) and TFIIB, as well as hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4. These
results highlight a critical role for NF-kappa B in bfl-1 transcription and point
to the need for a complex and precise regulatory network to control bfl-1
expression. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of
enhanceosome-mediated regulation of a cell death inhibitor.

PMCID: PMC152543
PMID: 12665576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 2;278(18):16021-9. Epub 2003 Feb 12.

Physical and functional interactions among AP-2 transcription factors,
p300/CREB-binding protein, and CITED2.

Bragança J(1), Eloranta JJ, Bamforth SD, Ibbitt JC, Hurst HC, Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics, Henry Wellcome Building of Genomic Medicine, University of Oxford,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

The transcriptional co-activators and histone acetyltransferases
p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP) interact with CITED2, a transcription factor AP-2
(TFAP2) co-activator. p300/CBP, CITED2, and TFAP2A are essential for normal
neural tube and cardiac development. Here we show that p300 and CBP co-activate
TFAP2A in the presence of CITED2. TFAP2A transcriptional activity was modestly
impaired in p300(+/-) and CBP(+/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts; this was rescued 
by ectopic expression of p300/CBP. p300, TFAP2A, and endogenous CITED2 could be
co-immunoprecipitated from transfected U2-OS cells indicating that they can
interact physically in vivo. CITED2 interacted with the dimerization domain of
TFAP2C, which is highly conserved in TFAP2A/B. In mammalian two-hybrid
experiments, full-length p300 and TFAP2A interacted only when CITED2 was
co-transfected. N-terminal residues of TFAP2A, containing the transactivation
domain, are both necessary and sufficient for interaction with p300, and this
interaction was independent of CITED2. Consistent with this, N-terminal residues 
of TFAP2A were required for p300- and CITED2-dependent co-activation. A histone
acetyltransferase-deficient p300 mutant (D1399Y) did not co-activate TFAP2A and
did not affect the expression or cellular localization of TFAP2A or CITED2. In
mammalian two-hybrid experiments p300D1399Y failed to interact with TFAP2A,
explaining, at least in part, its failure to function as a co-activator. Our
results suggest a model wherein interactions among TFAP2A, CITED2, and p300/CBP
are necessary for TFAP2A-mediated transcriptional activation and for normal
neural tube and cardiac development.

PMID: 12586840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. FEBS Lett. 2003 Feb 11;536(1-3):66-70.

Cyclin B1 transcription is enhanced by the p300 coactivator and regulated during 
the cell cycle by a CHR-dependent repression mechanism.

Wasner M(1), Tschöp K, Spiesbach K, Haugwitz U, Johne C, Mössner J, Mantovani R, 
Engeland K.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik II, Max-Bürger-Forschungszentrum,
Universität Leipzig, Johannisallee 30, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany.

Cyclin B is a central regulator of transition from the G(2) phase of the cell
cycle to mitosis. In mammalian cells two B-type cyclins have been characterised, 
cyclin B1 and B2. Both are expressed with a maximum in G(2) and their synthesis
is mainly regulated on the transcriptional level. We show that a single cell
cycle genes homology region, lacking a functional cell cycle-dependent element in
tandem with it, contributes most of the cell cycle-dependent transcription from
the cyclin B1 promoter. The coactivator p300 binds to the cyclin B1 promoter and 
synergises with the transcription factor NF-Y in activating transcription of
cyclin B1.

PMID: 12586340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Intervirology. 2003;46(1):1-16.

A point mutation in the first splice donor leads to reduced oncogenic properties 
of the adenovirus serotype 12 E1A gene.

Lehmkühler O(1), Kühn C, Gunawardena B, Esche H, Brockmann D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology (Cancer Research), University of Essen Medical 
School, Essen, Germany.

Cells transformed by proteins of early regions 1A (E1A) and 1B (E1B) of oncogenic
adenovirus serotype 12 (Ad12) grow to tumours in syngeneic, immunocompetent
rodents. To gain insight into the mechanisms of oncogenic transformation, we
point mutated the first splice donor in the Ad12-E1A gene, leading to the loss of
the Ad12-E1A(9.5S) and Ad12-E1A(11S/10S) proteins and to a conservative amino
acid (aa) exchange at position aa 30 (valine vs. leucine) in the Ad12-E1A(13S)
and Ad12-E1A(12S ) proteins. BMK cells transformed by mutant Ad12-E1A (Ad12-E1Am)
plus Ad12-E1B via retrovirus-mediated gene transfer showed features comparable to
wild-type Ad12-E1A (Ad12-E1Awt) plus Ad12-E1B-transformed cells: they formed foci
in soft agar and produced tumours in immunodeficient nude mice, although after a 
prolonged latency period. These results suggest that Ad12-E1A(9.5S) and
Ad12-E1A(11S/10S) are dispensable for cellular transformation. However, in
contrast to Ad12-E1Awt cells, Ad12-E1Am cells failed to grow to tumours in
syngeneic, immunocompetent rodents, with the exception of one cell line, which
produced tumours in about 50% of the immunocompetent animals. Interestingly, the 
concentration of the putative tumour suppressor and co-activator p300 was
elevated in cell lines expressing high levels of Ad12-E1A and Ad12-E1B due to an 
increased half-life. These results indicate that p300 is stabilized in
Ad12-E1-transformed BMK cells, probably by a mechanism linked to high expression 
of Ad12-E1A/E1B.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12566694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biochemistry. 2003 Feb 4;42(4):910-6.

Molecular recognition of the human coactivator CBP by the HIV-1 transcriptional
activator Tat.

Vendel AC(1), Lumb KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Chemistry,
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado 80523-1870, USA.

HIV-1 Tat is required for the expression of the viral genome. Tat binds to an RNA
stem-loop and mediates the recruitment of human coactivators to facilitate HIV-1 
transcription. The coactivator and acetyltransferase CREB binding protein (CBP), 
and the paralog p300, are recruited to the HIV-1 promoter by Tat. Here we
identify the interacting domains of Tat and CBP. Circular dichroism and pulldown 
assays show that full-length Tat binds to the KIX domain of CBP, but not to the
C/H1 or CR2 domains. Circular dichroism and NMR studies of Tat deletion mutants
localize the KIX-binding domain of Tat to the N-terminal 24 residues of Tat.
Transient cotransfections demonstrate that exogenous KIX behaves as a dominant
negative to Tat-mediated transcription in human T-cells, suggesting that Tat and 
KIX interact in vivo. These findings indicate that Tat targets the KIX domain of 
CBP and provide insight into the molecular interactions involved in regulating
HIV-1 gene expression.

PMID: 12549909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 21;278(12):10516-22. Epub 2003 Jan 21.

Proteomic analysis of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase I and IV in
vitro substrates reveals distinct catalytic preferences.

Corcoran EE(1), Joseph JD, MacDonald JA, Kane CD, Haystead TA, Means AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

The multifunctional calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases I and IV (CaMKI 
and CaMKIV) are closely related by primary sequence and predicted to have similar
substrate specificities based on peptide studies. We identified a fragment of
p300-(1-117) that is a substrate of both kinases, and through both mutagenesis
and Edman phosphate ((32)P) release sequencing, established that CaMKI and CaMKIV
phosphorylate completely different sites. The CaMKI site, Ser(89)
((84)LLRSGSSPNL(93)), fits the expected consensus whereas the CaMKIV site,
Ser(24) ((19)SSPALSASAS(28)), is novel. To compare kinase substrate preferences
more generally, we employed a proteomic display technique that allowed comparison
of complex cell extracts phosphorylated by each kinase in a rapid in vitro assay,
thereby demonstrating substrate preferences that overlapped but were clearly
distinct. To validate this approach, one of the proteins labeled in this assay
was identified by microsequencing as HSP25, purified as a recombinant protein,
and examined as a substrate for both CaMKI and CaMKIV. Again, CaMKI and CaMKIV
were different, this time in kinetics and stoichiometry of the phosphorylation
sites, with CaMKI preferring Ser(15) ((10)LLRTPSWGPF(19)) to Ser(85)
((80)LNRQLSSGVS(89)) 3:1, but CaMKIV phosphorylating the two sites equally. These
differences in substrate specificities emphasize the need to consider these
protein kinases independently despite their close homology.

PMID: 12538590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;23(2):526-33.

Regulation of tumor necrosis factor alpha gene expression by mycobacteria
involves the assembly of a unique enhanceosome dependent on the coactivator
proteins CBP/p300.

Barthel R(1), Tsytsykova AV, Barczak AK, Tsai EY, Dascher CC, Brenner MB,
Goldfeld AE.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Blood Research. Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School.
The Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) plays an important role in host
containment of infection by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, one of the leading causes
of death by an infectious agent globally. Using the pathogenic M. tuberculosis
strain H37Rv, we present evidence that upon stimulation of monocytic cells by M. 
tuberculosis a unique TNF-alpha enhanceosome is formed, and it is distinct from
the TNF-alpha enhanceosome that forms in T cells stimulated by antigen engagement
or virus infection. A distinct set of activators including ATF-2, c-jun, Ets,
Sp1, Egr-1 and the coactivator proteins CBP/p300 are recruited to the TNF-alpha
promoter after stimulation with M. tuberculosis. Furthermore, the formation of
this enhanceosome is dependent on inducer-specific helical phasing relationships 
between transcription factor binding sites. We also show that the transcriptional
activity of CBP/p300 is potentiated by mycobacterial stimulation of monocytes.
The identification of TNF-alpha regulatory elements and coactivators involved in 
M. tuberculosis-stimulated gene expression thus provides potential selective
molecular targets in the modulation of TNF-alpha gene expression in the setting
of mycobacterial infection.

PMCID: PMC151551
PMID: 12509451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;23(2):437-49.

Association between hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF-6) and FoxA2 DNA binding
domains stimulates FoxA2 transcriptional activity but inhibits HNF-6 DNA binding.

Rausa FM(1), Tan Y, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois 
at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

In previous studies we used transgenic mice or recombinant adenovirus infection
to increase hepatic expression of forkhead box A2 (FoxA2, previously called
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta [HNF-3beta]), which caused diminished hepatocyte 
glycogen levels and reduced expression of glucose homeostasis genes. Because this
diminished expression of FoxA2 target genes was associated with reduced levels of
the Cut-Homeodomain HNF-6 transcription factor, we conducted the present study to
determine whether there is a functional interaction between HNF-6 and FoxA2.
Human hepatoma (HepG2) cotransfection assays demonstrated that HNF-6
synergistically stimulated FoxA2 but not FoxA1 or FoxA3 transcriptional activity,
and protein-binding assays showed that this protein interaction required the
HNF-6 Cut-Homeodomain and FoxA2 winged-helix DNA binding domains. Furthermore, we
show that the HNF-6 Cut-Homeodomain sequences were sufficient to synergistically 
stimulate FoxA2 transcriptional activation by recruiting the p300/CBP coactivator
proteins. This was supported by the fact that FoxA2 transcriptional synergy with 
HNF-6 was dependent on retention of the HNF-6 Cut domain LXXLL sequence, which
mediated recruitment of the p300/CBP proteins. Moreover, cotransfection and DNA
binding assays demonstrated that increased FoxA2 levels caused a decrease in
HNF-6 transcriptional activation of the glucose transporter 2 (Glut-2) promoter
by interfering with the binding of HNF-6 to its target DNA sequence. These data
suggest that at a FoxA-specific site, HNF-6 serves as a coactivator protein to
enhance FoxA2 transcription, whereas at an HNF-6-specific site, FoxA2 represses
HNF-6 transcription by inhibiting HNF-6 DNA binding activity. This is the first
reported example of a liver-enriched transcription factor (HNF-6) functioning as 
a coactivator protein to potentiate the transcriptional activity of another liver
factor, FoxA2.

PMCID: PMC151533
PMID: 12509444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Genomics. 2002 Dec;80(6):601-13.

Cloning of mouse Cited4, a member of the CITED family p300/CBP-binding
transcriptional coactivators: induced expression in mammary epithelial cells.

Yahata T(1), Takedatsu H, Dunwoodie SL, Bragança J, Swingler T, Withington SL,
Hur J, Coser KR, Isselbacher KJ, Bhattacharya S, Shioda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

The CITED family proteins bind to CBP/p300 transcriptional integrators through
their conserved C-terminal acidic domain and function as coactivators. The 21-kDa
mouse Cited4 protein, a novel member of the CITED family, interacted with
CBP/p300 as well as isoforms of the TFAP2 transcription factor, coactivating
TFAP2-dependent transcription. The cited4 gene consisted of only a single exon
located on chromosome 4 at 56.5-56.8 cM flanked by marker genes kcnq4 and scml1. 
Expression of Cited4 protein was strong and selective in embryonic hematopoietic 
tissues and endothelial cells. In adult animals, Cited4 showed strong milk
cycle-dependent induction in pregnant and lactating mammary epithelial cells.
Strong induction of Cited4 expression was also observed in SCp2 mouse mammary
epithelial cells during their prolactin-dependent in vitro differentiation. These
results implied possible roles for Cited4 in regulation of gene expression during
development and differentiation of blood cells, endothelial cells, and mammary
epithelial cells.

PMID: 12504852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):7453-8. Epub 2002 Dec 18.

The acetylase activity of p300 is dispensable for MDM2 stabilization.

Zeng SX(1), Jin Y, Kuninger DT, Rotwein P, Lu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Molecular Medicine
Division, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

It has been shown that p300 binds to MDM2 and leads to down-regulation of the p53
function. However, it remains unclear whether the acetylase activity of p300 is
necessary for regulating MDM2 stability. In this study, we address this issue.
First, p300 did not acetylate MDM2 in solution and in cells. Second,
overexpression of p300 in cells increased the level of the MDM2 protein but not
its mRNA. Similarly, the acetylase-defective p300 AT2 mutant stabilized the MDM2 
protein as well. Consistently, the deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A, did not
significantly affect the half-life of the endogenous MDM2 protein, whereas p300
enhanced the half-life of MDM2. Finally, both wild type and acetylase-defective
mutant p300 proteins associated with MDM2 in nuclear body-like structures where
MDM2 might be protected from proteasomal degradation. Thus, these results suggest
that p300 appears to stabilize MDM2 by retaining this protein in a specific
nuclear structure rather than by acetylating it.

PMID: 12493762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 18;278(16):13696-705. Epub 2002 Dec 17.

The co-activator p300 associates physically with and can mediate the action of
the distal enhancer of the FGF-4 gene.

Nowling T(1), Bernadt C, Johnson L, Desler M, Rizzino A.

Author information: 
(1)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 68198, USA.

Distal enhancers commonly regulate gene expression. However, the mechanisms of
transcriptional mediation by distal enhancers remain largely unknown. To better
understand distal enhancer-mediated transcription, we examined the regulation of 
the FGF-4 gene. The FGF-4 gene is regulated during early development by a
powerful distal enhancer located downstream of the promoter in exon 3. Sox-2 and 
Oct-3 bind to the enhancer and are required for the activation of the FGF-4 gene.
Previously, we implicated the co-activator p300 as a mediator of Sox-2/Oct-3
synergistic activation of a heterologous promoter, suggesting that p300 may play 
a role in mediating enhancer activation of the FGF-4 gene. In this study, we
provide both functional and physical evidence that p300 plays an important role
in the action of the FGF-4 enhancer. Specifically, we show that E1a, but not a
mutant form of E1a that is unable to bind p300, inhibits enhancer activation of
the FGF-4 promoter. We also demonstrate that Gal4/p300 fusion proteins can
stimulate the FGF-4 promoter when bound to the FGF-4 enhancer. Additionally, we
present evidence that p300 mediation of the FGF-4 enhancer requires
acetyltransferase activity. Importantly, we also show that Sox-2 and p300 are
physically associated with the endogenous FGF-4 enhancer but weakly associated
with the endogenous FGF-4 promoter. These results are consistent with a model of 
transitory interaction between the distal enhancer and the FGF-4 promoter. Our
results also suggest that intragenic distal enhancers may use mechanisms that
differ from extragenic distal enhancers.

PMID: 12488456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):6642-50. Epub 2002 Dec 12.

Interactions between p300 and multiple NF-Y trimers govern cyclin B2 promoter
function.

Salsi V(1), Caretti G, Wasner M, Reinhard W, Haugwitz U, Engeland K, Mantovani R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Animale, Università di Modena e Reggio, Via Campi
213/d, 41100 Modena, Italy.

The CCAAT box is one of the most common elements in eukaryotic promoters and is
activated by NF-Y, a conserved trimeric transcription factor with histone-like
subunits. Usually one CCAAT element is present in promoters at positions between 
-60 and -100, but an emerging class of promoters harbor multiple NF-Y sites. In
the triple CCAAT-containing cyclin B2 cell-cycle promoter, all CCAAT boxes,
independently from their NF-Y affinities, are important for function. We
investigated the relationships between NF-Y and p300. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis found that NF-Y and p300 are bound to the cyclin B2 
promoter in vivo and that their binding is regulated during the cell cycle,
positively correlating with promoter function. Cotransfection experiments
determined that the coactivator acts on all CCAAT boxes and requires a precise
spacing between the three elements. We established the order of in vitro binding 
of the three NF-Y complexes and find decreasing affinities from the most distal
Y1 to the proximal Y3 site. Binding of two or three NF-Y trimers with or without 
p300 is not cooperative, but association with the Y1 and Y2 sites is extremely
stable. p300 favors the binding of NF-Y to the weak Y3 proximal site, provided
that a correct distance between the three CCAAT is respected. Our data indicate
that the precise spacing of multiple CCAAT boxes is crucial for coactivator
function. Transient association to a weak site might be a point of regulation
during the cell cycle and a general theme of multiple CCAAT box promoters.

PMID: 12482752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):6838-47. Epub 2002 Dec 10.

The transcriptional co-activators CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 play a
critical role in cardiac hypertrophy that is dependent on their histone
acetyltransferase activity.

Gusterson RJ(1), Jazrawi E, Adcock IM, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London, 30 Guilford St., London 
WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

The CBP and p300 proteins are transcriptional co-activators that are involved in 
a variety of transcriptional pathways in development and in response to specific 
signaling pathways. We have previously demonstrated that the ability of both
these factors to stimulate transcription is greatly enhanced by treatment of
cardiac cells with the hypertrophic agent phenylephrine (PE). Here, we show that 
inhibition of either CBP or p300 with antisense or dominant negative mutant
constructs inhibits PE-induced hypertrophy as assayed by atrial naturetic protein
production, cardiac cell protein:DNA ratio and cell size. Furthermore, we show
that overexpression of CBP or p300 can induce hypertrophy and that this effect
requires their histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. Moreover, we show that
PE can directly enhance CBP HAT activity and that artificial enhancement of HAT
activity is sufficient to induce hypertrophy. Hence, CBP and p300 play an
essential role in hypertrophy induced by PE, and this effect is mediated via
PE-induced enhancement of their HAT activity. This is the first time a role for
these factors, and their HAT activity, in hypertrophy has been directly
demonstrated.

PMID: 12477714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Dec;269(24):6142-51.

Transcriptional activity of interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-3 depends on
multiple protein-protein interactions.

Yang H(1), Lin CH, Ma G, Orr M, Baffi MO, Wathelet MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

Virus infection results in the activation of a set of cellular genes involved in 
host antiviral defense. IRF-3 has been identified as a critical transcription
factor in this process. The activation mechanism of IRF-3 is not fully
elucidated, yet it involves a conformational change triggered by the
virus-dependent phosphorylation of its C-terminus. This conformational change
leads to nuclear accumulation, DNA binding and transcriptional transactivation.
Here we show that two distinct sets of Ser/Thr residues of IRF-3, on
phosphorylation, synergize functionally to achieve maximal activation.
Remarkably, we find that activated IRF-3 lacks transcriptional activity, but
activates transcription entirely through the recruitment of the p300/CBP
coactivators. Moreover, we show that two separate domains of IRF-3 interact with 
several distinct regions of p300/CBP. Interference with any of these interactions
leads to a complete loss of transcriptional activity, suggesting that a bivalent 
interaction is essential for coactivator recruitment by IRF-3.

PMID: 12473110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 7;278(6):3776-85. Epub 2002 Nov 22.

Identification of a promoter-specific transcriptional activation domain at the C 
terminus of the Wnt effector protein T-cell factor 4.

Hecht A(1), Stemmler MP.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Stübeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany.
hecht@mm11.ukl.uni-freiburg.de

Wnt growth factors control numerous cell fate decisions in development by
altering specific gene expression patterns through the activity of heterodimeric 
transcriptional activators. These consist of beta-catenin and one of the four
members of the T-cell factor (TCF) family of DNA-binding proteins. How can the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway control various sets of target genes in distinct
cellular settings with such a limited number of nuclear effectors? Here we asked 
whether different TCF proteins could perform specific, nonredundant functions at 
natural beta-catenin/TCF-regulated promoters. We found that TCF4E but not LEF1
supported beta-catenin-dependent activation of the Cdx1 promoter, whereas LEF1
specifically activated the Siamois promoter. Deletion of a C-terminal domain of
TCF4E prevented Cdx1 promoter induction. A chimeric protein consisting of LEF1
and the C terminus of TCF4E was fully functional. Therefore, the TCF4E C terminus
harbors a promoter-specific transactivation domain. This domain influences the
DNA binding properties of TCF4 and additionally mediates an interaction with the 
transcriptional coactivator p300. Apparently, the C terminus of TCF4E cooperates 
with beta-catenin and p300 to form a specialized transcription factor complex
that specifically supports the activation of the Cdx1 promoter.

PMID: 12446687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 24;278(4):2370-6. Epub 2002 Nov 14.

Regulation of E2A activities by histone acetyltransferases in B lymphocyte
development.

Bradney C(1), Hjelmeland M, Komatsu Y, Yoshida M, Yao TP, Zhuang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

Genetic studies have demonstrated that the basic helix-loop-helix protein E2A is 
an essential transcription factor in B lymphocyte lineage commitment and
differentiation. However, the mechanism underlying E2A-mediated transcription
regulation is not fully understood. Here, we investigated the physical and
genetic interactions between E2A and co-activators histone acetyltransferases
(HATs) in B cells. Gel filtration analysis of human pre-B cell nuclear extract
showed that E2A co-elutes with the HATs p300, CBP, and PCAF. A
co-immunoprecipitation assay further demonstrated that a fraction of endogenous
E2A proteins is associated with each of the three HATs. We show that these HATs
acetylate E2A in vitro, enhance E2A-mediated transcription activity, and promote 
nuclear retention of E2A proteins. A catalytic mutation of p300 completely
abrogates the ability of p300 to acetylate E2A and to promote E2A nuclear
retention in 293T cells. A breeding test between E2A heterozygous mice and p300
heterozygous mice demonstrated that these two genes interact for proper B cell
development. Collectively, these results suggest that E2A and HATs
collaboratively regulate B cell development.

PMID: 12435739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Cell. 2002 Sep;10(3):573-84.

ICAT inhibits beta-catenin binding to Tcf/Lef-family transcription factors and
the general coactivator p300 using independent structural modules.

Daniels DL(1), Weis WI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

In the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, beta-catenin activates target genes
through its interactions with Tcf/Lef-family transcription factors and additional
transcriptional coactivators. The crystal structure of ICAT, an inhibitor of
beta-catenin-mediated transcription, bound to the armadillo repeat domain of
beta-catenin, has been determined. ICAT contains an N-terminal helilical domain
that binds to repeats 11 and 12 of beta-catenin, and an extended C-terminal
region that binds to repeats 5-10 in a manner similar to that of Tcfs and other
beta-catenin ligands. Full-length ICAT dissociates complexes of beta-catenin,
Lef-1, and the transcriptional coactivator p300, whereas the helical domain alone
selectively blocks binding to p300. The C-terminal armadillo repeats of
beta-catenin may be an attractive target for compounds designed to disrupt
aberrant beta-catenin-mediated transcription associated with various cancers.

PMID: 12408825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Nov 12;99(23):14789-94. Epub 2002 Oct 23.

Distinct roles for CREB-binding protein and p300 in hematopoietic stem cell
self-renewal.

Rebel VI(1), Kung AL, Tanner EA, Yang H, Bronson RT, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) are tightly regulated through, as yet, undefined
mechanisms that balance self-renewal and differentiation. We have identified a
role for the transcriptional coactivators CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 in 
such HSC fate decisions. A full dose of CBP, but not p300, is crucial for HSC
self-renewal. Conversely, p300, but not CBP, is essential for proper
hematopoietic differentiation. Furthermore, in chimeric mice, hematologic
malignancies emerged from both CBP(-/-) and p300(-/-) cell populations. Thus, CBP
and p300 play essential but distinct roles in maintaining normal hematopoiesis,
and, in mice, both are required for preventing hematologic tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC137497
PMID: 12397173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Cancer. 2002 Nov 10;102(2):137-41.

Mutation analysis of EP300 in colon, breast and ovarian carcinomas.

Bryan EJ(1), Jokubaitis VJ, Chamberlain NL, Baxter SW, Dawson E, Choong DY,
Campbell IG.

Author information: 
(1)VBCRC Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute, Locked Bag
No. 1 A'Beckett Street, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The putative tumour suppressor gene EP300 is located on chromosome 22q13 which is
a region showing frequent loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in colon, breast and
ovarian cancers. We analysed 203 human breast, colon and ovarian primary tumours 
and cell lines for somatic mutations in EP300. LOH across the EP300 locus was
detected in 38% of colon, 36% of breast, and 49% of ovarian primary tumours but
no somatic mutations in EP300 were identified in any primary tumour. Analysis of 
17 colon, 11 breast, and 11 ovarian cancer cell lines identified truncating
mutations in 4 colon cancer cell lines (HCT116, HT29, LIM2405 and LIM2412). We
confirmed the presence of a previously reported frameshift mutation in HCT116 at 
codon 1699 and identified a second frameshift mutation at codon 1468. Bi-allelic 
inactivation of EP300 was also detected in LIM2405 that harbours an insC mutation
at codon 927 as well an insA mutation at codon 1468. An insA mutation at codon
1468 was identified in HT29 and a CGA>TGA mutation at codon 86 was identified in 
LIM2412. Both these lines were heterozygous across the EP300 locus and western
blot analysis confirmed the presence of an apparently wild-type protein. Our
study has established that genetic inactivation of EP300 is rare in primary
colorectal, breast and ovarian cancers. In contrast, mutations are common among
colorectal cancer cell lines with 4/17 harbouring homozygous or heterozygous
mutations. The rarity of EP300 mutations among these tumour types that show a
high frequency of LOH across 22q13 may indicate that another gene is the target
of the loss. It is possible that bi-allelic inactivation of EP300 is not
necessary and that haploinsufficiency is sufficient to promote tumorigenesis.
Alternatively, silencing of EP300 may be achieved by epigenetic mechanisms such
as promoter methylation.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12385008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Nature. 2002 Oct 17;419(6908):738-43.

A transcription-factor-binding surface of coactivator p300 is required for
haematopoiesis.

Kasper LH(1), Boussouar F, Ney PA, Jackson CW, Rehg J, van Deursen JM, Brindle
PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 North
Lauderdale, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The coactivators CBP (Cre-element binding protein (CREB)-binding protein) and its
paralogue p300 are thought to supply adaptor molecule and protein
acetyltransferase functions to many transcription factors that regulate gene
expression. Normal development requires CBP and p300, and mutations in these
genes are found in haematopoietic and epithelial tumours. It is unclear, however,
which functions of CBP and p300 are essential in vivo. Here we show that the
protein-binding KIX domains of CBP and p300 have nonredundant functions in mice. 
In mice homozygous for point mutations in the KIX domain of p300 designed to
disrupt the binding surface for the transcription factors c-Myb and CREB,
multilineage defects occur in haematopoiesis, including anaemia, B-cell
deficiency, thymic hypoplasia, megakaryocytosis and thrombocytosis. By contrast, 
age-matched mice homozygous for identical mutations in the KIX domain of CBP are 
essentially normal. There is a synergistic genetic interaction between mutations 
in c-Myb and mutations in the KIX domain of p300, which suggests that the binding
of c-Myb to this domain of p300 is crucial for the development and function of
megakaryocytes. Thus, conserved domains in two highly related coactivators have
contrasting roles in haematopoiesis.

PMID: 12384703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. EMBO J. 2002 Oct 15;21(20):5457-66.

Control of CBP co-activating activity by arginine methylation.

Chevillard-Briet M(1), Trouche D, Vandel L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote, UMR 5099 CNRS, Institut de
Biologie Cellulaire et Génétique, 118 Route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse cedex,
France.

The histone acetyltransferases CREB binding protein (CBP) and the related p300
protein function as key transcriptional co-activators in multiple pathways. In
the case of transcriptional activation by nuclear receptors, ligand promotes the 
recruitment of co-activators of the p160 family, such as GRIP-1. Subsequently,
the p160 co-activators recruit other co-activators via two activation domains,
AD1 and AD2. AD1 binds CBP or p300, whereas AD2 has been shown to activate
transcription through the recruitment of the arginine methyltransferase CARM1.
Recently, the KIX domain of CBP has been shown to be methylated by CARM1 in
vitro. Here, we report that another domain of CBP is specifically methylated by
CARM1 on conserved arginine residues in vitro and in vivo. We also provide
functional evidence that arginine residues methylated by CARM1 play a critical
role in GRIP-1-dependent transcriptional activation and in hormone-induced gene
activation. Altogether, our data provide strong evidence that arginine
methylation represents an important mechanism for modulating co-activator
transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC129080
PMID: 12374746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):45004-12. Epub 2002 Sep 23.

Ataxin-3 is a histone-binding protein with two independent transcriptional
corepressor activities.

Li F(1), Macfarlan T, Pittman RN, Chakravarti D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6084, USA.

The mechanisms of pathology for the family of polyglutamine disease proteins are 
unknown; however, recently it was shown that several of these proteins inhibit
transcription suggesting that transcriptional repression may be a potential
mechanism for pathology. In the present study we use cell transfections, in vitro
binding, co-immunoprecipitations, and reporter assays to show that the
polyglutamine disease protein, ataxin-3, interacts with the major histone
acetyltransferases cAMP-response-element binding protein (CREB)-binding protein, 
p300, and p300/CREB-binding protein-associated factor and inhibits transcription 
by these coactivators. Importantly, endogenous ataxin-3 is co-immunoprecipitated 
with each of these coactivators in non-transfected cells. The C-terminal
polyglutamine-containing domain of ataxin-3 inhibits coactivator-dependent
transcription and is required for binding coactivators. The N-terminal domain of 
ataxin-3 inhibits histone acetylation by p300 in vitro and inhibits transcription
in vivo. Histone binding and blocking access of coactivators to acetylation sites
on histones appears to be the mechanism of inhibition. Together, our data provide
a novel mechanism of transcriptional regulation by ataxin-3 that involves
targeting histones, coactivators, and an independent mode of direct repression of
transcription, and suggests that its physiological function and possibly
pathological effects are linked to its interactions with these proteins.

PMID: 12297501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):44677-87. Epub 2002 Aug 29.

Developmentally regulated N-terminal variants of the nuclear receptor hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 4alpha mediate multiple interactions through coactivator and
corepressor-histone deacetylase complexes.

Torres-Padilla ME(1), Sladek FM, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364 du CNRS, Département de
Biologie du Développement, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

To understand the mechanisms governing the regulation of nuclear receptor (NR)
function, we compared the parameters of activation and repression of two isoforms
of the orphan receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4alpha. HNF4alpha7 and
HNF4alpha1 differ only in their N-terminal domains, and their expression in the
liver is regulated developmentally. We show that the N-terminal activation
function (AF)-1 of HNF4alpha1 possesses significant activity that can be enhanced
through interaction with glucocorticoid receptor-interacting protein 1 (GRIP-1)
and cAMP response element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP). In striking
contrast, HNF4alpha7 possesses no measurable AF-1, implying major functional
differences between the isoforms. Indeed, although HNF4alpha1 and HNF4alpha7 are 
able to interact via AF-2 with GRIP-1, p300, and silencing mediator for retinoid 
and thyroid receptors (SMRT), only HNF4alpha1 interacts in a synergistic fashion 
with GRIP-1 and p300. Although both isoforms interact physically and functionally
with SMRT, the repression of HNF4alpha7 is less robust than that of HNF4alpha1,
which may be caused by an increased ability of the latter to recruit histone
deacetylase (HDAC) activity to target promoters. Moreover, association of SMRT
with HDACs enhanced recruitment of HNF4alpha1 but not of HNF4alpha7. These
observations suggest that NR isoform-specific association with SMRT could affect 
activity of the SMRT complex, implying that selection of HDAC partners is a novel
point of regulation for NR activity. Possible physiological consequences of the
multiple interactions with these coregulators are discussed.

PMID: 12205093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. DNA Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;21(7):519-25.

MDMX inhibits the p300/CBP-mediated acetylation of p53.

Sabbatini P(1), McCormick F.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, University of California, School of Medicine, San
Francisco, California 94080, USA.

The p300/CBP-mediated acetylation of p53 significantly potentiates p53-mediated
transactivation and growth inhibition. MDM2 inhibits the acetylation of p53 by
p300/CBP through a mechanism that requires a stable p53-MDM2 interaction and that
is sensitive to the deacetylase inhibitor, TSA. MDMX is an MDM2-like protein that
shares with MDM2 the ability to interact with p53 and, in turn, inhibit
p53-mediated transcription. It was therefore of interest to determine if MDMX
could also inhibit the acetylation of p53 by p300/CBP. We demonstrate that MDMX
dramatically inhibits the acetylation of p53 induced by both endogenous and
ectopically expressed p300/CBP. We also demonstrate that the p53-binding domain
of MDMX is required for the MDMX-mediated inhibition of p53 acetylation. Our
results indicate that MDMX shares with MDM2 the ability to regulate a potentially
important post-translational modification of p53. These results may have
important biologic implications with respect to the MDMX-mediated regulation of
p53 activity during development.

PMID: 12162806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 11;277(41):38755-63. Epub 2002 Aug 2.

Acetylation of the adenovirus-transforming protein E1A determines nuclear
localization by disrupting association with importin-alpha.

Madison DL(1), Yaciuk P, Kwok RP, Lundblad JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and
Science University, Portland, Oregon 97201, USA.

Posttranslational modifications may alter the biochemical functions of a protein 
by modifying associations with other macromolecules, allosterically altering
intrinsic catalytic activities, or determining subcellular localization. The
adenovirus-transforming protein E1A is acetylated by its cellular targets, the
co-activators CREB-binding protein, p300, and p300/CREB-binding
protein-associated factor in vitro and also in vivo at a single lysine residue
(Lys(239)) within a multifunctional carboxyl-terminal domain necessary for both
nuclear localization and interaction with the transcriptional co-repressor
carboxyl-terminal binding protein (CtBP). In contrast to a previous report, we
demonstrate that acetylation of Lys(239) does not disrupt CtBP binding and that
12 S E1A-mediated repression of CREB-binding protein-dependent transcription does
not require recruitment of CtBP. Instead we find that the cytoplasmic fraction of
E1-transformed 293 cells is enriched for acetylated E1A with relative exclusion
from the nuclear compartment. Whereas wild type 12 S E1A binds importin-alpha 3, 
binding affinity was markedly reduced both by single amino acid substitution
mutations and acetylation at Lys(239). This is the first demonstration that
acetylation may alter nuclear partitioning by direct interference with nuclear
import receptor recognition. The finding that the cytoplasmic fraction of E1A is 
acetylated indicates that E1A may exert its pleiotropic effects on cellular
transformation in part by affecting cytoplasmic processes.

PMID: 12161448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 18;277(42):39144-55. Epub 2002 Jul 5.

The transcriptional regulating protein of 132 kDa (TReP-132) enhances P450scc
gene transcription through interaction with steroidogenic factor-1 in human
adrenal cells.

Gizard F(1), Lavallee B, DeWitte F, Teissier E, Staels B, Hum DW.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, Laval University, Québec
GIK 7P4, Canada.

The human P450scc gene is regulated by the tissue-specific orphan nuclear
receptor, steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1), which plays a key role in several
physiologic processes including steroid synthesis, adrenal and gonadal
development, and sexual differentiation. Several studies have demonstrated the
interaction of SF-1 with different proteins. However, it is clear that additional
factors not yet identified are involved with SF-1 to regulate different target
genes. Recently, it was demonstrated that a novel transcriptional regulating
protein of 132 kDa (TReP-132) regulates expression of the human P450scc gene. The
overexpression of TReP-132 in adrenal cells increases the production of
pregnenolone, which is associated with the activation of P450scc gene expression.
Considering the colocalization of TReP-132 and SF-1 in steroidogenic tissues such
as the adrenal and testis, and the presence of two putative LXXLL motifs in
TReP-132 that can potentially interact with SF-1, the relationship between these 
two factors on the P450scc gene promoter was determined. The coexpression of SF-1
and TReP-132 in adrenal NCI-H295 cells cooperates to increase promoter activity. 
Pull-down experiments demonstrated the interaction between TReP-132 and SF-1, and
this was further confirmed in intact cells by coimmunoprecipitation/Western blot 
and two-hybrid analyses. Deletions and mutations of the TReP-132 cDNA sequence
demonstrate that SF-1 interaction requires the LXXLL motif found at the
amino-terminal region of the protein. Also, the "proximal activation domain" and 
the "AF-2 hexamer" motif of SF-1 are involved in interaction with TReP-132.
Consistent with previous studies showing interaction between CBP/p300 and SF-1 or
TReP-132, the coexpression of these three proteins results in a synergistic
effect on P450scc gene promoter activity. Taken together the results in this
study identify a novel function of TReP-132 as a partner in a complex with SF-1
and CBP/p300 to regulate gene transcription involved in steroidogenesis.

PMID: 12101186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Brain Res. 2002 Jul 12;943(2):202-5.

Age-related changes in nuclear receptor coactivator immunoreactivity in
motoneurons of the spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus of male rats.

Matsumoto A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Hongo, Tokyo
113-0033, Japan. akira@med.juntendo.ac.jp

Immunoreactivity of phosphorylated cAMP response element binding protein-binding 
protein/p300 (CBP/p300) and steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1) was examined
in motoneurons of the spinal nucleus of the bulbocavernosus (SNB) in young and
old male rats by immunohistochemistry. In young animals, intense immunoreactive
CBP/p300 and SRC-1 proteins were confined to the nuclei, but not in the nucleolus
of SNB motoneurons. In old animals, both the intensity of CBP/p300 and SRC-1
immunoreactivity in the nuclei and number of CBP/p300 and SRC-1 immunoreactive
nuclei of the SNB motoneurons were significantly reduced. A marked decline in the
expression of CBP/p300 and SRC-1 in the aged SNB motoneurons suggests
down-regulation of androgen receptor coactivator-mediated gene expression in the 
SNB system with advancing age.

PMID: 12101042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Gene. 2002 May 29;291(1-2):271-7.

Major intestinal coactivator p300 strongly activates peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor in intestinal cell line, Caco-2.

Mochizuki K(1), Suruga K, Sakaguchi N, Takase S, Goda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Food and Nutritional Sciences, The
University of Shizuoka, 52-1 Yada, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan.

We have previously reported that several genes related to intestinal fatty acid
and vitamin A metabolism are coordinately regulated by peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) [Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 389 (2001) 41;
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1531 (2001) 68]. In this study, we demonstrated that PPAR 
alpha and PPAR delta interacted with endogenous coactivators in intestinal cell
line, Caco-2 in a ligand specific manner. We isolated rat cDNA clones encoding
the nuclear receptor interaction domains of the two transcriptional coactivators,
CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300. Expression level of CBP mRNA was relatively 
low in the small intestine, while p300 mRNA was ubiquitously expressed in various
tissues including the small intestine in the rat. Southern blot analysis revealed
that these coactivators were encoded by different genes. Mammalian two-hybrid
assays in Caco-2 cells revealed that p300 interacted with PPAR alpha or PPAR
delta in the presence of their specific ligands more efficiently than CBP did.
These results suggest that the major intestinal coactivator, p300 strongly
interacts with PPAR alpha and PPAR delta.

PMID: 12095700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Jun;269(12):2961-70.

Regulation of transcription of the Dnmt1 gene by Sp1 and Sp3 zinc finger
proteins.

Kishikawa S(1), Murata T, Kimura H, Shiota K, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Engineering Division, Department of Biological Systems, BioResource
Center, RIKEN (The Institute of Physical & Chemical Research), Japan.

The Sp family is a family of transcription factors that bind to cis-elements in
the promoter regions of various genes. Regulation of transcription by Sp proteins
is based on interactions between a GC-rich binding site (GGGCGG) in DNA and
C-terminal zinc finger motifs in the proteins. In this study, we characterized
the GC-rich promoter of the gene for the DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt1) that is
responsible for methylation of cytosine residues in mammals and plays a role in
gene silencing. We found that a cis-element (nucleotides -161 to -147) was
essential for the expression of the mouse gene for Dnmt1. DNA-binding assays
indicated that transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the same cis-element in
this region in a dose-dependent manner. In Drosophila SL2 cells, which lack the
Sp family of transcription factors, forced expression of Sp1 or Sp3 enhanced
transcription from the Dnmt1 promoter. Stimulation by Sp1 and Sp3 were
independent phenomena. Furthermore, cotransfection reporter assays with a
p300-expression plasmid revealed the activation of the promoter of the Dnmt1 gene
in the presence of Sp3. The transcriptional coactivator p300 interacted with Sp3 
in vivo and in vitro. Our results indicate that expression of the Dnmt1 gene is
controled by Sp1 and Sp3 and that p300 is involved in the activation by Sp3.

PMID: 12071960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;22(13):4815-26.

JDP2, a repressor of AP-1, recruits a histone deacetylase 3 complex to inhibit
the retinoic acid-induced differentiation of F9 cells.

Jin C(1), Li H, Murata T, Sun K, Horikoshi M, Chiu R, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Engineering Division, RIKEN Institute of Physical and Chemical Research, 
BioResource Center, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Up-regulation of the c-jun gene is a critical event in the retinoic acid
(RA)-mediated differentiation of embryonal carcinoma F9 cells. Activating
transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) and p300 cooperate in the activation of
transcription of the c-jun gene during the differentiation of F9 cells. We show
here that the overexpression of Jun dimerization protein 2 (JDP2), a repressor of
AP-1, inhibits the transactivation of the c-jun gene by ATF-2 and p300 by
recruitment of the histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) complex, thereby repressing the 
RA-induced transcription of the c-jun gene and inhibiting the RA-mediated
differentiation of F9 cells. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
showed that the JDP2/HDAC3 complex, which binds to the differentiation response
element within the c-jun promoter in undifferentiated F9 cells, was replaced by
the p300 complex in response to RA, with an accompanying change in the histone
acetylation status of the chromatin, the initiation of transcription of the c-jun
gene, and the subsequent differentiation of F9 cells. These results suggest that 
JDP2 may be a key factor that controls the commitment of F9 cells to
differentiation and shed new light on the mechanism by which an AP-1 repressor
functions.

PMCID: PMC133911
PMID: 12052888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;22(13):4556-66.

Increased p300 expression inhibits glucocorticoid receptor-T-cell receptor
antagonism but does not affect thymocyte positive selection.

Yu CT(1), Feng MH, Shih HM, Lai MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

Positive selection of T cells is postulated to be dependent on the
counterinteraction between glucocorticoid receptor (GR)- and T-cell-receptor
(TCR)-induced death signals. In this study we used T-cell-specific expression of 
p300 to investigate whether GR-TCR cross talk between thymocytes was affected.
Activation of the p300-transgenic T cells led to enhanced thymocyte proliferation
and increased interleukin 2 production. Thymocyte death, induced by TCR
engagement, was no longer prevented by dexamethasone in p300-transgenic mice,
indicating an absence of GR-TCR cross-inhibition. This was accompanied by a 50%
reduction in the number of thymocytes in p300-transgenic mice. However, the
CD4/CD8 profile of thymocytes remained unchanged in p300-transgenic mice. There
was no effect on positive selection of the bulk thymocytes or thymocytes with
transgenic TCR in p300-transgenic mice. In addition, there was no apparent TCR
repertoire "hole" in the selected antigens examined. Our results illustrate a
critical role of CBP/p300 in thymic GR-TCR counterinteraction yet do not support 
the involvement of GR-TCR antagonism in thymocyte positive selection.

PMCID: PMC133898
PMID: 12052865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Genes Dev. 2002 Jun 1;16(11):1397-411.

Mastermind mediates chromatin-specific transcription and turnover of the Notch
enhancer complex.

Fryer CJ(1), Lamar E, Turbachova I, Kintner C, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Regulatory Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Signaling through the Notch pathway activates the proteolytic release of the
Notch intracellular domain (ICD), a dedicated transcriptional coactivator of CSL 
enhancer-binding proteins. Here we show that chromatin-dependent transactivation 
by the recombinant Notch ICD-CBF1 enhancer complex in vitro requires an
additional coactivator, Mastermind (MAM). MAM provides two activation domains
necessary for Notch signaling in mammalian cells and in Xenopus embryos. We show 
that the central MAM activation domain (TAD1) recruits CBP/p300 to promote
nucleosome acetylation at Notch enhancers and activate transcription in vitro. We
also find that MAM expression induces phosphorylation and relocalization of
endogenous CBP/p300 proteins to nuclear foci in vivo. Moreover, we show that
coexpression with MAM and CBF1 strongly enhances phosphorylation and proteolytic 
turnover of the Notch ICD in vivo. Enhanced phosphorylation of the ICD and p300
requires a glutamine-rich region of MAM (TAD2) that is essential for Notch
transcription in vivo. Thus MAM may function as a timer to couple transcription
activation with disassembly of the Notch enhancer complex on chromatin.

PMCID: PMC186317
PMID: 12050117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 5;277(27):24390-8. Epub 2002 May 6.

The transcription factors GATA4 and dHAND physically interact to synergistically 
activate cardiac gene expression through a p300-dependent mechanism.

Dai YS(1), Cserjesi P, Markham BE, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

An intricate array of heterogeneous transcription factors participate in
programming tissue-specific gene expression through combinatorial interactions
that are unique to a given cell-type. The zinc finger-containing transcription
factor GATA4, which is widely expressed in mesodermal and endodermal derived
tissues, is thought to regulate cardiac myocyte-specific gene expression through 
combinatorial interactions with other semi-restricted transcription factors such 
as myocyte enhancer factor 2, nuclear factor of activated T-cells, serum response
factor, and Nkx2.5. Here we determined that GATA4 also interacts with the
cardiac-expressed basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor dHAND (also known
as HAND2). GATA4 and dHAND synergistically activated expression of
cardiac-specific promoters from the atrial natriuretic factor gene, the b-type
natriuretic peptide gene, and the alpha-myosin heavy chain gene. Using artificial
reporter constructs this functional synergy was shown to be GATA site-dependent, 
but E-box site-independent. A mechanism for the transcriptional synergy was
suggested by the observation that the bHLH domain of dHAND physically interacted 
with the C-terminal zinc finger domain of GATA4 forming a higher order complex.
This transcriptional synergy observed between GATA4 and dHAND was associated with
p300 recruitment, but not with alterations in DNA binding activity of either
factor. Moreover, the bHLH domain of dHAND directly interacted with the CH3
domain of p300 suggesting the existence of a higher order complex between GATA4, 
dHAND, and p300. Taken together with previous observations, these results suggest
the existence of an enhanceosome complex comprised of p300 and multiple
semi-restricted transcription factors that together specify tissue-specific gene 
expression in the heart.

PMID: 11994297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2002 Jan;38(1):48-53.

Expression of the nuclear coactivators CBP and p300 in developing craniofacial
tissue.

Warner DR(1), Pisano MM, Greene RM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Louisville Birth Defects Center, Kentucky 40292, USA.
drwarn01@gwise.louisville.edu

cAMP regulatory element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP) and its
functional homolog, the adenovirus E1A -associated 300-kDa protein (p300) are
nuclear coactivators and histone acetyltransferases that integrate signals from
disparate pathways by bridging specific transcription factors to the basal
transcription apparatus. Their role in patterning and development was suggested
by studies in mice in which CBP and p300 expression was disrupted and by the
human Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, which is associated with mutations of CBP. The
cAMP signal transduction pathway plays a critical role during development of the 
palate. The linkage between cAMP and expression of specific genes is mediated via
activation of trans-acting deoxyribonucleic acid-binding proteins such as the
nuclear CREB. For genes regulated by CBP- or p300-containing transcriptional
complexes, rates of transcription will depend in part on cellular levels and
distribution of CBP/p300. We have thus determined the temporal and spatial
expression of CBP and p300 in murine embryonic palatal tissue. Both CBP and p300 
proteins and messenger ribonucleic acids are expressed in palatal tissue on each 
d of palate development (days 12-14 of gestation), as measured by Western
blotting and reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. Expression of both 
CBP and p300 was greatest on day 12 of gestation, suggesting that these
transcriptional coactivators are developmentally regulated. Immunohistochemical
analysis of CBP and p300 expression in the murine embryonic craniofacial region
revealed a ubiquitous distribution for both proteins. These studies lay the
groundwork for further investigations into the role of CBP and p300 in cellular
signaling during craniofacial development.

PMID: 11963968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 16;99(8):5271-6.

Structural basis for Hif-1 alpha /CBP recognition in the cellular hypoxic
response.

Dames SA(1), Martinez-Yamout M, De Guzman RN, Dyson HJ, Wright PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology,
The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

The cellular response to low tissue oxygen concentrations is mediated by the
hypoxia-inducible transcription factor HIF-1. Under hypoxic conditions, HIF-1
activates transcription of critical adaptive genes by recruitment of the general 
coactivators CBP/p300 through interactions with its alpha-subunit (Hif-1 alpha). 
Disruption of the Hif-1 alpha/p300 interaction has been linked to attenuation of 
tumor growth. To delineate the structural basis for this interaction, we have
determined the solution structure of the complex between the carboxy-terminal
activation domain (CAD) of Hif-1 alpha and the zinc-binding TAZ1 (CH1) motif of
cyclic-AMP response element binding protein (CREB) binding protein (CBP). Despite
the overall similarity of the TAZ1 structure to that of the TAZ2 (part of the
CH3) domain of CBP, differences occur in the packing of helices that can account 
for differences in specificity. The unbound CAD is intrinsically disordered and
remains relatively extended upon binding, wrapping almost entirely around the
TAZ1 domain in a groove through much of its surface. Three short helices are
formed upon binding, stabilized by intermolecular interactions. The Asn-803 side 
chain, which functions as a hypoxic switch, is located on the second of these
helices and is buried in the molecular interface. The third helix of the Hif-1
alpha CAD docks in a deep hydrophobic groove in TAZ1, providing extensive
intermolecular hydrophobic interactions that contribute to the stability of the
complex. The structure of this complex provides new insights into the mechanism
through which Hif-1 alpha recruits CBP/p300 in response to hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC122759
PMID: 11959977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 21;277(25):22314-9. Epub 2002 Apr 8.

The HMG-I/Y-related protein p8 binds to p300 and Pax2 trans-activation
domain-interacting protein to regulate the trans-activation activity of the Pax2A
and Pax2B transcription factors on the glucagon gene promoter.

Hoffmeister A(1), Ropolo A, Vasseur S, Mallo GV, Bodeker H, Ritz-Laser B,
Dressler GR, Vaccaro MI, Dagorn JC, Moreno S, Iovanna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche INSERM, EMI 0116, 163 avenue de Luminy, Campus de Luminy, 
BP 172, 13276 Marseille cedex 9, France.

p8 is a nuclear DNA-binding protein, which was identified because its expression 
is strongly activated in response to several stresses. Biochemical and
biophysical studies revealed that despite a weak sequence homology p8 is an
HMG-I/Y-like protein, suggesting that p8 may be involved in transcription
regulation. Results reported here strongly support this hypothesis. Using a
pull-down approach, we found that p8 interacts with the general co-activator
p300. We also found that, similar to the HMG proteins, p300 was able to acetylate
recombinant p8 in vitro, although the significance of such modification remains
to be determined. Then a screening by the two-hybrid system, using p8 as bait,
allowed us to identify the Pax2 trans-activation domain-interacting protein
(PTIP) as another partner of p8. Transient transfection studies revealed that
PTIP is a strong inhibitor of the trans-activation activities of Pax2A and Pax2B 
on the glucagon gene promoter, which was chosen as a model because it is a target
of the Pax2A and Pax2B transcription factors. This effect is completely abolished
by co-transfection of p8 in glucagon-producing InRIG9 cells, indicating that p8
binding to PTIP prevents inhibition of the glucagon gene promoter. This was not
observed in NIH3T3 fibroblasts that do not express glucagon. Finally, expression 
of p8 enhances the effect of p300 on Pax2A and Pax2B trans-activation of the
glucagon gene promoter. These observations suggest that in glucagon-producing
cells p8 is a positive cofactor of the activation of the glucagon gene promoter
by Pax2A and Pax2B, both by recruiting the p300 cofactor to increase the Pax2A
and Pax2B activities and by binding the Pax2-interacting protein PTIP to suppress
its inhibition.

PMID: 11940591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Cell. 2002 Mar;9(3):625-36.

The phosphorylation status of nuclear NF-kappa B determines its association with 
CBP/p300 or HDAC-1.

Zhong H(1), May MJ, Jimi E, Ghosh S.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Section and Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT 06520, USA.

Homodimers of the NF-kappa B p50 subunit are transcriptionally repressive in
cells, whereas they can promote transcription in vitro, suggesting that their
endogenous effects are mediated by association with other factors. We now
demonstrate that transcriptionally inactive nuclear NF-kappaB in resting cells
consists of homodimers of either p65 or p50 complexed with the histone
deacetylase HDAC-1. Only the p50-HDAC-1 complexes bind to DNA and suppress
NF-kappa B-dependent gene expression in unstimulated cells. Appropriate
stimulation causes nuclear localization of NF-kappa B complexes containing
phosphorylated p65 that associates with CBP and displaces the p50-HDAC-1
complexes. Our results demonstrate that phosphorylation of p65 determines whether
it associates with either CBP or HDAC-1, ensuring that only p65 entering the
nucleus from cytoplasmic NF-kappa B:Ikappa B complexes can activate
transcription.

PMID: 11931769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 31;277(22):19754-61. Epub 2002 Mar 18.

Mechanisms regulating adipocyte expression of resistin.

Hartman HB(1), Hu X, Tyler KX, Dalal CK, Lazar MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine
and Genetics and The Penn Diabetes Center, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Resistin, also known as Adipocyte Secreted Factor (ADSF) and Found in
Inflammatory Zone 3 (FIZZ3), is a mouse protein with potential roles in insulin
resistance and adipocyte differentiation. The resistin gene is expressed almost
exclusively in adipocytes. Here we show that a proximal 264-base pair fragment of
the mouse resistin promoter is sufficient for expression in adipocytes. Ectopic
expression of the adipogenic transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein 
(C/EBPalpha) was sufficient for expression in non-adipogenic cells. C/EBPalpha
binds specifically to a site that is essential for expression of the resistin
promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies of the endogenous gene
demonstrated adipocyte-specific association of C/EBPalpha with the proximal
resistin promoter in adipocytes but not preadipocytes. C/EBPalpha binding was
associated with the recruitment of coactivators p300 and CREB-binding protein and
a dramatic increase in histone acetylation in the vicinity of the resistin
promoter. The antidiabetic thiazolidinedione (TZD) drug rosiglitazone reduced
resistin expression with an ED(50) similar to its K(d) for binding to peroxisome 
proliferator activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma). Other TZD- and non-TZD
PPARgamma ligands also down-regulated resistin expression. However, no functional
PPARgamma binding site was found within 6.2 kb of the transcriptional start site,
suggesting that if PPARgamma is involved, it is either acting at a long distance 
from the start site, in an intron, or indirectly. Nevertheless, rosiglitazone
treatment selectively decreased histone acetylation at the resistin promoter
without a change in occupation by C/EBPalpha, CREB-binding protein, or p300.
Thus, adipocyte specificity of resistin gene expression is because of C/EBPalpha 
binding, leading to the recruitment of transcriptional coactivators and histone
acetylation that is characteristic of an active chromatin environment. TZD
reduces resistin gene expression at least in part by reducing histone acetylation
associated with the binding of C/EBPalpha in mature adipocytes.

PMID: 11901161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Cell Biochem. 2002;85(1):54-71.

Suppression of tissue factor expression, cofactor activity, and metastatic
potential of murine melanoma cells by the N-terminal domain of adenovirus E1A 12S
protein.

Voigtländer C(1), Rand A, Liu SL, Wilson TJ, Pittelkow MR, Getz MJ, Kelm RJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Program in Tumor Biology,
Mayo Clinic/Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Tissue factor, the cellular initiator of blood coagulation, has been implicated
as a determinant of metastatic potential in human melanoma cells. Here, we report
that differential expression of tissue factor in murine melanoma cell lines of
known metastatic behavior is mediated by AP-1-dependent and 12S E1A
oncoprotein-repressible gene transcription. When compared to weakly metastatic
C10 cells, highly metastatic M4 cells possessed elevated levels of tissue factor 
cofactor activity, transfected promoter activity, and heterodimeric AP-1
DNA-binding complexes containing Fra-1. Transient co-expression of the adenovirus
E1A 12S oncoprotein strongly repressed transcription of an AP-1-driven tissue
factor reporter gene indicating the additional requirement of N-terminal
E1A-interacting coactivators. Stable expression of E1A mutants defective in
CBP/p300-binding failed to suppress tissue factor expression and experimental
metastasis by M4 cells while clones expressing wild type E1A exhibited greatly
reduced tissue factor cofactor activity and metastatic potential in vivo.
Overexpression of functional tissue factor in cells containing wild type E1A
failed to restore the highly metastatic M4 phenotype suggesting that additional
E1A-responsive and CBP/p300-dependent genes are required to facilitate metastasis
of murine melanoma cells demonstrating high tissue factor expression and cofactor
activity.

PMID: 11891850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2002 Mar;57(3):B93-8.

Histone acetyltransferase activities of cAMP-regulated enhancer-binding protein
and p300 in tissues of fetal, young, and old mice.

Li Q(1), Xiao H, Isobe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Gerontology, National Institute for Longevity Sciences,
Aichi, Japan.

CBP, a protein that binds to cyclic adenosine monophosphate-regulated
enhancer-binding protein, and homologue protein, p300, have histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity and are important in gene transcription,
although their physiological functions in vivo remain to be further elucidated.
By using immunoprecipitation and HAT activity assay we have found that p300 and
CBP have similar tissue patterns of HAT activities, with the highest level in the
brain, a relatively high level in the lung, spleen, and heart, an intermediate
level in testes and muscle, and a lower level in liver and kidney; that HAT
activities of p300 and CBP are relatively stable with advancing age in most
examined tissues, but in liver, muscle, and testes, the activities are attenuated
with aging; and that HAT activities of p300 and CBP are high in the brain and
liver of E14 fetal and newborn mice. These data suggest that the HAT activities
of p300 and CBP are important for gene transcription involved in tissue-specific 
expression, aging, and developing processes.

PMID: 11867645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;22(6):1626-38.

Competitive cofactor recruitment by orphan receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha1: modulation by the F domain.

Ruse MD Jr(1), Privalsky ML, Sladek FM.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Graduate Program, University of
California-Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

For most ligand-dependent nuclear receptors, the status of endogenous ligand
modulates the relative affinities for corepressor and coactivator complexes. It
is less clear what parameters modulate the switch between corepressor and
coactivator for the orphan receptors. Our previous work demonstrated that
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha1 (HNF4alpha1, NR2A1) interacts with the p160
coactivator GRIP1 and the cointegrators CBP and p300 in the absence of
exogenously added ligand and that removal of the F domain enhances these
interactions. Here, we utilized transient-transfection analysis to demonstrate
repression of HNF4alpha1 activity by the corepressor silencing mediator of
retinoid and thyroid receptors (SMRT) in several cell lines and on several
HNF4alpha-responsive promoter elements. Glutathione S-transferase pulldown assays
confirmed a direct interaction between HNF4alpha1 and receptor interaction domain
2 of SMRT. Loss of the F domain resulted in marked reduction of the ability of
SMRT to interact with HNF4alpha1 in vitro and repress HNF4alpha1 activity in
vivo, although the isolated F domain itself failed to interact with SMRT.
Surprisingly, loss of both the A/B and F domains restored full repression by
SMRT, suggesting involvement of both domains in the SMRT interaction. Finally, we
show that when coexpressed along with HNF4alpha1 and GRIP1, CBP, or p300, SMRT
can titer out HNF4alpha1-mediated transactivation in a dose-dependent manner and 
that this competition derives from mutually exclusive binding. Collectively,
these results suggest that HNF4alpha can functionally interact with both a
coactivator and a corepressor without altering the status of any putative ligand 
and that the presence of the F domain may play a role in discriminating between
the different coregulators.

PMCID: PMC135595
PMID: 11865043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9(2):265-77.

Association of CBP/p300 acetylase and thymine DNA glycosylase links DNA repair
and transcription.

Tini M(1), Benecke A, Um SJ, Torchia J, Evans RM, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA. mtini@uwo.ca

DNA repair in chromatin is subject to topological constraints, suggesting a
requirement for chromatin modification and remodeling activities. Thymine DNA
glycosylase (TDG) initiates repair of G/T and G/U mismatches, commonly associated
with CpG islands, by removing thymine and uracil moieties. We report that TDG
associates with transcriptional coactivators CBP and p300 and that the resulting 
complexes are competent for both the excision step of repair and histone
acetylation. Furthermore, TDG stimulates CBP transcriptional activity in
transfected cells and reciprocally serves as a substrate for CBP/p300
acetylation. Remarkably, this acetylation triggers release of CBP from DNA
ternary complexes and also regulates recruitment of repair endonuclease APE.
These observations reveal a potential regulatory role for protein acetylation in 
base mismatch repair and a role for CBP/p300 in maintaining genomic stability.

PMID: 11864601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):77-86.

The virus-induced factor VIF differentially recognizes the virus-responsive
modules of the mouse IFNA4 gene promoter.

Morin P(1), Génin P, Doly J, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2228-CNRS, Régulation Transcriptionnelle et Maladies Génétiques, UFR
Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université Paris V, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.

Maximal activation of murine infection-A4 (IFNA4) gene transcription following
viral infection requires the presence of four cooperating DNA sequences (denoted 
A to D), which make up the virus responsive element VRE-A4. The B, C, and D
modules, when tandemized, form binding sites for the virus-induced factor (VIF), 
a multiprotein complex that is detected early after viral infection in the nuclei
of mouse L929 cells. We now demonstrate that IFN regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) is a
component of VIF and that VIF is different from the previously identified
virus-activated complexes containing IRF-3 and coactivators of transcription,
such as CREB binding protein (CBP) or p300. We also show that the C module is
critical for both IRF-3-mediated and virus-induced transcription of the murine
IFNA4 gene. Consistently, DNase I footprinting experiments and EMSA performed
with increasing amounts of recombinant GST-IRF-3(DBD) fusion proteins demonstrate
that cooperativity between the modules facilitate the binding of IRF-3 and
recruitment of transcription coactivators on the IFNA4 promoter. These results
indicate that VIF differentially recognizes the virus-responsive modules of
VRE-A4 and further actualize our previous model concerning the differential
expression of murine IFNA genes.

PMID: 11846978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 19;277(16):14005-10. Epub 2002 Feb 5.

Regulation of histone acetylation and transcription by nuclear protein pp32, a
subunit of the INHAT complex.

Seo SB(1), Macfarlan T, McNamara P, Hong R, Mukai Y, Heo S, Chakravarti D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Histone acetylation by p300/CBP and PCAF coactivators is considered to be a key
mechanism of chromatin modification and transcriptional regulation. A
multiprotein cellular complex, INHAT (inhibitor of acetyltransferases),
containing the Set/TAF-Ibeta oncoprotein and pp32 strongly inhibits the HAT
activity of p300/CBP and PCAF by histone masking. Here we report that the INHAT
complex and its subunits have overlapping but distinct HAT inhibitory and histone
binding characteristics. We provide evidence suggesting that the histone binding 
and INHAT activity of pp32 can be regulated by its physical association with
other INHAT subunits. In vivo colocalization and transfection studies show that
pp32 INHAT domains are responsible for histone binding, HAT inhibitory activity, 
and repression of transcription. We propose that INHAT and its subunits may
function by modulating histone acetyltransferases through a histone-masking
mechanism and may play important regulatory roles in the establishment and
maintenance of the newly proposed "histone code" of chromatin.

PMID: 11830591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Nature. 2002 Jan 31;415(6871):549-53.

Mutual synergistic folding in recruitment of CBP/p300 by p160 nuclear receptor
coactivators.

Demarest SJ(1), Martinez-Yamout M, Chung J, Chen H, Xu W, Dyson HJ, Evans RM,
Wright PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Nuclear hormone receptors are ligand-activated transcription factors that
regulate the expression of genes that are essential for development, reproduction
and homeostasis. The hormone response is mediated through recruitment of p160
receptor coactivators and the general transcriptional coactivator CBP/p300, which
function synergistically to activate transcription. These coactivators exhibit
intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity, function in the remodelling of
chromatin, and facilitate the recruitment of RNA polymerase II and the basal
transcription machinery. The activities of the p160 coactivators are dependent on
CBP. Both coactivators are essential for proper cell-cycle control,
differentiation and apoptosis, and are implicated in cancer and other diseases.
To elucidate the molecular basis of assembling the multiprotein activation
complex, we undertook a structural and thermodynamic analysis of the interaction 
domains of CBP and the activator for thyroid hormone and retinoid receptors. Here
we show that although the isolated domains are intrinsically disordered, they
combine with high affinity to form a cooperatively folded helical heterodimer.
Our study uncovers a unique mechanism, called 'synergistic folding', through
which p160 coactivators recruit CBP/p300 to allow transmission of the hormonal
signal to the transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 11823864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):10283-91. Epub 2002 Jan 8.

Apoptosis stimulated by the 91-kDa caspase cleavage MEKK1 fragment requires
translocation to soluble cellular compartments.

Schlesinger TK(1), Bonvin C, Jarpe MB, Fanger GR, Cardinaux JR, Johnson GL,
Widmann C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Biology and Morphology, University of Lausanne, 1005
Lausanne, Switzerland.

MEKK1, a 196-kDa mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase kinase, generates
anti-apoptotic signaling as a full-length protein but induces apoptosis when
cleaved by caspases. Here, we show that caspase-dependent cleavage of MEKK1
relocalizes the protease-generated 91-kDa kinase fragment from a particulate
fraction to a soluble cytoplasmic fraction. Relocalization of MEKK1 catalytic
activity is necessary for the pro-apoptotic function of MEKK1. The addition of a 
membrane-targeting signal to the 91-kDa fragment inhibits caspase activation and 
the induction of apoptosis but does not change the activation of JNK, ERK,
NFkappaB, or p300. These results identify the caspase cleavage of MEKK1 as a
dynamic regulatory mechanism that alters the subcellular distribution of MEKK1,
changing its function to pro-apoptotic signaling, which does not depend on the
currently described MEKK1 effectors.

PMID: 11782455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jan;22(2):412-20.

Insulin gene transcription is mediated by interactions between the p300
coactivator and PDX-1, BETA2, and E47.

Qiu Y(1), Guo M, Huang S, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee 37215, USA.

Pancreatic beta-cell-type-specific expression of the insulin gene requires both
ubiquitous and cell-enriched activators, which are organized within the enhancer 
region into a network of protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions to promote 
transcriptional synergy. Protein-protein-mediated communication between DNA-bound
activators and the RNA polymerase II transcriptional machinery is inhibited by
the adenovirus E1A protein as a result of E1A's binding to the p300 coactivator. 
E1A disrupts signaling between the non-DNA-binding p300 protein and the basic
helix-loop-helix DNA-binding factors of insulin's E-element activator (i.e., the 
islet-enriched BETA2 and generally distributed E47 proteins), as well as a
distinct but unidentified enhancer factor. In the present report, we show that
E1A binding to p300 prevents activation by insulin's beta-cell-enriched PDX-1
activator. p300 interacts directly with the N-terminal region of the PDX-1
homeodomain protein, which contains conserved amino acid sequences essential for 
activation. The unique combination of PDX-1, BETA2, E47, and p300 was shown to
promote synergistic activation from a transfected insulin enhancer-driven
reporter construct in non-beta cells, a process inhibited by E1A. In addition,
E1A inhibited the level of PDX-1 and BETA2 complex formation in beta cells. These
results indicate that E1A inhibits insulin gene transcription by preventing
communication between the p300 coactivator and key DNA-bound activators, like
PDX-1 and BETA2:E47.

PMCID: PMC139753
PMID: 11756538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. FEBS Lett. 2002 Jan 2;510(1-2):50-6.

NGF-dependent and tissue-specific transcription of vgf is regulated by a
CREB-p300 and bHLH factor interaction.

Mandolesi G(1), Gargano S, Pennuto M, Illi B, Molfetta R, Soucek L, Mosca L, Levi
A, Jucker R, Nasi S.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Acidi Nucleici CNR, Dipartimento Genetica e Biologia Molecolare,
Università La Sapienza, P. le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.

Neurotrophins support neuronal survival, development, and plasticity through
processes requiring gene expression. We studied how vgf target gene transcription
is mediated by a critical promoter region containing E-box, CCAAT and cAMP
response element (CRE) sites. The p300 acetylase was present in two distinct
protein complexes bound to this region. One complex, containing HEB (ubiquitous
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)), bound the promoter in non-neuronal cells and was 
involved in repressing vgf expression. Neurotrophin-dependent transcription was
mediated by the second complex, specific for neuronal cells, which included CRE
binding protein and MASH1 (neuro-specific bHLH), bound the CCAAT motif, and was
target of neurotrophin signalling. The interaction, mediated by p300, of
different transcription factors may add specificity to the neurotrophin response.

PMID: 11755530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Cell Growth Differ. 2001 Dec;12(12):613-22.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 tax protein inhibits the expression of the
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor MyoD in muscle cells: maintenance of 
proliferation and repression of differentiation.

Riou P(1), Vandromme M, Gazzolo L.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherche 5537 Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique-Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Faculté de Médecine RTH Laennec,
Rue Guillaume Paradin, 69372 Lyon Cedex 08, France.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax protein, a transcriptional activator of
viral expression, promotes uncontrolled cellular proliferation. In this report,
we show that Tax-expressing myoblasts do not exit the cell cycle and fail to
differentiate into myotubes despite the deprivation of serum. In these cells,
which displayed unchanged levels of the ubiquitous basic helix-loop-helix E2A
factors and Id proteins, Tax was found to target the muscle-specific basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor MyoD. The Tax-induced increase in
cyclin-dependent kinase 2 activity correlated with the phosphorylation of MyoD.
However, the half-life of this hyperphosphorylated form of MyoD increased in
Tax-expressing myoblasts, contrary to that in control cells. Furthermore, MyoD
mRNA levels were reduced in Tax-expressing cells. Tax was found to repress MyoD
expression at the transcriptional step by preventing MyoD from activating its own
transcription. Interestingly, overexpression of the transcriptional coactivator
p300 restored the capacity of Tax-expressing muscle cells to differentiate. These
observations underscore the critical effect of the trans-repressing ability of
Tax on the MyoD-controlled proliferation and differentiation processes of the
myoblast lineage.

PMID: 11751456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. EMBO J. 2001 Dec 3;20(23):6816-25.

CBP/p300 and muscle differentiation: no HAT, no muscle.

Polesskaya A(1), Naguibneva I, Fritsch L, Duquet A, Ait-Si-Ali S, Robin P,
Vervisch A, Pritchard LL, Cole P, Harel-Bellan A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UPR 9079 and Service de Cytofluorométrie, Institut André Lwoff, 7 rue Guy
Moquet, 94800 Villejuif, France.

Terminal differentiation of muscle cells follows a precisely orchestrated program
of transcriptional regulatory events at the promoters of both muscle-specific and
ubiquitous genes. Two distinct families of transcriptional co-activators,
GCN5/PCAF and CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300, are crucial to this process. While
both possess histone acetyl-transferase (HAT) activity, previous studies have
failed to identify a requirement for CBP/p300 HAT function in myogenic
differentiation. We have addressed this issue directly using a chemical inhibitor
of CBP/p300 in addition to a negative transdominant mutant. Our results clearly
demonstrate that CBP/p300 HAT activity is critical for myogenic terminal
differentiation. Furthermore, this requirement is restricted to a subset of
events in the differentiation program: cell fusion and specific gene expression. 
These data help to define the requirements for enzymatic function of distinct
coactivators at different stages of the muscle cell differentiation program.

PMCID: PMC125755
PMID: 11726517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Nat Cell Biol. 2001 Nov;3(11):973-82.

HER-2/neu induces p53 ubiquitination via Akt-mediated MDM2 phosphorylation.

Zhou BP(1), Liao Y, Xia W, Zou Y, Spohn B, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Breast Cancer Basic Research
Program, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol 2002 Sep;4(9):736.

HER-2/neu amplification or overexpression can make cancer cells resistant to
apoptosis and promotes their growth. p53 is crucial in regulating cell growth and
apoptosis, and is often mutated or deleted in many types of tumour. Moreover,
many tumours with a wild-type gene for p53 do not have normal p53 function,
suggesting that some oncogenic signals suppress the function of p53. In this
study, we show that HER-2/neu-mediated resistance to DNA-damaging agents requires
the activation of Akt, which enhances MDM2-mediated ubiquitination and
degradation of p53. Akt physically associates with MDM2 and phosphorylates it at 
Ser166 and Ser186. Phosphorylation of MDM2 enhances its nuclear localization and 
its interaction with p300, and inhibits its interaction with p19ARF, thus
increasing p53 degradation. Our study indicates that blocking the Akt pathway
mediated by HER-2/neu would increase the cytotoxic effect of DNA-damaging drugs
in tumour cells with wild-type p53.

PMID: 11715018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 25;277(4):2517-24. Epub 2001 Nov 8.

The transcriptional co-activators CBP and p300 are activated via phenylephrine
through the p42/p44 MAPK cascade.

Gusterson R(1), Brar B, Faulkes D, Giordano A, Chrivia J, Latchman D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London, 30 Guilford St., London 
WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

The CBP and p300 co-activators play a key role in many aspects of gene regulation
being recruited to the DNA via transcription factors that are targets for
specific signaling pathways. It has previously been demonstrated that in neuronal
cells the ability of CBP and p300 to activate transcription can be directly
stimulated by nerve growth factor or calcium-activated signaling pathways. Here
we demonstrate that, in cardiac cells, the activity of CBP and p300 is stimulated
by phenylephrine (PE) treatment and that they are required for the activation of 
atrial naturetic factor (ANF) gene expression by PE. Activation of CBP/p300 by PE
involves the p42/p44 MAPK pathway and targets primarily the N terminus of p300
and the C terminus of CBP, which are not homologous to one another. To our
knowledge, this is the first report of a specific stimulus modulating the
activity of CBP and p300 in cardiac cells and it suggests that these factors play
an important role in the hypertrophic effect of PE.

PMID: 11705990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Science. 2001 Dec 21;294(5551):2507-11. Epub 2001 Nov 8.

A transcriptional switch mediated by cofactor methylation.

Xu W(1), Chen H, Du K, Asahara H, Tini M, Emerson BM, Montminy M, Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, Department of Biological Chemistry, University of 
California Davis Cancer Center/Basic Science, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2001 Dec 21;294(5551):2497-8.

We describe a molecular switch based on the controlled methylation of nucleosome 
and the transcriptional cofactors, the CREB-binding proteins (CBP)/p300. The
CBP/p300 methylation site is localized to an arginine residue that is essential
for stabilizing the structure of the KIX domain, which mediates CREB recruitment.
Methylation of KIX by coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 (CARM1)
blocks CREB activation by disabling the interaction between KIX and the kinase
inducible domain (KID) of CREB. Thus, CARM1 functions as a corepressor in cyclic 
adenosine monophosphate signaling pathway via its methyltransferase activity
while acting as a coactivator for nuclear hormones. These results provide strong 
in vivo and in vitro evidence that histone methylation plays a key role in
hormone-induced gene activation and define cofactor methylation as a new
regulatory mechanism in hormone signaling.

PMID: 11701890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Nat Genet. 2001 Dec;29(4):469-74.

Cardiac malformations, adrenal agenesis, neural crest defects and exencephaly in 
mice lacking Cited2, a new Tfap2 co-activator.

Bamforth SD(1), Bragança J, Eloranta JJ, Murdoch JN, Marques FI, Kranc KR, Farza 
H, Henderson DJ, Hurst HC, Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust
Center for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7BN UK.

The protein EP300 and its paralog CREBBP (CREB-binding protein) are ubiquitously 
expressed transcriptional co-activators and histone acetyl transferases. The gene
EP300 is essential for normal cardiac and neural development, whereas CREBBP is
essential for neurulation, hematopoietic differentiation, angiogenesis and
skeletal and cardiac development. Mutations in CREBBP cause Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome, which is characterized by mental retardation, skeletal abnormalities
and congenital cardiac defects. The CBP/p300-interacting transactivator with
ED-rich tail 2 (CITED2) binds EP300 and CREBBP with high affinity and regulates
gene transcription. Here we show that Cited2-/- embryos die with cardiac
malformations, adrenal agenesis, abnormal cranial ganglia and exencephaly. The
cardiac defects include atrial and ventricular septal defects, overriding aorta, 
double-outlet right ventricle, persistent truncus arteriosus and right-sided
aortic arches. We find increased apoptosis in the midbrain region and a marked
reduction in ErbB3-expressing neural crest cells in mid-embryogenesis. We show
that CITED2 interacts with and co-activates all isoforms of transcription factor 
AP-2 (TFAP2). Transactivation by TFAP2 isoforms is defective in Cited2-/-
embryonic fibroblasts and is rescued by ectopically expressed CITED2. As certain 
Tfap2 isoforms are essential in neural crest, neural tube and cardiac
development, we propose that abnormal embryogenesis in mice lacking Cited2
results, at least in part, from its role as a Tfap2 co-activator.

PMID: 11694877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;21(23):7892-900.

Chromatin-dependent cooperativity between constitutive and inducible activation
domains in CREB.

Asahara H(1), Santoso B, Guzman E, Du K, Cole PA, Davidson I, Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Peptide Biology Laboratories, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037-1002, USA.

The cyclic AMP (cAMP)-responsive factor CREB induces target gene expression via
constitutive (Q2) and inducible (KID, for kinase-inducible domain) activation
domains that function synergistically in response to cellular signals. KID
stimulates transcription via a phospho (Ser133)-dependent interaction with the
coactivator paralogs CREB binding protein and p300, whereas Q2 recruits the TFIID
complex via a direct association with hTAF(II)130. Here we investigate the
mechanism underlying cooperativity between the Q2 domain and KID in CREB by in
vitro transcription assay with naked DNA and chromatin templates containing the
cAMP-responsive somatostatin promoter. The Q2 domain was highly active on a naked
DNA template, and Ser133 phosphorylation had no additional effect on
transcriptional initiation in crude extracts. Q2 activity was repressed on a
chromatin template, however, and this repression was relieved by the phospho
(Ser133) KID-dependent recruitment of p300 histone acetyltransferase activity to 
the promoter. In chromatin immunoprecipitation assays of NIH 3T3 cells,
cAMP-dependent recruitment of p300 to the somatostatin promoter stimulated
acetylation of histone H4. Correspondingly, overexpression of hTAFII130
potentiated CREB activity in cells exposed to cAMP, but had no effect on reporter
gene expression in unstimulated cells. We propose that cooperativity between the 
KID and Q2 domains proceeds via a chromatin-dependent mechanism in which
recruitment of p300 facilitates subsequent interaction of CREB with TFIID.

PMCID: PMC99956
PMID: 11689682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. EMBO J. 2001 Nov 1;20(21):6095-103.

A specific lysine in c-Jun is required for transcriptional repression by E1A and 
is acetylated by p300.

Vries RG(1), Prudenziati M, Zwartjes C, Verlaan M, Kalkhoven E, Zantema A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Wassenaarseweg 72, 2333 AL Leiden, The Netherlands.

The adenovirus E1A protein regulates transcription of cellular genes via its
interaction with the transcriptional coactivators p300/CBP. The collagenase
promoter activated by the c-Jun protein is repressed by E1A. Here we show that
E1A repression is specific for c-Jun, as E1A does not repress the collagenase
promoter activated by the homologous transcription factor EB1. Using chimeras of 
c-Jun and EB1, we demonstrate that a 12 amino acid region in the basic region of 
the c-Jun DNA-binding domain is essential for repression by E1A. Since repression
requires the binding of p300 to E1A, we studied the involvement of p300
acetyltransferase activity in the repression mechanism. We demonstrate that c-Jun
is acetylated in vivo, and mutational analysis identified Lys271 in the c-Jun
basic region to be essential for repression of the collagenase promoter by E1A.
In addition, Lys271 is acetylated both in vitro and in vivo. These results
suggest that the specific repression of the collagenase promoter by E1A involves 
acetylation of c-Jun.

PMCID: PMC125698
PMID: 11689449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. EMBO J. 2001 Nov 1;20(21):6084-94.

A role for coactivators and histone acetylation in estrogen receptor
alpha-mediated transcription initiation.

Kim MY(1), Hsiao SJ, Kraus WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Graduate Field of Biochemistry, 
Molecular and Cell Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Transcriptional regulation by estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) involves
protein-protein interactions among the receptor, its associated coactivators and 
the RNA polymerase II transcriptional machinery. We have used an in vitro
chromatin assembly and transcription system to examine the biochemistry of
interactions among ERalpha, the SRC proteins and p300/CBP. Using polypeptides
designed to block specific receptor- cofactor or cofactor-cofactor interactions, 
we show that interactions among ERalpha, its coactivators and the RNA pol II
machinery are all required for ERalpha- mediated transcription. Furthermore, we
show that ERalpha-SRC-p300/CBP interactions are necessary and sufficient for the 
targeted acetylation of nucleosomal histones on estrogen-responsive promoters in 
the absence of transcription. The protein-protein interactions required for
histone acetylation constitute a subset of the interactions required for
transcriptional activation. Finally, we show that the major role of SRC-p300/CBP 
interactions is to enhance ERalpha- mediated transcription initiation, and they
have little or no role in stimulating subsequent rounds of transcription.
Together, our results indicate a specific role for the SRC and p300/CBP
coactivators, as well as targeted histone acetylation, in ERalpha-mediated
transcription.

PMCID: PMC125694
PMID: 11689448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Oncogene. 2001 Oct 4;20(45):6638-42.

Retinoid-dependent antagonism of serum response factor transactivation mediated
by transcriptional coactivator proteins.

Kim SW(1), Kim HJ, Jung DJ, Lee SK, Kim YS, Kim JH, Kim TS, Lee JW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Ligand and Transcription, Pohang University of Science and
Technology, Pohang 790-784, Korea.

Transcriptional coactivators SRC-1 and p300 specifically interact with
liganded-nuclear receptors and also modulate other transcription factors,
including serum response factor (SRF). Here, we report that retinoids repress
transactivation by SRF and specific interactions exist between the DNA binding
domains of SRF and retinoic acid and retinoid X receptors. We further demonstrate
that the repression may involve retinoid-dependent competition for a limiting
amount of SRC-1 and p300 between SRF and retinoid receptors. We propose that the 
well-defined anti-proliferative action of retinoids could, at least in part,
result from this novel transrepressive action on the mitogenic transcription
factor SRF.

PMID: 11641790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Nature. 2001 Oct 18;413(6857):739-43.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors arrest polyglutamine-dependent neurodegeneration
in Drosophila.

Steffan JS(1), Bodai L, Pallos J, Poelman M, McCampbell A, Apostol BL, Kazantsev 
A, Schmidt E, Zhu YZ, Greenwald M, Kurokawa R, Housman DE, Jackson GR, Marsh JL, 
Thompson LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Gillespie 2121, University of
California, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2001 Oct 18;413(6857):691, 693-4.

Proteins with expanded polyglutamine repeats cause Huntington's disease and other
neurodegenerative diseases. Transcriptional dysregulation and loss of function of
transcriptional co-activator proteins have been implicated in the pathogenesis of
these diseases. Huntington's disease is caused by expansion of a repeated
sequence of the amino acid glutamine in the abnormal protein huntingtin (Htt).
Here we show that the polyglutamine-containing domain of Htt, Htt exon 1 protein 
(Httex1p), directly binds the acetyltransferase domains of two distinct proteins:
CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF). In cell-free
assays, Httex1p also inhibits the acetyltransferase activity of at least three
enzymes: p300, P/CAF and CBP. Expression of Httex1p in cultured cells reduces the
level of the acetylated histones H3 and H4, and this reduction can be reversed by
administering inhibitors of histone deacetylase (HDAC). In vivo, HDAC inhibitors 
arrest ongoing progressive neuronal degeneration induced by polyglutamine repeat 
expansion, and they reduce lethality in two Drosophila models of polyglutamine
disease. These findings raise the possibility that therapy with HDAC inhibitors
may slow or prevent the progressive neurodegeneration seen in Huntington's
disease and other polyglutamine-repeat diseases, even after the onset of
symptoms.

PMID: 11607033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Nov;21(22):7761-74.

p300 acts as a transcriptional coactivator for mammalian Notch-1.

Oswald F(1), Täuber B, Dobner T, Bourteele S, Kostezka U, Adler G, Liptay S,
Schmid RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Ulm, Germany.

Notch-1 belongs to a family of transmembrane receptor proteins that direct the
decisions as to various cell fates. After ligand binding, a proteolytic cleavage 
step occurs and the intracellular part of Notch-1, Notch-1-IC, translocates into 
the nucleus, where it targets the DNA binding protein RBP-J kappa/CBF1. RBP-J
kappa mediates repression through recruitment of a histone deacetylase-containing
complex. The Notch-1-IC/RBP-J kappa complex overcomes repression and activates
the transcription of Notch target genes. We have identified a novel domain in
Notch-1-IC, the EP domain, which is indispensable for full transcriptional
activation. This transactivation domain is localized adjacent to the ankyrin
repeats of Notch-1-IC. In cotransfection experiments, Notch-1-IC-mediated
transcriptional activation was inhibited by E1A12S and p53, two proteins, which
interfere with the function of the common coactivator p300. Protein-protein
interaction assays demonstrated the association of Notch-1-IC and the CH3 region 
of p300. In addition, the interaction of mammalian Notch-1-IC with p300 was
destabilized after deletion of the EP domain of Notch-1-IC. Based on physical
interaction with Notch-1-IC and coactivator functions of p300, we propose a model
for Notch-1-mediated gene regulation via p300.

PMCID: PMC99946
PMID: 11604511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Nov;21(21):7391-402.

Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 Tax represses c-Myb-dependent
transcription through activation of the NF-kappaB pathway and modulation of
coactivator usage.

Nicot C(1), Mahieux R, Pise-Masison C, Brady J, Gessain A, Yamaoka S, Franchini
G.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Animal Models and Retroviral Vaccines, Basic Research Laboratory,
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, 
USA. cbeden@helix.nih.gov

The proto-oncogene c-myb is essential for a controlled balance between cell
growth and differentiation. Aberrant c-Myb activity has been reported for
numerous human cancers, and enforced c-Myb transcription can transform cells of
lymphoid origin by stimulating cellular proliferation and inhibiting apoptotic
pathways. Here we demonstrate that activation of the NF-kappaB pathway by the
HTLV-1 Tax protein leads to transcriptional inactivation of c-Myb. This
conclusion was supported by the fact that Tax mutants unable to stimulate the
NF-kappaB pathway could not inhibit c-Myb transactivating functions. In addition,
inhibition of Tax-mediated NF-kappaB activation by coexpression of IkappaBalpha
restored c-Myb transcription, and Tax was unable to block c-Myb transcription in 
a NEMO knockout cell line. Importantly, physiological stimuli, such as signaling 
with the cellular cytokines tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukin 1 beta
(IL-1beta), and lipopolysaccharide, also inhibited c-Myb transcription. These
results uncover a new link between extracellular signaling and c-Myb-dependent
transcription. The mechanism underlying NF-kappaB-mediated repression was
identified as sequestration of the coactivators CBP/p300 by RelA. Interestingly, 
an amino-terminal deletion form of p300 lacking the C/H1 and KIX domains and
unable to bind RelA retained the ability to stimulate c-Myb transcription and
prevented NF-kappaB-mediated repression.

PMCID: PMC99912
PMID: 11585920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Virol. 2001 Nov;75(21):10033-40.

Adenovirus DNA binding protein interacts with the SNF2-related CBP activator
protein (SrCap) and inhibits SrCap-mediated transcription.

Xu X(1), Chackalaparampil I, Monroy MA, Cannella MT, Pesek E, Chrivia J, Yaciuk
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, St. Louis University
Health Sciences Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63104, USA.

The SNF2-related CBP activator protein, SrCap (pronounced "sir cap"), shares
homology with the SNF2/SWI2 protein family. SrCap was cloned through its ability 
to bind CBP. SrCap can function as a CBP coactivator and can activate
transcription in a reporter assay when expressed as a Gal-SrCap fusion protein. A
monoclonal antibody raised against the carboxyl terminus of SrCap
coimmunoprecipitates CBP/p300, supporting the model that SrCap is a CBP binding
protein and that these proteins can be found together in a cellular protein
complex. In addition, several cellular proteins are coimmunoprecipitated by the
SrCap-specific antibody. Since adenovirus E1A proteins interact with CBP/p300
proteins, we examined what proteins could be copurified in a SrCap-specific
coimmunoprecipitation assay from lysates of adenovirus-infected cells. While E1A 
proteins were not detected in this complex, to our surprise, we observed the
presence of an infected-cell-specific band of 72 kDa, which we suspected might be
the adenovirus DNA binding protein, DBP. The adenovirus DBP is a multifunctional 
protein involved in several aspects of the adenovirus life cycle, including an
ability to modulate transcription. The identity of DBP was confirmed by
DBP-specific Western blot analysis and by reimmunoprecipitating DBP from
denatured SrCap-specific protein complexes. Using in vitro-translated DBP and
SrCap proteins, we demonstrated that these proteins interact. To determine
whether this interaction could affect SrCap-mediated transcription, we tested
whether increasing amounts of DBP could modulate the Gal-SrCap transcription
activity. We observed that DBP inhibited Gal-SrCap transcription activity in a
dose-dependent manner. These data suggest a novel mechanism of adenovirus host
cell control by which DBP binds to and inactivates SrCap, a member of the SNF2
chromatin-remodeling protein family.

PMCID: PMC114578
PMID: 11581372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Genes Dev. 2001 Oct 1;15(19):2598-612.

Selective coactivation of estrogen-dependent transcription by CITED1
CBP/p300-binding protein.

Yahata T(1), Shao W, Endoh H, Hur J, Coser KR, Sun H, Ueda Y, Kato S, Isselbacher
KJ, Brown M, Shioda T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

CITED1, a CBP/p300-binding nuclear protein that does not bind directly to DNA, is
a transcriptional coregulator. Here, we show evidence that CITED1 functions as a 
selective coactivator for estrogen-dependent transcription. When transfected,
CITED1 enhanced transcriptional activation by the ligand-binding/AF2 domain of
both estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) and ERbeta in an estrogen-dependent
manner, but it affected transcriptional activities of other nuclear receptors
only marginally. CITED1 bound directly to ERalpha in an estrogen-dependent manner
through its transactivating domain, and this binding activity was separable from 
its p300-binding activity. CITED1 was strongly expressed in nulliparous mouse
mammary epithelial cells and, when expressed in ER-positive MCF-7 breast cancer
cells by transduction, exogenous CITED1 enhanced sensitivity of MCF-7 cells to
estrogen, stabilizing the estrogen-dependent interaction between p300 and
ERalpha. The estrogen-induced expression of the transforming growth factor-alpha 
(TGF-alpha) mRNA transcript was enhanced in the CITED1-expressing MCF-7 cells,
whereas estrogen-induced expression of the mRNA transcripts for progesterone
receptor or pS2 was not affected. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed
that endogenous CITED1 is recruited to the chromosomal TGF-alpha promoter in
MCF-7 cells in an estrogen-dependent manner but not to the pS2 promoter. These
results suggest that CITED1 may play roles in regulation of estrogen sensitivity 
in a gene-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC312794
PMID: 11581164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):44936-43. Epub 2001 Sep 21.

Interaction of EVI1 with cAMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding protein 
(CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) results in reversible acetylation of
EVI1 and in co-localization in nuclear speckles.

Chakraborty S(1), Senyuk V, Sitailo S, Chi Y, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and The Cancer Center, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

EVI1 is a very complex protein with two domains of zinc fingers and is
inappropriately expressed in many types of human myeloid leukemias. Using
reporter gene assays, several investigators showed that EVI1 is a transcription
repressor, and recently it was shown that EVI1 interacts with the co-repressor
carboxyl-terminal binding protein 1 (CtBP1). Earlier, we showed that the
inappropriate expression of EVI1 in murine hematopoietic precursor cells leads to
their abnormal differentiation and to increased proliferation. Using biochemical 
assays, we have identified two groups of transcription co-regulators that
associate with EVI1 presumably to regulate gene expression. One group of
co-regulators includes the CtBP1 and histone deacetylase. The second group
includes the two co-activators cAMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding
protein (CBP) and p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF), both of which have histone 
acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. All of these proteins require separate regions 
of EVI1 for efficient interaction, and they divergently affect the ability of
EVI1 to regulate gene transcription in reporter gene assays. Confocal microscopy 
analysis shows that in the majority of the cells, EVI1 is nuclear and diffused,
whereas in about 10% of the cells EVI1 localizes in nuclear speckles. However, in
the presence of the added exogenous co-repressors histone deacetylase or CtBP1,
all of the nuclei have a diffuse EVI1 staining, and the proteins do not appear to
reside together in obvious nuclear structures. In contrast, when CBP or P/CAF are
added, defined speckled bodies appear in the nucleus. Analysis of the staining
pattern indicates that EVI1 and CBP or EVI1 and P/CAF are contained within these 
structures. These nuclear structures are not observed when CBP is substituted
with a point mutant HAT-inactive CBP with which EVI1 also physically interacts.
Finally, we show that the interaction of EVI1 with either CBP or P/CAF leads to
acetylation of EVI1. These results suggest that the assembly of EVI1 in nuclear
speckles requires the intact HAT activity of the co-activators.

PMID: 11568182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):46297-304. Epub 2001 Sep 20.

SNIP1 inhibits NF-kappa B signaling by competing for its binding to the C/H1
domain of CBP/p300 transcriptional co-activators.

Kim RH(1), Flanders KC, Birkey Reffey S, Anderson LA, Duckett CS, Perkins ND,
Roberts AB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation and Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5055, USA.

SNIP1 is a 396-amino acid nuclear protein shown to be an inhibitor of the
TGF-beta signal transduction pathway and to be important in suppressing
transcriptional activation dependent on the co-activators CBP and p300. In this
report we show that SNIP1 potently inhibits the activity of NF-kappa B, which
binds the C/H1 domain of CBP/p300, but does not interfere with the activity of
transcription factors such as p53, which bind to other domains of p300, or
factors such as VP16, which are independent of these co-activators. Inhibition of
NF-kappa B activity is a function of the N-terminal domain of SNIP1 and involves 
competition of SNIP1 and the NF-kappa B subunit, RelA/p65, for binding to p300,
similar to the mechanism of inhibition of Smad signaling by SNIP1.
Immunohistochemical staining shows that expression of SNIP1 is strictly regulated
in development and that it colocalizes, in certain tissues, with nuclear staining
for RelA/p65 and for p300, suggesting that they may regulate NF-kappa B activity 
in vivo in a spatially and temporally controlled manner. These data led us to
suggest that SNIP1 may be an inhibitor of multiple transcriptional pathways that 
require the C/H1 domain of CBP/p300.

PMID: 11567019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):45031-40. Epub 2001 Sep 19.

Role of Deltex-1 as a transcriptional regulator downstream of the Notch receptor.

Yamamoto N(1), Yamamoto S, Inagaki F, Kawaichi M, Fukamizu A, Kishi N, Matsuno K,
Nakamura K, Weinmaster G, Okano H, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Intercellular signaling through the cell-surface receptor Notch plays important
roles in a variety of developmental processes as well as in pathogenesis of some 
human cancers and genetic disorders. However, the mechanisms by which Notch
signals are transduced into cells still remain elusive. Here we investigated the 
signaling mechanisms for Notch in the cell fate control of neural progenitor
cells. We show that Deltex-1 (DTX1), a mammalian homolog of Drosophila Deltex,
mediates a Notch signal to block differentiation of neural progenitor cells. We
found that a significant fraction of DTX1 proteins were localized in the nucleus 
and physically interacted with the transcriptional coactivator p300. Through its 
binding to p300, DTX1 inhibited transcriptional activation by the neural-specific
helix-loop-helix-type transcription factor MASH1, and this mechanism is likely
responsible for the differentiation inhibition of neural progenitor cells. Our
results further suggest that DTX1 regulates transcription independently of the
previously characterized Notch signaling pathway involving RBP-J and HES1/HES5.
Thus, DTX1 serves as an important signaling component downstream of Notch that
regulates transcription in the nucleus.

PMID: 11564735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 19;276(42):38502-10. Epub 2001 Aug 13.

Transforming growth factor-beta repression of matrix metalloproteinase-1 in
dermal fibroblasts involves Smad3.

Yuan W(1), Varga J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago,
Illinois 60607-7171, USA.

Enhanced production of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1, collagenase-1) is
implicated in pathological tissue destruction. Transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta) prevents cytokine-induced MMP-1 gene expression in fibroblasts. In
these studies, we examined the hypothesis that repression of MMP-1 may be
mediated through the Smad signaling pathway. The results showed that Smad3 and
Smad4, but not Smad1 or Smad2, mimicked the inhibitory effect of TGF-beta and
abrogated interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta)-induced stimulation of MMP-1 promoter
activity and NFkappaB-specific gene transcription in dermal fibroblasts.
Experiments with truncation mutants indicated that both MH1 and MH2 domains of
Smad3 were necessary for inhibitory activity. Dominant negative mutants of Smad3 
or Smad4 and antagonistic Smad7, which disrupts ligand-induced Smad3
phosphorylation, abrogated the repression of MMP-1 transcription by TGF-beta.
Similar results were obtained using immunoblot and Northern analysis.
Furthermore, TGF-beta failed to repress MMP-1 promoter activity in
Smad3-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts. These results implicated cellular
Smads in mediating the inhibitory effects of TGF-beta. Overexpression of the
transcriptional co-activator p300, but not its histone acetyltransferase
(HAT)-deficient mutant, was able to relieve repression of MMP-1 gene expression, 
suggesting that Smad-dependent inhibition may be due to increased competition
between Smad proteins and IL-1beta signaling pathways for limiting amounts of
cellular p300. Together, these results demonstrate that MMP-1 is a target for
negative regulation by TGF-beta through cellular Smad3 and Smad4. Smad-mediated
repression of MMP-1 gene expression may be important for preventing excessive
matrix degradation induced by inflammatory cytokines; disruption of Smad
signaling, as occurs in certain cancer cells, may thus be causally linked to
uncontrolled tissue destruction mediated through MMP-1.

PMID: 11502752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 19;276(42):39115-22. Epub 2001 Aug 8.

Osmotic shock induces G1 arrest through p53 phosphorylation at Ser33 by activated
p38MAPK without phosphorylation at Ser15 and Ser20.

Kishi H(1), Nakagawa K, Matsumoto M, Suga M, Ando M, Taya Y, Yamaizumi M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kuhonji
4-24-1, Kumamoto 862-0976, Japan.

Osmotic shock induced transient stabilization of p53, possibly due to increased
degradation of Mdm2. Stabilized p53 was activated by p38(MAPK), resulting in G(1)
arrest through induction of p21(WAF1). Among the postulated phosphorylation sites
involved in p53 stabilization or activation (Ser(15), Ser(20), Ser(33), and
Ser(46)), only Ser(33) was phosphorylated. Furthermore, interaction of p53 with
the transcriptional coactivator p300 was induced, and Lys(382) of p53 was
acetylated. Although inhibition of p38(MAPK) did not prevent nuclear accumulation
of p53, phosphorylation of Ser(33) was markedly suppressed by SB203580, a
specific inhibitor of p38(MAPK). Under these conditions, acetylation of Lys(382) 
and induction of p21(WAF1) were also inhibited, and cells with elevated levels of
p53 showed normal cell cycle progression. Activated p38(MAPK) phosphorylated
endogenous p53 at Ser(33) in living cells. In stable transformants expressing
dominant negative MKK6, an upstream protein kinase of p38(MAPK), p53
stabilization was induced normally following osmotic shock, but phosphorylation
of Ser(33), acetylation of Lys(382), and induction of p21(WAF1) were almost
completely inhibited. These results suggest that phosphorylation at Ser(33) by
p38(MAPK) is critical for activation of p53 following osmotic shock.
Phosphorylation of neither Ser(15) nor Ser(20) was needed in this activation.

PMID: 11495913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 5;276(40):37178-85. Epub 2001 Jul 31.

p300 Functions as a coactivator of transcription factor GATA-4.

Dai YS(1), Markham BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Sciences, Pfizer Global Research and Development, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48105, USA.

Transcription factor GATA-4 plays critical roles in controlling heart development
and cardiac hypertrophy. To understand how GATA-4 functions under diverse
conditions, we sought to identify its coactivators. We tested p300 as a
coactivator in GATA-4-dependent transient transcription assays in NIH3T3 cells
and found that p300 synergistically activated GATA-4-dependent transcription on
both synthetic and natural promoters. Direct physical interactions between the N-
and C-zinc finger domains of GATA-4 and the cysteine/histidine-rich region 3
(C/H3) of p300 were identified in immunoprecipitation and glutathione
S-transferase pull-down experiments. Deletion of the C/H3 region of p300
abolished its coactivator activity indicating that the physical interaction was
required for functional synergy. Through the use of a series of GATA-4 zinc
finger mutants, the amino acids WRR in the C finger were identified as critical
to the interaction. The adenoviral E1A protein or a peptide encoding the C/H3
region of p300 could inhibit GATA-4-dependent transcription, presumably by
competing for p300 binding. Furthermore, deletion of the region of p300 encoding 
the histone acetyltransferase activity abolished its effect on GATA-4-dependent
transcriptional activity. These results establish that p300 acts as a GATA-4
coactivator and that the p300 histone acetyltransferase activity is necessary for
the functional interaction.

PMID: 11481322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Biol Reprod. 2001 Aug;65(2):568-74.

Role of the transcriptional coactivator CBP/p300 in linking basic
helix-loop-helix and CREB responses for follicle-stimulating hormone-mediated
activation of the transferrin promoter in Sertoli cells.

Chaudhary J(1), Skinner MK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology, School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington
State University, Pullman, Washington 99164-4231, USA.

Sertoli cells are the epithelial cells responsible for the onset of pubertal
development and the maintenance of spermatogenesis in the adult. Transferrin is
one of the major secretory products expressed by differentiated Sertoli cells.
Investigation of the transcriptional control of transferrin gene expression
provides insight regarding the regulation of Sertoli cell differentiation. The
optimal activation of the mouse transferrin promoter (mTf) by FSH requires the
synergistic actions of the cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) binding
to the cAMP response element-like proximal region II (PRII) and the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) binding to the E-box. Proximal region II alone is
sufficient for cAMP-mediated activation. The proximity of the PRII and E-box (220
base pairs apart) suggests the possibility of interaction between CREB and bHLH
proteins. Such an interaction can be mediated by transcriptional integrators such
as CREB-binding protein (CBP) and/or p300 and may stabilize the binding of
trans-acting factors to their respective cis-elements. Such an interaction may
also provide a mechanism for cell-specific promoter activation. The hypothesis
tested in this study was that CBP/p300 is required for the synergistic activation
of the transferrin promoter involving PRII and E-box through the formation of a
ternary complex. In the Sertoli cells, both CBP and p300 proteins are expressed. 
The effect of CBP/p300 on transferrin promoter activation and, hence, Sertoli
cell function was studied by using antisense oligonucleotides (AS-oligo). In the 
presence of CBP/p300 AS-oligo, activity of the FSH-induced mTf-chloramphenicol
acetyl transferase (CAT) was significantly lower as compared to the respective
controls. Interestingly, AS-oligo had no effect on cAMP-induced activation of the
transferrin promoter reporter construct (mTf-CAT). Mutations in the E-box (EB*)
significantly reduced the FSH response. The presence of AS-oligo had no further
effect on the FSH-mediated activation of the EB*-mTf-CAT construct but reduced
cAMP-mediated activation. Mutations in the CRE-like PRII (PRII*) also
significantly reduced the FSH response. Activation of the PRII*-mTf-CAT in
response to cAMP was completely abolished. The presence of AS-oligo had no
further effect on the FSH- or cAMP-mediated activation of the PRII*-mTf-CAT
construct. In Sertoli cells, CBP/p300 was coimmunoprecipitated with CREB and the 
bHLH protein E47. These observations suggest that CBP/p300 appears to be involved
in regulating FSH-mediated activation of the transferrin promoter by linking bHLH
and CREB activities.

PMID: 11466227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Aug;21(16):5520-30.

The oncoprotein Tax binds the SRC-1-interacting domain of CBP/p300 to mediate
transcriptional activation.

Scoggin KE(1), Ulloa A, Nyborg JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State University,
Fort Collins, Colorado 80523, USA.

Oncogenesis associated with human T-cell leukemia virus (HTLV) infection is
directly linked to the virally encoded transcription factor Tax. To activate
HTLV-1 transcription Tax interacts with the cellular protein CREB and the
pleiotropic coactivators CBP and p300. While extensively studied, the molecular
mechanisms of Tax transcription function and coactivator utilization are not
fully understood. Previous studies have focused on Tax binding to the KIX domain 
of CBP, as this was believed to be the key step in recruiting the coactivator to 
the HTLV-1 promoter. In this study, we identify a carboxy-terminal region of CBP 
(and p300) that strongly interacts with Tax and mediates Tax transcription
function. Through deletion mutagenesis, we identify amino acids 2003 to 2212 of
CBP, which we call carboxy-terminal region 2 (CR2), as the minimal region for Tax
interaction. Interestingly, this domain corresponds to the steroid receptor
coactivator 1 (SRC-1)-interacting domain of CBP. We show that a double point
mutant targeted to one of the putative alpha-helical motifs in this domain
significantly compromises the interaction with Tax. We also characterize the
region of Tax responsible for interaction with CR2 and show that the previously
identified transactivation domain of Tax (amino acids 312 to 319) participates in
CR2 binding. This region of Tax corresponds to a consensus amphipathic helix, and
single point mutations targeted to amino acids on the face of this helix abolish 
interaction with CR2 and dramatically reduce Tax transcription function. Finally,
we demonstrate that Tax and SRC-1 bind to CR2 in a mutually exclusive fashion.
Together, these studies identify a novel Tax-interacting site on CBP/p300 and
extend our understanding of the molecular mechanism of Tax transactivation.

PMCID: PMC87274
PMID: 11463834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 7;276(36):33375-83. Epub 2001 Jul 6.

Identification and characterization of RRM-containing coactivator activator
(CoAA) as TRBP-interacting protein, and its splice variant as a coactivator
modulator (CoAM).

Iwasaki T(1), Chin WW, Ko L.

Author information: 
(1)Lilly Research Laboratories, Department of Gene Regulation, Bone and
Inflammation Research, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, Indiana 46285, USA.

We previously cloned and characterized thyroid hormone receptor-binding protein
(TRBP) as an LXXLL-containing general coactivator that associates with
coactivator complexes through its C terminus. To identify protein cofactors for
TRBP action, a Sos-Ras yeast two-hybrid cDNA library was screened using TRBP C
terminus as bait. A novel coactivator was isolated, coactivator activator (CoAA),
that specifically associates with TRBP. Human CoAA is composed of 669 amino acids
with a TRBP-interacting domain and two highly conserved RNA recognition motifs
(RRM) commonly found in ribonucleoproteins. A splice variant lacking the entire
TRBP-interacting domain was also isolated as a coactivator modulator (CoAM), a
156-amino acid protein containing only the RRM region. Human CoAA and CoAM mRNAs 
are encoded by a single gene located on chromosome 11q13; alternative splicing in
exon 2 of CoAA yields CoAM. CoAA interacts with both TRBP and p300 in vitro. In
addition, CoAA potently coactivates transcription mediated by multiple
hormone-response elements and acts synergistically with TRBP and CREB-binding
protein (CBP). Furthermore, CoAA is associated with the DNA-dependent protein
kinase-poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase complex. Strikingly, CoAM, which lacks a
TRBP-interacting domain, strongly represses both TRBP and CBP action suggesting
that CoAM may modulate endogenous CoAA function. These data suggest that CoAA may
serve as a mediator of coactivators such as TRBP in gene activation.

PMID: 11443112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Biol Chem. 2001 Sep 7;276(36):33533-9. Epub 2001 Jul 3.

Binding of p300/CBP co-activators by polyoma large T antigen.

Cho S(1), Tian Y, Benjamin TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

Small DNA tumor viruses such as simian virus 40 (SV40) and polyomavirus (Py) take
advantage of host cell proteins to transcribe and replicate their DNA.
Interactions between the viral T antigens and host proteins result in cell
transformation and tumor induction. Large T antigen of SV40 interacts with p53,
pRb/p107/p130 family members, and the cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding
protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP)/p300. Py large T antigen is known to
interact only with pRb and p300 among these proteins. Here we report that Py
large T binds to CBP in vivo and in vitro. In co-transfection assays, Py large T 
inhibits the co-activation functions of CBP/p300 in CREB-mediated transactivation
but not in NF-kappa B-mediated transactivation. p53 appears not to be involved in
the functions of CREB-mediated transactivation and is not essential for large
T:CBP interaction. Mutations introduced into a region of Py large T with homology
to adenovirus E1A and SV40 large T prevent binding to the co-activators. These
mutant large T antigens fail to inhibit CREB-mediated transactivation. The
CBP/p300-binding Py mutants are able to transform established rat embryo
fibroblasts but are restricted in their ability to induce tumors in the newborn
mouse, indicating that interaction of large T with the co-activators may be
essential for virus replication and spread in the intact host.

PMID: 11438528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 11;283(3):655-60.

Histone acetylation induced by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in a map
kinase-dependent manner.

Miyata Y(1), Towatari M, Maeda T, Ozawa Y, Saito H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya University School of Medicine,
65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.

Histone acetylation has been shown to affect chromatin structure and gene
expression. The mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway is activated by a 
number of cytokines and plays critical roles in hematopoietic cell survival,
proliferation, and differentiation. We focused on the part of the MAP kinase
cascade and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)in histone acetylation
at one of the critical myeloid differentiation-associated genes, myeloperoxidase 
(MPO). G-CSF caused rapid acetylation of histone H3 and H4 at the promoter of MPO
as revealed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. In addition, CBP and p300 were
recruited to the promoter in response to G-CSF. Furthermore, we showed that rapid
histone acetylation induced by G-CSF is MAP kinase-dependent. These results
illustrate how myeloid-differentiating signals via G-CSF may be coupled with
histone acetylation during the process of gene expression.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11341775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 11;276(19):16348-55.

p300 coactivates the adipogenic transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein alpha.

Erickson RL(1), Hemati N, Ross SE, MacDougald OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-0622, USA.

Despite the knowledge that CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha)
plays an important role in preadipocyte differentiation, our understanding of how
C/EBPalpha interacts with nuclear proteins to regulate transcription is limited. 
Based on the hypothesis that evolutionarily conserved regions are functionally
important and likely to interact with coactivators, we compared the amino acid
sequence of C/EBPalpha from different species (frog to human) and identified four
highly conserved regions (CR1-CR4) within the transactivation domain. A series of
amino-terminal truncations and internal deletion constructs were made creating
forms of C/EBPalpha which lack single or multiple conserved regions. To determine
which regions of the C/EBPalpha transactivation domain are important in its
ability to induce spontaneous differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes, we
infected preadipocytes with expression vectors encoding the C/EBPalpha conserved 
region mutants and observed their ability to induce differentiation. We found
that CR2 fused to the DNA binding domain is able to induce spontaneous
differentiation independent of the other conserved regions. However, CR2 was not 
necessary for the adipogenic action of C/EBPalpha because a combination of CR1
and CR3 can also induce adipogenesis. Because the transcriptional coactivator
p300 participates in the signaling of many transcription factors to the basal
transcriptional apparatus, we examined whether functional interaction exists
between C/EBPalpha and p300. Cotransfection of p300 with p42C/EBPalpha results in
a synergistic increase in leptin promoter activity, indicating that p300 acts as 
a transcriptional coactivator of C/EBPalpha. Analyses using C/EBPalpha conserved 
region mutants suggest that multiple regions (CR2 and CR3) of the C/EBPalpha
transactivation domain functionally interact with p300.

PMID: 11340085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 11;276(19):16310-7. Epub 2001 Feb 22.

Stimulation of p300-mediated transcription by the kinase MEKK1.

See RH(1), Calvo D, Shi Y, Kawa H, Luke MP, Yuan Z, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School and Department of Radiation
Biology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

p300 and CREB-binding protein (CBP) are related transcriptional coactivators that
possess histone acetyltransferase activity. Inactivation of p300/CBP is part of
the mechanism by which adenovirus E1A induces oncogenic transformation of cells. 
Recently, the importance of p300/CBP has been demonstrated directly in several
organisms including mouse, Drosophila, and Caenorhabditis elegans where p300/CBP 
play an indispensable role in differentiation, in patterning, and in cell fate
determination and proliferation during development. CBP/p300s are modified by
phosphorylation during F9 cell differentiation as well as adenovirus infection,
suggesting that phosphorylation may play a role in the regulation of p300/CBP
activity. Here we show that the mitogen-activated/extracellular response kinase
kinase 1 (MEKK1) enhances p300-mediated transcription. We identify several
domains within p300 that can respond to MEKK1-induced transcriptional activation.
Interestingly, activation of p300-mediated transcription by MEKK1 does not appear
to require the downstream kinase JNK and may involve either a direct
phosphorylation of p300 by MEKK1 or by other non-JNK MEKK1-directed downstream
kinases. Finally, we present evidence that p300 is important for MEKK1 to induce 
apoptosis. Taken together, these results identify MEKK1 as a kinase that is
likely to be involved in the regulation of the transactivation potential of p300 
and support a role of p300 in MEKK1-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 11278389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Nature. 2001 Mar 15;410(6826):387-91.

Transcription coactivator p300 binds PCNA and may have a role in DNA repair
synthesis.

Hasan S(1), Hassa PO, Imhof R, Hottiger MO.

Author information: 
(1)institute of Veterinary Biochemistry, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

The transcriptional coactivator p300 interacts with many transcription factors
that participate in a broad spectrum of biological activities, such as cellular
differentiation, homeostasis and growth control. Mouse embryos lacking both p300 
alleles die around mid-gestation, with pleiotropic defects in morphogenesis, in
cell differentiation and, unexpectedly, in cell proliferation because of reduced 
DNA synthesis. Here we show that p300 may have a role in DNA repair synthesis
through its interaction with proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). We show
that in vitro and in vivo p300 forms a complex with PCNA that does not depend on 
the S phase of cell cycle. A large fraction of both p300 and PCNA colocalize to
speckled structures in the nucleus. Furthermore, the endogenous p300-PCNA complex
stimulates DNA synthesis in vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
indicate that p300 is associated with freshly synthesized DNA after ultraviolet
irradiation. Our results suggest that p300 may participate in chromatin
remodelling at DNA lesion sites to facilitate PCNA function in DNA repair
synthesis.

PMID: 11268218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Apr;15(4):625-37.

Inhibition of protein phosphatase PP1 in GH3B6, but not in GH3 cells, activates
the MEK/ERK/c-fos pathway and the human prolactin promoter, involving the
coactivator CPB/p300.

Manfroid I(1), Martial JA, Muller M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Institut de Chimie B6, B-4000 Sart-Tilman, Belgique.

The human (hPRL) PRL gene proximal promoter (-164/+15) is the target for numerous
signal transduction pathways involving protein kinases. The inhibitor of
Ser/Thr-protein phosphatases okadaic acid (OA) was shown to induce this promoter 
in rat pituitary GH3B6 through a synergism between increased amounts of the
ubiquitous factor AP-1 and the pituitary-specific factor Pit-1. Here we show that
this activation results mainly from transcriptional stimulation of the c-fos
promoter leading to increased AP-1 activity. We report the surprising absence of 
the hPRL and c-fos promoter stimulation by OA in GH3 cells, closely related to
GH3B6 cells, and we use this discrepancy to dissect the precise mechanism of
action. c-fos gene activation involves the mitogen-activated kinase
(MAPK)-ternary complex factor (TCF) pathway and can be obtained by expressing
active V12ras in both cell lines. We show that OA acts by inhibiting protein
phosphatase PP1, thereby protecting MAPK kinase (MEK)1/2 and/or a MEK1/2-kinase
from dephosphorylation. PP1 inhibition of MEK activation by V12ras does not occur
in GH3 cells, indicating that a distinct, PP1-sensitive phosphorylation site is
used in GH3B6 cells to activate the TCF pathway in GH3B6 cells. Finally, we show 
that the synergistic OA activation of the hPRL promoter by Pit-1 and AP-1 is
independent of the Pit-1 transactivation domain and is mediated by the general
coactivator (CRE-binding protein)-binding protein (CBP)/p300.

PMID: 11266513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Apr;15(4):614-24.

Analysis of the role of the mitogen-activated protein kinase in mediating
cyclic-adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate effects on prolactin promoter activity.

Kievit P(1), Lauten JD, Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, Oregon 97201, USA.

The mechanisms mediating cAMP effects to stimulate transcription of the PRL gene 
have been examined. Treatments that elevate intracellular cAMP concentrations
were found to stimulate the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) in GH(3)
cells. Elevated cAMP was also found to stimulate activation of the GTP-binding
protein, Rap1. Rap1GAP1 reduced cAMP-induced phosphorylation of MAPK, offering
evidence that Rap1 may play a role in mediating activation of MAPK. Treatment of 
GH(3) cells with PD98059, an inhibitor of the MAPK pathway, reduced the ability
of forskolin to activate a PRL reporter gene, providing evidence that MAPK
contributes to cAMP-mediated effects on the PRL promoter. As previous studies
have implicated Ets factor binding sites within the PRL promoter in mediating
responses to MAPK, we expected that the Ets sites would also play a role in cAMP 
responsiveness. Surprisingly, mutation of all of the consensus Ets factor binding
sites in the proximal PRL promoter greatly reduced responsiveness to epidermal
growth factor (EGF) and TRH but did not reduce cAMP responsiveness. Experiments
using an expression vector for adenovirus 12S E1a provided evidence that the
coactivators, CREB binding protein and/or p300, probably play a role in cAMP
responsiveness of the PRL promoter. Interestingly, the ability of a GAL4-p300
fusion protein to enhance reporter gene activity was stimulated by cAMP in a
MAPK-dependent manner. These findings provide evidence for a model for
cAMP-induced PRL transcription involving Rap1-induced MAPK activity leading to
stimulation of the transcriptional coactivators, CBP and p300.

PMID: 11266512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 1;276(22):18934-40. Epub 2001 Mar 20.

Akt stimulates the transactivation potential of the RelA/p65 Subunit of NF-kappa 
B through utilization of the Ikappa B kinase and activation of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase p38.

Madrid LV(1), Mayo MW, Reuther JY, Baldwin AS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular
Biology, Department of Biology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The serine/threonine kinase Akt/PKB is a potent regulator of cell survival and
has oncogenic transformation potential. Previously, it has been shown that Akt
can activate the transcription factor NF-kappaB and that this functions to block 
apoptosis induced by certain stimuli. The mechanism whereby Akt activates
NF-kappaB has been controversial, with evidence supporting induction of nuclear
translocation of NF-kappaB via activation of IkappaB kinase activity and/or the
stimulation of the transcription function of NF-kappaB. Here we demonstrate that 
Akt targets the transactivation function of NF-kappaB by stimulating the
transactivation domain of RelA/p65 in a manner that is dependent on IkappaB
kinase beta activity and on the mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 (p38).
Activation of RelA/p65 transactivation function requires serines 529 and 536,
sites shown previously to be inducibly phosphorylated. Consistent with the
requirement of p38 in the activation of NF-kappaB transcriptional function,
expression of activated Akt induces p38 activity. Furthermore, the ability of
IL-1beta to activate NF-kappaB is known to involve Akt, and we show here that
IL-1beta induces p38 activity in manner dependent on Akt and IkappaB kinase
activation. Interestingly, activated Akt and the transcriptional co-activators
CBP/p300 synergize in the activation of the RelA/p65 transactivation domain, and 
this synergy is blocked by p38 inhibitors. These studies demonstrate that Akt,
functioning through IkappaB kinase and p38, induces the transcription function of
NF-kappaB by stimulating the RelA/p65 transactivation subunit of NF-kappaB.

PMID: 11259436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cancer Res. 2001 Jan 1;61(1):64-70.

Human homologue of yeast Rad23 protein A interacts with p300/cyclic
AMP-responsive element binding (CREB)-binding protein to down-regulate
transcriptional activity of p53.

Zhu Q(1), Wani G, Wani MA, Wani AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology Ohio State University, Columbus 43210, USA.

The tumor suppressor protein p53 regulates various cellular responses to DNA
damage and plays a significant role in DNA repair. The nuclear p300/cyclic
AMP-responsive element binding (CREB)-binding protein (CBP) proteins act as
coactivators in supporting the transcription function of p53. We examined the
role of the human homologue of yeast Rad23 protein A (hHR23A), one of the two
human homologues of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae nucleotide excision repair gene 
product Rad23, in the p300/CBP-associated regulation of p53 activity.
Overexpression of wild-type hHR23A inhibits the p53 transcriptional activity and 
results in a decreased steady-state protein level of cellular p53. The inhibitory
effect of hHR23A can be overcome by the concomitant expression of p300, CBP, and 
p300 segments harboring C/H1 domain and neutralized by the coexpression of HIV
accessory protein Vpr, which binds COOH terminus of hHR23A/B. Additionally,
hHR23A was shown to interact in vitro and in vivo with p300 segments harboring
C/H1 domain. These studies provide evidence for the involvement of hHR23A in the 
regulation of p53 activity through p300/CBP. Although the precise direct role of 
hHR23 proteins in regulation of p53 and DNA repair remains to be elucidated, our 
data suggest that the interaction between hHR23A and p300/CBP has important
implications in cross-talk between the p53 pathway and DNA repair.

PMID: 11196199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. FEBS Lett. 2001 Feb 2;489(2-3):139-43.

Signaling crosstalk underlying synergistic induction of astrocyte differentiation
by BMPs and IL-6 family of cytokines.

Yanagisawa M(1), Nakashima K, Takizawa T, Ochiai W, Arakawa H, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Modulation, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Honjo, Japan.

We here show that bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 7 acted in synergy with the
distinct type of cytokines, leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and interleukin (IL)
6 that are in the IL-6 family, to induce astrocyte differentiation from
neuroepithelial cells as assessed by expression of glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP). In this synergistic action, transcription factors, Smads and
STAT3 (for signal transducer and activator of transcription 3) activated by
respective group of cytokines, as well as a transcriptional coactivator p300 were
essential. Taken together with our previous finding that the synergistic
astrocyte induction by BMP2 and LIF is attributed to the complex formation of
Smads and STAT3 bridged by p300, it is conceivable that this complex formation is
a mechanism utilized in common by two different types of cytokines belonging to
the BMP and IL-6 families in order to synergistically induce astrocyte
differentiation.

PMID: 11165238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Brain Res. 2001 Feb 2;890(2):197-202.

Localization of nuclear coactivators p300 and steroid receptor coactivator 1 in
the rat hippocampus.

Ogawa H(1), Nishi M, Kawata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Kyoto Prefectural University of
Medicine, 465 Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.
hogawa@basic.kpu-m.ac.jp

Cofactors (coactivators and corepressors) play an important role in mediating
ligand-dependent transcription by steroid hormone receptors, but little has been 
reported about the distribution of coactivators in the brain. The present study
represents the first immunohistochemical attempt to elucidate the localization of
coactivators p300 and steroid receptor coactivator 1 (SRC-1) in the hippocampus
of the rat. p300- and SRC-1-immunoreactivities were observed in CA1-CA4 pyramidal
cell layers of the hippocampus and the granular cell layer of the dentate gyrus, 
and their localization was in the cell nucleus. Double-labeling
immunohistochemistry of p300 and SRC-1 indicated that both coactivators were
colocalized in the same cell. Antibodies against neuron specific enolase (NSE)
and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) were used to identify whether neuron
and glia contained p300 or SRC-1. Most p300- or SRC-1-containing cells showed
NSE-immunoreactivity, but a limited number of these cells showed
GFAP-immunoreactivity. These findings suggest that in the hippocampus p300 and
SRC-1 synergistically play an important role in activating ligand-dependent
transcription by steroid hormone receptor.

PMID: 11164785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Dec 15;1517(1):119-27.

Upstream stimulatory factor 2 stimulates transcription through an initiator
element in the mouse cytochrome c oxidase subunit Vb promoter.

Breen GA(1), Jordan EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, The University of Texas at Dallas,
P.O. Box 830688, Richardson, TX 75083-0688, USA. breen@utdallas.edu

Upstream stimulatory factor (USF) is a basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper
transcription factor that plays an important role in transcriptional activation
and cell proliferation. In this article, we demonstrate that the mouse cytochrome
c oxidase subunit Vb gene (Cox5b) can be transactivated by ectopic expression of 
USF2 through an initiator (Inr) element in the core promoter. Importantly, using 
a dominant-negative mutant of USF2, we demonstrate the role of endogenous USF2
proteins in the transcriptional activation of the Cox5b Inr. Domains of USF2
encoded by exon 4, exon 5 and the USF-specific region are important for maximum
activation of the Cox5b Inr. Using the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein, we show that
p300/CBP acts as a coactivator in the USF2-dependent activation of the Cox5b Inr.
We also demonstrate that although expression of multifunctional regulatory
factor, Yin Yang 1 (YY1), can stimulate transcription of the Cox5b Inr to a
modest extent, expression of YY1 together with USF2 greatly reduces the level of 
activation of the Cox5b Inr. Furthermore, we show that the transcription factor, 
Sp1, represses both the YY1- and the USF2-dependent activation of the Cox5b Inr, 
indicating competition among Sp1, YY1, and USF2.

PMID: 11118624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Biochem J. 2001 Jan 1;353(Pt 1):13-22.

Msx3 protein recruits histone deacetylase to down-regulate the Msx1 promoter.

Mehra-Chaudhary R(1), Matsui H, Raghow R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Research Service (151), 1030
Jefferson Avenue, Memphis, TN 38104, USA.

Msx1 promoter is known to be repressed by Msx1 protein [Shetty, Takahashi,
Matsui, Iyengar and Raghow (1999) Biochem. J. 339, 751-758]. We show that in the 
transiently transfected C(2)C(12) myoblasts, co-expression of Msx3 also causes
potent repression of Msx1 promoter that can be relieved by exogenous expression
of cAMP-response-element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP) and p300 in a
dose-dependent manner. Co-immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses revealed 
that Msx3 interacts with CBP and p300 and this interaction significantly
decreases the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity of both proteins. We also 
discovered that Msx3-mediated repression of Msx1 promoter is synergized by the
exogenous co-expression of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). Furthermore, the
repression of Msx1 promoter by Msx3 could be relieved by treating transfected
cells with trichostatin A, an inhibitor of HDAC(s). Finally, we show that Msx3
and HDAC1 can be co-immunoprecipitated in a complex that does not contain CBP and
that Msx3 and HDAC1 proteins are co-localized in the nucleus. Taken together, our
results strongly suggest that two distinct multiprotein complexes are present
within the nuclei of C(2)C(12) cells: one containing Msx3 and HDAC(s) and another
containing Msx3 and CBP and/or p300. On the basis of these results, we propose a 
dual mechanism of repression by Msx3 protein that involves the squelching of the 
HAT activity of co-activators, CBP and p300, and recruitment of HDAC(s).

PMCID: PMC1221538
PMID: 11115394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Nat Med. 2000 Dec;6(12):1335-40.

Suppression of tumor growth through disruption of hypoxia-inducible
transcription.

Kung AL(1), Wang S, Klco JM, Kaelin WG, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115,USA.

Chronic hypoxia, a hallmark of many tumors, is associated with angiogenesis and
tumor progression. Strategies to treat tumors have been developed in which tumor 
cells are targeted with drugs or gene-therapy vectors specifically activated
under hypoxic conditions. Here we report a different approach, in which the
normal transcriptional response to hypoxia is selectively disrupted. Our data
indicate that specific blockade of the interaction of hypoxia-inducible factor
with the CH1 domain of its p300 and CREB binding protein transcriptional
coactivators leads to attenuation of hypoxia-inducible gene expression and
diminution of tumor growth. Thus, disrupting the normal co-activational response 
to hypoxia may be a new and useful therapeutic strategy.

PMID: 11100117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 9;276(10):7575-85. Epub 2000 Nov 28.

Control of cardiac-specific transcription by p300 through myocyte enhancer
factor-2D.

Slepak TI(1), Webster KA, Zang J, Prentice H, O'Dowd A, Hicks MN, Bishopric NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami,
Florida 33101, USA.

The transcriptional integrator p300 regulates gene expression by interaction with
sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins and local remodeling of chromatin. p300 is
required for cardiac-specific gene transcription, but the molecular basis of this
requirement is unknown. Here we report that the MADS (MCM-1, agamous, deficiens, 
serum response factor) box transcription factor myocyte enhancer factor-2D
(MEF-2D) acts as the principal conduit for cardiac transcriptional activation by 
p300. p300 activation of the native 2130-base pair human skeletal alpha-actin
promoter required a single hybrid MEF-2/GATA-4 DNA motif centered at -1256 base
pairs. Maximal expression of the promoter in cultured myocytes and in vivo
correlated with binding of both MEF-2 and p300, but not GATA-4, to this AT-rich
motif. p300 and MEF-2 were coprecipitated from cardiac nuclear extracts by an
oligomer containing this element. p300 was found exclusively in a complex with
MEF-2D at this and related sites in other cardiac-restricted promoters. MEF-2D,
but not other MEFs, significantly potentiated cardiac-specific transcription by
p300. No physical or functional interaction was observed between p300 and other
factors implicated in skeletal actin transcription, including GATA-4, TEF-1, or
SRF. These results show that, in the intact cell, p300 interactions with its
protein targets are highly selective and that MEF-2D is the preferred channel for
p300-mediated transcriptional control in the heart.

PMID: 11096067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2000 Dec;279(6):L1066-74.

Temporal/spatial expression of nuclear receptor coactivators in the mouse lung.

Naltner A(1), Wert S, Whitsett JA, Yan C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Our laboratory has previously demonstrated that retinoic acid nuclear receptor,
thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), and nuclear receptor coactivators such as
cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) binding protein (CBP)/p300 and
steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1) form an enhanceosome on the 5'-enhancer
region of the human surfactant protein B gene. Immunohistochemistry was used to
identify cells that coexpressed CBP/p300, SRC-1, retinoid X receptor, and TTF-1
in the developing and mature lung. CBP/p300 and SRC-1 were expressed in the adult
mouse lung, CBP and p300 being present in both alveolar type I and type II
epithelial cells and SRC-1 and TTF-1 being restricted to type II epithelial
cells. CBP/p300, SRC-1, and TTF-1 were readily detected in the nuclei of
developing respiratory epithelial tubules in fetal mice from embryonic days 10 to
18. CBP/p300 and SRC-1 were also detected in developing mesenchymal cells. These 
coactivators were coexpressed with TTF-1 and SP-B in human pulmonary
adenocarcinoma cells (H441 cells) in vitro. Interaction assays with a two-hybrid 
reporter analysis demonstrated direct interactions among TTF-1, SRC-1, and
CBP/p300 in H441 cells. These findings support a role for retinoic acid receptor 
and nuclear receptor coactivators in the regulation of SP-B gene expression in
the respiratory epithelium.

PMID: 11076796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Dec;20(23):8643-54.

Proteasome-mediated degradation of the coactivator p300 impairs cardiac
transcription.

Poizat C(1), Sartorelli V, Chung G, Kloner RA, Kedes L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetic Medicine and Department of Biochemistry & Molecular
Biology, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, USA.

The transcription of tissue-specific genes is controlled by regulatory factors
and cofactors and is suppressed in cardiac cells by the antineoplastic agent
doxorubicin. Here we show that exposure of cultured cardiomyocytes to doxorubicin
resulted in the rapid depletion of transcripts for MEF2C, dHAND, and NKX2.5,
three pivotal regulators of cardiac gene expression. Delivery of exogenous p300, 
a coactivator of MEF2C and NKX2.5 in cardiomyocytes, restored cardiac
transcription despite the presence of doxorubicin. Furthermore, p300 also
restored the accumulation of transcripts for MEF2C itself. Importantly,
cardiocytes exposed to doxorubicin displayed reduced levels of p300 proteins.
This was not due to alterations in the level of p300 transcripts; rather, and
surprisingly, doxorubicin promoted selective degradation of p300 mediated by the 
26S-proteasome machinery. Doxorubicin had no effect on the general level of
ubiquitinated proteins or on the levels of beta-catenin, a protein known to be
degraded by proteasome-mediated degradation. These results provide evidence for a
new mechanism of transcriptional repression caused by doxorubicin in which the
selective degradation of p300 results in reduced p300-dependent transcription,
including production of MEF2C mRNA.

PMCID: PMC86467
PMID: 11073966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Nov 7;97(23):12613-8.

Regulation of beta -catenin transformation by the p300 transcriptional
coactivator.

Sun Y(1), Kolligs FT, Hottiger MO, Mosavin R, Fearon ER, Nabel GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Research Center, National Institutes of Health, 40 Convent Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892-3005, USA.

The beta-catenin protein plays a critical role in embryonic development and
mature tissue homeostasis through its effects on E-cadherin-mediated cell
adhesion and Wnt-dependent signal transduction. In colon and other cancers,
mutations of beta-catenin or the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor
suppressor appear to stabilize beta-catenin and enhance its interaction with T
cell factor (TCF) or lymphoid enhancer factor (Lef) transcription factors. At
present, a complete picture of the means by which beta-catenin's interactions
with TCF/Lef proteins contribute to neoplastic transformation is lacking. We
report that the transcriptional coactivator p300 interacts with beta-catenin in
vitro and in vivo and is critical for beta-catenin-mediated neoplastic
transformation. p300 synergistically activates beta-catenin/TCF transcription,
and their biochemical association requires the CH1 domain of p300 and a region of
beta-catenin that includes its NH(2)-terminal transactivation domain and the
first two armadillo repeats. Lowering of cellular p300 levels by using a ribozyme
directed against p300 reduced TCF transcriptional activity and inhibited the
neoplastic growth properties of a beta-catenin-transformed rat epithelial cell
line and a human colon carcinoma line with a beta-catenin mutation. These
findings demonstrate a critical role for p300 in beta-catenin/TCF transcription
and in cancers arising from defects in beta-catenin regulation.

PMCID: PMC18812
PMID: 11050151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cell. 2000 Sep 15;102(6):839-48.

p300 interacts with the nuclear proto-oncoprotein SYT as part of the active
control of cell adhesion.

Eid JE(1), Kung AL, Scully R, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Complexes containing p300, but not CBP, and the nuclear proto-oncoprotein SYT
were detected in confluent cultures of G1-arrested cells but not in sparse cells 
or during S or G2. SYT sequences constitute the N-terminal segment of a fusion
oncogene product, SYT-SSX, routinely detected in synovial sarcoma, an aggressive 
human tumor. SYT/p300 complex formation promotes cell adhesion to a fibronectin
matrix, as reflected by compromise of this process in cells expressing SYT dl
mutants that retain p300 binding activity and in the primary fibroblasts of p300 
but not CBP heterozygous null mice. The mechanism linking the action of SYT/p300 
complexes to adhesion function is, at least in part, transcription
activation-independent and results in proper activation of beta1 integrin, a
major adhesion receptor.

PMID: 11030627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Nat Genet. 2000 Oct;26(2):229-32.

Loss of Gcn5l2 leads to increased apoptosis and mesodermal defects during mouse
development.

Xu W(1), Edmondson DG, Evrard YA, Wakamiya M, Behringer RR, Roth SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas-M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Histone acetyltransferases regulate transcription, but little is known about the 
role of these enzymes in developmental processes. Gcn5 (encoded by Gcn5l2) and
Pcaf, mouse histone acetyltransferases, share similar sequences and enzymatic
activities. Both interact with p300 and CBP (encoded by Ep300 and Crebbp,
respectively), two other histone acetyltransferases that integrate multiple
signalling pathways. Pcaf is thought to participate in many of the cellular
processes regulated by p300/CBP (refs 2-8), but the functions of Gcn5 are unknown
in mammalian cells. Here we show that the gene Pcaf is dispensable in mice. In
contrast, Gcn5l2-null embryos die during embryogenesis. These embryos develop
normally to 7.5 days post coitum (d.p.c.), but their growth is severely retarded 
by 8.5 d.p.c. and they fail to form dorsal mesoderm lineages, including
chordamesoderm and paraxial mesoderm. Differentiation of extra-embryonic and
cardiac mesoderm seems to be unaffected. Loss of the dorsal mesoderm lineages is 
due to a high incidence of apoptosis in the Gcn5l2 mutants that begins before the
onset of morphological abnormality. Embryos null for both Gcn5l2 and Pcaf show
even more severe defects, indicating that these histone acetyltransferases have
overlapping functions during embryogenesis. Our studies are the first to
demonstrate that specific acetyltransferases are required for cell survival and
mesoderm formation during mammalian development.

PMID: 11017084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Nat Biotechnol. 2000 Oct;18(10):1080-5.

Minimal activators that bind to the KIX domain of p300/CBP identified by phage
display screening.

Frangioni JV(1), LaRiccia LM, Cantley LC, Montminy MR.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Hematology/Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Human gene therapy approaches involving transcription factors often rely on
artificial activation domains for transcriptional activation. These domains are
often large (e.g., 80 amino acids for VP16), recruit multiple co-activation
complexes at once, and offer no fine control over the level of transcription. In 
an attempt to understand the sequence and structural requirements of a minimal
mammalian activator, we employed a molecular diversity approach with a peptide
phage display library composed of random eight-amino acid peptides. Using the KIX
domain of the mammalian co-activators p300 and CBP as target, we discovered a
family of synthetic binding peptides. These peptides share significant homology
with natural KIX domain ligands, and are shown to bind an overlapping, yet
distinct, surface of p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP). When fused to a
heterologous DNA binding domain, these synthetic peptides function as titratable,
modular, and potent transcriptional activators in living cells through specific
recruitment of p300/CBP, with the level of transcriptional activation
proportional to the affinity of the synthetic peptide for the KIX domain. Taken
together, our data demonstrate that a molecular diversity approach can be used to
discover minimal, co-activator domain-specific synthetic activators, and that
transcriptional activation can be modulated as desired at the level of
co-activator recruitment.

PMID: 11017047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 Oct;58(4):845-51.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor is required for p300-mediated induction of DNA
synthesis by adenovirus E1A.

Tohkin M(1), Fukuhara M, Elizondo G, Tomita S, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institute of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0001, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that mediates the biological responses to environmental contaminants such as
2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Embryonic fibroblast (EF) isolated from
AHR-null mice exhibited slow cell growth compared with wild-type EF.
Reintroduction of AHR into AHR-null EF increased cell growth, suggesting that AHR
is involved in cell cycle control. The role of the AHR in cell cycle control was 
examined using the adenovirus oncoprotein E1A. EF, derived from wild-type and
AHR-null mice, were transfected with two mutant E1A expression plasmids that
inactivate either p300/CBP or retinoblastoma protein (pRb). Although DNA
synthesis of wild-type EF was induced by both E1A mutants, DNA synthesis in the
AHR-null EF was induced only by the mutant that binds pRb, not by the mutant to
p300/CBP. These data show that both pRb and p300/CBP were the target of
E1A-induced DNA synthesis in wild-type EF. In AHR-null mice, however, only pRb
was the target of E1A-induced DNA synthesis and p300/CBP cannot be inactivated by
E1A in the absence of AHR. Immunoprecipitation revealed that AHR directly bound
to p300, thus suggesting the intriguing possibility that AHR is involved in
control of the cell cycle via interaction with p300.

PMID: 10999956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(19):7300-10.

Phosphorylation of ETS transcription factor ER81 in a complex with its
coactivators CREB-binding protein and p300.

Papoutsopoulou S(1), Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo
Graduate School, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The ETS protein ER81 is a DNA-binding factor capable of enhancing gene
transcription and is implicated in cellular transformation, but presently the
mechanisms of its actions are unclear. In this report, ER81 is shown to
coimmunoprecipitate with the transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein
(CBP) and the related p300 protein (together referred to as CBP/p300). Moreover, 
confocal laser microscopic studies demonstrated that ER81 and p300 colocalized to
nuclear speckles. In vitro and in vivo interaction studies revealed that ER81
amino acids 249 to 429, which encompass the ETS DNA-binding domain, are
responsible for binding to CBP/p300. However, mutation of a putative
protein-protein interaction motif, LXXLL, in the ETS domain of ER81 did not
affect interaction with CBP/p300, whereas DNA binding of ER81 was abolished.
Furthermore, two regions within CBP, amino acids 451 to 721 and 1891 to 2175, are
capable of binding to ER81. Consistent with the physical interaction between ER81
and the coactivators CBP and p300, ER81 transcriptional activity was potentiated 
by CBP/p300 overexpression. Moreover, an ER81-associated protein kinase activity 
was enhanced upon p300 overexpression. This protein kinase phosphorylates ER81 on
serines 191 and 216, and mutation of these phosphorylation sites increased ER81
transcriptional activity in Mv1Lu cells but not in HeLa cells. Altogether, our
data elucidate the mechanism of how ER81 regulates gene transcription, through
interaction with the coactivators CBP and p300 and an associated kinase that may 
cell type specifically modulate the ability of ER81 to activate gene
transcription.

PMCID: PMC86284
PMID: 10982847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Genes Cells. 2000 Sep;5(9):739-47.

Transactivation mechanisms of mouse clock transcription factors, mClock and
mArnt3.

Takahata S(1), Ozaki T, Mimura J, Kikuchi Y, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University,
Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The Arnt3 (also termed as BMAL1 or MOP3)/Clock heterodimer is a
positive regulator of circadian rhythm and activates the transcription of target 
genes such as per1 and vasopressin.
RESULTS: We investigated the transcriptional mechanism of mArnt3/mClock
heterodimer. While mClock did not possess any distinct activation domain, mArnt3 
contained a transcriptional activation domain at the most C-terminal end, the
activity of which was not expressed, even in the one hybrid system, until it was 
bound by mClock. It has been suggested that mClock plays a regulatory or
structural role in exerting a transcription enhancing effect of the mArnt3/mClock
heterodimer. Deletion proceeding from amino acids 559-492 of mClock markedly
reduced the transactivation activity of mArnt3/mClock heterodimer, in consistence
with the results of the Clock-delta 19 mutant. Yeast and mammalian two-hybrid
systems revealed that CBP and p300 interacted with mArnt3 via the CREB binding
domain. The In vivo interaction between mArnt3 and CBP was confirmed by the GST
pull down assay.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results suggest that the mArnt3/mClock
heterodimer exerted its transactivation activity via CBP or p300 interacting with
mArnt3 in the heterodimer with mClock playing a structural or regulatory role in 
the transactivation process.

PMID: 10971655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 3;275(44):34359-64.

CREB-binding protein/p300 activates MyoD by acetylation.

Polesskaya A(1), Duquet A, Naguibneva I, Weise C, Vervisch A, Bengal E, Hucho F, 
Robin P, Harel-Bellan A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Oncogenèse, Différenciation et Transduction du Signal, CNRS UPR
9079, Institut Fédératif André Lwoff, 7 rue Guy Moquet, Villejuif, France.

The myogenic protein MyoD requires two nuclear histone acetyltransferases,
CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300 and PCAF, to transactivate muscle promoters. MyoD
is acetylated by PCAF in vitro, which seems to increase its affinity for DNA. We 
here show that MyoD is constitutively acetylated in muscle cells. In vitro, MyoD 
is acetylated both by CBP/p300 and by PCAF on two lysines located at the boundary
of the DNA binding domain. MyoD acetylation by CBP/p300 (as well as by PCAF)
increases its activity on a muscle-specific promoter, as assessed by
microinjection experiments. MyoD mutants that cannot be acetylated in vitro are
not activated in the functional assay. Our results provide direct evidence that
MyoD acetylation functionally activates the protein and show that both PCAF and
CBP/p300 are candidate enzymes for MyoD acetylation in vivo.

PMID: 10944526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biochem. 2000 Aug;128(2):301-7.

Analyses of virus-induced homomeric and heteromeric protein associations between 
IRF-3 and coactivator CBP/p300.

Suhara W(1), Yoneyama M, Iwamura T, Yoshimura S, Tamura K, Namiki H, Aimoto S,
Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

Cellular genes including the type I interferon genes are activated in response to
viral infection. We previously reported that IRF-3 (interferon regulatory factor 
3) is specifically phosphorylated on serine residues and directly transmits a
virus-induced signal from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, and then participates in 
the primary phase of gene induction. In this study, we analyzed the molecular
mechanism of IRF-3 activation further. The formation of a stable homomeric
complex of IRF-3 between the specifically phosphorylated IRF-3 molecules
occurred. While virus-induced IRF-7 did not bind to p300, the phosphorylated
IRF-3 complex formed a stable multimeric complex with p300 (active holocomplex). 
Competition using a synthetic phosphopeptide corresponding to the activated IRF-3
demonstrated that p300 directly recognizes the structure in the vicinity of the
phosphorylated residues of IRF-3. These results indicated that the
phosphorylation of serine residues at positions 385 and 386 is critical for the
formation of the holocomplex, presumably through a conformational switch
facilitating homodimer formation and the generation of the interaction interface 
with CBP/p300.

PMID: 10920266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(14):4970-8.

Histone binding protein RbAp48 interacts with a complex of CREB binding protein
and phosphorylated CREB.

Zhang Q(1), Vo N, Goodman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, Oregon 97201,
USA.

A CREB-CREB binding protein (CBP) complex was used as bait to screen a mouse
embryo cDNA library in yeast. One of the strongest interactions identified the
histone binding protein RbAp48. RbAp48 also interacted weakly with CBP alone but 
did not interact with phosphorylated or nonphosphorylated CREB. CBP (or its
homologue p300) from HeLa cell nuclear extracts coimmunoprecipitated with RbAp48 
and its homologue RbAp46 and bound to a glutathione S-transferase-RbAp48 fusion
protein. This interaction was stimulated by the addition of phosphorylated CREB
and allowed the association of core histones and mononucleosomes in an
acetylation-dependent manner. RbAp48 lowered the K(m) of CBP histone acetylase
activity and facilitated p300-mediated in vitro transcription of a chromatinized 
template in the presence of acetylcoenzyme A. These data indicate that the
association of phosphorylated CREB with CBP promotes the binding of RbAp48 and
its homologue RbAp46, allowing the formation of a complex that facilitates
histone acetylation during transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC85947
PMID: 10866654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 18;275(33):25330-5.

A p300 protein as a coactivator of GATA-6 in the transcription of the smooth
muscle-myosin heavy chain gene.

Wada H(1), Hasegawa K, Morimoto T, Kakita T, Yanazume T, Sasayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Japan.

The mechanisms that regulate smooth muscle development and differentiation are
poorly understood. Although recent studies have suggested the possible role of a 
zinc finger transcription factor, GATA-6, in the differentiation of vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), the downstream gene targeted by GATA-6 is unknown.
The expression of smooth muscle-myosin heavy chain (Sm-MHC) provides a highly
specific marker for the differentiated phenotype of VSMCs as well as the smooth
muscle cell lineage. Here, we show that GATA-6 bound to a GATA-like motif
(-810/-805) within the rat Sm-MHC promoter in a sequence-specific manner and
activated this promoter through this site. In addition, we show that the
transcriptional coactivator p300 associated with GATA-6 during the transcription 
of the Sm-MHC gene. A p300/GATA-6 complex in VSMCs was up-regulated by induction 
of the quiescent phenotype. A wild-type E1A, which interferes with endogenous
p300, but not a mutant E1A defective for p300 binding, markedly down-regulated
the expression of endogenous Sm-MHC in quiescent-phenotype VSMCs. These studies
provide the first identification of a functionally important GATA-6 binding site 
within a smooth muscle-specific promoter and suggest a role for p300 in the
maintenance of the differentiated phenotype in VSMCs as a coactivator of GATA-6.

PMID: 10851229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Jun;14(6):889-99.

Characterization of transactivational property and coactivator mediation of rat
mineralocorticoid receptor activation function-1 (AF-1).

Fuse H(1), Kitagawa H, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacological Research Department, Teikoku Hormone Manufacturing Company,
Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.

The autonomous activation function-2 (AF-2) in the mineralocorticoid receptor
(MR) E/F domain is known to play a major role in the ligand-induced
transactivation function of MR; however, it remained unclear about the
transactivation function of its A/B domain. We therefore tried to characterize
the MR A/B domain as the AF-1 and further studied the actions of known
coactivators for AF-2 in the E/F ligand-binding domain in the function of the MR 
A/B domain. Deletion analyses of rat and human MRs revealed that the A/B domains 
harbor a transactivation function acting as AF-1. The MR mutant (E959Q) with a
point mutation in helix 12, which causes a complete loss of MR AF-2 activity,
still retained ligand-induced transactivation function, indicating a significant 
role for AF-1 in the full activity of the ligand-induced MR function. Among the
coactivators tested to potentiate the MR AF-2, TIF2 and p300 potentiated the MR
AF-1 through two different core regions [amino acids (a.a.) 1-169, a.a. 451-603] 
and exhibited functional interactions with the MR A/B domain in the cultured
cells. However, such interactions were undetectable in a yeast and in an in vitro
glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assay, indicating that the functional
interaction of TIF2 and p300 with the MR A/B domain to support the MR AF-1
activity require some unknown nuclear factor(s) or a proper modification of the
A/B domain in the cells.

PMID: 10847590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jun 7;272(2):375-9.

p300/CBP-dependent and -independent transcriptional interference between
NF-kappaB RelA and p53.

Ikeda A(1), Sun X, Li Y, Zhang Y, Eckner R, Doi TS, Takahashi T, Obata Y,
Yoshioka K, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa
University, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa, 920-0934, Japan.

p53 and NF-kappaB RelA are activated by various genotoxic agents and mutually
suppress each other's ability to activate transcription, most likely through
competition for transcriptional coactivators such as CBP or p300. However, we
found that the inhibition by RelA of p53 transcriptional activity is not
completely restored by CBP/p300 overexpression and that a p53 mutant can not
suppress RelA activity despite of its ability to bind CBP/p300. In the present
study, we further present evidence that these two transcriptional factors
directly interact both in vivo and in vitro. These results therefore indicate
that the cross transcriptional interference between p53 and RelA is partly caused
by the direct interaction between these two transcription factors which is
mediated by their dimerization/tetramerization domains and results in inhibition 
of each other's transcriptional activity. Finally, cells derived from RelA
knockout mice showed enhanced p53 transcriptional activity, suggesting that this 
cross transcriptional interference is physiologically important in cellular
response to genotoxic stress.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10833421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(10):3377-86.

Inactivation of p53 by human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 Tax requires
activation of the NF-kappaB pathway and is dependent on p53 phosphorylation.

Pise-Masison CA(1), Mahieux R, Jiang H, Ashcroft M, Radonovich M, Duvall J,
Guillerm C, Brady JN.

Author information: 
(1)Virus Tumor Biology Section, Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene
Expression, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA. masionc@dce41.nci.nih.gov

p53 plays a key role in guarding cells against DNA damage and transformation. We 
previously demonstrated that the human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) 
Tax can inactivate p53 transactivation function in lymphocytes. The present study
demonstrates that in T cells, Tax-induced p53 inactivation is dependent upon
NF-kappaB activation. Analysis of Tax mutants demonstrated that Tax inactivation 
of p53 function correlates with the ability of Tax to induce NF-kappaB but not
p300 binding or CREB transactivation. The Tax-induced p53 inactivation can be
overcome by overexpression of a dominant IkappaB mutant. Tax-NF-kappaB-induced
p53 inactivation is not due to p300 squelching, since overexpression of p300 does
not recover p53 activity in the presence of Tax. Further, using wild-type and p65
knockout mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs), we demonstrate that the p65 subunit of 
NF-kappaB is critical for Tax-induced p53 inactivation. While Tax can inactivate 
endogenous p53 function in wild-type MEFs, it fails to inactivate p53 function in
p65 knockout MEFs. Importantly, Tax-induced p53 inactivation can be restored by
expression of p65 in the knockout MEFs. Finally, we present evidence that
phosphorylation of serines 15 and 392 correlates with inactivation of p53 by Tax 
in T cells. This study provides evidence that the divergent NF-kappaB
proliferative and p53 cell cycle arrest pathways may be cross-regulated at
several levels, including posttranslational modification of p53.

PMCID: PMC85630
PMID: 10779327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Mar 16;269(2):410-4.

p300/CBP acts as a coactivator of the cone-rod homeobox transcription factor.

Yanagi Y(1), Masuhiro Y, Mori M, Yanagisawa J, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Tokyo School of Medicine, 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

CRX (cone-rod homeobox) is shown to play an important role on the photoreceptor
cell maturation and maintenance. However, little is known about the molecular
mechanism how CRX potentiates transcription. Here, we investigated the effect of 
several coactivators (p300/CBP, SRC-1, TIF2, and AIB1) on the transactivation
function of CRX. The transient expression assay with a luciferase reporter gene
showed that only p300/CBP potentiates the transactivation function of CRX.
Furthermore, by interaction studies in vivo (a mammalian two-hybrid assay) and in
vitro (a pulldown assay), p300/CBP was found to directly bind CRX through their
C-terminal domains. The C-terminal domain of CRX was mapped as a transactivation 
domain to associate with p300/CBP. Taken together, our results demonstrate that
p300/CBP acts as one of the coactivators of CRX.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10708567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Nat Genet. 2000 Mar;24(3):300-3.

Mutations truncating the EP300 acetylase in human cancers.

Gayther SA(1), Batley SJ, Linger L, Bannister A, Thorpe K, Chin SF, Daigo Y,
Russell P, Wilson A, Sowter HM, Delhanty JD, Ponder BA, Kouzarides T, Caldas C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

The EP300 protein is a histone acetyltransferase that regulates transcription via
chromatin remodelling and is important in the processes of cell proliferation and
differentiation. EP300 acetylation of TP53 in response to DNA damage regulates
its DNA-binding and transcription functions. A role for EP300 in cancer has been 
implied by the fact that it is targeted by viral oncoproteins, it is fused to MLL
in Leukaemia and two missense sequence alterations in EP300 were identified in
epithelial malignancies. Nevertheless, direct demonstration of the role of EP300 
in tumorigenesis by inactivating mutations in human cancers has been lacking.
Here we describe EP300 mutations, which predict a truncated protein, in 6(3%) of 
193 epithelial cancers analysed. Of these six mutations, two were in primary
tumours (a colorectal cancer and a breast cancer) and four were in cancer cell
lines (colorectal, breast and pancreatic). In addition, we identified a somatic
in-frame insertion in a primary breast cancer and missense alterations in a
primary colorectal cancer and two cell lines (breast and pancreatic).
Inactivation of the second allele was demonstrated in five of six cases with
truncating mutations and in two other cases. Our data show that EP300 is mutated 
in epithelial cancers and provide the first evidence that it behaves as a
classical tumour-suppressor gene.

PMID: 10700188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Genes Dev. 2000 Feb 1;14(3):272-7.

Gene dose-dependent control of hematopoiesis and hematologic tumor suppression by
CBP.

Kung AL(1), Rebel VI, Bronson RT, Ch'ng LE, Sieff CA, Livingston DM, Yao TP.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Mice with monoallelic inactivation of the CBP gene develop highly penetrant,
multilineage defects in hematopoietic differentiation and, with advancing age, an
increased incidence of hematologic malignancies. The latter are characterized, at
least in some cases, by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at the CBP locus. No such
pathology was observed in wild-type or p300 heterozygous null mice of the same
age and genetic background. Thus, a full complement of CBP, but not p300, is
required for normal hematopoietic differentiation. These results also provide the
first experimental evidence for the hypothesis that CBP has tumor-suppressing
activity.

PMCID: PMC316359
PMID: 10673499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Dec 23;1489(2-3):354-64.

Activation of Smad1-mediated transcription by p300/CBP.

Pearson KL(1), Hunter T, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Smad1 is the intracellular effector of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), a
growth factor family well known to stimulate bone and cartilage formation. Smad1 
becomes phosphorylated by the cognate BMP transmembrane receptor protein kinases,
associates with the common mediator Smad4 and translocates to the nucleus where
it is involved in regulation of gene transcription. In this report we demonstrate
that Smad1 interacts with the paralogous coactivators p300 and CBP both in vitro 
and in vivo. The N- and C-termini of Smad1 negatively interfere with binding to
p300/CBP, and the C-terminal half of Smad1 harbors two interaction domains both
binding to the same region near the C-terminus of p300/CBP. We show that Smad1 as
well as a Gal4 fusion with the C-terminal half of Smad1 stimulate gene
transcription in a cooperative fashion with p300/CBP. Phosphorylation of Smad1
enhances its binding to CBP and thereby further stimulates Smad1-dependent
transcription. These results provide a mechanism how phosphorylated Smad1
regulates gene activity by interaction with p300/CBP, and factors associated with
these bridging coactivators.

PMID: 10673036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Blood. 2000 Feb 1;95(3):745-55.

CREB-binding protein and p300: molecular integrators of hematopoietic
transcription.

Blobel GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, and the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

PMID: 10648382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Neurochem. 2000 Feb;74(2):527-39.

Functional interplay between nuclear factor-kappaB and c-Jun integrated by
coactivator p300 determines the survival of nerve growth factor-dependent PC12
cells.

Maggirwar SB(1), Ramirez S, Tong N, Gelbard HA, Dewhurst S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester Medical
Center, New York 14642, USA. sanjay_maggirwar@urmc.rochester.edu

Nerve growth factor (NGF) activates the transcription factors nuclear factor
kappaB (NF-kappaB) and activator protein-1 (AP-1) in sympathetic neurons. Whereas
NGF-inducible NF-kappaB is required for the survival of neurons, c-Jun has the
ability to promote neuronal death. In this report, we have examined the effect of
NGF withdrawal on c-Jun and NF-kappaB transcription factors in PC12 cells
differentiated to a neuronal phenotype. We show that the withdrawal of NGF from
these cultures results in de novo synthesis of c-Jun, increase in AP-1 activity, 
and down-regulation of NF-kappaB activity. To investigate how the signal
transduction pathways activating c-Jun and NF-kappaB are differentially regulated
by NGF, we performed transcriptional analyses. Expression of ReIA (NF-kappaB)
suppressed the c-Jun-dependent transcription of c-jun, and this effect was
reversed by overexpression of the coactivator p300. RelA's effects on c-Jun
transcription were mediated by competitive binding of the carboxy-terminal region
of RelA to the CH1 domain of p300, which also binds to c-Jun; deletion of this
region abrogated the ability of RelA to inhibit c-Jun activity. Furthermore, the 
inhibition of endogenous NF-kappaB in NGF-maintained neuronal PC12 cells led to
the induction of c-Jun synthesis and a marked increase in cell death. Together,
these studies demonstrate a functional interaction between NF-kappaB and c-Jun
and suggest a novel mechanism of NF-kappaB-mediated neuroprotection.

PMID: 10646503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 21;275(3):2115-22.

The Smad4 activation domain (SAD) is a proline-rich, p300-dependent
transcriptional activation domain.

de Caestecker MP(1), Yahata T, Wang D, Parks WT, Huang S, Hill CS, Shioda T,
Roberts AB, Lechleider RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation and Carcinogenesis, NCI, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5055, USA.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) family members signal through a unique
set of intracellular proteins called Smads. Smad4, previously identified as the
tumor suppressor DPC4, is functionally distinct among the Smad family, and is
required for the assembly and transcriptional activation of diverse, Smad-DNA
complexes. We previously identified a 48-amino acid proline-rich regulatory
element within the middle linker domain of this molecule, the Smad4 activation
domain (SAD), which is essential for mediating these signaling activities. We now
characterize the functional activity of the SAD. Mutants lacking the SAD are
still able to form complexes with other Smad family members and associated
transcription factors, but cannot activate transcription in these complexes.
Furthermore, the SAD itself is able to activate transcription in heterologous
reporter assays, identifying it as a proline-rich transcriptional activation
domain, and indicating that the SAD is both necessary and sufficient to activate 
Smad-dependent transcriptional responses. We show that transcriptional activation
by the SAD is p300-dependent, and demonstrate that this activity is associated
with a physical interaction of the SAD with the amino terminus of p300. These
data identify a novel function of the middle linker region of Smad4, and define
the role of the SAD as an important locus determining the transcriptional
activation of the Smad complex.

PMID: 10636916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1999 Oct-Nov;14(4-5):327-39.

Activation of Xenopus genes required for lateral inhibition and neuronal
differentiation during primary neurogenesis.

Koyano-Nakagawa N(1), Wettstein D, Kintner C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
San Diego, California 92186, USA.

XNGN-1, a member of the neurogenin family of basic helix-loop-helix proteins,
plays a critical role in promoting neuronal differentiation in Xenopus embryos.
When ectopically expressed, XNGN-1 induces the expression of a set of genes
required for neuronal differentiation such as XMyT1 and NeuroD. At the same time,
however, XNGN-1 induces the expression of genes that antagonize neuronal
differentiation by a process called lateral inhibition. Here, we present evidence
that XNGN-1 activates the expression of genes required for differentiation and
lateral inhibition by recruiting transcriptional coactivators p300/CBP
(CREB-binding protein) or PCAF (p3OO/CBP-associated protein), both of which
contain histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. Significantly, transcriptional 
activation of the genes in the lateral inhibitory pathway is less dependent on
the HAT activity than is the activation of the genes that mediate
differentiation. We propose that this difference enables the genes in the lateral
inhibition pathway to be induced prior to the genes that promote differentiation,
thus enabling lateral inhibition to establish a negative feedback loop and
restrict the number of cells undergoing neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 10588388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;19(12):8123-35.

Biochemical analysis of distinct activation functions in p300 that enhance
transcription initiation with chromatin templates.

Kraus WL(1), Manning ET, Kadonaga JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Molecular Genetics, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0347, USA.

To investigate the mechanisms of transcriptional enhancement by the p300
coactivator, we analyzed wild-type and mutant versions of p300 with a chromatin
transcription system in vitro. Estrogen receptor, NF-kappaB p65 plus Sp1, and
Gal4-VP16 were used as different sequence-specific activators. The CH3 domain (or
E1A-binding region) was found to be essential for the function of each of the
activators tested. The bromodomain was also observed to be generally important
for p300 coactivator activity, though to a lesser extent than the CH3
domain/E1A-binding region. The acetyltransferase activity and the C-terminal
region (containing the steroid receptor coactivator/p160-binding region and the
glutamine-rich region) were each found to be important for activation by estrogen
receptor but not for that by Gal4-VP16. The N-terminal region of p300, which had 
been previously found to interact with nuclear hormone receptors, was not seen to
be required for any of the activators, including estrogen receptor. Single-round 
transcription experiments revealed that the functionally important subregions of 
p300 contribute to its ability to promote the assembly of transcription
initiation complexes. In addition, the acetyltransferase activity of p300 was
observed to be distinct from the broadly essential activation function of the CH3
domain/E1A-binding region. These results indicate that specific regions of p300
possess distinct activation functions that are differentially required to enhance
the assembly of transcription initiation complexes. Interestingly, with the
estrogen receptor, four distinct regions of p300 each have an essential role in
the transcription activation process. These data exemplify a situation in which a
network of multiple activation functions is required to achieve gene
transcription.

PMCID: PMC84897
PMID: 10567538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 26;274(48):34096-102.

p300 protein as a coactivator of GATA-5 in the transcription of
cardiac-restricted atrial natriuretic factor gene.

Kakita T(1), Hasegawa K, Morimoto T, Kaburagi S, Wada H, Sasayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 54 Kawara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

A cellular target of adenovirus E1A oncoprotein, p300 is a transcriptional
coactivator and a negative regulator of cellular proliferation. A previous study 
suggests that the p300 family is also involved in cell type-specific
transcription in cardiac myocytes. However, nothing is known about which cardiac 
transcription factor(s) interact with and transactivate through these proteins.
The transcription factors GATA-4/5/6 have been implicated as key regulators of
cardiogenesis, and they participate in the transcription of many cardiac-specific
genes. Here we show that E1A represses the GATA-5-dependent transactivation of a 
promoter derived from the cardiac-restricted atrial natriuretic factor gene. This
repression is correlated with the interaction of E1A with p300, indicating that
p300 participates in GATA-5-dependent transactivation. E1A markedly
down-regulates endogenous atrial natriuretic factor expression, as well as
disrupts the interaction between p300 and GATA-5. A small fragment of p300
containing the carboxyl-terminal cysteine/histidine-rich domain, sufficient to
interact with GATA-5, prevents transcriptional activation by GATA-5 as a
dominant-negative mutant. Consistent with its role as a coactivator, p300
markedly potentiates GATA-5-activated transcription. These results implicate p300
as an important component of myocardial cell differentiation and provide an
insight into the relationship between mechanisms that mediate cell type-specific 
transcription and cell cycle regulation during cardiogenesis.

PMID: 10567378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Science. 1999 Nov 12;286(5443):1368-71.

Activation of PPARgamma coactivator-1 through transcription factor docking.

Puigserver P(1), Adelmant G, Wu Z, Fan M, Xu J, O'Malley B, Spiegelman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Transcriptional coactivators have been viewed as constitutively active
components, using transcription factors mainly to localize their functions. Here,
it is shown that PPARgamma coactivator-1 (PGC-1) promotes transcription through
the assembly of a complex that includes the histone acetyltransferases steroid
receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1) and CREB binding protein (CBP)/p300. PGC-1 has a
low inherent transcriptional activity when it is not bound to a transcription
factor. The docking of PGC-1 to peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 
(PPARgamma) stimulates an apparent conformational change in PGC-1 that permits
binding of SRC-1 and CBP/p300, resulting in a large increase in transcriptional
activity. Thus, transcription factor docking switches on the activity of a
coactivator protein.

PMID: 10558993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 5;274(45):32091-8.

The nuclear factor-kappaB engages CBP/p300 and histone acetyltransferase activity
for transcriptional activation of the interleukin-6 gene promoter.

Vanden Berghe W(1), De Bosscher K, Boone E, Plaisance S, Haegeman G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Gent and Flanders
Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology, B-9000 Gent, Belgium.

Expression of the pleiotropic cytokine interleukin (IL)-6 can be stimulated by
the proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and the microbial
alkaloid staurosporine (STS). In this report, the transcriptional mechanisms were
thoroughly investigated. Whereas transcription factors binding to the activator
protein-1-, cAMP-responsive element-, and CAAT enhancer-binding
protein-responsive sequences are necessary for gene activation by STS, nuclear
factor (NF)-kappaB alone is responsible and sufficient for inducibility by TNF,
which reveals distinct signaling pathways for both compounds. At the cofactor
level, cAMP-responsive element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP) or p300
potentiate basal and induced IL-6 promoter activation via multiple
protein-protein interactions with all transcription factors bound to the promoter
DNA. However, the strongest promoter activation relies on the p65 NF-kappaB
subunit, which specifically engages CBP/p300 for maximal transcriptional
stimulation by its histone acetyltransferase activity. Moreover, treatment of
chromatin-integrated promoter constructions with the histone deacetylase
inhibitor trichostatin A exclusively potentiates TNF-dependent (i.e.
NF-kappaB-mediated) gene activation, while basal or STS-stimulated IL-6 promoter 
activity remains completely unchanged. Similar observations were recorded with
other natural NF-kappaB-driven promoters, namely IL-8 and endothelial leukocyte
adhesion molecule (ELAM). We conclude that, within an "enhanceosome-like"
structure, NF-kappaB is the central mediator of TNF-induced IL-6 gene expression,
involving CBP/p300 and requiring histone acetyltransferase activity.

PMID: 10542243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1999 Jul-Aug;70(1-3):15-25.

Conditional modulation of glucocorticoid receptor activities by CREB-binding
protein (CBP) and p300.

Kino T(1), Nordeen SK, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Pediatric Endocrinology, Developmental Endocrinology Branch,
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1862, USA. kinot@mail.nih.gov

Coactivators of nuclear receptors are integral components of the signal
transduction pathways of steroid hormones. Here, we show that one of the major
coactivators of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), CREB-binding protein (CBP), can
also function conditionally as a negative regulator of its activities. Indeed,
CBP suppressed the responsiveness of the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)
promoter to dexamethasone in a dose-dependent fashion in HeLa and A204 cells.
Similarly, this protein suppressed the responsiveness of several
glucocorticoid-responsive element (GRE)-containing synthetic promoters. Using
deletion mutants of CBP, we localized the repressor effect of this protein to its
N-terminal domain and showed that it was independent of the histone
acetyltransferase and coactivator-binding domains but dependent upon its
GR-binding domain. We also demonstrated functional differentiation between CBP
and other coactivators, including SRC-1 and the CBP-related protein p300, both of
which influenced GR signaling in a positive fashion. In fact, p300 completely
antagonized the suppressive effects of CBP in a dose-dependent fashion, probably 
by competing with this protein at the level of the transcription complex. These
findings suggest that CBP and p300 may function additively or antagonistically to
each other depending on their relative concentrations and type of target tissue, 
to influence the sensitivity of tissues to glucocorticoids.

PMID: 10528999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 2;18(35):4958-67.

p300 functions as a transcriptional coactivator for the TAL1/SCL oncoprotein.

Huang S(1), Qiu Y, Stein RW, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, TN 37232, USA.

Activation of the TAL1 (or SCL) gene, originally identified through its
involvement by a recurrent chromosomal translocation, is the most frequent
gain-of-function mutation recognized in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL). The TAL1 proteins contain a basic helix - loop - helix (bHLH) motif
characteristic of a large family of transcription factors that control
transcription from an E box target element as heterodimers with the E2A- and
HEB-encoded gene products. Gene knockout studies in mice indicate that this
transcription factor is required for embryonic and adult hematopoiesis, and
considerable evidence suggests it has specific functions in terminal erythroid
differentiation. We investigated whether the broadly expressed nuclear protein
p300, known to function as a coactivator for other bHLH proteins involved in
cellular differentiation, also interacts with TAL1. p300 was found to
coimmunoprecipitate with Tal1 in extracts from murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells
induced to differentiate with dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), and p300 and Tal1 were
observed in a common E box DNA-binding complex in extracts from differentiating
MEL cells. p300 also interacted with Tal1 in protein pulldown assays, suggesting 
this was a direct interaction. Finally, p300 augmented transcription by Tal1 from
an E box-containing promoter and by a GAL4-Tal1 fusion from a promoter containing
the GAL4 DNA-binding element. Deletion analysis identified the bHLH domain of
Tal1 and amino-terminal sequences of p300 as necessary for p300-stimulated
transactivation and Tal1-p300 interaction in vitro. These results indicate that
recruitment of the transcriptional coactivator p300 can positively regulate
TAL1-directed gene expression. The dependence of their interaction in MEL cells
on addition of a differentiation inducer suggests, further, that this TAL1-p300
complex may have an important role in terminal erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 10490830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 17;274(38):26850-9.

Requirement of an E1A-sensitive coactivator for long-range transactivation by the
beta-globin locus control region.

Forsberg EC(1), Johnson K, Zaboikina TN, Mosser EA, Bresnick EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Four erythroid-specific DNase I-hypersensitive sites at the 5'-end of the
beta-globin locus confer high-level transcription to the beta-globin genes. To
identify coactivators that mediate long-range transactivation by this locus
control region (LCR), we assessed the influence of E1A, an inhibitor of the
CBP/p300 histone acetylase, on LCR function. E1A strongly inhibited
transactivation of Agamma- and beta-globin promoters by the HS2, HS2-HS3, and
HS1-HS4 subregions of the LCR in human K562 and mouse erythroleukemia cells.
Short- and long-range transactivation mediated by the LCR were equally sensitive 
to E1A. The E1A sensitivity was apparent in transient and stable transfection
assays, and E1A inhibited expression of the endogenous gamma-globin genes. Only
sites for NF-E2 within HS2 were required for E1A sensitivity in K562 cells, and
E1A abolished transactivation mediated by the activation domain of NF-E2. E1A
mutants defective in CBP/p300 binding only weakly inhibited HS2-mediated
transactivation, whereas a mutant defective in retinoblastoma protein binding
strongly inhibited transactivation. Expression of CBP/p300 potentiated
HS2-mediated transactivation. Moreover, expression of GAL4-CBP strongly increased
transactivation of a reporter containing HS2 with a GAL4 site substituted for the
NF-E2 sites. Thus, we propose that a CBP/p300-containing coactivator complex is
the E1A-sensitive factor important for LCR function.

PMID: 10480893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Mol Med (Berl). 1999 Jun;77(6):481-94.

The coactivators p300 and CBP have different functions during the differentiation
of F9 cells.

Ugai H(1), Uchida K, Kawasaki H, Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Ibaraki, Japan.

We have characterized an element (differentiation response element, DRE) in the
promoter region of the c-jun gene that is both necessary and sufficient for
retinoic acid (RA) and adenovirus early region (E1A) mediated up-regulation of
c-jun gene expression during the differentiation of F9 cells. The DRF complex,
which binds specifically to DRE, is composed of the E1A-associated protein p300
and the activation transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) as a DNA-binding subunit of the
DRF. The molecular association of p300 and ATF-2 enhances the transcription of
the c-jun gene, which requires protein kinase C alpha mediated phosphorylation of
Ser-121 of ATF-2 within its p300 interaction domain. We used antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides (AS-ODNs) capable of binding specifically to the mRNA for
either p300 or CBP to examine the individual roles of p300 and CBP during the
RA-induced differentiation, exit from the cell cycle, and apoptosis of F9 cells. 
F9 cells treated with AS-ODNs specific for p300 mRNA became resistant to
RA-induced differentiation, while cells incubated with AS-ODNs specific for CBP
mRNA were still able to differentiate. Despite their similarities p300 and CBP
appear to have distinct functions during the differentiation of F9 cells. These
results suggest that ATF-2 and p300 cooperate in the control of transcription by 
forming a protein complex in response to RA or E1A, and that the phosphorylation 
of ATF-2 and p300 is probably a signaling event in the pathway that leads to the 
transactivation of the c-jun gene in F9 cell differentiation.

PMID: 10475063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Sep 15;251(2):414-23.

E1A oncogene induction of cellular susceptibility to killing by cytolytic
lymphocytes through target cell sensitization to apoptotic injury.

Cook JL(1), Routes BA, Walker TA, Colvin KL, Routes JM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA.

E1A oncogene expression increases mammalian cell susceptibility to lysis by
cytolytic lymphocytes (CLs) at a stage in this intercellular interaction that is 
independent of cell surface recognition events. Since CLs can induce either
apoptotic or necrotic cell death, we asked whether E1A sensitization to
injury-induced apoptosis is sufficient to explain E1A-induced cytolytic
susceptibility. Mouse, rat, hamster, and human cells that were rendered cytolytic
susceptible by E1A were also sensitized to CL-induced and chemically induced
apoptosis. In contrast, E1A-positive cells were no more susceptible to
injury-induced necrosis than E1A-negative cells. Similar to induction of
cytolytic susceptibility and in contrast to other E1A activities, cellular
sensitization to chemically induced apoptosis depended on high-level E1A
oncoprotein expression. Loss of both cytolytic susceptibility and sensitization
to chemically induced apoptosis was coselected during in vivo selection of
E1A-positive sarcoma cells for increased tumorigenicity. Furthermore, E1A mutant 
proteins that cannot bind the cellular transcriptional coactivator, p300, and
that fail to induce cytolytic susceptibility also failed to sensitize cells to
injury-induced apoptosis. These data indicate that E1A induces susceptibility to 
killer cell-induced lysis through sensitization of cells to injury-induced
apoptosis.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10471326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Virol. 1999 Sep;73(9):7334-42.

Functional analysis of human herpesvirus 8-encoded viral interferon regulatory
factor 1 and its association with cellular interferon regulatory factors and
p300.

Burýsek L(1), Yeow WS, Lubyová B, Kellum M, Schafer SL, Huang YQ, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

Human herpesvirus 8/Kaposi sarcoma-associated virus (HHV-8/KSHV) contains, in
addition to genes required for viral replication, a unique set of nonstructural
genes which may be part of viral mimicry and contribute to viral replication and 
pathogenesis in vivo. Among these, HHV-8 encodes four open reading frames (ORFs) 
that showed homology to the transcription factors of the interferon regulatory
factor (IRF) family. The ORF K9, viral IRF 1 (vIRF-1), has been cloned, and it
was shown that, when overexpressed, it down modulates the interferon-mediated
transcriptional activation of the interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG 15)
promoter, and the role of vIRF-1 in viral mimicry was implied. However, the
molecular mechanism of this effect has not been clarified. Here, we extend this
observation and show that vIRF-1 also downregulates the transcriptional activity 
of IFNA gene promoter in infected cells by interfering with the transactivating
activity of cellular IRFs, including IRF-1 and IRF-3. We further show that
ectopic expression of vIRF-1 in NIH 3T3 cells confers resistance to tumor
necrosis factor alpha-induced apoptosis. While vIRF-1 is unable to bind DNA with 
the same specificity as cellular IRFs, we demonstrate by in vitro binding assay
that it can associate with the family of cellular IRFs, such as IRF-1 and the
interferon consensus sequence binding protein. vIRF-1 interaction domain was
localized between amino acids (aa) 152 and 243. While no binding between the
full-size IRF-3 and vIRF-1 could be detected by the same assay, we show that
vIRF-1 also targets the carboxy-terminal region (aa 1623 to 2414) of the
transcriptional coactivator p300 which could also bind IRF-3 and IRF-1. These
results demonstrate that vIRF-1 can modulate the transcription of the IFNA genes 
by direct heterodimerization with members of the IRF family, as well as by
competitive binding with cellular transcription factors to the carboxy-terminal
region of p300.

PMCID: PMC104259
PMID: 10438822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jul;19(7):5203-17.

Critical role played by cyclin D3 in the MyoD-mediated arrest of cell cycle
during myoblast differentiation.

Cenciarelli C(1), De Santa F, Puri PL, Mattei E, Ricci L, Bucci F, Felsani A,
Caruso M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche, CNR, 00137 Rome, Italy.

During the terminal differentiation of skeletal myoblasts, the activities of
myogenic factors regulate not only tissue-specific gene expressions but also the 
exit from the cell cycle. The induction of cell cycle inhibitors such as p21 and 
pRb has been shown to play a prominent role in the growth arrest of
differentiating myoblasts. Here we report that, at the onset of differentiation, 
activation by MyoD of the Rb, p21, and cyclin D3 genes occurs in the absence of
new protein synthesis and with the requirement of the p300 transcriptional
coactivator. In differentiated myocytes, cyclin D3 also becomes stabilized and is
found nearly totally complexed with unphosphorylated pRb. The detection of
complexes containing cyclin D3, cdk4, p21, and PCNA suggests that cdk4, along
with PCNA, may get sequestered into high-order structures held together by pRb
and cyclin D3. Cyclin D3 up-regulation and stabilization is inhibited by
adenovirus E1A, and this correlates with the ability of E1A to promote pRb
phosphorylation; conversely, the overexpression of cyclin D3 in differentiated
myotubes counteracts the E1A-mediated reactivation of DNA synthesis. These
results indicate that cyclin D3 critically contributes to the irreversible exit
of differentiating myoblasts from the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC84363
PMID: 10373569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Oncogene. 1999 May 6;18(18):2872-82.

Cooperation of Sp1 and p300 in the induction of the CDK inhibitor p21WAF1/CIP1
during NGF-mediated neuronal differentiation.

Billon N(1), Carlisi D, Datto MB, van Grunsven LA, Watt A, Wang XF, Rudkin BB.

Author information: 
(1)Differentiation & Cell Cycle Group, Laboratoire de Biologie Moleculaire et
Cellulaire, UMR 49 CNRS/Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France.

Addition of nerve growth factor (NGF) to PC12 cells promotes neuronal
differentiation while inhibiting cell proliferation. In order to understand how
NGF exerts its antimitogenic effect during differentiation, we have studied the
mechanism by which this factor activates the promoter of the CDK inhibitor
p21W4F1/CIP1. The minimal region of the p21 promoter required for the
NGF-induction was mapped to a contiguous stretch of 10 bp located 83 bases
upstream of the transcription initiation site. This GC-rich region was shown to
interact specifically with the transcription factor Sp1 and the related protein
Sp3, in either exponentially-growing or NGF-treated PC12 cells. The addition of
NGF resulted in an accumulation of the transcriptional co-activator p300 in
complexes associated with the NGF-responsive region. Transcriptional activity of 
Sp1, Sp3 and p300 was specifically induced by NGF in a Gal4-fusion assay,
indicating that induction of p21 during neuronal differentiation may involve
regulation of the activity of these factors by NGF. Furthermore, p300 was able to
act as a co-activator for Sp1-mediated transcriptional activation in PC12 cells, 
suggesting that p300 and Sp1 may cooperate in activating p21 transcription during
the withdrawal of neuronal precursors from the cell cycle. This hypothesis is
supported by experiments showing that p300 and Sp1 form complexes in PC12 cells.

PMID: 10362258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1999 May 21;69(1):124-34.

Regulation of transcription factor C/ATF by the cAMP signal activation in
hippocampal neurons, and molecular interaction of C/ATF with signal integrator
CBP/p300.

Yukawa K(1), Tanaka T, Tsuji S, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology II, Wakayama Medical College, 811-1 kimiidera,
Wakayama 641-0012, Japan. kazu59@wakayama-med.ac.jp

The CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins related activating transcription factor,
C/ATF, is a mouse leucine-zipper transcription factor which is structurally
homologous to ApCREB2, a suppressor integral to long-term synaptic plasticity in 
Aplysia. To gain a clue to whether C/ATF is involved in long-term plasticities of
brain, we examined if the expression levels of C/ATF are modulated by cAMP, an
inducer crucial for memory formation in Aplysia, Drosophila and mice. Our in situ
hybridization analysis revealed the expression of C/ATF mRNA in hippocampal
neurons. C/ATF protein levels increased after the cAMP signal stimulation in
hippocampal neurons, while C/ATF mRNA levels remained constant. The human
activating transcription factor 4 (hATF4), another homolog of ApCREB2, interacts 
with multiple domains of the coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP), resulting in
the potentiation of its ability to activate transcription. As expected, C/ATF was
found to interact with three domains of CBP including CREB binding domain or
kinase-inducible interaction (KIX) domain, the third cysteine-histidine-rich
region (CH3 domain) and the nuclear receptor coactivator p160/SRC-1-interacting
domain. Interestingly, C/ATF was further found to interact strongly with CREB
binding protein/p300 (CBP/p300) CH1 domain. Mammalian two hybrid assays indicated
that the interaction between C/ATF and CBP/p300 can occur in mammalian cells, and
that the p300 CH1 domain is critical for the interaction. Thus, C/ATF may be
implicated in transcription-dependent phase of hippocampal long-term plasticities
through the modulation of its protein level under cAMP signal and the interaction
with signal integrator, CBP/p300.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10350644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 14;274(20):13760-7.

Murine double minute (MDM2) blocks p53-coactivator interaction, a new mechanism
for inhibition of p53-dependent gene expression.

Wadgaonkar R(1), Collins T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The ability of the p53 tumor suppressor to induce cell cycle arrest and cell
death is closely regulated under normal conditions. The transcriptional activity 
of p53 is negatively controlled by murine double minute (MDM2). p53 requires the 
coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP), or its structural homolog, p300, to
stimulate transcription of responsive genes. Here we find that the
transactivation domain of p53 selectively interacts with the N- and C-terminal
regions of CBP/p300. A mutant CBP lacking the N terminus failed to stimulate
p53-dependent transactivation. In both p53 null Saos2 cells, and in UV-irradiated
MCF7 cells, we observed that MDM2 associates with the N-terminal region of
CBP/p300. Because p53 interacts with both MDM2 and CBP/p300 through its
trans-activation domain, we examined the role of MDM2 in p53-coactivator
interactions. MDM2 blocked CBP/p300 recruitment in vitro and inhibited the
interaction of the transactivating region of p53 with both the N- or C-terminal
regions of CBP/p300 in a mammalian two-hybrid assay. These observations suggest
that MDM2 may be inhibiting p53 trans-activation by shielding its activation
domain from the coactivators, a new mechanism for the inhibition of p53-dependent
gene expression.

PMID: 10318779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Science. 1999 Apr 16;284(5413):479-82.

Synergistic signaling in fetal brain by STAT3-Smad1 complex bridged by p300.

Nakashima K(1), Yanagisawa M, Arakawa H, Kimura N, Hisatsune T, Kawabata M,
Miyazono K, Taga T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Cell Fate Modulation Research Unit,
Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 101-0062, 
Japan.

Comment in
    Science. 1999 Apr 16;284(5413):443-4.

The cytokines LIF (leukemia inhibitory factor) and BMP2 (bone morphogenetic
protein-2) signal through different receptors and transcription factors, namely
STATs (signal transducers and activators of transcription) and Smads. LIF and
BMP2 were found to act in synergy on primary fetal neural progenitor cells to
induce astrocytes. The transcriptional coactivator p300 interacts physically with
STAT3 at its amino terminus in a cytokine stimulation-independent manner, and
with Smad1 at its carboxyl terminus in a cytokine stimulation-dependent manner.
The formation of a complex between STAT3 and Smad1, bridged by p300, is involved 
in the cooperative signaling of LIF and BMP2 and the subsequent induction of
astrocytes from neural progenitors.

PMID: 10205054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Hum Virol. 1999 Jan-Feb;2(1):19-32.

Unique properties of a second human herpesvirus 8-encoded interferon regulatory
factor (vIRF-2).

Burysek L(1), Yeow WS, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Human herpesvirus 8/Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus (HHV-8/KSHV)
contains, in addition to genes required for viral replication, an unique set of
nonstructural genes which may be part of viral mimicry and contribute to viral
replication and pathogenesis in vivo. Among these, HHV-8 encodes four open
reading frames (ORFs) that show homology to the transcription factors of the
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family. In this study we demonstrate that one 
of these ORFs (vIRF-2) encodes a protein with mobility of 18 kd which has
distinct pattern of expression and properties from the cellular IRFs and the
previously characterized vIRF-1.
METHODS: We cloned vIRF-2 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and studied its
expression by Northern blot and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Biologic activities were tested by chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) assay in transiently transfected mammalian cells. We characterized its DNA 
binding specificity by electrophoretic mobility shift analysis (EMSA) and its
protein-protein interactions by in vitro pull-down assay.
RESULTS: Although low levels of vIRF-2 mRNAs can be detected in the
HHV-8-positive BCBL-1 tumor cell line, 12-0-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)
treatment does not stimulate expression of vIRF-2 gene together with primary
lytic cycle genes. Recombinant vIRF-2, which can form homodimers, does not bind
specifically to the oligodeoxynucleotide repeats corresponding to the
interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE), but it does bind to the NF-kappa B
binding site. The fusion protein generated from vIRF-2 and the RelA (p65)
activation domain stimulates transcriptional activity of HIV LTR, which contains 
two NF-kappa B sites, but does not stimulate the interferon-beta (IFNB) promoter,
which contains only one NF-kappa B site. Interaction between recombinant vIRF-2
and cellular IRFs such as IRF-1, IRF-2, and ICSBP was detected by in vitro
binding assay, but no interaction between IRF-3 and vIRF-2 was found. Interaction
of vIRF-2 with RelA (p65) and the carboxy-terminal part of p300 was also
observed. In a transient transfection assay, vIRF-2 inhibits the IRF-1- or
IRF-3-mediated transcriptional activation of interferon-alpha (IFNA) gene
promoter in infected cells and downmodulates RelA (p65)-stimulated activity of
HIV LTR.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that, by interacting with cellular
transcription factors and cofactors, vIRF-2 may modulate the expression of the
early inflammatory genes and potentially deregulate the immune system.

PMID: 10200596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Biol Chem. 1999 Mar 12;274(11):7501-7.

Transcriptional regulation of the mouse ferritin H gene. Involvement of p300/CBP 
adaptor proteins in FER-1 enhancer activity.

Tsuji Y(1), Moran E, Torti SV, Torti FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA. ytsuji@wfubmc.edu

We previously identified a major enhancer of the mouse ferritin H gene (FER-1)
that is central to repression of the ferritin H gene by the adenovirus E1A
oncogene (Tsuji, Y., Akebi, N., Lam, T. K., Nakabeppu, Y., Torti, S. V., and
Torti, F. M. (1995) Mol. Cell. Biol. 15, 5152-5164). To dissect the molecular
mechanism of transcriptional regulation of ferritin H, E1A mutants were tested
for their ability to repress FER-1 enhancer activity using cotransfection with
ferritin H-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter constructs. Here we
report that p300/CBP transcriptional adaptor proteins are involved in the
regulation of ferritin H transcription through the FER-1 enhancer element. Thus, 
E1A mutants that failed to bind p300/CBP lost the ability to repress FER-1,
whereas mutants of E1A that abrogated its interaction with Rb, p107, or p130 were
fully functional in transcriptional repression. Transfection with E1A did not
affect endogenous p300/CBP levels, suggesting that repression of FER-1 by E1A is 
not due to repression of p300/CBP synthesis, but to E1A and p300/CBP interaction.
In addition, we have demonstrated that transfection of a p300 expression plasmid 
significantly activated ferritin H-CAT containing the FER-1 enhancer, but had a
marginal effect on ferritin H-CAT with FER-1 deleted. Furthermore, both wild-type
p300 and a p300 mutant that failed to bind E1A but retained an adaptor function
restored FER-1 enhancer activity repressed by E1A. Sodium butyrate, an inhibitor 
of histone deacetylase, mimicked p300/CBP function in activation of ferritin
H-CAT and elevation of endogenous ferritin H mRNA, suggesting that the histone
acetyltransferase activity of p300/CBP or its associated proteins may contribute 
to the activation of ferritin H transcription. Recruitment of these broadly
active transcriptional adaptor proteins for ferritin H synthesis may represent an
important mechanism by which changes in iron metabolism are coordinated with
other cellular responses mediated by p300/CBP.

PMID: 10066817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cell. 1999 Feb 5;96(3):405-13.

Regulation of histone acetyltransferases p300 and PCAF by the bHLH protein twist 
and adenoviral oncoprotein E1A.

Hamamori Y(1), Sartorelli V, Ogryzko V, Puri PL, Wu HY, Wang JY, Nakatani Y,
Kedes L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetic Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Southern California School of Medicine, Los Angeles 90033,
USA.

Histone acetyltransferases (HAT) play a critical role in transcriptional control 
by relieving repressive effects of chromatin, and yet how HATs themselves are
regulated remains largely unknown. Here, it is shown that Twist directly binds
two independent HAT domains of acetyltransferases, p300 and p300/CBP-associated
factor (PCAF), and directly regulates their HAT activities. The N terminus of
Twist is a primary domain interacting with both acetyltransferases, and the same 
domain is required for inhibition of p300-dependent transcription by Twist.
Adenovirus E1A protein mimics the effects of Twist by inhibiting the HAT
activities of p300 and PCAF. These findings establish a cogent argument for
considering the HAT domains as a direct target for acetyltransferase regulation
by both a cellular transcription factor and a viral oncoprotein.

PMID: 10025406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Mar;19(3):1810-20.

The histone acetylase PCAF is a phorbol-ester-inducible coactivator of the IRF
family that confers enhanced interferon responsiveness.

Masumi A(1), Wang IM, Lefebvre B, Yang XJ, Nakatani Y, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-2753, USA.

Transcription factors of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family bind to
the type I interferon (IFN)-responsive element (ISRE) and activate transcription 
from IFN-inducible genes. To identify cofactors that associate with IRF proteins,
DNA affinity binding assays were performed with nuclear extracts prepared from
tissue culture cells. The results demonstrated that the endogenous IRFs bound to 
the ISRE are complexed with the histone acetylases, PCAF, GCN5, and p300/CREB
binding protein and that histone acetylase activities are accumulated on the
IRF-ISRE complexes. By testing recombinant proteins, we show that PCAF directly
binds to some but not all members of the IRF family through distinct domains of
the two proteins. This interaction was functionally significant, since
transfection of PCAF strongly enhanced IRF-1- and IRF-2-dependent promoter
activities. Further studies showed that expression of PCAF and other histone
acetylases was markedly induced in U937 cells upon phorbol ester treatment, which
led to increased recruitment of PCAF to the IRF-ISRE complexes. Coinciding with
the induction of histone acetylases, phorbol ester markedly enhanced
IFN-alpha-stimulated gene expression in U937 cells. Supporting the role for PCAF 
in conferring IFN responsiveness, transfection of PCAF into U937 cells led to a
large increase in IFN-alpha-inducible promoter activity. These results
demonstrate that PCAF is a phorbol ester-inducible coactivator of the IRF
proteins which contributes to the establishment of type I IFN responsiveness.

PMCID: PMC83974
PMID: 10022868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Mar;19(3):1617-26.

The amino-terminal C/H1 domain of CREB binding protein mediates zta
transcriptional activation of latent Epstein-Barr virus.

Zerby D(1), Chen CJ, Poon E, Lee D, Shiekhattar R, Lieberman PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Latent Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is maintained as a nucleosome-covered episome
that can be transcriptionally activated by overexpression of the viral
immediate-early protein, Zta. We show here that reactivation of latent EBV by Zta
can be significantly enhanced by coexpression of the cellular coactivators CREB
binding protein (CBP) and p300. A stable complex containing both Zta and CBP
could be isolated from lytically stimulated, but not latently infected RAJI
nuclear extracts. Zta-mediated viral reactivation and transcriptional activation 
were both significantly inhibited by coexpression of the E1A 12S protein but not 
by an N-terminal deletion mutation of E1A (E1ADelta2-36), which fails to bind
CBP. Zta bound directly to two related cysteine- and histidine-rich domains of
CBP, referred to as C/H1 and C/H3. These domains both interacted specifically
with the transcriptional activation domain of Zta in an electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay. Interestingly, we found that the C/H3 domain was a potent dominant
negative inhibitor of Zta transcriptional activation function. In contrast, an
amino-terminal fragment containing the C/H1 domain was sufficient for
coactivation of Zta transcription and viral reactivation function. Thus, CBP can 
stimulate the transcription of latent EBV in a histone
acetyltransferase-independent manner mediated by the CBP amino-terminal
C/H1-containing domain. We propose that CBP may regulate aspects of EBV latency
and reactivation by integrating cellular signals mediated by competitive
interactions between C/H1, C/H3, and the Zta activation domain.

PMCID: PMC83956
PMID: 10022850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Feb 16;96(4):1541-6.

GA-binding protein factors, in concert with the coactivator CREB binding
protein/p300, control the induction of the interleukin 16 promoter in T
lymphocytes.

Bannert N(1), Avots A, Baier M, Serfling E, Kurth R.

Author information: 
(1)Paul-Ehrlich-Institute, Paul-Ehrlich-Strasse 51-59, D-63225 Langen, Germany.

Interleukin 16 (IL-16) is a chemotactic cytokine that binds to the CD4 receptor
and affects the activation of T cells and replication of HIV. It is expressed as 
a large 67-kDa precursor protein (pro-IL-16) in lymphocytes, macrophages, and
mast cells, as well as in airway epithelial cells from asthmatics after challenge
with allergen. This pro-IL-16 is subsequently processed to the mature cytokine of
13 kDa. To study the expression of IL-16 at the transcriptional level, we cloned 
the human chromosomal IL-16 gene and analyzed its promoter. The human IL-16 gene 
consists of seven exons and six introns. The 5' sequences up to nucleotide -120
of the human and murine IL-16 genes share >84% sequence homology and harbor
promoter elements for constitutive and inducible transcription in T cells.
Although both promoters lack any TATA box, they contain two CAAT box-like motifs 
and three binding sites of GA-binding protein (GABP) transcription factors. Two
of these motifs are part of a highly conserved and inducible dyad symmetry
element shown previously to control a remote IL-2 enhancer and the CD18 promoter.
In concert with the coactivator CREB binding protein/p300, which interacts with
GABPalpha, the binding of GABPalpha and -beta to the dyad symmetry element
controls the induction of IL-16 promoter in T cells. Supplementing the data on
the processing of pro-IL-16, our results indicate the complexity of IL-16
expression, which is tightly controlled at the transcriptional and
posttranslational levels in T lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC15509
PMID: 9990060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Virol. 1999 Feb;73(2):1734-9.

Polyomavirus large T antigen binds the transcriptional coactivator protein p300.

Nemethova M(1), Wintersberger E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie der Universität Wien, Wiener Biozentrum, A-1030
Vienna, Austria.

Using coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pulldown experiments,
we found that polyomavirus large T antigen binds to p300 in vivo and in vitro.
The N-terminal region of the viral protein, including the pRB binding motif, was 
dispensable for this interaction, which involved several regions within the
C-terminal half of the large T antigen. Interestingly, anti-T antibody
coimmunoprecipitated a subspecies of p300 which has high histone
acetyltransferase activity.

PMCID: PMC104009
PMID: 9882390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Dec;9(12):989-97.

Accumulation of p300 mediates transcriptional repression of simian virus 40
enhancer in undifferentiated F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Ota M(1), Eto K, Ninomiya Y, Ikeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Dentistry, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Japan.

The SV40 enhancer is repressed in embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells, and it is also 
repressed by the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein. Repression by E1A is mediated by the
binding of E1A to the p300 transcriptional coactivator. Thus, we examined the
role of p300 in the repression of the SV40 enhancer activity in EC cells. We
demonstrated that high levels of p300 protein are accumulated in undifferentiated
EC cells and that the levels decline dramatically upon differentiation because of
the changes of protein stability. Furthermore, we showed that overexpression of
p300 does not stimulate the SV40 enhancer activity in undifferentiated F9 cells. 
However, the activity of a p300 mutant deficient for E1A binding can be restored 
by the presence of excess E1A. In addition, low-level expression of E1A causes
derepression of the enhancer activity in F9 cells. These results indicate that
the accumulation of p300 protein participates in repression of the SV40 enhancer 
activity in undifferentiated F9 cells.

PMID: 9869299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Nature. 1998 Dec 10;396(6711):594-8.

Regulation of activity of the transcription factor GATA-1 by acetylation.

Boyes J(1), Byfield P, Nakatani Y, Ogryzko V.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gene Function and Regulation, Chester Beatty Laboratories at The
Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK. jboyes@icr.ac.uk

Modification of histones, DNA-binding proteins found in chromatin, by addition of
acetyl groups occurs to a greater degree when the histones are associated with
transcriptionally active DNA. A breakthrough in understanding how this
acetylation is mediated was the discovery that various transcriptional
co-activator proteins have intrinsic histone acetyltransferase activity (for
example, Gcn5p, PCAF, TAF(II)250 and p300/CBP. These acetyltransferases also
modify certain transcription factors (TFIIEbeta, TFIIF, EKLF and p53). GATA-1 is 
an important transcription factor in the haematopoietic lineage and is essential 
for terminal differentiation of erythrocytes and megakaryocytes. It is associated
in vivo with the acetyltransferase p300/CBP. Here we report that GATA-1 is
acetylated in vitro by p300. This significantly increases the amount of GATA-1
bound to DNA and alters the mobility of GATA-1-DNA complexes, suggestive of a
conformational change in GATA-1. GATA-1 is also acetylated in vivo and
acetylation directly stimulates GATA-1-dependent transcription. Mutagenesis of
important acetylated residues shows that there is a relationship between the
acetylation and in vivo function of GATA-1. We propose that acetylation of
transcription factors can alter interactions between these factors and DNA and
among different transcription factors, and is an integral part of transcription
and differentiation processes.

PMID: 9859997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Dec 1;26(23):5501-10.

The orphan nuclear receptor, COUP-TF II, inhibits myogenesis by
post-transcriptional regulation of MyoD function: COUP-TF II directly interacts
with p300 and myoD.

Bailey P(1), Sartorelli V, Hamamori Y, Muscat GE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Queensland, Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Ritchie
Research Laboratories, B402A, St Lucia, 4072 Queensland, Australia.

COUP-TF II is an orphan nuclear receptor that has no known ligand in the
'classical sense'. COUP-TF interacts with the corepressors N-CoR, SMRT and RIP13,
and silences transcription by active repression and trans-repression. Forced
expression of the orphan nuclear receptor COUP-TF II in mouse C2 myogenic cells
has been demonstrated to inhibit morphological differentiation, and to repress
the expression of: (i) the myoD gene family which encodes myogenic basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins; and (ii) the cell cycle regulator,
p21(Waf-1/Cip-1). In the present study, we show that COUP-TF II efficiently
inhibits the myoD -mediated myogenic conversion of pluripotential C3H10T1/2 cells
by post-transcriptional mechanisms. Furthermore, repression of MyoD-dependent
transcription by COUP-TF II occurs in the absence of the nuclear receptor cognate
binding motif. The inhibition of MyoD-mediated trans-activation involves the
direct binding of the DNA binding domain/C-region and hinge/D-regions [i.e. amino
acid (aa) residues 78-213] of COUP-TF II to the N-terminal activation domain of
MyoD. Over-expression of the cofactor p300, which functions as a coactivator of
myoD-mediated transcription, alleviated repression by COUP-TF II. Further binding
analysis demonstrated that COUP-TF II interacted with the N-terminal 149 aa
residues of p300 which encoded the receptor interaction domain of the
coactivator. Finally we observed that COUP-TF II, MyoD and p300 interact in a
competitive manner, and that increasing amounts of COUP-TF II have the ability to
reduce the interaction between myoD and p300 invitro. The experiments presented
herein suggest thatCOUP-TF II post-transcriptionally regulates myoD
activity/function, and that crosstalk between orphan nuclear receptors and the
myogenic bHLH proteins has functional consequences for differentiation.

PMCID: PMC147985
PMID: 9826778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Oct;18(10):5659-69.

Mammalian GCN5 and P/CAF acetyltransferases have homologous amino-terminal
domains important for recognition of nucleosomal substrates.

Xu W(1), Edmondson DG, Roth SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The yeast transcriptional adapter Gcn5p serves as a histone acetyltransferase,
directly linking chromatin modification to transcriptional regulation. Two human 
homologs of Gcn5p have been reported previously, hsGCN5 and hsP/CAF (p300/CREB
binding protein [CBP]-associated factor). While hsGCN5 was predicted to be close 
to the size of the yeast acetyltransferase, hsP/CAF contained an additional 356
amino-terminal residues of unknown function. Surprisingly, we have found that in 
mouse, both the GCN5 and the P/CAF genes encode proteins containing this extended
amino-terminal domain. Moreover, while a shorter version of GCN5 might be
generated upon alternative or incomplete splicing of a longer transcript, mRNAs
encoding the longer protein are much more prevalent in both mouse and human
cells, and larger proteins are detected by GCN5-specific antisera in both mouse
and human cell extracts. Mouse GCN5 (mmGCN5) and mmP/CAF genes are ubiquitously
expressed, but maximum expression levels are found in different, complementary
sets of tissues. Both mmP/CAF and mmGCN5 interact with CBP/p300. Interestingly,
mmGCN5 maps to chromosome 11 and cosegregates with BRCA1, and mmP/CAF maps to a
central region of chromosome 17. As expected, recombinant mmGCN5 and mmP/CAF both
exhibit histone acetyltransferase activity in vitro with similar substrate
specificities. However, in contrast to yeast Gcn5p and the previously reported
shorter form of hsGCN5, mmGCN5 readily acetylates nucleosomal substrates as well 
as free core histones. Thus, the unique amino-terminal domains of mammalian P/CAF
and GCN5 may provide additional functions important to recognition of chromatin
substrates and the regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC109152
PMID: 9742083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 17;273(29):17983-6.

Lineage-specific signaling in melanocytes. C-kit stimulation recruits p300/CBP to
microphthalmia.

Price ER(1), Ding HF, Badalian T, Bhattacharya S, Takemoto C, Yao TP, Hemesath
TJ, Fisher DE.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Research Institute and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

During melanocyte development, the cytokine Steel factor activates its receptor
c-Kit, initiating a signal transduction cascade, which is vital for lineage
determination via unknown downstream nuclear targets. c-Kit has recently been
found to trigger mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated phosphorylation of
Microphthalmia (Mi), a lineage-restricted transcription factor, which, like Steel
factor and c-Kit, is essential for melanocyte development. This cascade results
in increased Mi-dependent transcriptional reporter activity. Here we examine the 
mechanism by which Mi is activated by this pathway. Phosphorylation does not
significantly alter Mi's nuclear localization, DNA binding, or dimerization.
However, the transcriptional coactivator p300/CBP selectively associates with
mitogen-activated protein kinase-phosphorylated Mi, even under conditions in
which non-MAPK phospho-Mi is more abundant. Moreover, p300/CBP coactivates Mi
transcriptional activity in a manner dependent upon this phosphorylation. Mi thus
joins CREB as a transcription factor whose signal-responsive phosphorylation
regulates coactivator recruitment, in this case modulating lineage development in
melanocytes.

PMID: 9660747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Mol Cell. 1997 Dec;1(1):35-45.

Differential roles of p300 and PCAF acetyltransferases in muscle differentiation.

Puri PL(1), Sartorelli V, Yang XJ, Hamamori Y, Ogryzko VV, Howard BH, Kedes L,
Wang JY, Graessmann A, Nakatani Y, Levrero M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression, Fondazione Andrea Cesalpino, Istituto I Clinica
Medica, Policlinico Umberto I, University of Rome, La Sapienza, Italy.

PCAF is a histone acetyltransferase that associates with p300/CBP and competes
with E1A for access to them. While exogenous expression of PCAF potentiates both 
MyoD-directed transcription and myogenic differentiation, PCAF inactivation by
anti-PCAF antibody microinjection prevents differentiation. MyoD interacts
directly with both p300/CBP and PCAF, forming a multimeric protein complex on the
promoter elements. Viral transforming factors that interfere with muscle
differentiation disrupt this complex without affecting the MyoD-DNA interaction, 
indicating functional significance of the complex formation. Exogenous expression
of PCAF or p300 promotes p21 expression and terminal cell-cycle arrest. Both of
these activities are dependent on the histone acetyltransferase activity of PCAF,
but not on that of p300. These results indicate that recruitment of histone
acetyltransferase activity of PCAF by MyoD, through p300/CBP, is crucial for
activation of the myogenic program.

PMID: 9659901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Genes Dev. 1998 Jul 1;12(13):1975-85.

Suppression of the p300-dependent mdm2 negative-feedback loop induces the p53
apoptotic function.

Thomas A(1), White E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Cancer Institute of New
Jersey, Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854 USA.

The p53 tumor suppressor gene product interacts with the p300 transcriptional
coactivator that regulates the transactivation of p53-inducible genes. The
adenovirus E1A protein has been shown to bind to p300 and inhibit its function.
E1A inhibits p53 transactivation and also promotes p53 accumulation by a
p300-dependent mechanism. Murine double minute 2 (Mdm2) is a transcriptional
target of p53 that binds to p53 and inhibits its transcriptional activity. E1A
inhibited mdm2 transactivation without affecting the expression of p21(WAF1) or
Bax, which resulted in high levels of p53 accumulation and apoptosis. Ectopic
expression of p300 restored Mdm2 levels and inhibited p53-dependent apoptosis, as
did ectopic expression of Mdm2. Thus, p300 is required for mdm2 induction by p53 
and the subsequent inhibition of p53 stabilization. Inhibition of p300 by E1A
results in stabilization of p53 and causes apoptosis. Moreover, E1B 19K or Bcl-2 
expression in E1A-transformed cells abrogated p53-dependent apoptosis by
restoring mdm2 transactivation by p53. Hence, p300 regulation of mdm2 expression 
controls apoptotic activity of p53, and 19K or Bcl-2 bypass E1A inhibition of
p300 transactivation of Mdm2.

PMCID: PMC316960
PMID: 9649502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Trends Genet. 1998 Jun;14(6):214.

Update CBP/p300 transgenic mice.

Giles RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, The
Netherlands.

PMID: 9635400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. FEBS Lett. 1998 Mar 20;425(1):112-6.

Involvement of the IRF family transcription factor IRF-3 in virus-induced
activation of the IFN-beta gene.

Sato M(1), Tanaka N, Hata N, Oda E, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

The virus-induced activation of interferon alpha/beta (IFN-alpha/beta) gene
transcription is essential for host defense. The IFN-beta promoter is controlled 
primarily by the virus-inducible enhancer elements, the IRF-Es. Here we show that
IRF-3, an IRF family transcription factor, translocates to the nucleus from the
cytoplasm upon virus infection in NIH/3T3 cells. The nuclear IRF-3 is
phosphorylated, interacts with the co-activators CBP/p300, and binds specifically
to the IFN-beta IRF-E. Furthermore, overexpression of IRF-3 causes a marked
increase in virus-induced IFN-beta mRNA expression. Thus, IRF-3 is a candidate
transcription factor mediating the activation of the IFN-beta gene.

PMID: 9541017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):2230-9.

Notch inhibition of E47 supports the existence of a novel signaling pathway.

Ordentlich P(1), Lin A, Shen CP, Blaumueller C, Matsuno K, Artavanis-Tsakonas S, 
Kadesch T.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Genetics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104-6145, USA.

E47 is a widely expressed transcription factor that activates B-cell-specific
immunoglobulin gene transcription and is required for early B-cell development.
In an effort to identify processes that regulate E47, and potentially B-cell
development, we found that activated Notch1 and Notch2 effectively inhibit E47
activity. Only the intact E47 protein was inhibited by Notch-fusion proteins
containing isolated DNA binding and activation domains were unaffected-suggesting
that Notch targets an atypical E47 cofactor. Although overexpression of the
coactivator p300 partially reversed E47 inhibition, results of several assays
indicated that p300/CBP is not a general target of Notch. Notch inhibition of E47
did not correlate with its ability to activate CBF1/RBP-Jkappa, the mammalian
homolog of Suppressor of Hairless, a protein that associates physically with
Notch and defines the only known Notch signaling pathway in drosophila.
Importantly, E47 was inhibited independently of CBF1/RPB-Jkappa by Deltex, a
second Notch-interacting protein. We provide evidence that Notch and Deltex may
act on E47 by inhibiting signaling through Ras because (i) full E47 activity was 
found to be dependent on Ras and (ii) both Notch and Deltex inhibited GAL4-Jun, a
hybrid transcription factor whose activity is dependent on signaling from Ras to 
SAPK/JNK.

PMCID: PMC121468
PMID: 9528794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Genes Dev. 1998 Jan 15;12(2):233-45.

p300 and ATF-2 are components of the DRF complex, which regulates retinoic acid- 
and E1A-mediated transcription of the c-jun gene in F9 cells.

Kawasaki H(1), Song J, Eckner R, Ugai H, Chiu R, Taira K, Shi Y, Jones N,
Yokoyama KK.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), Tsukuba 305, Japan.

Transcriptional activation of the c-jun gene is a critical event in the
differentiation of F9 cells. In our previous studies we characterized an element 
[differentiation response element (DRE)] in the c-jun promoter that is both
necessary and sufficient to confer the capacity for differentiation-dependent
up-regulation. This element binds the differentiation regulatory factor (DRF)
complex, of which one component is the adenovirus E1A-associated protein p300. We
have now identified activation transcription factor-2 (ATF-2) as a DNA-binding
subunit of the DRF complex. p300 and ATF-2 interact with each other in vivo and
in vitro. The bromodomain and the C/H2 domain of p300 mediate the binding to
ATF-2, which in turn requires a proline-rich region between amino acids 112 and
350 for its interaction with p300. The phosphorylation of the serine residue at
position 121 of ATF-2 appears to be induced by protein kinase C alpha (PKC alpha)
after treatment of cells with retinoic acid (RA) or induction with E1A. In
cotransfection assays, wild-type ATF-2 enhanced the transcription of an
E2/tk-luciferase construct, in conjunction with p300-E2. However, a mutant form
of ATF-2 with a mutation at position 121 (pCMVATF-2(Ser121-Ala)) did not. These
results suggest that ATF-2 and p300 cooperate in the control of transcription by 
forming a protein complex that is responsive to differentiation-inducing signals,
such as RA or E1A, and moreover, that the phosphorylation of ATF-2 by PKC alpha
is probably a signaling event in the pathway that leads to the transactivation of
the c-jun gene in F9 cells.

PMCID: PMC316443
PMID: 9436983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Mar;18(3):1359-68.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 and CREB-binding protein/p300 are subunits of
double-stranded RNA-activated transcription factor DRAF1.

Weaver BK(1), Kumar KP, Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York at Stony Brook, 11794,
USA.

Cells respond to viral infection or double-stranded RNA with the transcriptional 
induction of a subset of alpha/beta interferon-stimulated genes by a pathway
distinct from the interferon signal pathway. The transcriptional induction is
mediated through a DNA sequence containing the alpha/beta interferon-stimulated
response element (ISRE). We previously identified a novel transcription factor,
designated double-stranded RNA-activated factor 1 (DRAF1), that recognizes this
response element. The DNA-binding specificity of DRAF1 correlates with
transcriptional induction, thereby distinguishing it as a positive regulator of
alpha/beta interferon-stimulated genes. Two of the components of DRAF1 have now
been identified as interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and the transcriptional
coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300. We demonstrate that IRF-3 preexists 
in the cytoplasm of uninfected cells and translocates to the nucleus following
viral infection. Translocation of IRF-3 is accompanied by an increase in serine
and threonine phosphorylation. Coimmunoprecipitation analyses of endogenous
proteins demonstrate an association of IRF-3 with the transcriptional
coactivators CBP and p300 only subsequent to infection. In addition, antibodies
to the IRF-3, CBP, and p300 molecules react with DRAF1 bound to the ISRE target
site of induced genes. The cellular response that leads to DRAF1 activation and
specific gene expression may serve to increase host survival during viral
infection.

PMCID: PMC108849
PMID: 9488451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Dec 15;67(4):423-31.

Synergistic role of E1A-binding proteins and tissue-specific transcription
factors in differentiation.

Condorelli G(1), Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson
Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107,
USA.

In this review, the complex relationship between tissue-specific transcription
factors and genes regulating cell cycle is taken into account. Both E1-A binding 
proteins belonging to the family of the retinoblastoma gene product and the
CBP/p300 coactivator of transcription interact physically and functionally with
tissue-specific transcription factor. The relationship between these two classes 
of molecules regulates cell fate in differentiating cells, deciding whether cells
continue to replicate, undergo apoptosis or terminally differentiate. We provide 
here an update on the recent advances in this field and some models of
interaction between E1A binding protein and tissue-specific transcription
factors.

PMID: 9383702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Sep 1;66(3):277-85.

Roles of p300, pocket proteins, and hTBP in E1A-mediated transcriptional
regulation and inhibition of p53 transactivation activity.

Sang N(1), Avantaggiati ML, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy, and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

The conserved region 1 and the extreme N-terminus of adenoviral oncoprotein E1A
are essential for transforming activity. They also play roles in the interaction 
of E1A with p300/CBP and pRb and are involved in both transactivation and
repression of host gene expression. It was reported recently that p53-mediated
transactivation is specifically repressed by E1A and that p53-induced apoptosis
can be protected by pRb. In this report, we investigated the roles of pRb and
p300 in the N-terminus of E1A-mediated transcriptional regulation. We demonstrate
here that p300 and pRb have no effect on DBD.1-70 transactivation and that
overexpression of p300 or pRb failed to relieve the repression by E1A. Repression
of p53 transactivation requires both the extreme amino terminus and CR1 but not
CR2. This repressive activity of E1A specifically correlates with E1A's ability
to bind p300 and TBP. On the other hand, E1A inhibited the transactivation
activity of a fusion construct containing the DNA binding domain of yeast Gal4
and the transactivation domain of p53. When p53 was contransfected with E1A,
similar inhibition was found in Saos-2 cells that lack endogenous pRb and p53
activity. Introduction of pRb into Saos-2 cells did not affect p53 transcription 
activity. E1A-mediated repression can be relieved be overexpression of either
p300, hTBP, or-TFIIB but cannot be released by overexpression of pocket proteins.
Our data suggest that p300/CBP and TBP but not the pocket proteins, pRb, p107,
and pRb2/p130 are functional targets of E1A in transcriptional regulation and
that p53 transactivation requires the function of the p300/TBP/TFIIB complex,
thus delineating a new pathway by which E1A may exert its transforming activity.

PMID: 9257185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Virology. 1997 Jun 23;233(1):130-5.

SV40 and adenovirus may act as cocarcinogens by downregulating glutathione
S-transferase expression.

Sompayrac L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder 80309, USA. laurens@colorado.edu

We have discovered a novel function of the SV40 T antigen and the adenovirus E1A 
proteins: the ability to downregulate the endogenous expression of an important
detoxification enzyme, glutathione S-transferase alpha (GST alpha). GST alpha
mRNA is much less abundant in rat and human cells that express SV40 T antigen
than in the parental cell lines. This GST alpha downregulation does not require
expression of SV40 small t antigen or complex formation between large T antigen
and p53, p300, or the pRb family of proteins. As might be predicted, cells that
express SV40 T antigen are more sensitive than normal cells to alkylating drugs, 
which GST alpha is known to detoxify. Finally, GST alpha expression is also
downregulated in cells that express the adenovirus E1A proteins. We propose that 
by downregulating GST alpha expression and inactivating p53 function, SV40 and
adenovirus may contribute to the initiation of, or the progression toward,
malignancy. Thus, in their quest to establish persistent infections, these
viruses may inadvertently make the cellular environment more permissive for
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9201222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Nature. 1997 Jun 19;387(6635):823-7.

Binding and modulation of p53 by p300/CBP coactivators.

Lill NL(1), Grossman SR, Ginsberg D, DeCaprio J, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The adenovirus E1A and SV40 large-T-antigen oncoproteins bind to members of the
p300/CBP transcriptional coactivator family. Binding of p300/CBP is implicated in
the transforming mechanisms of E1A and T-antigen oncoproteins. A common region of
the T antigen is critical for binding both p300/CBP and the tumour suppressor
p53, suggesting a link between the functions of p53 and p300. Here we report that
p300/CBP binds to p53 in the absence of viral oncoproteins, and that p300 and p53
colocalize within the nucleus and coexist in a stable DNA-binding complex.
Consistent with its ability to bind to p300, E1A disrupted functions mediated by 
p53. It reduced p53-mediated activation of the p21 and bax promoters, and
suppressed p53-induced cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis. We conclude that members 
of the p300/CBP family are transcriptional adaptors for p53, modulating its
checkpoint function in the G1 phase of the cell cycle and its induction of
apoptosis. Disruption of p300/p53-dependent growth control may be part of the
mechanism by which E1A induces cell transformation. These results help to explain
how p53 mediates growth and checkpoint control, and how members of the p300/CBP
family affect progression from G1 to the S phase of the cell cycle.

PMID: 9194565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Nature. 1997 Jun 12;387(6634):677-84.

The transcriptional co-activator p/CIP binds CBP and mediates nuclear-receptor
function.

Torchia J(1), Rose DW, Inostroza J, Kamei Y, Westin S, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0648, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1997 Jun 12;387(6634):654-5.

The functionally conserved proteins CBP and p300 act in conjunction with other
factors to activate transcription of DNA. A new factor, p/CIP, has been
discovered that is present in the cell as a complex with CBP and is required for 
transcriptional activity of nuclear receptors and other CBP/p300-dependent
transcription factors. The highly related nuclear-receptor co-activator protein
NCoA-1 is also specifically required for ligand-dependent activation of genes by 
nuclear receptors. p/CIP, NCoA-1 and CBP all contain related leucine-rich charged
helical interaction motifs that are required for receptor-specific mechanisms of 
gene activation, and allow the selective inhibition of distinct
signal-transduction pathways.

PMID: 9192892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 May;8(5):541-51.

Immortalization of primary epithelial cells by E1A 12S requires late, second
exon-encoded functions in addition to complex formation with pRB and p300.

Gopalakrishnan S(1), Douglas JL, Quinlan MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Tennessee, Memphis
38163, USA.

Immortalization of primary cells is an early and important event in multistep
tumorigenesis and is itself a multistep process. Adenovirus E1A 12S encodes an
oncoprotein that can rescue cells from senescence and overcome apoptosis, leading
to their immortalization. Five regions of 12S, located in both exons, are
required for immortalization. Two regions in the first exon are necessary to
activate the cell cycle, increase the number of population doublings, and
overcome the M1 stage of mortality. However, extension of life span requires
overcoming crisis or M2, which can be accomplished by the expression of the
second exon. Several cellular proteins associate with the peptide encoded by the 
first exon of 12S including pRB, p107, p130, and p300. The importance of pRB-E1A 
and p300-E1A complexes in transformation is well established; however, their
roles in 12S-mediated immortalization remain undefined. Results obtained from the
present study using a panel of second exon immortalization-defective mutants
demonstrate that formation of pRB-E1A and p300-E1A complexes is insufficient for 
immortalization of primary cells. We further demonstrate that the expression
levels of another tumor suppressor protein, p53, also do not correlate with the
inability of the mutants to immortalize. Thus, mutations in the second exon of
12S do not affect the early steps in the immortalization pathway. The second exon
mutants are defective in performing a late function in immortalization, involving
the reactivation of the cell cycle, indicating that it is a crucial event in
immortalization.

PMID: 9149905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. EMBO J. 1997 Jan 15;16(2):369-83.

p300 is required for MyoD-dependent cell cycle arrest and muscle-specific gene
transcription.

Puri PL(1), Avantaggiati ML, Balsano C, Sang N, Graessmann A, Giordano A, Levrero
M.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione Andrea Cesalpino, Università degli Studi di Roma La Sapienza, Rome,
Italy.

The nuclear phosphoprotein p300 is a new member of a family of 'co-activators'
(which also includes the CREB binding protein CBP), that directly modulate
transcription by interacting with components of the basal transcriptional
machinery. Both p300 and CBP are targeted by the adenovirus E1A protein, and
binding to p300 is required for E1A to inhibit terminal differentiation in both
keratinocytes and myoblasts. Here we demonstrate that, in differentiating
skeletal muscle cells, p300 physically interacts with the myogenic basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) regulatory protein MyoD at its DNA binding sites. During 
muscle differentiation, MyoD plays a dual role: besides activating
muscle-specific transcription, it induces permanent cell cycle arrest by
up-regulating the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21. We show that p300 is
involved in both these activities. Indeed, E1A mutants lacking the ability to
bind p300 are greatly impaired in the repression of E-box-driven transcription,
and p300 overexpression rescues the wild-type E1A-mediated repression. Moreover, 
p300 potentiates MyoD- and myogenin-dependent activation of transcription from
E-box-containing reporter genes. We also provide evidence, obtained by
microinjection of anti-p300 antibodies, that p300 is required for MyoD-dependent 
cell cycle arrest in either myogenic cells induced to differentiate or in
MyoD-converted C3H10T1/2 fibroblasts, but is dispensable for maintenance of the
postmitotic state of myotubes.

PMCID: PMC1169642
PMID: 9029156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Virus Genes. 1997;15(2):161-70.

Identification of specific amino acid residues of adenovirus 12 E1A involved in
transformation and p300 binding.

Sawada Y(1), Ishino M, Miura K, Ohtsuka E, Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Japan.

The early region 1A (E1A) gene of highly oncogenic adenovirus type 12 (Ad12) was 
analyzed for transforming activity and protein binding using specific mutations. 
The Ad12 E1A proteins were found to bind p300 protein mainly within the CR1
region, although mutations that affect both p300 binding and transformation were 
identified in both the CR1 and the N-terminal region. The most critical mutation 
dlf89 located in the CR1 region was further dissected by point mutations and the 
results identified 68S as the most critical for transformation and 67E as the
most critical for p300 binding. Specific mutations that retain p300 binding but
impair transcriptional repression of a viral enhancer were also identified in
both the N-terminal and CR1 regions.

PMID: 9421880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Virol. 1997 Jan;71(1):129-37.

p300 family members associate with the carboxyl terminus of simian virus 40 large
tumor antigen.

Lill NL(1), Tevethia MJ, Eckner R, Livingston DM, Modjtahedi N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neoplastic Disease Mechanisms, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Several cellular polypeptides critical for growth regulation interact with DNA
tumor virus oncoproteins. p400 is a cellular protein which binds to the
adenovirus E1A oncoprotein(s). The biological function of p400 is not yet known, 
but it is structurally and immunologically closely related to p300 and
CREB-binding protein, two known E1A-binding transcription adapters. Like p300,
p400 is a phosphoprotein that binds to the simian virus 40 large tumor antigen
(T). In anti-T coimmunoprecipitation experiments, staggered deletions spanning
the amino-terminal 250 amino acids of T did not abrogate T binding to either p400
or p300. A T species composed of residues 251 to 708 bound both p400 and p300,
while a T species defective in p53 binding was unable to bind either detectably. 
Anti-p53 immunoprecipitates prepared from cells containing wild-type T also
contained p400 and p300. Hence, both p400 and p300 can bind (directly or
indirectly) to a carboxyl-terminal fragment of T which contains its p53 binding
domain. Since the p53 binding domain of T contributes to its immortalizing and
transforming activities, T-p400 and/or T-p300 interactions may participate in
these functions.

PMCID: PMC191032
PMID: 8985331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Nov 26;93(24):13985-90.

Role of p300-family proteins in E1A oncogene induction of cytolytic
susceptibility and tumor cell rejection.

Cook JL(1), Krantz CK, Routes BA.

Author information: 
(1)Robert W. Lisle Research Laboratory in Immunology and Tumor Cell Biology,
Department of Medicine, National Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory
Medicine, Denver, CO 80206, USA.

The mechanism by which the adenoviral (Ad) E1A oncogene induces cellular
susceptibility to lysis by killer lymphocytes involves interactions between its
first exon and different second-exon accessory regions. Mutational analysis
showed that two first-exon regions--one in the N terminus and one in the
conserved region 1 (CR1) domain--are necessary for this activity. E1A complex
formation with cellular p300 protein through these first-exon-encoded regions
correlated with induction of the cytolytic susceptible phenotype but was only
effective in the context of E1A second-exon expression. An E1A first-exon
deletion that prevented p300 binding eliminated both oncoprotein-induced
cytolytic susceptibility and rejection of transfected sarcoma cells by
immunocompetent animals. These results suggest that the E1A oncogene induces
cytolytic susceptibility and tumor rejection by interactions with cellular
proteins of the p300 family that affect transcription of genes involved in the
cellular response to injury inflicted by host killer cells.

PMCID: PMC19481
PMID: 8943047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Oncogene. 1996 Nov 21;13(10):2047-54.

The CDK inhibitor p21WAF1/Cip1 is induced through a p300-dependent mechanism
during NGF-mediated neuronal differentiation of PC12 cells.

Billon N(1), van Grunsven LA, Rudkin BB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 49 CNRS/Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Lyon, France.

The block of cell proliferation elicited by the addition of nerve growth factor
(NGF) to exponentially-growing PC12 cells results, in part, from the inhibition
of cyclin D1-associated kinase activity by p21WAF1/CIP1. NGF treatment of PC12
cells provokes the accumulation of p21 mRNA, due to transcriptional activation of
the p21 promoter in a p53-independent manner. Transient expression of a mutated
form of the adenovirus E1A protein (E1A dCR2), which retains its capacity to bind
the transcriptional co-activator p300, completely abolishes the NGF-mediated
stimulation of p21 promoter activity. This phenomenon can be reversed by ectopic 
expression of p300, suggesting that p300 is necessary for the induction of p21 by
NGF. In addition, stable expression of E1A dCR2 in PC12 cells results in the
inhibition of the NGF response, i.e. it prevents activation of the p21 promoter, 
cell cycle arrest, and neuronal differentiation. The signalling pathway from the 
TrkA receptor via the MAP kinase pathway is not altered in these cells. Together,
these data indicate that p300 could play a pivotal role in the triggering of the 
anti-mitogenic effect of NGF and of neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 8950971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 1;93(20):10626-31.

The nuclear hormone receptor coactivator SRC-1 is a specific target of p300.

Yao TP(1), Ku G, Zhou N, Scully R, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

p300 and its family member, CREB-binding protein (CBP), function as key
transcriptional coactivators by virtue of their interaction with the activated
forms of certain transcription factors. In a search for additional cellular
targets of p300/CBP, a protein-protein cloning strategy, surprisingly identified 
SRC-1, a coactivator involved in nuclear hormone receptor transcriptional
activity, as a p300/CBP interactive protein. p300 and SRC-1 interact,
specifically, in vitro and they also form complexes in vivo. Moreover, we show
that SRC-1 encodes a new member of the basic helix-loop-helix-PAS domain family
and that it physically interacts with the retinoic acid receptor in response to
hormone binding. Together, these results implicate p300 as a component of the
retinoic acid signaling pathway, operating, in part, through specific interaction
with a nuclear hormone receptor coactivator, SRC-1.

PMCID: PMC38204
PMID: 8855229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Genes Dev. 1996 Oct 1;10(19):2478-90.

Interaction and functional collaboration of p300/CBP and bHLH proteins in muscle 
and B-cell differentiation.

Eckner R(1), Yao TP, Oldread E, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Differentiation of skeletal muscle cells and B lymphocytes is regulated by basic 
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins. Both differentiation programs are inhibited by 
the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein. Analysis of E1A mutants has implicated two of its
cellular-binding proteins, p300 and CBP, in controlling certain aspects of
differentiation. We find that p300 can cooperate with tissue-specific bHLH
proteins in activating target genes and requires only the bHLH domain of such
proteins to stimulate E box-directed transcription. Importantly, the ability of
bHLH proteins to activate transcription correlates with the presence of p300/CBP 
in E box-dependent DNA-binding complexes, because both phenomena require at least
two adjacent E-box motifs. Microinjection of p300/CBP antibodies into myoblasts
blocks terminal differentiation, cell fusion, and transcriptional activity of
myogenic bHLH proteins. These results suggest that the function of p300/CBP is
essential for the execution of key aspects of cellular differentiation.

PMID: 8843199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5846-56.

A novel E1A domain mediates skeletal-muscle-specific enhancer repression
independently of pRB and p300 binding.

Sandmöller A(1), Meents H, Arnold HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Braunschweig, Germany.
A.Sandmoeller@tu-bs.de

The adenovirus E1A oncoprotein completely blocks muscle differentiation and
specifically inhibits the transactivating function of myogenic basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. This inhibition is dependent on
the conserved region CR1 of E1A, which also constitutes part of the binding sites
for the pocket proteins pRB, p107, and p130 and the transcriptional coactivators 
p300 and CBP. Here we report a detailed mutational analysis of E1A and the
identification of a muscle inhibition motif within CR1. This motif encompasses
amino acids 38 to 62 and inhibits Myf-5- or MyoD-mediated activation of myogenin 
and the muscle creatine kinase gene. Overexpression of this E1A region also
inhibits the conversion of 10T1/2 fibroblasts to the myogenic lineage. The
sequence motif EPDNEE (amino acids 55 to 60) within CR1 appears to be
particularly important, because point mutations of this sequence diminish the E1A
inhibitory activity. Interactions of E1A with pRB and with p300 do not seem to be
necessary for the muscle-specific enhancer repression, because E1A mutants which 
lack these interactions still inhibit Myf-5- and MyoD-mediated transactivation.
Moreover, overexpression of p300 fails to overcome muscle-specific inhibition by 
wild-type E1A and mutant E1A protein which lacks pRB binding. Since we have no
evidence for direct E1A interaction with bHLH proteins, we propose that E1A may
target a necessary cofactor of the muscle-specific bHLH transcription complex.

PMCID: PMC231586
PMID: 8816499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3454-64.

Association of p300 and CBP with simian virus 40 large T antigen.

Eckner R(1), Ludlow JW, Lill NL, Oldread E, Arany Z, Modjtahedi N, DeCaprio JA,
Livingston DM, Morgan JA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

p300 and the CREB-binding protein CBP are two large nuclear phosphoproteins that 
are structurally highly related. Both function, in part, as transcriptional
adapters and are targeted by the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein. We show here that
p300 and CBP interact with another transforming protein, the simian virus 40
large T antigen (T). This interaction depends on the integrity of a region of T
which is critical for its transforming and mitogenic properties and includes its 
LXCXE Rb-binding motif. T interferes with normal p300 and CBP function on at
least two different levels. The presence of T alters the phosphorylation states
of both proteins and inhibits their transcriptional activities on certain
promoters. Although E1A and T show little sequence similarity, they interact with
the same domain of p300 and CBP, suggesting that this region exhibits
considerable flexibility in accommodating diverse protein ligands.

PMCID: PMC231340
PMID: 8668161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;133(2):325-34.

Induction of DNA synthesis and apoptosis in cardiac myocytes by E1A oncoprotein.

Liu Y(1), Kitsis RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Cardiology), Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Beginning during the second half of gestation, increasing numbers of cardiac
myocytes withdraw from the cell cycle such that DNA synthesis is no longer
detectable in these cells by neonatal day 17 in vivo. The mechanisms that exclude
these and other terminally differentiated cells from the cell division cycle are 
poorly understood. To begin to explore the molecular basis of the barrier to G1/S
progression in cardiac myocytes, we used adenoviruses to express wild-type and
mutant E1A proteins in primary cultures from embryonic day 20 rats. While most of
these cardiac myocytes are ordinarily refractory to DNA synthesis, even in the
presence of serum growth factors, expression of wild-type E1A stimulates DNA
synthesis in up to 94% or almost all successfully transduced cells. Rather than
complete the cell cycle, however, these cells undergo apoptosis. Apoptosis is
limited to those cells that engage in DNA synthesis, and the kinetics of the two 
processes suggest that DNA synthesis precedes apoptosis. Mutations in E1A that
disable it from binding Rb and related pocket proteins have little effect on its 
ability to stimulate DNA synthesis in cardiac myocytes. In contrast, mutants that
are defective in binding the cellular protein p300 stimulate DNA synthesis
2.4-4.1-fold less efficiently, even in the context of retained E1A pocket protein
binding. In the absence of ElA pocket protein binding, the usual situation in the
cell, loss of p300 binding severely decreases the ability of ElA to stimulate DNA
synthesis. These results suggest that the barrier to G1/S progression in cardiac 
myocytes is mediated. at least in part, by the same molecules that gate the G1/S 
transition in actively cycling cells, and that p300 or related family members
play an important role in this process.

PMCID: PMC2120791
PMID: 8609165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Virol. 1996 Jan;70(1):68-77.

Induction of susceptibility to tumor necrosis factor by E1A is dependent on
binding to either p300 or p105-Rb and induction of DNA synthesis.

Shisler J(1), Duerksen-Hughes P, Hermiston TM, Wold WS, Gooding LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

The introduction of the adenovirus early region 1A (E1A) gene products into
normal cells sensitizes these cells to the cytotoxic effects of tumor necrosis
factor (TNF). Previous studies have shown that the region of E1A responsible for 
susceptibility is CR1, a conserved region within E1A which binds the cellular
proteins p300 and p105-Rb at nonoverlapping sites. Binding of these and other
cellular proteins by E1A results in the induction of E1A-associated activities
such as transformation, immortalization, DNA synthesis, and apoptosis. To
investigate the mechanism by which E1A induces susceptibility to TNF, the NIH 3T3
mouse fibroblast cell line was infected with viruses containing mutations within 
E1A which abrogate binding of some or all of the cellular proteins to E1A. The
results show that TNF susceptibility is induced by E1A binding to either p300 or 
p105-Rb. E1A mutants that bind neither p300 nor p105-Rb do not induce
susceptibility to TNF. Experiments with stable cell lines created by transfection
with either wild-type or mutant E1A lead to these same conclusions. In addition, 
a correlation between induction of DNA synthesis and induction of TNF sensitivity
is seen. Only viruses which induce DNA synthesis can induce TNF sensitivity.
Those viruses which do not induce DNA synthesis also do not induce TNF
sensitivity. These data suggest that the mechanisms underlying induction of
susceptibility to TNF by E1A are intimately connected to E1A's capacity to
override cell cycle controls.

PMCID: PMC189789
PMID: 8523594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Virol. 1995 Dec;69(12):7917-24.

E1A promotes association between p300 and pRB in multimeric complexes required
for normal biological activity.

Wang HG(1), Moran E, Yaciuk P.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

The oncogenes of the small DNA tumor viruses encode transforming proteins with
multiple domains that influence the cell cycle and aspects of the transformed
phenotype. Like other gene products of this type, the adenovirus E1A proteins
influence the cell by binding to specific cell growth control proteins. These
include members of the retinoblastoma gene product (pRB) family, which are bound 
by the E1A region 2-specific site, and p300, which is bound at the E1A amino
terminus. Binding at these two sites is largely independent, and discrete
transcription-regulating functions remain intact in E1A products when only one or
the other binding site is functional. In this report, immunoprecipitation with
p300 antibodies reveals the presence of the pRB family proteins in p300 complexes
when E1A is expressed in host cells, indicating that E1A can mediate physical
contact between p300 and the pRB-related proteins. The ability of E1A to induce
proliferation efficiently in quiescent primary cells correlates closely with the 
ability to bind p300 and individual members of the pRB family simultaneously in
multimeric complexes, even though the E1A active sites can bind their target
proteins efficiently when separated on different molecules. Conservation of a
spacer region between the two binding sites that is required for simultaneous
binding and efficient induction of proliferation supports the concept that the
E1A protein structure has evolved to facilitate simultaneous binding. These
results indicate that the E1A proteins are designed not merely to sequester these
cellular products, but also to bring them into proximal association with each
other in biologically significant complexes.

PMCID: PMC189736
PMID: 7494304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jun 6;92(12):5451-5.

Involvement of the cell-cycle inhibitor Cip1/WAF1 and the E1A-associated p300
protein in terminal differentiation.

Missero C(1), Calautti E, Eckner R, Chin J, Tsai LH, Livingston DM, Dotto GP.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown 02129, USA.

The mechanism of cell cycle withdrawal during terminal differentiation is poorly 
understood. We report here that the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor
p21Cip1/WAF1 is induced at early times of both keratinocyte and myoblast
differentiation. p21Cip1/WAF1 induction is accompanied by a drastic inhibition of
total Cdk2, as well as p21Cip1/WAF1-associated CDK kinase activities.
p21Cip1/WAF1 has been implicated in p53-mediated G1 arrest and apoptosis. In
keratinocyte differentiation, Cip1/WAF1 induction is observed even in cells
derived from p53-null mice. Similarly, keratinocyte differentiation is associated
with induction of Cip1/WAF1 promoter activity in both wild-type and p53-negative 
keratinocytes. Induction of the Cip1/WAF1 promoter upon differentiation is
abolished by expression of an adenovirus E1A oncoprotein (d1922/947), which is
unable to bind p105-Rb, p107, or cyclin A but which still binds the nuclear
phosphoprotein p300. Overexpression of p300 can suppress the E1A effect,
independent of its direct binding to E1A. Thus, terminal differentiation-induced 
growth arrest in both keratinocyte and myoblast systems is associated with
induction of Cip1/WAF1 expression. During keratinocyte differentiation, Cip1/WAF1
induction does not require p53 but depends on the transcriptional modulator p300.

PMCID: PMC41712
PMID: 7777529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Biol Chem. 1995 Apr 7;270(14):7791-4.

Adenovirus E1A represses cardiac gene transcription and reactivates DNA synthesis
in ventricular myocytes, via alternative pocket protein- and p300-binding
domains.

Kirshenbaum LA(1), Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

To examine the potential impact of disrupting "pocket" protein function on
cardiac differentiation and growth, we introduced 12 S E1A genes into neonatal
ventricular myocytes, by adenoviral gene transfer. In the absence of E1B, E1A was
cytotoxic, with features typical of apoptosis. In the presence of E1B, E1A
preferentially inhibited transcription of cardiac-restricted alpha-actin
promoters, and reactivated DNA synthesis in cardiac myocytes, without cell death.
Mutations that abrogate known activities of the amino terminus of E1A, versus
conserved region 2, demonstrate that the "pocket" protein- and p300-binding
domains each suffice, in the absence of the other, for transcriptional repression
and re-entry into S phase.

PMID: 7713869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Oncogene. 1995 Jan 5;10(1):123-34.

The Microphthalmia gene product interacts with the retinoblastoma protein in
vitro and is a target for deregulation of melanocyte-specific transcription.

Yavuzer U(1), Keenan E, Lowings P, Vachtenheim J, Currie G, Goding CR.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Transcription Laboratory, Marie Curie Research Institute, Oxted,
Surrey, UK.

Little is known of the molecular mechanisms underlying the differentiation of the
melanocyte from the melanoblast or the progression from the melanocyte to a
malignant melanoma. Since the adenovirus E1A products have proved a useful tool
for understanding control of differentiation in other systems, we explored the
possibility of using E1A as a probe for factors controlling melanocyte-specific
gene expression and differentiation. The results obtained show that the
adenovirus E1A 13S, but not the 12S, product can transform the highly pigmented
and TPA-dependent melanocyte cell line melan-a. Transformation is characterised
by a morphological change, loss of TPA-dependence, the ability to grow in soft
agar and strikingly, loss of pigmentation which correlates with loss of
expression of the melanocyte-specific TRP-1 and tyrosinase genes. Cotransfection 
assays demonstrated that repression of TRP-1 by E1A correlated with E1A binding
to p105Rb and p300, with the target in the TRP-1 promoter being the M-box, and 11
bp basic-Helix-loop-Helix (bHLH) factor-binding motif conserved between
melanocyte-specific promoters. Consistent with the M-box acting as a target for
E1a-mediated transcription repression, we also show that the
basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLH-LZ) protein (Mi) encoded by the
microphthalmia gene (mi), which is required for pigment cell differentiation, is 
a positive acting transcription factor which can interact with the retinoblastoma
product in vitro and activate the TRP-1 promoter. Moreover, expression of the mi 
gene was reduced around 50-fold in the non-pigmented E1a-transformed melan-a
cells compared to the nontransformed melan-a cell line, with ectopic expression
of Mi able to prevent repression of the tyrosinase and TRP-1 promoters in the
presence of E1A. Mi therefore appears to play a crucial role in
melanocyte-specific gene expression. The parallels between repression of
myogenesis and muscle cell bHLH factors, and Mi and melanocyte differentiation
are discussed.

PMID: 7824265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. EMBO J. 1994 Dec 15;13(24):6107-14.

The adenovirus E1A protein overrides the requirement for cellular ras in
initiating DNA synthesis.

Stacey DW(1), Dobrowolski SF, Piotrkowski A, Harter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, OH 44195.

The adenovirus E1A protein can induce cellular DNA synthesis in growth-arrested
cells by interacting with the cellular protein p300 or pRb. In addition, serum-
and growth factor-dependent cells require ras activity to initiate DNA synthesis 
and recently we have shown that Balb/c 3T3 cells can be blocked in either early
or late G1 following microinjection of an anti-ras antibody. In this study, the
E1A 243 amino acid protein is shown through microinjection not only to shorten
the G0 to S phase interval but, what is more important, to override the
inhibitory effects exerted by the anti-ras antibody in either early or late G1.
Specifically, whether E1A is co-injected with anti-ras into quiescent cells or
injected 18 h following a separate injection of anti-ras after serum stimulation,
it efficiently induces cellular DNA synthesis in cells that would otherwise be
blocked in G0/G1. Moreover, injection of a mutant form of E1A that can no longer 
associate with p300 is just as efficient as wild-type E1A in stimulating DNA
synthesis in cells whose ras activity has been neutralized by anti-ras. The
results presented here show that E1A is capable of overriding the requirement of 
cellular ras activity in promoting the entry of cells into S phase. Moreover, the
results suggest the possibility that pRb and/or pRb-related proteins may function
in a ras-dependent pathway that enables E1A to achieve this activity.

PMCID: PMC395590
PMID: 7813447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Virol. 1994 Aug;68(8):4910-20.

Complementary functions of E1a conserved region 1 cooperate with conserved region
3 to activate adenovirus serotype 5 early promoters.

Wong HK(1), Ziff EB.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, New York
University Medical Center, New York 10016.

The amino-terminal region of the adenovirus type 5 E1a protein including
conserved regions (CRs) 1 and 2 binds the 105-kDa retinoblastoma protein and a
second, 300-kDa, cellular protein. We show that mutant viruses with deletions of 
CR1 which release the binding of either p105 or p300 still activate early
promoters and infect cells productively. However, mutations which disrupt binding
of both proteins disrupt early promoter activity and block the viral life cycle. 
Ela CR3, which has an established role in early promoter activation, can act in
trans to the amino-terminal functions. This suggests that the amino terminus
provides distinct, redundant functions related to p300 and Rb binding that
synergize with CR3 to transactivate early genes.

PMCID: PMC236431
PMID: 8035489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1994;59:85-95.

The adenovirus E1A-associated 300-kD protein exhibits properties of a
transcriptional coactivator and belongs to an evolutionarily conserved family.

Eckner R(1), Arany Z, Ewen M, Sellers W, Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PMID: 7587135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


