
1. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2016 Mar 29. pii: sctm.2015-0262. [Epub ahead of print]

Rapamycin-Induced Hypoxia Inducible Factor 2A Is Essential for Chondrogenic
Differentiation of Amniotic Fluid Stem Cells.

Preitschopf A(1), Schörghofer D(2), Kinslechner K(2), Schütz B(2), Zwickl H(3),
Rosner M(2), Joó JG(4), Nehrer S(3), Hengstschläger M(2), Mikula M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
Center for Regenerative Medicine, Danube University Krems, Krems, Austria.
(2)Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. 
(3)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Danube University Krems, Krems, Austria.
(4)First Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Semmelweis University Medical 
School, Budapest, Hungary. (5)Institute of Medical Genetics, Medical University
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria mario.mikula@meduniwien.ac.at.

: Amniotic fluid stem (AFS) cells represent a major source of donor cells for
cartilage repair. Recently, it became clear that mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) inhibition has beneficial effects on cartilage homeostasis, but the effect
of mTOR on chondrogenic differentiation is still elusive. Therefore, the
objectives of this study were to investigate the effects of mammalian target of
rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) modulation on the expression of SOX9 and on its
downstream targets during chondrogenic differentiation of AFS cells. We performed
three-dimensional pellet culturing of AFS cells and of in vitro-expanded,
human-derived chondrocytes in the presence of chondrogenic factors. Inhibition of
mTORC1 by rapamycin or by small interfering RNA-mediated targeting of raptor
(gene name, RPTOR) led to increased AKT activation, upregulation of hypoxia
inducible factor (HIF) 2A, and an increase in SOX9, COL2A1, and ACAN abundance.
Here we show that HIF2A expression is essential for chondrogenic differentiation 
and that AKT activity regulates HIF2A amounts. Importantly, engraftment of AFS
cells in cell pellets composed of human chondrocytes revealed an advantage of
raptor knockdown cells compared with control cells in their ability to express
SOX9. Our results demonstrate that mTORC1 inhibition leads to AKT activation and 
an increase in HIF2A expression. Therefore, we suggest that mTORC1 inhibition is 
a powerful tool for enhancing chondrogenic differentiation of AFS cells and also 
of in vitro-expanded adult chondrocytes before transplantation.SIGNIFICANCE:
Repair of cartilage defects is still an unresolved issue in regenerative
medicine. Results of this study showed that inhibition of the mammalian target of
rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) pathway, by rapamycin or by small interfering
RNA-mediated targeting of raptor (gene name, RPTOR), enhanced amniotic fluid stem
cell differentiation toward a chondrocytic phenotype and increased their
engrafting efficiency into cartilaginous structures. Moreover, freshly isolated
and in vitro passaged human chondrocytes also showed redifferentiation upon
mTORC1 inhibition during culturing. Therefore, this study revealed that rapamycin
could enable a more efficient clinical use of cell-based therapy approaches to
treat articular cartilage defects.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 27025692  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Exp Hematol. 2016 Mar 4. pii: S0301-472X(16)30001-7. doi:
10.1016/j.exphem.2016.02.010. [Epub ahead of print]

SENP1, but not fetal hemoglobin, differentiates Andean highlanders with chronic
mountain sickness from healthy individuals Among Andean highlanders.

Hsieh MM(1), Callacondo D(2), Rojas-Camayo J(3), Quesada-Olarte J(3), Wang X(4), 
Uchida N(5), Maric I(6), Remaley AT(6), Leon-Velarde F(3), Villafuerte FC(3),
Tisdale JF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Clinical Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD. Electronic address:
matthewhs@mail.nih.gov. (2)School of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Universidad Privada de Tacna, Tacna, Perú; Facultad de Ciencias y Filosofía,
Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia (UPCH), Lima, Perú; Clínica Internacional,
Lima, Peru. (3)Facultad de Ciencias y Filosofía, Universidad Peruana Cayetano
Heredia (UPCH), Lima, Perú (4)Sickle Cell Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD. (5)Molecular and Clinical
Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center,
Bethesda, MD.

Chronic mountain sickness (CMS) results from chronic hypoxia. It is unclear why
certain highlanders develop CMS. We hypothesized that modest increases in fetal
hemoglobin (HbF) are associated with lower CMS severity. In this cross-sectional 
study, we found that HbF levels were normal (median = 0.4%) in all 153 adult
Andean natives in Cerro de Pasco, Peru. Compared with healthy adults, the
borderline elevated hemoglobin group frequently had symptoms (headaches,
tinnitus, cyanosis, dilatation of veins) of CMS. Although the mean hemoglobin
level differed between the healthy (17.1 g/dL) and CMS (22.3 g/dL) groups, mean
plasma erythropoietin (EPO) levels were similar (healthy, 17.7 mIU/mL; CMS, 12.02
mIU/mL). Sanger sequencing determined that single-nucleotide polymorphisms in
endothelial PAS domain 1 (EPAS1) and egl nine homolog 1 (EGLN1), associated with 
lower hemoglobin in Tibetans, were not identified in Andeans. Sanger sequencing
of sentrin-specific protease 1 (SENP1) and acidic nuclear phosphoprotein 32
family, member D (ANP32D), in healthy and CMS individuals revealed that non-G/G
genotypes were associated with higher CMS scores. No JAK2 V617F mutation was
detected in CMS individuals. Thus, HbF and other classic erythropoietic
parameters did not differ between healthy and CMS individuals. However, the
non-G/G genotypes of SENP1 appeared to differentiate individuals with CMS from
healthy Andean highlanders.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26952840  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Anim Genet. 2016 Feb 28. doi: 10.1111/age.12420. [Epub ahead of print]

Use of single nucleotide polymorphisms in candidate genes associated with
daughter pregnancy rate for prediction of genetic merit for reproduction in
Holstein cows.

Ortega MS(1), Denicol AC(1), Cole JB(2), Null DJ(2), Hansen PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, D.H. Barron Reproductive and Perinatal Biology 
Research Program and Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 
USA. (2)Animal Genomics and Improvement Laboratory, Agricultural Research
Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, MD, USA.

We evaluated 69 SNPs in genes previously related to fertility and production
traits for their relationship to daughter pregnancy rate (DPR), cow conception
rate (CCR) and heifer conception rate (HCR) in a separate population of Holstein 
cows grouped according to their predicted transmitting ability (PTA) [=-1
(n = 1287) and =1.5 (n = 1036)] for DPR. Genotyping was performed using Sequenom 
MassARRAY(®) . There were a total of 39 SNPs associated with the three fertility 
traits. The SNPs that explained the greater proportion of the genetic variation
for DPR were COQ9 (3.2%), EPAS1 (1.0%), CAST (1.0%), C7H19orf60 (1.0%) and MRPL48
(1.0%); for CCR were GOLGA4 (2.4%), COQ9 (1.8%), EPAS1 (1.1%) and MRPL48 (0.8%); 
and for HCR were HSD17B7 (1.0%), AP3B1 (0.8%), HSD17B12 (0.7%) and CACNA1D
(0.6%). Inclusion of 39 SNPs previously associated with DPR in the genetic
evaluation system increased the reliability of PTA for DPR by 0.20%. Many of the 
genes represented by SNPs associated with fertility are involved in
steroidogenesis or are regulated by steroids. A large proportion of SNPs
previously associated with genetic merit for fertility in Holstein bulls
maintained their association in a separate population of cows. The inclusion of
these genes in genetic evaluation can improve reliabilities of genomic estimates 
for fertility.

© 2016 Stichting International Foundation for Animal Genetics.

PMID: 26923315  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016 Feb 22. pii: annrheumdis-2015-208406. doi:
10.1136/annrheumdis-2015-208406. [Epub ahead of print]

Pleiotropic roles of metallothioneins as regulators of chondrocyte apoptosis and 
catabolic and anabolic pathways during osteoarthritis pathogenesis.

Won Y(1), Shin Y(1), Chun CH(2), Cho Y(3), Ha CW(4), Kim JH(5), Chun JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju,
Korea. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Wonkwang University School of
Medicine, Iksan, Korea. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Stem Cell and
Regenerative Medicine Institute, Samsung Medical Center, SungKyunKwan University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea Department of Health Sciences and Technology,
SAIHST, SungKyunKwan University, Seoul, South Korea. (5)School of Life Sciences, 
Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Korea Department of
Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: The zinc-ZIP8-MTF1 axis induces metallothionein (MT) expression and is
a catabolic regulator of experimental osteoarthritis (OA) in mice. The main aim
of the current study was to explore the roles and underlying molecular mechanisms
of MTs in OA pathogenesis.
METHODS: Experimental OA in mice was induced by destabilisation of the medial
meniscus or intra-articular injection of adenovirus carrying a target gene
(Ad-Zip8, Ad-Mtf1, Ad-Epas1, Ad-Nampt, Ad-Mt1 or Ad-Mt2) into wild type,
Zip8(fl/fl); Col2a1-Cre, Mtf1(fl/fl); Col2a1-Cre and Mt1/Mt2 double knockout
mice. Primary cultured mouse chondrocytes were infected with Ad-Mt1 or Ad-Mt2,
and gene expression profiles analysed via microarray and reverse
transcription-PCR. Proteins in human and mouse OA cartilage were identified via
immunostaining. Chondrocyte apoptosis in OA cartilage was determined using
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT)-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate
(dUTP) nick end labelling (TUNEL).
RESULTS: MTs were highly expressed in human and mouse OA cartilage.
Hypoxia-inducible factor 2a, nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase and several
proinflammatory cytokine pathways, as well as the zinc-ZIP8-MTF1 axis were
identified as upstream regulators of MT expression. Genetic deletion of Mt1 and
Mt2 enhanced cartilage destruction through increasing chondrocyte apoptosis.
Unexpectedly, aberrant overexpression of MT2, but not MT1, induced upregulation
of matrix-degrading enzymes and downregulation of matrix molecules through
nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and activator protein-1 (AP-1) activation,
ultimately leading to OA.
CONCLUSIONS: MTs play an antiapoptotic role in post-traumatic OA. However,
aberrant and chronic upregulation of MT2 triggers an imbalance between
chondrocyte anabolism and catabolism, consequently accelerating OA development.
Our findings collectively highlight pleiotropic roles of MTs as regulators of
chondrocyte apoptosis as well as catabolic and anabolic pathways during OA
pathogenesis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26903440  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. BMC Genomics. 2016 Feb 18;17(1):122. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2449-0.

Exome sequencing reveals genetic differentiation due to high-altitude adaptation 
in the Tibetan cashmere goat (Capra hircus).

Song S(1,)(2), Yao N(3), Yang M(4), Liu X(5), Dong K(6), Zhao Q(7), Pu Y(8), He
X(9), Guan W(10), Yang N(11), Ma Y(12), Jiang L(13).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory for Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of
Ministry of Agriculture of China, Institute of Animal Science (IAS), Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, 100193, China.
songs_193@163.com. (2)Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, 100094, China. songs_193@163.com. (3)The Key
Laboratory for Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of
Agriculture of China, Institute of Animal Science (IAS), Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, 100193, China. yaona820226@126.com. (4)The
Key Laboratory for Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of
Agriculture of China, Institute of Animal Science (IAS), Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, 100193, China. yangmindk@163.com. (5)The
Key Laboratory for Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of
Agriculture of China, Institute of Animal Science (IAS), Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, 100193, China. lxx_caas@163.com. (6)The
Key Laboratory for Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of
Agriculture of China, Institute of Animal Science (IAS), Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, 100193, China. dkzhe1987@163.com. (7)The
Key Laboratory for Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of
Agriculture of China, Institute of Animal Science (IAS), Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, 100193, China. zhaoqianjun@caas.cn. (8)The
Key Laboratory for Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of
Agriculture of China, Institute of Animal Science (IAS), Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, 100193, China. pyb@iascaas.net.cn. (9)The 
Key Laboratory for Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of
Agriculture of China, Institute of Animal Science (IAS), Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, 100193, China. hexiaohong@caas.cn. (10)The
Key Laboratory for Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of
Agriculture of China, Institute of Animal Science (IAS), Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, 100193, China. wjguan86@iascaas.net.cn.
(11)Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, 100094, China. nyang@cau.edu.cn. (12)The Key Laboratory for Farm Animal 
Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of Agriculture of China, Institute 
of Animal Science (IAS), Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS),
Beijing, 100193, China. yuehui.ma@263.net. (13)The Key Laboratory for Farm Animal
Genetic Resources and Utilization of Ministry of Agriculture of China, Institute 
of Animal Science (IAS), Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS),
Beijing, 100193, China. jianglin@caas.cn.

BACKGROUND: The Tibetan cashmere goat (Capra hircus), one of the most ancient
breeds in China, has historically been a critical source of meat and cashmere
production for local farmers. To adapt to the high-altitude area, extremely harsh
climate, and hypoxic environment that the Tibetan cashmere goat lives in, this
goat has developed distinct phenotypic traits compared to lowland breeds.
However, the genetic components underlying this phenotypic adaptation remain
largely unknown.
RESULTS: We obtained 118,700 autosomal SNPs through exome sequencing of 330
cashmere goats located at a wide geographic range, including the Tibetan Plateau 
and low-altitude regions in China. The great majority of SNPs showed low genetic 
differentiation among populations; however, approximately 2-3 % of the loci
showed more genetic differentiation than expected under a selectively neutral
model. Together with a combined analysis of high- and low-altitude breeds, we
revealed 339 genes potentially under high-altitude selection. Genes associated
with cardiovascular system development were significantly enriched in our study. 
Among these genes, the most evident one was endothelial PAS domain protein 1
(EPAS1), which has been previously reported to be involved in complex oxygen
sensing and significantly associated with high-altitude adaptation of human, dog,
and grey wolf. The missense mutation Q579L that we identified in EPAS1, which
occurs next to the Hypoxia-Inducible Factor-1 (HIF-1) domain, was exclusively
enriched in the high-altitude populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides insights concerning the population variation in
six different cashmere goat populations in China. The variants in cardiovascular 
system-related genes may explain the observed phenotypic adaptation of the
Tibetan cashmere goat.

PMCID: PMC4758086
PMID: 26892324  [PubMed - in process]


6. Hum Genet. 2016 Apr;135(4):393-402. doi: 10.1007/s00439-016-1641-2. Epub 2016 Feb
16.

Wide distribution and altitude correlation of an archaic high-altitude-adaptive
EPAS1 haplotype in the Himalayas.

Hackinger S(1), Kraaijenbrink T(2), Xue Y(1), Mezzavilla M(1,)(3), Asan(4), van
Driem G(5), Jobling MA(6), de Knijff P(2), Tyler-Smith C(1), Ayub Q(7).

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SA, UK. (2)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (3)Division of Experimental Genetics,
Sidra Medical and Research Center, Doha, Qatar. (4)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen,
518083, China. (5)Institute of Linguistics, University of Bern, Bern, CH 3012,
Switzerland. (6)Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(7)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridgeshire, CB10 1SA, UK. qa1@sanger.ac.uk.

High-altitude adaptation in Tibetans is influenced by introgression of a 32.7-kb 
haplotype from the Denisovans, an extinct branch of archaic humans, lying within 
the endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1), and has also been reported in
Sherpa. We genotyped 19 variants in this genomic region in 1507 Eurasian
individuals, including 1188 from Bhutan and Nepal residing at altitudes between
86 and 4550 m above sea level. Derived alleles for five SNPs characterizing the
core Denisovan haplotype (AGGAA) were present at high frequency not only in
Tibetans and Sherpa, but also among many populations from the Himalayas, showing 
a significant correlation with altitude (Spearman's correlation
coefficient = 0.75, p value 3.9 × 10(-11)). Seven East- and South-Asian 1000
Genomes Project individuals shared the Denisovan haplotype extending beyond the
32-kb region, enabling us to refine the haplotype structure and identify a
candidate regulatory variant (rs370299814) that might be interacting in an
additive manner with the derived G allele of rs150877473, the variant previously 
associated with high-altitude adaptation in Tibetans. Denisovan-derived alleles
were also observed at frequencies of 3-14 % in the 1000 Genomes Project African
samples. The closest African haplotype is, however, separated from the Asian
high-altitude haplotype by 22 mutations whereas only three mutations, including
rs150877473, separate the Asians from the Denisovan, consistent with distant
shared ancestry for African and Asian haplotypes and Denisovan adaptive
introgression.

PMID: 26883865  [PubMed - in process]


7. Nat Commun. 2016 Feb 8;7:10605. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10605.

Genome-wide association study identifies multiple susceptibility loci for
craniofacial microsomia.

Zhang YB(1,)(2), Hu J(2), Zhang J(2,)(3), Zhou X(2), Li X(4), Gu C(1), Liu T(2), 
Xie Y(2), Liu J(5), Gu M(1), Wang P(1), Wu T(1), Qian J(2), Wang Y(2), Dong X(6),
Yu J(1), Zhang Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Sciences and Key Laboratory of Genome Science and
Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China. (2)Department of Ear Reconstruction, Plastic Surgery Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100144, China. (3)Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, Brody School of Medicine, East Carolina University,
Greenville, North Carolina 27834, USA. (4)Department of Cardiology, Beijing
Anzhen Hospital of the Capital University of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100029,
China. (5)Beijing KPS biotechnology, Beijing 102206, China. (6)Department of
Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA.

Craniofacial microsomia (CFM) is a rare congenital anomaly that involves immature
derivatives from the first and second pharyngeal arches. The genetic pathogenesis
of CFM is still unclear. Here we interrogate 0.9 million genetic variants in 939 
CFM cases and 2,012 controls from China. After genotyping of an additional 443
cases and 1,669 controls, we identify 8 significantly associated loci with the
most significant SNP rs13089920 (logistic regression P=2.15 × 10(-120)) and 5
suggestive loci. The above 13 associated loci, harboured by candidates of ROBO1, 
GATA3, GBX2, FGF3, NRP2, EDNRB, SHROOM3, SEMA7A, PLCD3, KLF12 and EPAS1, are
found to be enriched for genes involved in neural crest cell (NCC) development
and vasculogenesis. We then perform whole-genome sequencing on 21 samples from
the case cohort, and identify several novel loss-of-function mutations within the
associated loci. Our results provide new insights into genetic background of
craniofacial microsomia.

PMCID: PMC4748111
PMID: 26853712  [PubMed - in process]


8. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016 Feb 5. pii: annrheumdis-2015-208420. doi:
10.1136/annrheumdis-2015-208420. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibition of Notch1 promotes hedgehog signalling in a HES1-dependent manner in
chondrocytes and exacerbates experimental osteoarthritis.

Lin NY(1), Distler A(1), Beyer C(1), Philipi-Schöbinger A(1), Breda S(2), Dees
C(1), Stock M(1), Tomcik M(3), Niemeier A(4), Dell'Accio F(5), Gelse K(6),
Mattson MP(7), Schett G(1), Distler JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III and Institute for Clinical Immunology,
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine III and Institute for Clinical Immunology, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany Division of Rheumatology, University of
Pavia, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy. (3)Institute of
Rheumatology and Department of Rheumatology, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, Prague, Czech Republic. (4)Department of Orthopedics, University
Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (5)William Harvey Research
Institute, Barts and The London, School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary,
University of London, London, UK. (6)Division of Trauma Surgery and Orthopedic
Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany.
(7)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research
Program, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Notch ligands and receptors have recently been shown to be
differentially expressed in osteoarthritis (OA). We aim to further elucidate the 
functional role of Notch signalling in OA using Notch1 antisense transgenic
(Notch1 AS) mice.
METHODS: Notch and hedgehog signalling were analysed by real-time PCR and
immunohistochemistry. Notch-1 AS mice were employed as a model of impaired Notch 
signalling in vivo. Experimental OA was induced by destabilisation of the medial 
meniscus (DMM). The extent of cartilage destruction and osteophyte formation was 
analysed by safranin-O staining with subsequent assessment of the Osteoarthritis 
Research Society International (OARSI) and Mankin scores and µCT scanning.
Collagen X staining was used as a marker of chondrocyte hypertrophy. The role of 
hairy/enhancer of split 1 (Hes-1) was investigated with knockdown and
overexpression experiments.
RESULTS: Notch signalling was activated in human and murine OA with increased
expression of Jagged1, Notch-1, accumulation of the Notch intracellular domain 1 
and increased transcription of Hes-1. Notch1 AS mice showed exacerbated OA with
increases in OARSI scores, osteophyte formation, increased subchondral bone plate
density, collagen X and osteocalcin expression and elevated levels of Epas1 and
ADAM-TS5 mRNA. Inhibition of the Notch pathway induced activation of hedgehog
signalling with induction of Gli-1 and Gli-2 and increased transcription of
hedgehog target genes. The regulatory effects of Notch signalling on
Gli-expression were mimicked by Hes-1.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of Notch signalling activates hedgehog signalling,
enhances chondrocyte hypertrophy and exacerbates experimental OA including
osteophyte formation. These data suggest that the activation of the Notch pathway
may limit aberrant hedgehog signalling in OA.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26851274  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Stem Cells. 2016 Feb 6. doi: 10.1002/stem.2306. [Epub ahead of print]

Manipulating Stem Cells to Treat Calcification Pharmacological Regulation of
in-situ Tissue Stem Cells Differentiation for Soft Tissue Calcification
Treatment.

Hu JJ(1,)(2), Yin Z(1,)(2), Shen WL(3), Xie YB(1,)(2), Zhu T(1,)(2), Lu P(1,)(2),
Cai YZ(4), Kong MJ(3), Heng BC(5), Zhou YT(1,)(6), Chen WS(3), Chen X(1,)(2),
Ouyang HW(1,)(2,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Li Dak Sum & Yip Yio Chin Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, 
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, 310009, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine of Zhejiang Province, 
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, 310009, China. (3)Department
of Orthopedic Surgery, 2nd Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Zhejiang, 310009, China. (4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, 1st
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, 310009,
China. (5)Department of Biosystems Science & Engineering (D-BSSE), ETH-Zurich,
Switzerland. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (7)Department of Sports
Medicine, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Zhejiang, 310000, China.
(8)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
310003, Hangzhou, China.

Calcification of soft tissues, such as heart valves and tendons, is a common
clinical problem with limited therapeutics. Tissue specific stem/progenitor cells
proliferate to repopulate injured tissues. But some of them become divergent to
the direction of ossification in the local pathological microenvironment, thereby
representing a cellular target for pharmacological approach. We observed that
HIF-2alpha (encoded by EPAS1) signaling is markedly activated within
stem/progenitor cells recruited at calcified sites of diseased human tendons and 
heart valves. Proinflammatory microenvironment, rather than hypoxia, is
correlated with HIF-2alpha activation and promoted osteochondrogenic
differentiation of tendon stem/progenitor cells (TSPCs). Abnormal upregulation of
HIF-2alpha served as a key switch to direct TSPCs differentiation into
osteochondral-lineage rather than teno-lineage. Notably, Scleraxis (Scx), an
essential tendon specific transcription factor, was suppressed upon constitutive 
activation of HIF-2alpha and mediated the effect of HIF-2alpha on TSPCs fate
decision. Moreover, pharmacological inhibition of HIF-2alpha with digoxin, which 
is a widely utilized drug, can efficiently inhibit calcification and enhance
tenogenesis in vitro and in the Achilles's tendinopathy model. Taken together,
these findings reveal the significant role of the tissue stem/progenitor cells
fate decision and suggest that pharmacological regulation of HIF-2alpha function 
is a promising approach for soft tissue calcification treatment. This article is 
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26851078  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Nat Commun. 2016 Feb 3;7:10539. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10539.

Epigenetic re-expression of HIF-2a suppresses soft tissue sarcoma growth.

Nakazawa MS(1), Eisinger-Mathason TS(1,)(2), Sadri N(1,)(3), Ochocki JD(1), Gade 
TP(4), Amin RK(5), Simon MC(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania, BRB
II/III Room 456, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
(2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. (4)Department of Radiology, Perelman
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19104, USA. (5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104,
USA.

In soft tissue sarcomas (STS), low intratumoural O2 (hypoxia) is a poor
prognostic indicator. HIF-1a mediates key transcriptional responses to hypoxia,
and promotes STS metastasis; however, the role of the related HIF-2a protein is
unknown. Surprisingly, here we show that HIF-2a inhibits high-grade STS cell
growth in vivo, as loss of HIF-2a promotes sarcoma proliferation and increases
calcium and mTORC1 signalling in undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma and
dedifferentiated liposarcoma. We find that most human STS have lower levels of
EPAS1 (the gene encoding HIF-2a) expression relative to normal tissue. Many
cancers, including STS, contain altered epigenetics, and our findings define an
epigenetic mechanism whereby EPAS1 is silenced during sarcoma progression. The
clinically approved HDAC inhibitor Vorinostat specifically increases HIF-2a, but 
not HIF-1a, accumulation in multiple STS subtypes. Vorinostat inhibits STS tumour
growth, an effect ameliorated by HIF-2a deletion, implicating HIF-2a as a
biomarker for Vorinostat efficacy in STS.

PMCID: PMC4742834
PMID: 26837714  [PubMed - in process]


11. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Apr;1862(4):670-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2016.01.017. 
Epub 2016 Jan 26.

EPAS1/HIF-2 alpha-mediated downregulation of tissue factor pathway inhibitor
leads to a pro-thrombotic potential in endothelial cells.

Stavik B(1), Espada S(2), Cui XY(3), Iversen N(4), Holm S(5), Mowinkel MC(6),
Halvorsen B(7), Skretting G(8), Sandset PM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Oslo University Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen,
0424 Oslo, Norway; Research Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University
Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
benedicte.stavik@rr-research.no. (2)Department of Haematology, Oslo University
Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway; Research Institute of
Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo,
Norway; Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Postboks 1072
Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: s.e.serrano@medisin.uio.no.
(3)Department of Haematology, Oslo University Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen,
0424 Oslo, Norway; Research Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University
Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oslo, Postboks 1072 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway.
Electronic address: x.y.cui@medisin.uio.no. (4)Department of Medical Genetics,
Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, Postboks 4950 Nydalen, 0424
Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: nina.iversen@medisin.uio.no. (5)Research
Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen, 
0424 Oslo, Norway; Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Margrethe Grundtvigsvei 6,
2609 Lillehammer, Norway. Electronic address: sverre.holm@rr-research.no.
(6)Department of Haematology, Oslo University Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen,
0424 Oslo, Norway; Research Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University
Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
uxmaow@ous-hf.no. (7)Research Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University
Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oslo, Postboks 1072 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway.
Electronic address: bente.halvorsen@rr-research.no. (8)Department of Haematology,
Oslo University Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway; Research
Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen, 
0424 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: grethe.skretting@medisin.uio.no.
(9)Department of Haematology, Oslo University Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen,
0424 Oslo, Norway; Research Institute of Internal Medicine, Oslo University
Hospital, Postboks 4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway; Institute of Clinical
Medicine, University of Oslo, Postboks 1072 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway.
Electronic address: p.m.sandset@medisin.uio.no.

Neovascularization and hemorrhaging are evident in advanced atherosclerotic
plaques due to hypoxic conditions, and mediate the accumulation of metabolic
substrates, inflammatory cells, lipids, and other blood born factors inside the
plaque. Tissue factor (TF) pathway inhibitor (TFPI) is mainly expressed by
endothelial cells and is the endogenous inhibitor of the coagulation activator
TF, which together with the downstream product thrombin can drive plaque
progression and atherogenesis. We aimed to investigate the effect of hypoxic
conditions on endothelial cell expression and activity of TFPI and TF that are
important in coagulation initiation. Hypoxia was induced in primary human
umbilical vein endothelial cells using chemicals or 1% oxygen tension, and mRNA
and protein expressions were measured using qRT-PCR, ELISA, and Western blot
analysis. Microscopy of fluorescence-labeled cells was used to visualize
cell-associated TFPI. Cell-surface factor Xa (FXa) activity was measured using a 
two-stage chromogenic substrate method. We found that hypoxia reduced the TFPI
mRNA and protein levels and increased the TF mRNA expression in a dose-dependent 
manner. The effect on TFPI was apparent on all the protein pools of TFPI, i.e.,
secreted TFPI, cell-surface associated TFPI, and intracellular TFPI, and seemed
to be dependent upon hypoxia inducible factor-2a (HIF-2a). An increase in FXa
activity was also observed on the endothelial cell surface, reflecting an
increase in pro-thrombotic potential of the cells. Our findings indicate that
hypoxic conditions may enhance the pro-coagulant activity of endothelial cells,
which may promote atherogenesis in addition to clinical events and thus the
severity of atherosclerotic disorders.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26826018  [PubMed - in process]


12. Hum Mutat. 2016 Feb;37(2):216-23. doi: 10.1002/humu.22935. Epub 2015 Dec 14.

HMOX2 Functions as a Modifier Gene for High-Altitude Adaptation in Tibetans.

Yang D(1,)(2), Peng Y(1), Ouzhuluobu(3), Bianbazhuoma(4), Cui C(3), Bianba(3),
Wang L(5), Xiang K(1), He Y(1,)(2), Zhang H(1), Zhang X(1), Liu J(1,)(2), Shi
H(1,)(6), Pan Y(3), Duojizhuoma(3), Dejiquzong(3), Cirenyangji(3),
Baimakangzhuo(3), Gonggalanzi(3), Liu S(5), Gengdeng(5), Wu T(5), Chen H(7), Qi
X(1), Su B(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, 650223, China. (2)Kunming College 
of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049,
China. (3)High Altitude Medical Research Center, School of Medicine, Tibetan
University, Lhasa, 850000, China. (4)The Municipal People's Hospital of Lhasa,
Lhasa, 850000, Tibet, China. (5)National Key Laboratory of High Altitude
Medicine, High Altitude Medical Research Institute, Xining, 810012, China.
(6)Institute of Primate Translational Medicine, Kunming University of Science and
Technology, Kunming, Yunnan, 650500, China. (7)Center for Computational Genomics,
Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101,
China.

Tibetans are well adapted to high-altitude environments. Among the adaptive
traits in Tibetans, the relatively low hemoglobin level is considered a blunted
erythropoietic response to hypoxic challenge. Previously, EPAS1 and EGLN1, the
major upstream regulators in the hypoxic pathway, were reportedly involved in the
hemoglobin regulation in Tibetans. In this study, we report a downstream gene
(HMOX2) involved in heme catabolism, which harbors potentially adaptive variants 
in Tibetans. We first resequenced the entire genomic region (45.6 kb) of HMOX2 in
Tibetans, which confirmed the previously suspected signal of positive selection
on HMOX2 in Tibetans. Subsequent association analyses of hemoglobin levels in two
independent Tibetan populations (a total of 1,250 individuals) showed a
male-specific association between the HMOX2 variants and hemoglobin levels.
Tibetan males with the derived C allele at rs4786504:T>C displayed lower
hemoglobin level as compared with the T allele carriers. Furthermore, our in
vitro experiments indicated that the C allele of rs4786504 could increase the
expression of HMOX2, presumably leading to a more efficient breakdown of heme
that may help maintain a relatively low hemoglobin level at high altitude.
Collectively, we propose that HMOX2 contributes to high-altitude adaptation in
Tibetans by functioning as a modifier in the regulation of hemoglobin metabolism.

© 2015 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMID: 26781569  [PubMed - in process]


13. Nature. 2016 Jan 14;529(7585):172-7. doi: 10.1038/nature16475. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

An ID2-dependent mechanism for VHL inactivation in cancer.

Lee SB(1), Frattini V(1), Bansal M(2,)(3), Castano AM(1), Sherman D(4),
Hutchinson K(4), Bruce JN(5), Califano A(2,)(3), Liu G(1), Cardozo T(4), Iavarone
A(1,)(6,)(7), Lasorella A(1,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York
10032, USA. (2)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York 10032, USA. (3)Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics,
Columbia University Medical Center, New York 10032, USA. (4)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, NYU School of Medicine, New York 10014, 
USA. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, Columbia University Medical Center, New York 
10032, USA. (6)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York 10032, USA. (7)Department of Pathology, Columbia University Medical Center, 
New York 10032, USA. (8)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York 10032, USA.

Mechanisms that maintain cancer stem cells are crucial to tumour progression. The
ID2 protein supports cancer hallmarks including the cancer stem cell state. HIFa 
transcription factors, most notably HIF2a (also known as EPAS1), are expressed in
and required for maintenance of cancer stem cells (CSCs). However, the pathways
that are engaged by ID2 or drive HIF2a accumulation in CSCs have remained
unclear. Here we report that DYRK1A and DYRK1B kinases phosphorylate ID2 on
threonine 27 (Thr27). Hypoxia downregulates this phosphorylation via inactivation
of DYRK1A and DYRK1B. The activity of these kinases is stimulated in normoxia by 
the oxygen-sensing prolyl hydroxylase PHD1 (also known as EGLN2). ID2 binds to
the VHL ubiquitin ligase complex, displaces VHL-associated Cullin 2, and impairs 
HIF2a ubiquitylation and degradation. Phosphorylation of Thr27 of ID2 by DYRK1
blocks ID2-VHL interaction and preserves HIF2a ubiquitylation. In glioblastoma,
ID2 positively modulates HIF2a activity. Conversely, elevated expression of DYRK1
phosphorylates Thr27 of ID2, leading to HIF2a destabilization, loss of glioma
stemness, inhibition of tumour growth, and a more favourable outcome for patients
with glioblastoma.

PMID: 26735018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Indian J Cancer. 2015 Dec;52 Suppl 2:e47-55. doi: 10.4103/0019-509X.172513.

Transcatheter arterial infusion chemotherapy increases expression level of
miR-142-5p in stage III colorectal cancer.

Shi D, Zhai B(1), Zheng Y, Ren R, Han M, Wang X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interventional Oncology, Renji Hospital Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine,160 Pujian Rd., Pudong, Shanghai 200127, China.
(2)Shanghai Institute of Medical Image Research, 180 Fenglin Rd., Shanghai
200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression level of miR-142-5p and its potential
target gene endothelial PAS domain protein 1(EPAS1) in Stage III colorectal
cancer during Transcatheter arterial infusion chemotherapy (TAI).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Illumina high-throughput sequencing was used to obtain
miRNA expression profiles of paired tumor and adjacent normal tissues from one
patient received TAI 1 week before the operation and another patient directly
underwent an operation. The expression levels of miR-142-5p was measured with
both high-throughput sequencing and quantitative real time-polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: The expression levels of miR-142-5p, were significantly reduced in tumor
tissues of stage III CRC, then significantly increased in tumor tissues receiving
TAI and higher than tumor tissues without TAI. The apoptosis rate of HT-29 colon 
cancer cells was mildly increased after transfection with pre-miR-142. miR-142-5p
could bind directly to the 3'untranslated region of endothelial PAS domain
protein 1 and reduce its expression.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-142-5p is a potential tumor suppressor in CRC and is upregulated
in tumor tissues after TAI, suggesting its potential clinical values for testing 
the functionality of TAI and predicting the progress of CRC.

PMID: 26728674  [PubMed - in process]


15. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2015 May 25;44(5):571-7.

[Expression of plateau adaptation gene of rat tissues after plain acute exposure 
to high altitude].

[Article in Chinese]

Hua X(1), Ying H(2), Qiang Y(1), Wen-Bing LI(1), Hui LU(1), Zheng-Ping J(1), Rong
W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Plateau Environmental Damage Control of PLA, Lanzhou General
Hospital of Lanzhou Command, Lanzhou 730050, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Plateau 
Environmental Damage Control of PLA, Lanzhou General Hospital of Lanzhou Command,
Lanzhou 730050, China;School of Life Science, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730050,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expression of the plateau adaptablity gene(EPAS1, EGLN1 
and PPARa) and proteins(HIF-2, PHD2 and PPARa) in rats blood, heart, liver, lung 
and kidney tissue after the rats exposed to high altitude.
METHODS: The Wistar rats were randomly divided into plain group(Shanghai, 55 m), 
acute exposure to high altitude 3400 m group, acute exposure to high altitude
4300 m group. Blood and organs of rats were collected in 1, 3, 5 days after
arrival. Real time PCR and ELISA were used to compare the expression of plateau
adaptablity gene and related protein between plain group and high altitude
exposure groups.
RESULTS: The count of red blood cells, hemoglobin and HCT in high altitude 4300 m
were higher than those in plain group. Compared with plain group, the expression 
of EPAS1 gene in blood, heart, liver and kidney tissue of rats at high altitude
increased obviously(all P<0.05); the expression of EGLN1 in the heart, liver,
brain and kidney increased, and PPARa gene in the heart, liver and kidney
increased(all P<0.05). Compared with plain group, the expression of HIF-2 protein
increased significantly at high altitudes in the liver, brain and kidney tissues.
PHD2 and PPARa increased in the heart, liver and kidney.
CONCLUSION: Plateau adaptive genes(EPAS1, EGLN1 and PPARa) and protein(HIF-2,
PHD2 and PPARa) differed in different altitude and different organizations. They 
might be used as target markers of plateau hypoxia.

PMID: 26713534  [PubMed - in process]


16. Exp Ther Med. 2015 Sep;10(3):907-914. Epub 2015 Jul 1.

Genetic variants of endothelial PAS domain protein 1 are associated with
susceptibility to acute mountain sickness in individuals unaccustomed to high
altitude: A nested case-control study.

Guo LI(1), Zhang J(1), Jin J(1), Gao X(1), Yu J(1), Geng Q(1), Li H(1), Huang
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases of PLA, Department of Cardiology, Xinqiao
Hospital, The Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400037, P.R. China.

The endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) gene functions to sense the blood
oxygen level by regulating the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor pathway,
and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of EPAS1 have been found to have a
strong and positive selection in the adaptation of the native Tibetan highland
population to high-altitude hypoxia. The aim of the present study was to
investigate the effect of EPAS1 SNPs on the risk of acute mountain sickness (AMS)
and the physiological responses to acute high-altitude hypoxia in lowland humans.
Three tag SNPs (rs6756667, rs13419896 and rs4953354; minor allele frequency, =5%)
were selected and genotyped in 603 unrelated Han Chinese men, who had traveled to
Lhasa (a high-altitude hypoxia environment) by plane, using a matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry method. The data
showed that the EPAS1 rs6756667 wild-type GG homozygous genotype was associated
with elevated AMS risk compared with the AA and AG genotypes (odds ratio, 1.815; 
95% confidence interval, 1.233-2.666; P=0.0023) using the dominant-model
analysis. EPAS1 rs6756667 GG genotypes were also associated with higher levels of
hemoglobin, red blood cells and hematocrit than those carrying the AG
heterozygote during AMS development. These findings indicate that EPAS1 SNPs play
a role in the physiological effects of AMS, and these effects could be further
evaluated as a therapeutic strategy to control acute hypoxia-related human
diseases.

PMCID: PMC4533176
PMID: 26622413  [PubMed]


17. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2016 Jan;36(1):19-24. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.306681. Epub 2015 Nov 24.

Myeloid-Derived Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor and Hypoxia-Inducible Factor
Are Dispensable for Ocular Neovascularization-Brief Report.

Liyanage SE(1), Fantin A(1), Villacampa P(1), Lange CA(1), Denti L(1), Cristante 
E(1), Smith AJ(1), Ali RR(1), Luhmann UF(1), Bainbridge JW(2), Ruhrberg C(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Divisions of Genetics (S.E.L., P.V., C.A.L., E.C., A.J.S., R.R.A.,
U.F.L., J.W.B.) and Cell Biology (A.F., L.D., C.R.), UCL Institute of
Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. (2)From the
Divisions of Genetics (S.E.L., P.V., C.A.L., E.C., A.J.S., R.R.A., U.F.L.,
J.W.B.) and Cell Biology (A.F., L.D., C.R.), UCL Institute of Ophthalmology,
University College London, London, United Kingdom. c.ruhrberg@ucl.ac.uk
j.bainbridge@ucl.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: Ocular neovascularization (ONV) is a pathological feature of
sight-threatening human diseases, such as diabetic retinopathy and age-related
macular degeneration. Macrophage depletion in mouse models of ONV reduces the
formation of pathological blood vessels, and myeloid cells are widely considered 
an important source of the vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF). However, 
the importance of VEGF or its upstream regulators hypoxia-inducible factor-1a
(HIF1a) and hypoxia-inducible factor-2a (HIF2a) as myeloid-derived regulators of 
ONV remains to be determined.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: We used 2 mouse models of ONV, choroidal neovascularization
and oxygen-induced retinopathy, to show that Vegfa is highly expressed by several
cell types, but not myeloid cells during ONV. Moreover, myeloid-specific VEGF
ablation did not reduce total ocular VEGF during choroidal neovascularization or 
oxygen-induced retinopathy. In agreement, the conditional inactivation of Vegfa, 
Hif1a, or Epas1 in recruited and resident myeloid cells that accumulated at sites
of neovascularization did not significantly reduce choroidal neovascularization
or oxygen-induced retinopathy.
CONCLUSIONS: The finding that myeloid cells are not a significant local source of
VEGF in these rodent models of ONV suggests that myeloid function in neovascular 
eye disease differs from skin wound healing and other neovascular pathologies.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4684248
PMID: 26603154  [PubMed - in process]


18. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 25;5:17262. doi: 10.1038/srep17262.

Genetic adaptations of the plateau zokor in high-elevation burrows.

Shao Y(1,)(2), Li JX(3), Ge RL(4), Zhong L(3), Irwin DM(1,)(5,)(6), Murphy
RW(1,)(7), Zhang YP(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650223, China. (2)Kunming
College of Life Science, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming
650204, China. (3)Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-resources,
Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, China. (4)Key Laboratory for High Altitude
Medicine of Ministry of Chinese Education and Research Center for High Altitude
Medicine, Qinghai University, Xining 810001, China. (5)Department of Laboratory
Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1A8, Canada.
(6)Banting and Best Diabetes Centre, University of Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1A8,
Canada. (7)Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, Royal Ontario
Museum, 100 Queen's Park, Toronto, Ont., M5S 2C6, Canada.

The plateau zokor (Myospalax baileyi) spends its entire life underground in
sealed burrows. Confronting limited oxygen and high carbon dioxide
concentrations, and complete darkness, they epitomize a successful physiological 
adaptation. Here, we employ transcriptome sequencing to explore the genetic
underpinnings of their adaptations to this unique habitat. Compared to Rattus
norvegicus, genes belonging to GO categories related to energy metabolism (e.g.
mitochondrion and fatty acid beta-oxidation) underwent accelerated evolution in
the plateau zokor. Furthermore, the numbers of positively selected genes were
significantly enriched in the gene categories involved in ATPase activity, blood 
vessel development and respiratory gaseous exchange, functional categories that
are relevant to adaptation to high altitudes. Among the 787 genes with evidence
of parallel evolution, and thus identified as candidate genes, several GO
categories (e.g. response to hypoxia, oxygen homeostasis and erythrocyte
homeostasis) are significantly enriched, are two genes, EPAS1 and AJUBA, involved
in the response to hypoxia, where the parallel evolved sites are at positions
that are highly conserved in sequence alignments from multiple species. Thus,
accelerated evolution of GO categories, positive selection and parallel evolution
at the molecular level provide evidences to parse the genetic adaptations of the 
plateau zokor for living in high-elevation burrows.

PMCID: PMC4658562
PMID: 26602147  [PubMed - in process]


19. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 15;291(3):1514-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.684399. Epub 2015 
Nov 24.

1a,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 Regulates Mitochondrial Oxygen Consumption and Dynamics
in Human Skeletal Muscle Cells.

Ryan ZC(1), Craig TA(1), Folmes CD(1), Wang X(2), Lanza IR(1), Schaible NS(3),
Salisbury JL(4), Nair KS(1), Terzic A(1), Sieck GC(3), Kumar R(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Medicine. (2)Health Sciences Research. (3)Physiology
and Biomedical Engineering, and. (4)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo
Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 55905. (5)From the Departments
of Medicine, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905 rkumar@mayo.edu.

Muscle weakness and myopathy are observed in vitamin D deficiency and chronic
renal failure, where concentrations of the active vitamin D3 metabolite,
1a,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1a,25(OH)2D3), are low. To evaluate the mechanism of
action of 1a,25(OH)2D3 in skeletal muscle, we examined mitochondrial oxygen
consumption, dynamics, and biogenesis and changes in expression of nuclear genes 
encoding mitochondrial proteins in human skeletal muscle cells following
treatment with 1a,25(OH)2D3. The mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate (OCR)
increased in 1a,25(OH)2D3-treated cells. Vitamin D3 metabolites lacking a
1a-hydroxyl group (vitamin D3, 25-hydroxyvitamin D3, and 24R,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D3) decreased or failed to increase OCR. 1a-Hydroxyvitamin D3 did not increase
OCR. In 1a,25(OH)2D3-treated cells, mitochondrial volume and branching and
expression of the pro-fusion protein OPA1 (optic atrophy 1) increased, whereas
expression of the pro-fission proteins Fis1 (fission 1) and Drp1 (dynamin 1-like)
decreased. Phosphorylated pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) (Ser-293) and PDH kinase 4
(PDK4) decreased in 1a,25(OH)2D3-treated cells. There was a trend to increased
PDH activity in 1a,25(OH)2D3-treated cells (p = 0.09). 83 nuclear mRNAs encoding 
mitochondrial proteins were changed following 1a,25(OH)2D3 treatment; notably,
PDK4 mRNA decreased, and PDP2 mRNA increased. MYC, MAPK13, and EPAS1 mRNAs, which
encode proteins that regulate mitochondrial biogenesis, were increased following 
1a,25(OH)2D3 treatment. Vitamin D receptor-dependent changes in the expression of
1947 mRNAs encoding proteins involved in muscle contraction, focal adhesion,
integrin, JAK/STAT, MAPK, growth factor, and p53 signaling pathways were observed
following 1a,25(OH)2D3 treatment. Five micro-RNAs were induced or repressed by
1a,25(OH)2D3. 1a,25(OH)2D3 regulates mitochondrial function, dynamics, and enzyme
function, which are likely to influence muscle strength.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4714233 [Available on 2017-01-15]
PMID: 26601949  [PubMed - in process]


20. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 29;6(42):44609-22. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6338.

Tumor invasion and metastasis regulated by microRNA-184 and microRNA-574-5p in
small-cell lung cancer.

Zhou R(1), Zhou X(1), Yin Z(1), Guo J(2), Hu T(1), Jiang S(3), Liu L(1), Dong
X(1), Zhang S(1), Wu G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (2)Department of Oncology of The Affiliated
Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao, China. (3)Department of Oncology, Second
Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, China.

Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly aggressive neuroendocrine tumor that
has an extremely poor clinical prognosis. Metastasis is the key event in SCLC
progression, but its mechanism has not been fully elucidated. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) 
have been proven to participate in cancer processes, but their function in SCLC
has not been thoroughly studied either. Here, we performed microarray and
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysesto identify the miRNAsassociated
with metastasis and prognosis in SCLC as well as the correlation between serum
and tissue. We also explored these miRNAs' promising molecular mechanisms by
3'UTR reporter assay and immunoblotting. We showed thatmiR-184 significantly
attenuated the metastasis of SCLC, whereas miR-574-5p enhanced it. Both miRNAs
were found to participate in ß-catenin signaling by suppressing protein tyrosine 
phosphatase receptor type U (PTPRU)orendothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1).
Furthermore, miR-574-5p was verified as an independent prognostic risk factor for
SCLC. Taken together, our findings providea comprehensive analysis of the miRNA
expression pattern in SCLC and indicate that miRNAs may serve as potential
therapeutic and prognostic predictors in SCLC.

PMCID: PMC4792579
PMID: 26587830  [PubMed - in process]


21. Cancer. 2016 Jan 1;122(1):108-15. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29543. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Gene-environment interaction of genome-wide association study-identified
susceptibility loci and meat-cooking mutagens in the etiology of renal cell
carcinoma.

Melkonian SC(1), Daniel CR(1), Ye Y(1), Tannir NM(2), Karam JA(3), Matin SF(3),
Wood CG(3), Wu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Urology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.

BACKGROUND: Meat-cooking mutagens may be associated with renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) risk. In the current study, the authors examined associations between
meat-cooking mutagens, genetic susceptibility variants, and risk of RCC.
METHODS: The authors used 659 newly diagnosed RCC cases and 699 healthy controls 
to investigate the association between dietary intake of meat-cooking mutagens
and RCC. They examined whether associations varied by risk factors for RCC and
genetic susceptibility variants previously identified from genome-wide
association studies. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were estimated
using tertiles of intake of dietary polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons/heterocyclic
amines.
RESULTS: Dietary intake of the mutagenic compounds
2-amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo-(4,5-f) quinoxaline (MeIQx) and 2-amino-1
methyl-6-phenylimidazo(4,5-b)pyridine (PhIP) were found to be significantly
associated with an increased risk of RCC (odds ratios across tertiles: 1.00
[referent], 1.28 [95% confidence interval, 0.94-1.74], and 1.95 [95% confidence
interval, 1.43-2.66] [P for trend <.001], respectively; and 1.00 [referent], 1.41
[95% confidence interval, 1.04-1.90], and 1.54 [95% confidence interval,
1.14-2.07] [P for trend =.02], respectively). The authors observed evidence of
interactions between PhIP and RCC susceptibility variants in 2 genes: inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, type 2 (ITPR2) (rs718314; multiplicative P for
interaction<U+2009>=<U+2009>.03 and additive P for interaction =.002) and endothelial PAS
domain-containing protein 1 (EPAS1) (rs7579899; additive P for interaction =.06).
CONCLUSIONS: The intake of meat may increase the risk of RCC through mechanisms
related to the cooking compounds MeIQx and PhIP. These associations may be
modified by genetic susceptibility to RCC. Further research is necessary to
understand the biological mechanisms underlying these interactions. Cancer
2016;122:108-115. © 2015 American Cancer Society.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 26551148  [PubMed - in process]


22. Semin Perinatol. 2015 Dec;39(8):604-10. doi: 10.1053/j.semperi.2015.09.007. Epub 
2015 Oct 23.

Genomics in the neonatal nursery: Focus on ROP.

Hartnett ME(1), Cotten CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)John A. Moran Eye Center, University of Utah, 65 Mario Capecchi Dr, Salt Lake 
City, Utah 84132. Electronic address: me.hartnett@hsc.utah.edu. (2)Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC.

Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a complex disease that is influenced by both 
genetic and environmental factors. Several small studies have found genetic
variants in EPAS1, VEGF, SOD, and members of the WNT family in association with
ROP. Design in genetic studies is challenging because of changing recommendations
for the management of prematurity and ROP, the fact ROP is rare, and that
availability of resources for managing premature infants can vary throughout the 
world. In addition, there is a shortage of ophthalmologists with the ability to
diagnose and characterize severe ROP. Careful determination of the degree of
prematurity is important when evaluating genetic studies. Controlling for
significant epidemiologic factors and multiple comparisons is also important to
consider when evaluating genetic studies. One large candidate gene study
controlled for degree of prematurity, significant epidemiologic factors, and
multiple comparisons and found variants within the intron of BDNF associated with
severe ROP. Future studies using unbiased techniques to assess genetic risk are
important as are in-depth study of BDNF through deep sequencing and associated
mechanistic studies using appropriate experimental models.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4644692 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26477493  [PubMed - in process]


23. Genome Res. 2015 Dec;25(12):1903-9. doi: 10.1101/gr.192336.115. Epub 2015 Oct 13.

A probabilistic method for testing and estimating selection differences between
populations.

He Y(1), Wang M(1), Huang X(1), Li R(1), Xu H(1), Xu S(1), Jin L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences-Max Planck Society Partner Institute for Computational
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; (2)Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory
of Computational Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences-Max Planck Society Partner 
Institute for Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; State Key Laboratory of
Genetic Engineering and Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary
Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and Development,
School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Human populations around the world encounter various environmental challenges
and, consequently, develop genetic adaptations to different selection forces.
Identifying the differences in natural selection between populations is critical 
for understanding the roles of specific genetic variants in evolutionary
adaptation. Although numerous methods have been developed to detect genetic loci 
under recent directional selection, a probabilistic solution for testing and
quantifying selection differences between populations is lacking. Here we report 
the development of a probabilistic method for testing and estimating selection
differences between populations. By use of a probabilistic model of genetic drift
and selection, we showed that logarithm odds ratios of allele frequencies provide
estimates of the differences in selection coefficients between populations. The
estimates approximate a normal distribution, and variance can be estimated using 
genome-wide variants. This allows us to quantify differences in selection
coefficients and to determine the confidence intervals of the estimate. Our work 
also revealed the link between genetic association testing and hypothesis testing
of selection differences. It therefore supplies a solution for hypothesis testing
of selection differences. This method was applied to a genome-wide data analysis 
of Han and Tibetan populations. The results confirmed that both the EPAS1 and
EGLN1 genes are under statistically different selection in Han and Tibetan
populations. We further estimated differences in the selection coefficients for
genetic variants involved in melanin formation and determined their confidence
intervals between continental population groups. Application of the method to
empirical data demonstrated the outstanding capability of this novel approach for
testing and quantifying differences in natural selection.

© 2015 He et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4665011 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26463656  [PubMed - in process]


24. Exp Physiol. 2015 Nov 1;100(11):1263-8. doi: 10.1113/EP085035.

Adaptive genetic changes related to haemoglobin concentration in native
high-altitude Tibetans.

Simonson TS(1), Huff CD(2), Witherspoon DJ(3), Prchal JT(4), Jorde LB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Physiology, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. (2)Department of Epidemiology, University of Texas, MD 
Anderson, Houston, TX, USA. (3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (4)Department of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA.

NEW FINDINGS: What is the topic of this review? Tibetans have genetic adaptations
that are hypothesized to underlie the distinct set of traits they exhibit at
altitude. What advances does it highlight? Several adaptive signatures in the
same genomic regions have been identified among Tibetan populations resident
throughout the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. Many highland Tibetans exhibit a
haemoglobin concentration within the range expected at sea level, and this trait 
is associated with putatively adaptive regions harbouring the hypoxia-inducible
factor pathway genes EGLN1, EPAS1 and PPARA. Precise functional variants at
adaptive loci and relationships to physiological traits, beyond haemoglobin
concentration, are currently being examined in this population. Some native
Tibetan, Andean and Ethiopian populations have lived at altitudes ranging from
3000 to >4000 m above sea level for hundreds of generations and exhibit distinct 
combinations of traits at altitude. It was long hypothesized that genetic factors
contribute to adaptive differences in these populations, and recent advances in
genomics provide evidence that some of the strongest signatures of positive
selection in humans are those identified in Tibetans. Many of the top adaptive
genomic regions highlighted thus far harbour genes related to hypoxia sensing and
response. Putatively adaptive copies of three hypoxia-inducible factor pathway
genes, EPAS1, EGLN1 and PPARA, are associated with sea-level range, rather than
elevated, haemoglobin concentration observed in many Tibetans at high altitude,
and recent studies provide insight into some of the precise adaptive variants,
timing of adaptive events and functional roles. While several studies in highland
Tibetans have converged on a few hypoxia-inducible factor pathway genes,
additional candidates have been reported in independent studies of Tibetans
located throughout the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. Various aspects of adaptive
significance have yet to be identified, integrated, and fully explored. Given the
rapid technological advances and interdisciplinary efforts in genomics,
physiology and molecular biology, careful examination of Tibetans and comparisons
with other distinctively adapted highland populations will provide valuable
insight into evolutionary processes and models for both basic and clinical
research.

© 2015 The Authors. Experimental Physiology © 2015 The Physiological Society.

PMID: 26454145  [PubMed - in process]


25. Cancer Res. 2015 Nov 1;75(21):4617-28. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0708. Epub
2015 Oct 2.

PI3K-mTORC2 but not PI3K-mTORC1 regulates transcription of HIF2A/EPAS1 and
vascularization in neuroblastoma.

Mohlin S(1), Hamidian A(1), von Stedingk K(1), Bridges E(2), Wigerup C(1), Bexell
D(1), Påhlman S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Cancer Research, Lund University Cancer Center at Medicon
Village, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. (2)Department of Medical Oncology,
Molecular Oncology Laboratories, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (3)Translational Cancer Research,
Lund University Cancer Center at Medicon Village, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 
sven.pahlman@med.lu.se.

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) is a master regulator of cellular responses to
oxygen deprival with a critical role in mediating the angiogenic switch in solid 
tumors. Differential expression of the HIF subunits HIF1a and HIF2a occurs in
many human tumor types, suggesting selective implications to biologic context.
For example, high expression of HIF2a that occurs in neuroblastoma is associated 
with stem cell-like features, disseminated disease, and poor clinical outcomes,
suggesting pivotal significance for HIF2 control in neuroblastoma biology. In
this study, we provide novel insights into how HIF2a expression is
transcriptionally controlled by hypoxia and how this control is abrogated by
inhibition of insulin-like growth factor-1R/INSR-driven phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K) signaling. Reducing PI3K activity was sufficient to decrease HIF2a mRNA
and protein expression in a manner with smaller and less vascularized tumors in
vivo. PI3K-regulated HIF2A mRNA expression was independent of Akt or mTORC1
signaling but relied upon mTORC2 signaling. HIF2A mRNA was induced by hypoxia in 
neuroblastoma cells isolated from metastatic patient-derived tumor xenografts,
where HIF2A levels could be reduced by treatment with PI3K and mTORC2 inhibitors.
Our results suggest that targeting PI3K and mTORC2 in aggressive neuroblastomas
with an immature phenotype may improve therapeutic efficacy.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26432405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Am J Pathol. 2015 Nov;185(11):3090-101. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.07.008. Epub
2015 Sep 6.

Fibrosis and hypoxia-inducible factor-1a-dependent tumors of the soft tissue on
loss of von Hippel-Lindau in mesenchymal progenitors.

Mangiavini L(1), Merceron C(2), Araldi E(3), Khatri R(3), Gerard-O'Riley R(4),
Wilson TL(5), Sandusky G(6), Abadie J(7), Lyons KM(8), Giaccia AJ(9), Schipani
E(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and the Division of Endocrinology,
Department of Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan; Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis, Indiana; Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital-Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Orthopaedic and
Traumatology, Milano-Bicocca University, Milan, Italy. (2)Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery and the Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Division of
Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana;
INSERM, UMRS 791-LIOAD, Centre for Osteoarticular and Dental Tissue Engineering, 
Group STEP (Skeletal Tissue Engineering and Physiopathology), Nantes, France;
Faculty of Dental Surgery, l'Universite Nantes Angers le Mans (LUNAM), Nantes,
France. (3)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital-Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine,
Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana. (5)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery
and the Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Division of Endocrinology, Department of
Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana; Endocrine Unit,
Massachusetts General Hospital-Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis,
Indiana. (7)Oniris Animal Cancers, Models for Comparative Oncology Research
(AMaROC), l'Universite Nantes Angers le Mans (LUNAM), Nantes, France.
(8)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at the
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California. Electronic
address: klyons@mednet.ucla.edu. (9)Division of Radiation and Cancer Biology,
Department of Radiation Oncology, Center for Clinical Sciences Research,
Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
Electronic address: giaccia@stanford.edu. (10)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery
and the Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Division of Endocrinology, Department of
Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana; Endocrine Unit,
Massachusetts General Hospital-Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
Electronic address: eschipan@med.umich.edu.

The hypoxia-inducible factor (Hif)-1a (Hif-1a) and Hif-2a (Epas1) have a critical
role in both normal development and cancer. von Hippel Lindau (Vhl) protein,
encoded by a tumor suppressor gene, is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that targets Hif-1a
and Epas1 to the proteasome for degradation. To better understand the role of Vhl
in the biology of mesenchymal cells, we analyzed mutant mice lacking Vhl in
mesenchymal progenitors that give rise to the soft tissues that form and surround
synovial joints. Loss of Vhl in mesenchymal progenitors of the limb bud caused
severe fibrosis of the synovial joints and formation of aggressive masses with
histologic features of mesenchymal tumors. Hif-1a and its downstream target
connective tissue growth factor were necessary for the development of these
tumors, which conversely still developed in the absence of Epas1, but at lower
frequency. Human tumors of the soft tissue are a very complex and heterogeneous
group of neoplasias. Our novel findings in genetically altered mice suggest that 
activation of the HIF signaling pathway could be an important pathogenetic event 
in the development and progression of at least a subset of these tumors.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26348575  [PubMed - in process]


27. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2015 Nov 15;119(10):1129-34. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00322.2015. Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Archaic inheritance: supporting high-altitude life in Tibet.

Huerta-Sánchez E(1), Casey FP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology, University of California, Merced, California; and
ehuerta-sanchez@ucmerced.edu. (2)Merced, California.

The Tibetan Plateau, often called the roof of the world, sits at an average
altitude exceeding 4,500 m. Because of its extreme altitude, the Plateau is one
of the harshest human-inhabited environments in the world. This, however, did not
impede human colonization, and the Tibetan people have made the Tibetan Plateau
their home for many generations. Many studies have quantified their markedly
different physiological response to altitude and proposed that Tibetans were
genetically adapted. Recently, advances in sequencing technologies led to the
discovery of a set of candidate genes which harbor mutations that are likely
beneficial at high altitudes in Tibetans. Since then, other studies have further 
characterized this impressive adaptation. Here, in this minireview, we discuss
the progress made since the discovery of the genes involved in Tibetans'
adaptation to high altitude with a particular emphasis on describing the series
of studies that led us to conclude that archaic human DNA likely contributed to
this impressive adaptation.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 26294746  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Med Genet. 2015 Oct;52(10):647-56. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103218. Epub
2015 Aug 12.

Recommendations for somatic and germline genetic testing of single
pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma based on findings from a series of 329
patients.

Currás-Freixes M(1), Inglada-Pérez L(2), Mancikova V(1), Montero-Conde C(1),
Letón R(1), Comino-Méndez I(1), Apellániz-Ruiz M(1), Sánchez-Barroso L(1),
Aguirre Sánchez-Covisa M(3), Alcázar V(4), Aller J(5), Álvarez-Escolá C(6),
Andía-Melero VM(7), Azriel-Mira S(8), Calatayud-Gutiérrez M(9), Díaz JÁ(10),
Díez-Hernández A(11), Lamas-Oliveira C(12), Marazuela M(13), Matias-Guiu X(14),
Meoro-Avilés A(15), Patiño-García A(16), Pedrinaci S(17), Riesco-Eizaguirre
G(18), Sábado-Álvarez C(19), Sáez-Villaverde R(20), Sainz de Los Terreros A(21), 
Sanz Guadarrama Ó(22), Sastre-Marcos J(23), Scolá-Yurrita B(24), Segura-Huerta
Á(25), Serrano-Corredor Mde L(26), Villar-Vicente MR(27), Rodríguez-Antona C(2), 
Korpershoek E(28), Cascón A(2), Robledo M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hereditary Endocrine Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre,
Madrid, Spain. (2)Hereditary Endocrine Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre, Madrid, Spain Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain. (3)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital
General Universitario de Ciudad Real, Ciudad Real, Spain. (4)Department of
Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario Severo Ochoa, Madrid, Spain. (5)Department 
of Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, 
Madrid, Spain. (8)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Infanta Sofía, San
Sebastián de los Reyes, Spain. (9)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital
Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain. (10)Department of Endocrinology,
Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain. (11)Department of Endocrinology,
Hospital El Bierzo, León, Spain. (12)Department of Endocrinology, Complejo
Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain. (13)Department of
Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, Instituto Princesa, Madrid,
Spain. (14)Oncologic Pathology Group, Institut de Recerca Biomèdica de Lleida,
Lleida, Spain. (15)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital General Universitario
Reina Sofía, Murcia, Spain. (16)Department of Pediatrics and Clinical Genetics
Unit, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Navarra, Spain. (17)Department of Genetics,
Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain. (18)Department of
Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario de Móstoles, Madrid, Spain. (19)Department 
of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron,
Barcelona, Spain. (20)Department of Genetics, Hospital Universitario Donostia,
Gipuzkoa, Spain. (21)Department of Endocrinology, Complejo Hospitalario de
Navarra, Navarra, Spain. (22)Department of General Surgery and Digestive Tract,
Complejo Asistencial de León, León, Spain. (23)Department of Endocrinology,
Hospital Virgen de la Salud-Complejo Hospitalario de Toledo, Toledo, Spain.
(24)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio
Marañón, Madrid, Spain. (25)Genetic Counselling Cancer Unit, Hospital
Universitari i Politecnic La Fe, Valencia, Spain. (26)Department of
Endocrinology, Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, Alicante, Spain.
(27)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario de Fuenlabrada, Madrid,
Spain. (28)Erasmus Universitair Medisch Centrum Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Nowadays, 65-80% of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma (PPGL) cases
are explained by germline or somatic mutations in one of 22 genes. Several
genetic testing algorithms have been proposed, but they usually exclude
sporadic-PPGLs (S-PPGLs) and none include somatic testing. We aimed to
genetically characterise S-PPGL cases and propose an evidence-based algorithm for
genetic testing, prioritising DNA source.
METHODS: The study included 329 probands fitting three criteria: single PPGL, no 
syndromic and no PPGL family history. Germline DNA was tested for point mutations
in RET and for both point mutation and gross deletions in VHL, the SDH genes,
TMEM127, MAX and FH. 99 tumours from patients negative for germline screening
were available and tested for RET, VHL, HRAS, EPAS1, MAX and SDHB.
RESULTS: Germline mutations were found in 46 (14.0%) patients, being more
prevalent in paragangliomas (PGLs) (28.7%) than in pheochromocytomas (PCCs)
(4.5%) (p=6.62×10(-10)). Somatic mutations were found in 43% of those tested,
being more prevalent in PCCs (48.5%) than in PGLs (32.3%) (p=0.13). A quarter of 
S-PPGLs had a somatic mutation, regardless of age at presentation. Head and neck 
PGLs (HN-PGLs) and thoracic-PGLs (T-PGLs) more commonly had germline mutations
(p=2.0×10(-4) and p=0.027, respectively). Five of the 29 metastatic cases
harboured a somatic mutation, one in HRAS.
CONCLUSIONS: We recommend prioritising testing for germline mutations in patients
with HN-PGLs and T-PGLs, and for somatic mutations in those with PCC. Biochemical
secretion and SDHB-immunohistochemistry should guide genetic screening in
abdominal-PGLs. Paediatric and metastatic cases should not be excluded from
somatic screening.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26269449  [PubMed - in process]


29. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 11;10(8):e0134496. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134496.
eCollection 2015.

The A Allele at rs13419896 of EPAS1 Is Associated with Enhanced Expression and
Poor Prognosis for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Putra AC(1), Eguchi H(2), Lee KL(3), Yamane Y(1), Gustine E(1), Isobe T(4),
Nishiyama M(5), Hiyama K(6), Poellinger L(7), Tanimoto K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. (2)Division of Translational
Research, Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University,
Saitama, Japan. (3)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (4)Division of Clinical Oncology and Respiratory
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Shimane
University, Shimane, Japan. (5)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,
Graduate School of Medicine, Gunma University, Gunma, Japan. (6)Natural Science
Center for Basic Research and Development, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima,
Japan. (7)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Medical Nobel Institute, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-2a (HIF-2a, or EPAS1) is important for cancer
progression, and is a putative biomarker for poor prognosis for non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC). However, molecular mechanisms underlying the EPAS1
overexpression are not still fully understood. We explored a role of a single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs13419896 located within intron 1 of the EPAS1
gene in regulation of its expression. Bioinformatic analyses suggested that a
region including the rs13419896 SNP plays a role in regulation of the EPAS1 gene 
expression and the SNP alters the binding activity of transcription factors. In
vitro analyses demonstrated that a fragment containing the SNP locus function as 
a regulatory region and that a fragment with A allele showed higher
transactivation activity than one with G, especially in the presence of
overexpressed c-Fos or c-Jun. Moreover, NSCLC patients with the A allele showed
poorer prognosis than those with G at the SNP even after adjustment with various 
variables. In conclusion, the genetic polymorphism of the EPAS1 gene may lead to 
variation of its gene expression levels to drive progression of the cancer and
serve as a prognostic marker for NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4532412
PMID: 26263511  [PubMed - in process]


30. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2015 Jul 21;3:42. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2015.00042. eCollection
2015.

Hypoxia signaling pathways: modulators of oxygen-related organelles.

Schönenberger MJ(1), Kovacs WJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences ETH Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.

Oxygen (O2) is an essential substrate in cellular metabolism, bioenergetics, and 
signaling and as such linked to the survival and normal function of all
metazoans. Low O2 tension (hypoxia) is a fundamental feature of physiological
processes as well as pathophysiological conditions such as cancer and ischemic
diseases. Central to the molecular mechanisms underlying O2 homeostasis are the
hypoxia-inducible factors-1 and -2 alpha (HIF-1a and EPAS1/HIF-2a) that function 
as master regulators of the adaptive response to hypoxia. HIF-induced genes
promote characteristic tumor behaviors, including angiogenesis and metabolic
reprogramming. The aim of this review is to critically explore current knowledge 
of how HIF-a signaling regulates the abundance and function of major O2-consuming
organelles. Abundant evidence suggests key roles for HIF-1a in the regulation of 
mitochondrial homeostasis. An essential adaptation to sustained hypoxia is
repression of mitochondrial respiration and induction of glycolysis. HIF-1a
activates several genes that trigger mitophagy and represses regulators of
mitochondrial biogenesis. Several lines of evidence point to a strong
relationship between hypoxia, the accumulation of misfolded proteins in the
endoplasmic reticulum, and activation of the unfolded protein response.
Surprisingly, although peroxisomes depend highly on molecular O2 for their
function, there has been no evidence linking HIF signaling to peroxisomes. We
discuss our recent findings that establish HIF-2a as a negative regulator of
peroxisome abundance and suggest a mechanism by which cells attune peroxisomal
function with O2 availability. HIF-2a activation augments peroxisome turnover by 
pexophagy and thereby changes lipid composition reminiscent of peroxisomal
disorders. We discuss potential mechanisms by which HIF-2a might trigger
pexophagy and place special emphasis on the potential pathological implications
of HIF-2a-mediated pexophagy for human health.

PMCID: PMC4508581
PMID: 26258123  [PubMed]


31. Ukr Biochem J. 2015 Mar-Apr;87(2):76-87.

INHIBITION OF ERN1 SIGNALING ENZYME AFFECTS HYPOXIC REGULATION OF THE EXPRESSION 
OF E2F8, EPAS1, HOXC6, ATF3, TBX3 AND FOXF1 GENES IN U87 GLIOMA CELLS.

Minchenko OH, Tsymbal DO, Minchenko DO, Kovalevska OV, Karbovskyi LL, Bikfalvi A.

Hypoxia as well as the endoplasmic reticulum stress are important factors of
malignant tumor growth and control of the expression of genes, which regulate
numerous metabolic processes and cell proliferation. Furthermore, blockade of
ERN1 (endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus 1) suppresses cell proliferation and tumor
growth. We studied the effect of hypoxia on the expression of genes encoding the 
transcription factors such as E2F8 (E2F transcription factor 8), EPAS1
(endothelial PAS domain protein 1), TBX3 (T-box 3), ATF3 (activating
transcription factor 3), FOXF1 (forkhead box F), and HOXC6 (homeobox C6) in U87
glioma cells with and without ERN1 signaling enzyme function. We have established
that hypoxia enhances the expression of HOXC6, E2F8, ATF3, and EPAS1 genes but
does not change TBX3 and FOXF1 gene expression in glioma cells with ERNI
function. At the same time, the expression level of all studied genes is strongly
decreased, except for TBX3 gene, in glioma cells without ERN1 function. Moreover,
the inhibition of ERN1 signaling enzyme function significantly modifies the
effect of hypoxia on the expression of these transcription factor genes. removes 
or introduces this regulation as well as changes a direction or magnitude of
hypoxic regulation. Present study demonstrates that fine-tuning of the expression
of proliferation related genes depends upon hypoxia and ERN1-mediated endoplasmic
reticulum stress signaling and correlates with slower proliferation rate of
glioma cells without ERN1 function.

PMID: 26255341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2016 Jan;24(1):134-45. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2015.07.016.
Epub 2015 Aug 1.

Reciprocal activation of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-2a and the zinc-ZIP8-MTF1
axis amplifies catabolic signaling in osteoarthritis.

Lee M(1), Won Y(1), Shin Y(1), Kim JH(2), Chun JS(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 
500-712, Republic of Korea. (2)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of
Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, Republic of Korea; Department of
Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-747, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: jinhkim@snu.ac.kr. (3)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju
Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: jschun@gist.ac.kr.

OBJECTIVE: Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-2a and the zinc-ZIP8-MTF1 axis in
chondrocytes serve as catabolic regulators of osteoarthritic cartilage
destruction by regulating the expression of catabolic factor genes. We explored
possible crosstalk between these signaling pathways and its biological
significance in osteoarthritis (OA).
METHODS: Microarray analysis, various mRNA and protein assays were conducted
using primary cultured mouse articular chondrocytes and experimental OA cartilage
to reveal molecular mechanisms underlying the crosstalk between HIF-2a and the
zinc-ZIP8-MTF1 axis. Experimental OA in mice was induced by intra-articular (IA) 
injection of adenovirus expressing HIF-2a (Ad-Epas1), ZIP8 (Ad-Zip8), or MTF1
(Ad-Mtf1) in wild-type mice or mice with cartilage-specific conditional knockout 
of HIF-2a (Epas1(fl/fl);Col2a1-Cre), ZIP8 (Zip8(fl/fl);Col2a1-Cre), or MTF1
(Mtf1(fl/fl);Col2a1-Cre).
RESULTS: HIF-2a activated the zinc-ZIP8-MTF1 axis in chondrocytes by upregulating
the Zn(2+) transporter ZIP8, thereby increasing Zn(2+) influx and activating the 
downstream transcription factor MTF1. The zinc-ZIP8-MTF1 axis, in turn, acted as 
a novel transcriptional regulator of HIF-2a. HIF-2a-induced activation of the
zinc-ZIP8-MTF1 axis amplified HIF-2a regulation of OA cartilage destruction by
synergistically promoting expression of matrix-degrading enzymes. Thus,
HIF-2a-induced activation of the zinc-ZIP8-MTF1 axis, together with
zinc-ZIP8-MTF1 regulation of HIF-2a, acted collectively to synergistically
promote expression of matrix-degrading enzymes and OA cartilage destruction.
CONCLUSION: Our findings identify a reciprocal activation mechanism involving
HIF-2a and the zinc-ZIP8-MTF1 axis during OA pathogenesis that amplifies
catabolic signaling and cartilage destruction.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26241779  [PubMed - in process]


33. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 31;10(7):e0133210. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133210.
eCollection 2015.

Bioinformatic Challenges in Clinical Diagnostic Application of Targeted Next
Generation Sequencing: Experience from Pheochromocytoma.

Crona J(1), Ljungström V(2), Welin S(3), Walz MK(4), Hellman P(1), Björklund
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, SE-75185, Uppsala,
Sweden. (2)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, 
SE-75185, Uppsala, Sweden. (3)Departments of Medical Sciences, Uppsala
University, SE-75185, Uppsala, Sweden. (4)Department for Surgery and Centre of
Minimal Invasive Surgery, Kliniken Essen-Mitte, Academic Teaching Hospital of the
University of Duisburg-Essen, DE-45136 Essen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have demonstrated equal quality of targeted next
generation sequencing (NGS) compared to Sanger Sequencing. Whereas these novel
sequencing processes have a validated robust performance, choice of enrichment
method and different available bioinformatic software as reliable analysis tool
needs to be further investigated in a diagnostic setting.
METHODS: DNA from 21 patients with genetic variants in SDHB, VHL, EPAS1, RET,
(n=17) or clinical criteria of NF1 syndrome (n=4) were included. Targeted NGS was
performed using Truseq custom amplicon enrichment sequenced on an Illumina MiSEQ 
instrument. Results were analysed in parallel using three different
bioinformatics pipelines; (1) Commercially available MiSEQ Reporter, fully
automatized and integrated software, (2) CLC Genomics Workbench, graphical
interface based software, also commercially available, and ICP (3) an in-house
scripted custom bioinformatic tool.
RESULTS: A tenfold read coverage was achieved in between 95-98% of targeted
bases. All workflows had alignment of reads to SDHA and NF1 pseudogenes. Compared
to Sanger sequencing, variant calling revealed a sensitivity ranging from 83 to
100% and a specificity of 99.9-100%. Only MiSEQ reporter identified all
pathogenic variants in both sequencing runs.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that targeted next generation sequencing have equal
quality compared to Sanger sequencing. Enrichment specificity and the
bioinformatic performance need to be carefully assessed in a diagnostic setting. 
As acceptable accuracy was noted for a fully automated bioinformatic workflow, we
suggest that processing of NGS data could be performed without expert
bioinformatics skills utilizing already existing commercially available
bioinformatics tools.

PMCID: PMC4521794
PMID: 26230854  [PubMed - in process]


34. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2015 Dec;23(12):2288-96. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2015.07.009. Epub 2015 Jul 23.

Reciprocal regulation by hypoxia-inducible factor-2a and the NAMPT-NAD(+)-SIRT
axis in articular chondrocytes is involved in osteoarthritis.

Oh H(1), Kwak JS(1), Yang S(1), Gong MK(1), Kim JH(2), Rhee J(1), Kim SK(1), Kim 
HE(1), Ryu JH(3), Chun JS(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 
500-712, South Korea. (2)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science
and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, South Korea; Department of Biological Sciences, 
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-747, South Korea. (3)School of Life
Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, South
Korea; Research Center for Biomineralization Disorders and Dental Science
Research Institute, School of Dentistry, Chonnam National University, Gwangju
500-757, South Korea. (4)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science
and Technology, Gwangju 500-712, South Korea. Electronic address:
jschun@gist.ac.kr.

OBJECTIVE: Hypoxia-inducible factor-2a (HIF-2a) transcriptionally upregulates
Nampt in articular chondrocytes. NAMPT, which exhibits nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase activity, in turn causes osteoarthritis (OA) in mice by
stimulating the expression of matrix-degrading enzymes. Here, we sought to
elucidate whether HIF-2a activates the NAMPT-NAD(+)-SIRT axis in chondrocytes and
thereby contributes to the pathogenesis of OA.
METHODS: Assays of NAD levels, SIRT activity, reporter gene activity, mRNA, and
protein levels were conducted in primary cultured mouse articular chondrocytes.
Experimental OA in mice was induced by intra-articular (IA) injection of
adenovirus expressing HIF-2a (Ad-Epas1) or NAMPT (Ad-Nampt). The functions of
SIRT in OA were examined by IA co-injection of SIRT inhibitors or adenovirus
expressing individual SIRT isoforms or shRNA targeting specific SIRT isoforms.
RESULTS: HIF-2a activated the NAMPT-NAD(+)-SIRT axis in chondrocytes by
upregulating NAMPT, which stimulated NAD(+) synthesis and thereby activated SIRT 
family members. The activated NAMPT-SIRT pathway, in turn, promoted HIF-2a
protein stability by negatively regulating its hydroxylation and 26S
proteasome-mediated degradation, resulting in increased HIF-2a transcriptional
activity. Among SIRT family members (SIRT1-7), SIRT2 and SIRT4 were positively
associated with HIF-2a stability and transcriptional activity in chondrocytes.
This reciprocal regulation was required for the expression of catabolic matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP3, MMP12, and MMP13) and OA cartilage destruction caused
by IA injection of Ad-Epas1 Ad-Nampt.
CONCLUSION: The reciprocal regulation of HIF-2a and the NAMPT-NAD(+)-SIRT axis in
articular chondrocytes is involved in OA cartilage destruction caused by HIF-2a
or NAMPT.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26209889  [PubMed - in process]


35. J Cell Sci. 2015 Aug 15;128(16):3082-93. doi: 10.1242/jcs.168864. Epub 2015 Jul
6.

Cezanne regulates E2F1-dependent HIF2a expression.

Moniz S(1), Bandarra D(1), Biddlestone J(1), Campbell KJ(2), Komander D(3), Bremm
A(4), Rocha S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, College of Life Sciences,
University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK. (2)Beatson Institute for Cancer
Research, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK. (3)Medical Research Council Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge
CB2 0QH, UK. (4)Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Goethe University
Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue-Strasse 15, Frankfurt am Main 60438, Germany. (5)Centre
for Gene Regulation and Expression, College of Life Sciences, University of
Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK s.rocha@dundee.ac.uk.

Mechanisms regulating protein degradation ensure the correct and timely
expression of transcription factors such as hypoxia inducible factor (HIF). Under
normal O2 tension, HIFa subunits are targeted for proteasomal degradation, mainly
through vHL-dependent ubiquitylation. Deubiquitylases are responsible for
reversing this process. Although the mechanism and regulation of HIFa by
ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal degradation has been the object of many studies, 
little is known about the role of deubiquitylases. Here, we show that expression 
of HIF2a (encoded by EPAS1) is regulated by the deubiquitylase Cezanne (also
known as OTUD7B) in an E2F1-dependent manner. Knockdown of Cezanne downregulates 
HIF2a mRNA, protein and activity independently of hypoxia and proteasomal
degradation. Mechanistically, expression of the HIF2a gene is controlled directly
by E2F1, and Cezanne regulates the stability of E2F1. Exogenous E2F1 can rescue
HIF2a transcript and protein expression when Cezanne is depleted. Taken together,
these data reveal a novel mechanism for the regulation of the expression of
HIF2a, demonstrating that the HIF2a promoter is regulated by E2F1 directly and
that Cezanne regulates HIF2a expression through control of E2F1 levels. Our
results thus suggest that HIF2a is controlled transcriptionally in a
cell-cycle-dependent manner and in response to oncogenic signalling.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4541044
PMID: 26148512  [PubMed - in process]


36. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Jul 2;97(1):54-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.05.005. Epub
2015 Jun 11.

A 3.4-kb Copy-Number Deletion near EPAS1 Is Significantly Enriched in
High-Altitude Tibetans but Absent from the Denisovan Sequence.

Lou H(1), Lu Y(1), Lu D(1), Fu R(1), Wang X(2), Feng Q(1), Wu S(1), Yang Y(3), Li
S(3), Kang L(4), Guan Y(5), Hoh BP(6), Chung YJ(7), Jin L(3), Su B(8), Xu S(9).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Max Planck Independent Research Group
on Population Genomics, Partner Institute for Computational Biology, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Max Planck Independent
Research Group on Population Genomics, Partner Institute for Computational
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; School of Life Science and Technology,
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 200031, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of
Genetic Engineering and Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary
Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, School
of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. (4)School of
Medicine, Xizang University for Nationalities, Xianyang 712082, Shaanxi, China.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Preclinical Medicine
College, Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi 830011, China. (6)Key Laboratory of 
Computational Biology, Max Planck Independent Research Group on Population
Genomics, Partner Institute for Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; Faculty
of Medicine and Health Sciences, UCSI University, Kualal Lumpur Campus, Jalan
Choo Lip Kung, Taman Taynton View, 56000 Cheras, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(7)Integrated Research Center for Genome Polymorphism, Department of
Microbiology, School of Medicine, Catholic University of Korea, Seocho-gu, Seoul 
137-701, Korea. (8)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution,
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650223, China.
(9)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Max Planck Independent Research Group
on Population Genomics, Partner Institute for Computational Biology, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China; School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai
200031, China; Collaborative Innovation Center of Genetics and Development,
Shanghai 200438, China. Electronic address: xushua@picb.ac.cn.

Tibetan high-altitude adaptation (HAA) has been studied extensively, and many
candidate genes have been reported. Subsequent efforts targeting HAA functional
variants, however, have not been that successful (e.g., no functional variant has
been suggested for the top candidate HAA gene, EPAS1). With WinXPCNVer, a method 
developed in this study, we detected in microarray data a Tibetan-enriched
deletion (TED) carried by 90% of Tibetans; 50% were homozygous for the deletion, 
whereas only 3% carried the TED and 0% carried the homozygous deletion in 2,792
worldwide samples (p < 10(-15)). We employed long PCR and Sanger sequencing
technologies to determine the exact copy number and breakpoints of the TED in 70 
additional Tibetan and 182 diverse samples. The TED had identical boundaries
(chr2: 46,694,276-46,697,683; hg19) and was 80 kb downstream of EPAS1. Notably,
the TED was in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD; r(2) = 0.8) with EPAS1 variants
associated with reduced blood concentrations of hemoglobin. It was also in
complete LD with the 5-SNP motif, which was suspected to be introgressed from
Denisovans, but the deletion itself was absent from the Denisovan sequence.
Correspondingly, we detected that footprints of positive selection for the TED
occurred 12,803 (95% confidence interval = 12,075-14,725) years ago. We further
whole-genome deep sequenced (>60×) seven Tibetans and verified the TED but failed
to identify any other copy-number variations with comparable patterns, giving
this TED top priority for further study. We speculate that the specific patterns 
of the TED resulted from its own functionality in HAA of Tibetans or LD with a
functional variant of EPAS1.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4572470
PMID: 26073780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 9;5:11158. doi: 10.1038/srep11158.

Inhibition of hypoxia inducible factors combined with all-trans retinoic acid
treatment enhances glial transdifferentiation of neuroblastoma cells.

Cimmino F(1), Pezone L(2), Avitabile M(1), Acierno G(1), Andolfo I(1), Capasso
M(1), Iolascon A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università
degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II", Naples, Italy [2] CEINGE Biotecnologie
Avanzate, Naples, Italy. (2)1] CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy [2]
Scuola di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Verona, Verona, Italy.

Neuroblastoma (NBL) is a heterogeneous tumor characterized by a wide range of
clinical manifestations. A high tumor cell differentiation grade correlates to a 
favorable stage and positive outcome. Expression of the hypoxia inducible factors
HIF1-a (HIF1A gene) and HIF2-a (EPAS1 gene) and/or hypoxia-regulated pathways has
been shown to promote the undifferentiated phenotype of NBL cells. Our hypothesis
is that HIF1A and EPAS1 expression represent one of the mechanisms responsible
for the lack of responsiveness of NBL to differentiation therapy. Clinically,
high levels of HIF1A and EPAS1 expression were associated with inferior survival 
in two NBL microarray datasets, and patient subgroups with lower expression of
HIF1A and EPAS1 showed significant enrichment of pathways related to neuronal
differentiation. In NBL cell lines, the combination of all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA) with HIF1A or EPAS1 silencing led to an acquired glial-cell phenotype and 
enhanced expression of glial-cell differentiation markers. Furthermore, HIF1A or 
EPAS1 silencing might promote cell senescence independent of ATRA treatment.
Taken together, our data suggest that HIF inhibition coupled with ATRA treatment 
promotes differentiation into a more benign phenotype and cell senescence in
vitro. These findings open the way for additional lines of attack in the
treatment of NBL minimal residue disease.

PMCID: PMC4460899
PMID: 26057707  [PubMed - in process]


38. Exp Physiol. 2015 Nov 1;100(11):1247-55. doi: 10.1113/EP085292. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Metabolic aspects of high-altitude adaptation in Tibetans.

Ge RL(1), Simonson TS(2), Gordeuk V(3), Prchal JT(2), McClain DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for High-Altitude Medicine, Qinghai University Medical School,
Xining, Qinghai, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Human Genetics and 
the Divisions of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes and Division of
Hematology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(3)Section of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

NEW FINDINGS: What is the topic of this review? The topic of this review is how
Tibetans have adapted genetically to high altitude, particularly with reference
to altitude-induced changes in metabolism. What advances does it highlight? It
highlights recent work on metabolic phenotyping in Tibetans and demonstrates that
selected genetic haplotypes influence their metabolism of fats and glucose.
Recent studies have identified genes involved in high-altitude adaptation in
Tibetans. Three of these genes (EPAS1, EGLN1 and PPARA) are associated with
decreased haemoglobin levels compared with non-Tibetans living at altitude.
Consistent with the phenotype, EGLN1 in Tibetans has a gain-of-function mutation 
that confers a higher affinity for oxygen, hence less sensitivity to hypoxia.
Considering the demands imposed upon metabolism in meeting energy demands despite
limitations on fuel oxidation, we hypothesized that other selected genes might
alter metabolism to allow adaptation to altitude despite the desensitization of
the upstream hypoxia sensing caused by the EGLN1 mutation that results in the
failure to sense hypoxia. A shift in fuel preference to glucose oxidation and
glycolysis at the expense of fatty acid oxidation would provide adaptation to
decreased oxygen availability. Measurements of serum metabolites from Tibetans
living at high altitude are consistent with this hypothesis; the EPAS1 haplotype 
is significantly associated with increased lactate levels (suggesting increased
anaerobic metabolism), and the PPARA haplotype and serum free fatty acids are
positively related (suggesting decreased fat oxidation). These data suggest that 
the high-altitude adaptations may offer protection from diabetes at high altitude
but increase the risk of diabetes at lower elevations and/or with adoption of a
non-traditional diet. It should also be considered in future work in the field
that because iron is a cofactor for EGLN1, there may be significant associations 
of phenotypes with the significant degrees of variation seen in tissue iron among
human populations.

© 2015 The Authors. Experimental Physiology © 2015 The Physiological Society.

PMID: 26053282  [PubMed - in process]


39. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2015 Sep;54(9):542-54. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22267. Epub
2015 May 29.

Whole-exome sequencing defines the mutational landscape of pheochromocytoma and
identifies KMT2D as a recurrently mutated gene.

Juhlin CC(1,)(2,)(3), Stenman A(3), Haglund F(3), Clark VE(4), Brown TC(1,)(2),
Baranoski J(4), Bilguvar K(5), Goh G(6,)(7), Welander J(8), Svahn F(3),
Rubinstein JC(1,)(2), Caramuta S(3), Yasuno K(4,)(6), Günel M(4), Bäckdahl M(9), 
Gimm O(8,)(10), Söderkvist P(8), Prasad ML(11), Korah R(1,)(2), Lifton
RP(6,)(7,)(12), Carling T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Endocrine Neoplasia Laboratory, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
06520. (2)Department of Surgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(3)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University
Hospital, CCK, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale Program in 
Brain Tumor Research, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT. (5)Department of
Genetics and Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT. (6)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT. (7)Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT. (8)Department
of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping
University, Linköping, SE-58185, Sweden. (9)Department of Molecular Medicine and 
Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden. (10)Department of Surgery, County Council of Östergötland, Linköping,
SE-58185, Sweden. (11)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT. (12)Yale Center for Mendelian Genomics, New Haven, CT.

As subsets of pheochromocytomas (PCCs) lack a defined molecular etiology, we
sought to characterize the mutational landscape of PCCs to identify novel gene
candidates involved in disease development. A discovery cohort of 15 PCCs wild
type for mutations in PCC susceptibility genes underwent whole-exome sequencing, 
and an additional 83 PCCs served as a verification cohort for targeted sequencing
of candidate mutations. A low rate of nonsilent single nucleotide variants (SNVs)
was detected (6.1/sample). Somatic HRAS and EPAS1 mutations were observed in one 
case each, whereas the remaining 13 cases did not exhibit variants in established
PCC genes. SNVs aggregated in apoptosis-related pathways, and mutations in COSMIC
genes not previously reported in PCCs included ZAN, MITF, WDTC1, and CAMTA1. Two 
somatic mutations and one constitutional variant in the well-established cancer
gene lysine (K)-specific methyltransferase 2D (KMT2D, MLL2) were discovered in
one sample each, prompting KMT2D screening using focused exome-sequencing in the 
verification cohort. An additional 11 PCCs displayed KMT2D variants, of which two
were recurrent. In total, missense KMT2D variants were found in 14 (11 somatic,
two constitutional, one undetermined) of 99 PCCs (14%). Five cases displayed
somatic mutations in the functional FYR/SET domains of KMT2D, constituting 36% of
all KMT2D-mutated PCCs. KMT2D expression was upregulated in PCCs compared to
normal adrenals, and KMT2D overexpression positively affected cell migration in a
PCC cell line. We conclude that KMT2D represents a recurrently mutated gene with 
potential implication for PCC development.

© 2015 The Authors. Genes, Chromosomes & Cancer Published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

PMCID: PMC4755142
PMID: 26032282  [PubMed - in process]


40. Autophagy. 2015;11(6):967-9. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1045180.

EPAS1/HIF-2a is a driver of mammalian pexophagy.

Schönenberger MJ(1), Krek W, Kovacs WJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Molecular Health Sciences; ETH Zurich ; Zurich , Switzerland.

Oxygen (O2) is an essential substrate in cellular metabolism and signaling and as
such is linked to the survival and normal function of metazoans. Central to the
molecular mechanisms underlying O2 homeostasis are hypoxia-inducible factors
(HIFs), heterodimeric transcription factors composed of O2-regulated a subunits
(HIF1A/HIF-1a or EPAS1/HIF-2a), and a constitutively expressed ARNT/HIF-1ß
subunit, that serve as master regulators of the adaptive response to hypoxia.
HIF1A and EPAS1 have both unique and overlapping functions in the regulation of
diverse cellular processes, but so far there has been no evidence linking HIF
signaling to peroxisomes. In a recent study we identified a unique function of
EPAS1 as promoter of pexophagy in hepatocytes. Here we summarize our findings and
discuss potential mechanisms by which EPAS1 might trigger pexophagy.

PMCID: PMC4502715 [Available on 2016-05-22]
PMID: 25997392  [PubMed - in process]


41. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Oct 1;21(19):4451-60. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2854.
Epub 2015 May 19.

Spatiotemporal Heterogeneity Characterizes the Genetic Landscape of
Pheochromocytoma and Defines Early Events in Tumorigenesis.

Crona J(1), Backman S(2), Maharjan R(2), Mayrhofer M(3), Stålberg P(2), Isaksson 
A(3), Hellman P(2), Björklund P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
joakim.crona@surgsci.uu.se. (2)Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden. (3)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of
Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

PURPOSE: Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma (PPGL) patients display heterogeneity
in the clinical presentation and underlying genetic cause. The degree of inter-
and intratumor genetic heterogeneity has not yet been defined.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In PPGLs from 94 patients, we analyzed LOH, copy-number
variations, and mutation status of SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, VHL, EPAS1,
NF1, RET, TMEM127, MAX, and HRAS using high-density SNP array and targeted deep
sequencing, respectively. Genetic heterogeneity was determined through (i)
bioinformatics analysis of individual samples that estimated absolute purity and 
ploidy from SNP array data and (ii) comparison of paired tumor samples that
allowed reconstruction of phylogenetic trees.
RESULTS: Mutations were found in 61% of the tumors and correlated with specific
patterns of somatic copy-number aberrations (SCNA) and degree of nontumoral cell 
admixture. Intratumor genetic heterogeneity was observed in 74 of 136 samples
using absolute bioinformatics estimations and in 22 of 24 patients by comparison 
of paired samples. In addition, a low genetic concordance was observed between
paired primary tumors and distant metastases. This allowed for reconstructing the
life history of individual tumors, identifying somatic mutations as well as
copy-number loss of 3p and 11p (VHL subgroup), 1p (Cluster 2), and 17q (NF1
subgroup) as early events in PPGL tumorigenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Genomic landscapes of PPGL are specific to mutation subtype and
characterized by genetic heterogeneity both within and between tumor lesions of
the same patient.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25991818  [PubMed - in process]


42. J Genet Genomics. 2015 Apr 20;42(4):173-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jgg.2015.02.006. Epub
2015 Mar 6.

A Positive Correlation between Elevated Altitude and Frequency of Mutant Alleles 
at the EPAS1 and HBB Loci in Chinese Indigenous Dogs.

Fan R(1), Liu F(2), Wu H(1), Wu S(2), Zhu C(2), Li Y(2), Wang G(3), Zhang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-resources, Yunnan
University, Kunming 650091, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources
and Evolution, and Yunnan Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Domestic Animals,
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650223, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, and Yunnan Laboratory
of Molecular Biology of Domestic Animals, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650223, China. Electronic address:
wanggd@mail.kiz.ac.cn. (4)Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of
Bio-resources, Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, China; State Key Laboratory of 
Genetic Resources and Evolution, and Yunnan Laboratory of Molecular Biology of
Domestic Animals, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Kunming 650223, China. Electronic address: zhangyp@mail.kiz.ac.cn.

PMID: 25953356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Autophagy. 2015;11(5):850-1. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1037063.

An essential role for chaperone-mediated autophagy in cell cycle progression.

Hubbi ME(1), Semenza GL.

Author information: 
(1)a Vascular Program; Institute for Cell Engineering; Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine ; Baltimore , MD , USA.

Hypoxia has long been known to serve as a stimulus for cell cycle arrest.
Hypoxia-mediated cell cycle arrest is mediated through the actions of HIF1a
(hypoxia inducible factor 1, a subunit [basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factor]), which has a nontranscriptional role as an inhibitor of MCM
(minichromosome maintenance complex component) helicase activity. We identified
chaperone-mediated autophagy as a pathway for selective degradation of HIF1a
through lysosomes prior to the onset of DNA replication. CDK2 (cyclin-dependent
kinase 2) mediates degradation of HIF1a at the G1/S transition, whereas CDK1
(cyclin-dependent kinase 1) increases HIF1a levels and transcriptional activity
prior to the onset of G1 phase. Lysosomal inhibitors induce cell cycle arrest,
which is recovered by knockdown of HIF1a and EPAS1/HIF2a. These findings
establish lysosomes as essential regulators of cell cycle progression through the
degradation of HIF1a.

PMCID: PMC4509436 [Available on 2016-05-06]
PMID: 25945892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:860405. doi: 10.1155/2015/860405. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

Variants of SCARB1 and VDR Involved in Complex Genetic Interactions May Be
Implicated in the Genetic Susceptibility to Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma.

Pospiech E(1), Ligeza J(2), Wilk W(3), Golas A(1), Jaszczynski J(3), Stelmach
A(3), Rys J(3), Blecharczyk A(1), Wojas-Pelc A(4), Jura J(2), Branicki W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Faculty of Biology and Earth Sciences, Jagiellonian
University, Gronostajowa 9, 30-387 Cracow, Poland. (2)Faculty of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7, 30-387
Cracow, Poland. (3)Centre of Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Institute,
Garncarska 11, 31-115 Cracow, Poland. (4)Department of Dermatology, Collegium
Medicum of the Jagiellonian University, Skawinska 8, 31-066 Cracow, Poland.

The current data are still inconclusive in terms of a genetic component involved 
in the susceptibility to renal cell carcinoma. Our aim was to evaluate 40
selected candidate polymorphisms for potential association with clear cell renal 
cell carcinoma (ccRCC) based on independent group of 167 patients and 200 healthy
controls. The obtained data were searched for independent effects of particular
polymorphisms as well as haplotypes and genetic interactions. Association testing
implied position rs4765623 in the SCARB1 gene (OR = 1.688, 95% CI: 1.104-2.582, P
= 0.016) and a haplotype in VDR comprising positions rs739837, rs731236,
rs7975232, and rs1544410 (P = 0.012) to be the risk factors in the studied
population. The study detected several epistatic effects contributing to the
genetic susceptibility to ccRCC. Variation in GNAS1 was implicated in a strong
synergistic interaction with BIRC5. This effect was part of a model suggested by 
multifactor dimensionality reduction method including also a synergy between
GNAS1 and SCARB1 (P = 0.036). Significance of GNAS1-SCARB1 interaction was
further confirmed by logistic regression (P = 0.041), which also indicated
involvement of SCARB1 in additional interaction with EPAS1 (P = 0.008) as well as
revealing interactions between GNAS1 and EPAS1 (P = 0.016), GNAS1 and MC1R (P =
0.031), GNAS1 and VDR (P = 0.032), and MC1R and VDR (P = 0.035).

PMCID: PMC4402472
PMID: 25945350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 15;6:6863. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7863.

Increased prevalence of EPAS1 variant in cattle with high-altitude pulmonary
hypertension.

Newman JH(1), Holt TN(2), Cogan JD(3), Womack B(3), Phillips JA 3rd(3), Li C(4), 
Kendall Z(3), Stenmark KR(5), Thomas MG(6), Brown RD(5), Riddle SR(5), West
JD(1), Hamid R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.
(2)Department of Veterinary Sciences, College of Agricultural Science, Colorado
State University, Ft Collins, Colorado 80523, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Medical Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Vanderbilt University School
of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.
(5)Cardiovascular Pulmonary Research Laboratory, Department of Medicine and
Pediatrics, University of Colorado, Denver Colorado 80045, USA. (6)Department of 
Animal Science, Colorado State University, Ft Collins, Colorado 80523, USA.

High-altitude pulmonary hypertension (HAPH) has heritable features and is a major
cause of death in cattle in the Rocky Mountains, USA. Although multiple genes are
likely involved in the genesis of HAPH, to date no major gene variant has been
identified. Using whole-exome sequencing, we report the high association of an
EPAS1 (HIF2a) double variant in the oxygen degradation domain of EPAS1 in Angus
cattle with HAPH, mean pulmonary artery pressure >50<U+2009>mm<U+2009>Hg in two independent
herds. Expression analysis shows upregulation of 26 of 27 HIF2a target genes in
EPAS1 carriers with HAPH. Of interest, this variant appears to be prevalent in
lowland cattle, in which 41% of a herd of 32 are carriers, but the variant may
only have a phenotype when the animal is hypoxemic at altitude. The EPAS1 variant
will be a tool to determine the cells and signalling pathways leading to HAPH.

PMCID: PMC4399003
PMID: 25873470  [PubMed - in process]


46. Islets. 2014;6(5-6):e1006075. doi: 10.1080/19382014.2015.1006075.

Overexpression of HIF-2a in pancreatic ß cells does not alter glucose
homeostasis.

Brunt JJ(1), Shi SY, Schroer SA, Sivasubramaniyam T, Cai EP, Woo M.

Author information: 
(1)a Toronto General Research Institute ; Toronto , Canada.

Both type 1 and type 2 diabetes are associated with insufficient functional
ß-cell mass. Understanding intracellular signaling pathways associated with this 
decline is important in broadening our understanding of the disease and potential
therapeutic strategies. The hypoxia inducible factor pathway (HIF) plays a
critical role in cellular adaptation to hypoxic conditions. Activation of this
pathway increases expression of numerous genes involved in multiple cellular
processes and has been shown to impact the regulation of ß-cell function.
Previously, deletion of HIF-1a or HIF-1ß in pancreatic ß-cells, as well as
constitutive activation of the HIF pathway in ß-cells, was shown to result in
glucose intolerance and impaired insulin secretion. The objective of this study
was to delineate roles of HIF-2a overexpression in pancreatic ß-cells in vivo. We
overexpressed HIF-2a in pancreatic ß-cells by employing the Cre-loxP system
driven by the Pdx1 promoter to delete a stop codon. Our study revealed that
pancreatic HIF-2a overexpression does not result in significant differences in
glucose tolerance, insulin sensitivity or ß-cell area compared to wild-type
littermates under basal conditions or after high fat diet. Together, our study
shows excess HIF-2a in the pancreatic ß-cells does not play a significant role in
ß-cell function and glucose homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4398283
PMID: 25833250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(4):549-57. doi: 10.1080/15384047.2015.1016689. Epub
2015 Apr 1.

Endothelial PAS domain-containing protein 1 confers TKI-resistance by mediating
EGFR and MET pathways in non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Zhen Q(1), Liu JF, Liu JB, Wang RF, Chu WW, Zhang YX, Tan GL, Zhao XJ, Lv BL.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Thoracic Surgery; Shijiazhuang No.1 Hospital ; Shijiazhuang , 
Hebei Province , China.

Mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) rendering it constitutively 
active is one of the major causes for metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), and EGFR-targeted therapies utilizing tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) 
are often used clinically as the first-line treatment. But approximately half of 
NSCLC patients develop resistance to these therapies, where the MET
proto-oncogene is amplified by EGFR through the hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-1a. Here we report that endothelial PAS domain-containing protein 1
(EPAS1), with 48% sequence identity to HIF-1a, specifically binds to
TKI-resistant T790M EGFR, but not to wild-type EGFR, in NSCLC cell lines.
Expression of EPAS1 enhances amplification of MET when simultaneously expressed
with T790M EGFR but not with wild-type EGFR, and this enhancement is independent 
of ligand binding domain of EGFR. MET amplification requires EPAS1, since EPAS1
knock-down reduced MET levels. When NSCLC cells expressing T790M EGFR were
treated with TKIs, reduced EPAS1 levels significantly enhanced the drug effect,
whereas over-expression of EPAS1 increased the drug resistant effect. This
EPAS1-dependent TKI-resistance was abolished by knocking-down MET, suggesting
that EPAS1 does not cause TKI-resistance itself but functions to bridge EGFR and 
MET interactions. Our findings suggest that EPAS1 is a key factor in the EGFR-MET
crosstalk in conferring TKI-resistance in NSCLC cases, and could be used as a
potential therapeutic target in TKI-resistant NSCLC patients.

PMCID: PMC4623030
PMID: 25831463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 23;10(3):e0120296. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120296.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-wide transcript profiling reveals novel breast cancer-associated intronic 
sense RNAs.

Kim SW(1), Fishilevich E(1), Arango-Argoty G(1), Lin Y(1), Liu G(1), Li Z(1),
Monaghan AP(2), Nichols M(3), John B(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260,
United States of America. (2)Department of Neurobiology, University of
Pittsburgh, 3501 Fifth Ave, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, United States of
America. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260, United States of
America.

Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) play major roles in development and cancer progression. 
To identify novel ncRNAs that may identify key pathways in breast cancer
development, we performed high-throughput transcript profiling of tumor and
normal matched-pair tissue samples. Initial transcriptome profiling using
high-density genome-wide tiling arrays revealed changes in over 200 novel
candidate genomic regions that map to intronic regions. Sixteen genomic loci were
identified that map to the long introns of five key protein-coding genes, CRIM1, 
EPAS1, ZEB2, RBMS1, and RFX2. Consistent with the known role of the tumor
suppressor ZEB2 in the cancer-associated epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT), in situ hybridization reveals that the intronic regions deriving from ZEB2
as well as those from RFX2 and EPAS1 are down-regulated in cells of epithelial
morphology, suggesting that these regions may be important for maintaining normal
epithelial cell morphology. Paired-end deep sequencing analysis reveals a large
number of distinct genomic clusters with no coding potential within the introns
of these genes. These novel transcripts are only transcribed from the coding
strand. A comprehensive search for breast cancer associated genes reveals
enrichment for transcribed intronic regions from these loci, pointing to an
underappreciated role of introns or mechanisms relating to their biology in EMT
and breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4370647
PMID: 25798919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Wilderness Environ Med. 2015 Sep;26(3):288-94. doi: 10.1016/j.wem.2015.01.002.
Epub 2015 Mar 16.

EPAS1 Gene Polymorphisms Are Associated With High Altitude Polycythemia in
Tibetans at the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau.

Xu J(1), Yang YZ(2), Tang F(2), Ga Q(2), Tana W(2), Ge RL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for High Altitude Medical Sciences, Qinghai University School 
of Medicine, Qinghai, China (Drs Xu, Yang, Tang, Ga, Tana, and Ge); Department of
Clinical Medicine, Qinghai University School of Medicine, Qinghai, China (Dr Xu).
(2)Research Center for High Altitude Medical Sciences, Qinghai University School 
of Medicine, Qinghai, China (Drs Xu, Yang, Tang, Ga, Tana, and Ge). (3)Research
Center for High Altitude Medical Sciences, Qinghai University School of Medicine,
Qinghai, China (Drs Xu, Yang, Tang, Ga, Tana, and Ge). Electronic address:
geriligao@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that the polymorphisms in the EPAS1 gene are
associated with the susceptibility to high altitude polycythemia (HAPC) in
Tibetans at the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau.
METHODS: We enrolled 63 Tibetan HAPC patients and 131 matched healthy Tibetans as
a control group, from the Yushu area in Qinghai where the altitude is greater
than 3500 m. Eight single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the EPAS1 gene,
including rs12619696, rs13420857, rs2881504, rs4953388, rs13419896, rs4953354,
rs10187368, and rs7587138, were genotyped by the Sequenom MassARRAY SNP assay.
RESULTS: The frequencies of the G allele of EPAS1 SNP rs13419896 were
significantly higher in the HAPC group than in the control group (P < .05).
Moreover, the A alleles of rs12619696 and rs4953354 were prevalent in the HAPC
group, and their counterpart homozygotes were prevalent in the normal Tibetan
group (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with normal Tibetans, Tibetans with HAPC are maladapted and
have a different haplotype in EPAS1 SNPs rs12619696, rs13419896, and rs4953354.

Copyright © 2015 Wilderness Medical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25792003  [PubMed - in process]


50. High Alt Med Biol. 2015 Mar;16(1):34-42. doi: 10.1089/ham.2014.1083. Epub 2015
Mar 11.

A genetic predisposition score associates with reduced aerobic capacity in
response to acute normobaric hypoxia in lowlanders.

Masschelein E(1), Puype J, Broos S, Van Thienen R, Deldicque L, Lambrechts D,
Hespel P, Thomis M.

Author information: 
(1)1 Exercise Physiology Research Group , KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium .

Given the high inter-individual variability in the sensitivity to high altitude, 
we hypothesize the presence of underlying genetic factors. The aim of this study 
was to construct a genetic predisposition score based on previously identified
high-altitude gene variants to explain the inter-individual variation in the
reduced maximal O2 uptake (<U+0394>Vo2max) in response to acute hypoxia. Ninety-six
healthy young male Belgian lowlanders were included. In both normobaric normoxia 
(Fio2=20.9%) and acute normobaric hypoxia (Fio2=10.7%-12.5%) Vo2max was measured.
Forty-one SNPs in 21 genes were genotyped. A stepwise regression analysis was
applied to detect a subset of SNPs to be associated with <U+0394>Vo2max. This subset of 
SNPs was included in the genetic predisposition score. A general linear model and
regression analysis with age, weight, height, hypoxic protocol group, and Vo2max 
in normoxia as covariates were used to test the explained variance of the genetic
predisposition score. A ROC analysis was performed to discriminate between the
low- and high <U+0394>Vo2max subgroups. A stepwise regression analysis revealed a subset
of SNPs [rs833070 (VEGFA), rs4253778 (PPARA), rs6735530 (EPAS1), rs4341 (ACE),
rs1042713 (ADRB2), and rs1042714 (ADRB2)] to be associated with <U+0394>Vo2max. The
genetic predisposition score was found to be an independent predictive variable
with a partial explained variance of 23% (p<0.0001). A ROC analysis showed
significant discriminating accuracy (AUC=0.78, 95% confidence interval=0.64-0.91)
between the low- and high <U+0394>Vo2max subgroups. This six-SNP based genetic
predisposition score showed a significantly predictive value for <U+0394>Vo2max.

PMID: 25761120  [PubMed - in process]


51. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 5;11(3):e1005032. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005032.
eCollection 2015.

Correction: integrative analysis of DNA methylation and gene expression data
identifies EPAS1 as a key regulator of COPD.

PLOS Genetics Staff.

Erratum for
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Jan;11(1):e1004898. Feronjy, Robert [corrected to Foronjy,
Robert F].

PMCID: PMC4351104
PMID: 25742436  [PubMed]


52. Br J Haematol. 2015 Aug;170(4):586-8. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13313. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

Outcomes of pregnancy in patients with congenital erythrocytosis.

McMullin MF(1), Bento C(2), Rossi C(3), Rainey MG(4), Girodon F(3), Cario H(5).

Author information: 
(1)CCRCB, The Queens' University of Belfast, Belfast, UK. m.mcmullin@qub.ac.uk.
(2)Haematology Department, Centro Hospitalare Universitario de Coimbra, Coimbra, 
Portugal. (3)Laboratoire d'hématologie, PTB, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France.
(4)Haematology Department, Vale of Level, Hospital, Alexandria, UK. (5)Department
of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Centre, Ulm, Germany.

PMID: 25732921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Autophagy. 2015 Feb 25:0. [Epub ahead of print]

The autophagy sensor ITPR1 protects renal carcinoma cells from NK-mediated
killing.

Messai Y(1), Noman MZ, Janji B, Hasmim M, Escudier B, Chouaib S.

Author information: 
(1)a INSERM U753 , Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus , 114, rue Edouard Vaillant,
F-94805 Villejuif Cedex , France .

Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is dominated by inactivating mutations in
VHL (von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor, E3 ubiquitin protein ligase), leading to
constitutive activation of the hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) and induction of 
a hypoxia response transcription signature. Our study demonstrated that VHL
mutation results in the acquisition of ccRCC resistance to NK-mediated lysis by a
mechanism involving EPAS1/HIF-2a stabilization. More importantly we identified
ITPR1 (inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, type 1) as a direct novel target of
EPAS1 and as a potent regulator of NK-mediated killing through the activation of 
autophagy in target cells by a signal derived from NK cells. Therefore, it is
conceivable to consider EPAS1 or the autophagy sensor ITPR1 as a potential target
in future therapeutic protocols that aim to improve NK cell responses in patients
with RCC and other solid malignancies.

PMID: 25714778  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


54. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Apr;29(4):627-42. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1356. Epub 2015 Feb
24.

Research resource: the dynamic transcriptional profile of sertoli cells during
the progression of spermatogenesis.

Zimmermann C(1), Stévant I, Borel C, Conne B, Pitetti JL, Calvel P, Kaessmann H, 
Jégou B, Chalmel F, Nef S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development (C.Z., I.S., C.B., B.C.,
J.-L.P., P.C., S.N.), University of Geneva Medical School, 1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland; Center for Integrative Genomics (H.K.), University of Lausanne,
Génopode, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; and Inserm U1085-IRSET (B.J., F.C.),
Université de Rennes 1, Campus de Beaulieu, F-35042 Rennes, France.

Sertoli cells (SCs), the only somatic cells within seminiferous tubules,
associate intimately with developing germ cells. They not only provide physical
and nutritional support but also secrete factors essential to the complex
developmental processes of germ cell proliferation and differentiation. The SC
transcriptome must therefore adapt rapidly during the different stages of
spermatogenesis. We report comprehensive genome-wide expression profiles of pure 
populations of SCs isolated at 5 distinct stages of the first wave of mouse
spermatogenesis, using RNA sequencing technology. We were able to reconstruct
about 13 901 high-confidence, nonredundant coding and noncoding transcripts,
characterized by complex alternative splicing patterns with more than 45%
comprising novel isoforms of known genes. Interestingly, roughly one-fifth (2939)
of these genes exhibited a dynamic expression profile reflecting the evolving
role of SCs during the progression of spermatogenesis, with stage-specific
expression of genes involved in biological processes such as cell cycle
regulation, metabolism and energy production, retinoic acid synthesis, and
blood-testis barrier biogenesis. Finally, regulatory network analysis identified 
the transcription factors endothelial PAS domain-containing protein 1
(EPAS1/Hif2a), aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT/Hif1ß), and
signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) as potential master
regulators driving the SC transcriptional program. Our results highlight the
plastic transcriptional landscape of SCs during the progression of
spermatogenesis and provide valuable resources to better understand SC function
and spermatogenesis and its related disorders, such as male infertility.

PMID: 25710594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Apr;35(4):995-1002. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2096. Epub 2015
Feb 11.

PLGA/poloxamer nanoparticles loaded with EPAS1 siRNA for the treatment of
pancreatic cancer in vitro and in vivo.

Pan X(1), Zhu Q(1), Sun Y(1), Li L(1), Zhu Y(1), Zhao Z(2), Zuo J(1), Fang W(1), 
Li K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, Shandong 266003, P.R. China. (2)Nano New Material Key Laboratory of
Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong 266003, P.R. China.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) is a hypoxia-inducible protein that
contributes to tumor progression. Hypoxia is involved in tumor aggressiveness and
resistance to chemotherapy and ionizing radiation. In this study, we aimed to
assess the effects of EPAS1 silencing using
polyethylenimine-poly(lactide-coglycolide) (PLGA)/poloxamer nanoparticles loaded 
with EPAS1 siRNA on BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cells and in a mouse model of
ectopic pancreatic cancer. PLGA/poloxamer nanoparticles loaded with EPAS1 siRNA
or scramble siRNA were prepared using the emulsion/solvent evaporation method.
BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cells were cultured under hypoxic conditions and treated
with or without the nanoparticles. MTT and apoptosis assays were then performed. 
A xenograft nude mouse model of pancreatic cancer was established and the mice
were treated with or without the nanoparticles. The mRNA and protein expression
levels of EPAS1 in the tumor tissues were determined by semi-quantitative RT-PCR 
and western blot analysis, respectively. Vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and tumor microvessel density indicated by CD34 were determined by
immunohistochemistry. The in vitro release of EPAS1 siRNA from the nanoparticles 
exerted a sustained-release effect. EPAS1 siRNA nanoparticles inhibited BxPC-3
cell proliferation, and induced cell apoptosis under hypoxic conditions, compared
with the nanoparticles loaded with scramble siRNA (all P<0.05). EPAS1 expression 
was significantly decreased in the pancreatic tumors of the mice injected with
the nanoparticles loaded with EPAS1 siRNA. The pancreatic tumors of the mice
injected with nanoparticles loaded with EPAS1 siRNA were significantly smaller in
size and had a lower number of microvessels and a percentage of VEGF-positive
cells compared with those of the mice injected with the nanoparticles loaded with
scramble siRNA (all P<0.05). In conclusion, the results from the present study
suggest that PLGA/poloxamer nanoparticles loaded with EPAS1 siRNA inhibit
pancreatic cancer cell proliferation, induce cell apoptosis under hypoxic
conditions and significantly inhibit the formation of microvessels and tumor
growth in vivo.

PMID: 25672594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2015 Jan 24;15:1. doi: 10.1186/s12906-015-0520-z.

Arthropod steroid hormone (20-Hydroxyecdysone) suppresses IL-1ß-induced catabolic
gene expression in cartilage.

Sheu SY(1), Ho SR(2), Sun JS(3,)(4,)(5), Chen CY(6), Ke CJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan. amel@tmu.edu.tw. (2)School of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. god940@gmail.com. (3)Department of Orthopedic
Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch, No.25, Lane 442,
Sec. 1, Jingguo Rd., Hsin-Chu City, ROC, 30059, Taiwan. drjssun@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, No. 1, Ren-Ai Rd., Taipei, ROC, 10051, Taiwan. drjssun@gmail.com.
(5)Biomimetic Systems Research Center, National Chiao Tung University, Hsin-Chu
City, Taiwan. drjssun@gmail.com. (6)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, College 
of Engineering and College of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. chingyun523@gmail.com. (7)Biomimetic Systems Research
Center, National Chiao Tung University, Hsin-Chu City, Taiwan.
fonchanwd@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: In osteoarthritis (OA), the imbalance of chondrocytes' anabolic and
catabolic factors can induce cartilage destruction. Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1ß) is
a potent pro-inflammatory cytokine that is capable of inducing chondrocytes and
synovial cells to synthesize MMPs. The hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha
(HIF-2alpha, encoded by Epas1) is the catabolic transcription factor in the
osteoarthritic process. The purpose of this study is to validate the effects of
ecdysteroids (Ecd) on IL-1ß-induced cartilage catabolism and the possible role of
Ecd in treatment or prevention of early OA.
METHODS: Chondrocytes and articular cartilage was harvested from newborn ICR
mice. Ecd effect on chondrocytes viability was tested and the optimal
concentration was determined by MTT assay. The effect of HIF-2a (EPAS1) in
cartilage catabolism simulated by IL-1ß (5 ng/ml) was evaluated by articular
cartilage explants culture. The effects of Ecd on IL-1ß-induced inflammatory
conditions and their related catabolic genes expression were analyzed.
RESULTS: Interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) treatment on primary mouse articular cartilage
explants enhanced their Epas1, matrix metalloproteinases (MMP-3, MMP-13) and
ADAMTS-5 genes expression and down-regulated collagen type II (Col2a1) gene
expression. With the pre-treatment of 10(-8) M Ecd, the catabolic effects of
IL-1ß on articular cartilage were scavenged.
CONCLUSION: In conclusions, Ecd can reduce the IL-1ß-induced inflammatory effect 
of the cartilage. Ecd may suppress IL-1ß-induced cartilage catabolism via HIF-2a 
pathway.

PMCID: PMC4310028
PMID: 25617057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS Genet. 2015 Jan 8;11(1):e1004898. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004898.
eCollection 2015.

Integrative analysis of DNA methylation and gene expression data identifies EPAS1
as a key regulator of COPD.

Yoo S(1), Takikawa S(2), Geraghty P(3), Argmann C(1), Campbell J(4), Lin L(1),
Huang T(1), Tu Z(1), Foronjy RF, Spira A(4), Schadt EE(1), Powell CA(2), Zhu
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, New York, United States of America; Department of Genetics and Genomic 
Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York, United States of
America. (2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Mount Sinai 
School of Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America. (3)Department
of Medicine, St. Luke's Roosevelt Medical Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, New York, United States of America. (4)Division of Computational
Biomedicine, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar;11(3):e1005032. Feronjy, Robert [corrected to Foronjy,
Robert F].

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a complex disease. Genetic,
epigenetic, and environmental factors are known to contribute to COPD risk and
disease progression. Therefore we developed a systematic approach to identify key
regulators of COPD that integrates genome-wide DNA methylation, gene expression, 
and phenotype data in lung tissue from COPD and control samples. Our integrative 
analysis identified 126 key regulators of COPD. We identified EPAS1 as the only
key regulator whose downstream genes significantly overlapped with multiple genes
sets associated with COPD disease severity. EPAS1 is distinct in comparison with 
other key regulators in terms of methylation profile and downstream target genes.
Genes predicted to be regulated by EPAS1 were enriched for biological processes
including signaling, cell communications, and system development. We confirmed
that EPAS1 protein levels are lower in human COPD lung tissue compared to
non-disease controls and that Epas1 gene expression is reduced in mice
chronically exposed to cigarette smoke. As EPAS1 downstream genes were
significantly enriched for hypoxia responsive genes in endothelial cells, we
tested EPAS1 function in human endothelial cells. EPAS1 knockdown by siRNA in
endothelial cells impacted genes that significantly overlapped with EPAS1
downstream genes in lung tissue including hypoxia responsive genes, and genes
associated with emphysema severity. Our first integrative analysis of genome-wide
DNA methylation and gene expression profiles illustrates that not only does DNA
methylation play a 'causal' role in the molecular pathophysiology of COPD, but it
can be leveraged to directly identify novel key mediators of this
pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC4287352
PMID: 25569234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Sci Rep. 2014 Dec 12;4:7465. doi: 10.1038/srep07465.

Two functional loci in the promoter of EPAS1 gene involved in high-altitude
adaptation of Tibetans.

Xu XH(1), Huang XW(2), Qun L(3), Li YN(1), Wang Y(1), Liu C(4), Ma Y(1), Liu
QM(1), Sun K(5), Qian F(1), Jin L(1), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences and Institutes of Biomedical
Sciences, Fudan University Jiangwan Campus, 2005 Songhu Road, Shanghai 200438,
P.R. China. (2)1] Clinical laboratory of Huadong Sanatorium, Dajishan, Meiyuan
Garden, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214065, P.R. China [2] Public Health Bureau for Shigatse
District, 5 Keji Road, Shigatse District, Tibet 857000, P.R. China. (3)Department
of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The People's Hospital of Shigatse District, 28
Shanghai Middle Road, Shigatse District, Tibet 857000, P.R. China. (4)School of
Life Sciences, Fudan University Jiangwan Campus, 2005 Songhu Road, Shanghai
200438, P.R. China. (5)1] School of Life Sciences, Fudan University Jiangwan
Campus, 2005 Songhu Road, Shanghai 200438, P.R. China [2] Center for Reproductive
Medicine, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200135, P.R. China.

EPAS1 involves in the hypoxic response and is suggested to be responsible for the
genetic adaptation of high-altitude hypoxia in Tibetans. However, the detailed
molecular mechanism remains unknown. In this study, a single nucleotide
polymorphism rs56721780:G>C and an insertion/deletion (indel) polymorphism -742
indel in the promoter region showed divergence between Tibetans and non-Tibetan
lowlanders. rs56721780:G>C regulated the transcription of EPAS1 by IKAROS family 
zinc finger 1 (IKZF1), which was identified as a new transcriptional repressor
for EPAS1 gene. It demonstrated that the C allele of rs56721780:G>C decreased the
binding of IKZF1, leading to the attenuated transcriptional repression of EPAS1
gene. The insertion at -742 indel provided a new binding site for Sp1 and was
related to the activation of EPAS1 promoter. Further functional analysis revealed
that lysyl oxidase (LOX) gene, which was reported to be responsible for
extracellular matrix protein cross-linking of amnion previously, was a direct
target of EPAS1. The CC genotype at rs56721780:G>C and the insertion genotype at 
-742 indel were found associated with higher EPAS1 and LOX expression levels in
amnion, as well as higher birth weight of Tibetan newborns, suggesting that EPAS1
gene might play important roles in the development of amnion, fetus growth and
high-altitude adaptation of Tibetans.

PMCID: PMC4264014
PMID: 25501874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Thorac Oncol. 2014 Nov;9(11):1709-13. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000309.

Association of EPAS1 gene rs4953354 polymorphism with susceptibility to lung
adenocarcinoma in female Japanese non-smokers.

Iwamoto S(1), Tanimoto K, Nishio Y, Putra AC, Fuchita H, Ohe M, Sutani A, Kuraki 
T, Hiyama K, Murakami I, Eguchi H, Isobe T.

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Medical Oncology & Respiratory Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine, Shimane, Japan; Research
Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Department of Radiation Medicine,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan; Natural Science Center for Basic
Research and Development, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan;
§Higashihiroshima Medical Center, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hiroshima, 
Japan; and <U+2016>Division of Translational Research, Research Center for Genomic
Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Hypoxia-inducible factor-2a (also called endothelial periodic
acid-Schiff domain protein 1 [EPAS1]) seems to play an important role in some
carcinogenesis, though there is no information on the relationship between single
nucleotide polymorphism of EPAS1 and lung cancer development. The aim of this
study was to explore a possible association of the EPAS1 gene rs4953354
polymorphism with susceptibility to lung cancer.
METHODS: A case-control study of 346 patients with non-small-cell lung carcinoma 
(adenocarcinoma = 249, squamous cell carcinoma = 97) and 247 healthy control
subjects was carried out. A/G polymorphism within an intron 2 of the EPAS1
(rs4953354) was determined by direct sequencing.
RESULTS: A frequency of lung adenocarcinoma patients with a minor allele G (A/G
or G/G genotype) at the rs4953354 was much higher than that of controls (odds
ratio, 1.800; 95% confidence interval, 1.161-2.791; p = 0.008). This association 
was more evident when analyzed using female never-smokers (odds ratio, 3.31; 95% 
confidence interval, 1.21-9.01; p = 0.017). Mutations in epidermal growth factor 
receptor tended to be frequent in patients with G allele at the rs4953354,
compared with those with other genotypes.
CONCLUSION: The EPAS1 rs4953354 may be a potentially susceptible marker for
development of lung adenocarcinoma, especially in female never-smokers.

PMID: 25436804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Genes Dev. 2014 Oct 15;28(20):2189-204. doi: 10.1101/gad.250167.114.

Human high-altitude adaptation: forward genetics meets the HIF pathway.

Bigham AW(1), Lee FS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109,
USA; (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA
franklee@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Humans have adapted to the chronic hypoxia of high altitude in several locations,
and recent genome-wide studies have indicated a genetic basis. In some
populations, genetic signatures have been identified in the hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF) pathway, which orchestrates the transcriptional response to hypoxia.
In Tibetans, they have been found in the HIF2A (EPAS1) gene, which encodes for
HIF-2a, and the prolyl hydroxylase domain protein 2 (PHD2, also known as EGLN1)
gene, which encodes for one of its key regulators, PHD2. High-altitude adaptation
may be due to multiple genes that act in concert with one another. Unraveling
their mechanism of action can offer new therapeutic approaches toward treating
common human diseases characterized by chronic hypoxia.

© 2014 Bigham and Lee; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4201282
PMID: 25319824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. BMC Genomics. 2014 Oct 1;15:834. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-834.

Population history and genomic signatures for high-altitude adaptation in Tibetan
pigs.

Ai H, Yang B, Li J, Xie X, Chen H, Ren J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry
of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang 330045, P, R
China. renjunjxau@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The Tibetan pig is one of domestic animals indigenous to the
Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. Several geographically isolated pig populations are
distributed throughout the Plateau. It remained an open question if these
populations have experienced different demographic histories and have evolved
independent adaptive loci for the harsh environment of the Plateau. To address
these questions, we herein investigated ~ 40,000 genetic variants across the pig 
genome in a broad panel of 678 individuals from 5 Tibetan geographic populations 
and 34 lowland breeds.
RESULTS: Using a series of population genetic analyses, we show that Tibetan pig 
populations have marked genetic differentiations. Tibetan pigs appear to be 3
independent populations corresponding to the Tibetan, Gansu and Sichuan & Yunnan 
locations. Each population is more genetically similar to its geographic
neighbors than to any of the other Tibetan populations. By applying a
locus-specific branch length test, we identified both population-specific and
-shared candidate genes under selection in Tibetan pigs. These genes, such as
PLA2G12A, RGCC, C9ORF3, GRIN2B, GRID1 and EPAS1, are involved in high-altitude
physiology including angiogenesis, pulmonary hypertension, oxygen intake, defense
response and erythropoiesis. A majority of these genes have not been implicated
in previous studies of highlanders and high-altitude animals.
CONCLUSION: Tibetan pig populations have experienced substantial genetic
differentiation. Historically, Tibetan pigs likely had admixture with neighboring
lowland breeds. During the long history of colonization in the Plateau, Tibetan
pigs have developed a complex biological adaptation mechanism that could be
different from that of Tibetans and other animals. Different Tibetan pig
populations appear to have both distinct and convergent adaptive loci for the
harsh environment of the Plateau.

PMCID: PMC4197311
PMID: 25270331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Curr Biol. 2014 Sep 22;24(18):R845-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.07.079.

Human evolution: genomic gifts from archaic hominins.

Vernot B(1), Akey JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, 3720 15th Ave NE,
Box 355065, Seattle WA 98195-5065, USA. (2)Department of Genome Sciences,
University of Washington, 3720 15th Ave NE, Box 355065, Seattle WA 98195-5065,
USA. Electronic address: akeyj@uw.edu.

Comment on
    Nature. 2014 Aug 14;512(7513):194-7.

The dispersal of humans throughout the world was accompanied by adaptations to
local environments. New research shows that a previously identified haplotype of 
the EPAS1 gene, which allows Tibetans to live at high altitude, was inherited
from archaic hominin ancestors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25247359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mutagenesis. 2014 Nov;29(6):419-25. doi: 10.1093/mutage/geu046. Epub 2014 Sep 18.

Variants in angiogenesis-related genes and the risk of clear cell renal cell
carcinoma.

Qin C(1), Chen J(1), Li J(1), Ju X(1), Zhang S(1), Cao Q(1), Han Z(1), Li P(1),
Shao P(1), Wang M(2), Zhang Z(2), Gu M(1), Zhang W(1), Yin C(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Urology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China and Cancer Center of Nanjing Medical University,
Department of Molecular and Genetic Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, 140
Hanzhong Road, Nanjing 210029, China. (2)Cancer Center of Nanjing Medical
University, Department of Molecular and Genetic Toxicology, Nanjing Medical
University, 140 Hanzhong Road, Nanjing 210029, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of 
Reproductive Medicine, Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China
and Cancer Center of Nanjing Medical University, Department of Molecular and
Genetic Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, 140 Hanzhong Road, Nanjing
210029, China drcjyin@gmail.com.

Angiogenesis is fundamentally important to the pathogenesis of clear cell renal
cell carcinoma (ccRCC). We investigated the association between variations of
genes related to angiogenesis and the risk of ccRCC. In a case-control study of
859 ccRCC patients and 1004 cancer-free subjects, we genotyped 24 potentially
functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in seven angiogenesis-related
genes (HIF1A, EPAS1, VEGFA, VEGFR1, VEGFR2, VEGFR3 and PDGFRB) using the TaqMan
or Snapshot method. Unconditional logistic regression, adjusted for potential
confounding factors, was used to assess the risk associations. The functionality 
of selected SNPs was assessed by real-time quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and luciferase reporter gene assays. We found 
two SNPs (VEGFA rs2010963 and VEGFR3 rs448012) that were significantly associated
with increased risk of ccRCC, after adjusting for multiple comparisons [rs2010963
CC/GC cf. GG: false discovery rate (FDR) = 0.048, odds ratio (OR) = 1.36, 95%
confidence interval (95% CI) = 1.12-1.66; rs448012 CC/GC cf. GG: FDR = 0.048, OR 
= 1.38, 95% CI =1.13-1.69]. Real-time quantitative PCR revealed that the variant 
genotypes of rs2010963, but not rs448012, were associated with increased gene
expression in normal tissues of ccRCC patients (CC/GC cf. GG: P = 0.036). The
luciferase reporter assay showed that the rs2010963 C allele significantly
increased luciferase activity over that of the rs2010963 G allele. Our results
indicate that VEGFA rs2010963 and VEGFR3 rs448012 are associated with risk of
ccRCC. Furthermore, rs2010963 is a functional SNP that may affect ccRCC
susceptibility by modulating endogenous VEGFA expression.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the UK
Environmental Mutagen Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25239121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Wilderness Environ Med. 2014 Dec;25(4):392-400. doi: 10.1016/j.wem.2014.06.003.
Epub 2014 Sep 16.

An EPAS1 haplotype is associated with high altitude polycythemia in male Han
Chinese at the Qinghai-Tibetan plateau.

Chen Y(1), Jiang C(1), Luo Y(2), Liu F(1), Gao Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and High Altitude Physiology (Drs Chen, Jiang,
Liu, and Gao); Key Laboratory of High Altitude Medicine, People's Liberation Army
(Drs Chen, Jiang, Luo, Liu, and Gao), Chongqing, China. (2)Department of High
Altitude Disease (Dr Luo), College of High Altitude Military Medicine, and Key
Laboratory of High Altitude Medicine, Third Military Medical University, Ministry
of Education; Key Laboratory of High Altitude Medicine, People's Liberation Army 
(Drs Chen, Jiang, Luo, Liu, and Gao), Chongqing, China. (3)Department of
Pathophysiology and High Altitude Physiology (Drs Chen, Jiang, Liu, and Gao); Key
Laboratory of High Altitude Medicine, People's Liberation Army (Drs Chen, Jiang, 
Luo, Liu, and Gao), Chongqing, China. Electronic address: gaoy66@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Hemoglobin concentration at high altitude is considered an important 
marker of high altitude adaptation, and native Tibetans in the Qinghai-Tibetan
plateau show lower hemoglobin concentrations than Han people who have emigrated
from plains areas. Genetic studies revealed that EPAS1 plays a key role in high
altitude adaptation and is associated with the low hemoglobin concentration in
Tibetans. Three single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs13419896, rs4953354,
rs1868092) of noncoding regions in EPAS1 exhibited significantly different allele
frequencies in the Tibetan and Han populations and were associated with low
hemoglobin concentrations in Tibetans.
METHODS: To explore the hereditary basis of high altitude polycythemia (HAPC) and
investigate the association between EPAS1 and HAPC in the Han population, these 3
single nucleotide polymorphisms were assessed in 318 male Han Chinese HAPC
patients and 316 control subjects. Genotyping was performed by high resolution
melting curve analysis.
RESULTS: The G-G-G haplotype of rs13419896, rs4953354, and rs1868092 was
significantly more frequent in HAPC patients than in control subjects, whereas no
differences in the allele or genotype frequencies of the 3 single nucleotide
polymorphisms were found between HAPC patients and control subjects. Moreover,
genotypes of rs1868092 (AA) and rs4953354 (GG) that were not observed in the
Chinese Han in the Beijing population were found at frequencies of 1.6% and 0.9%,
respectively, in our study population of HAPC patients and control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Carriers of this EPAS1 haplotype (G-G-G, rs13419896, rs4953354, and 
rs1868092) may have a higher risk for HAPC. These results may contribute to a
better understanding of the pathogenesis of HAPC in the Han population.

Copyright © 2014 Wilderness Medical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25239027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Oct;12(10):1520-31. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0682. Epub
2014 Aug 7.

A macrophage-dominant PI3K isoform controls hypoxia-induced HIF1a and HIF2a
stability and tumor growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis.

Joshi S(1), Singh AR(1), Zulcic M(1), Durden DL(2).

Author information: 
(1)UCSD Department of Pediatrics, Moores Cancer Center, University of California,
La Jolla, California. (2)UCSD Department of Pediatrics, Moores Cancer Center,
University of California, La Jolla, California. Division of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology, UCSD Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, California.
SignalRx Pharmaceuticals, San Diego, California. ddurden@ucsd.edu.

Tumor growth, progression, and response to the hypoxic tumor microenvironment
involve the action of hypoxia-inducible transcription factors, HIF1 and HIF2. HIF
is a heterodimeric transcription factor containing an inducible HIFa subunit and 
a constitutively expressed HIFß subunit. The signaling pathways operational in
macrophages regulating hypoxia-induced HIFa stabilization remain the subject of
intense investigation. Here, it was discovered that the PTEN/PI3K/AKT signaling
axis controls hypoxia-induced HIF1a (HIF1A) and HIF2a (EPAS1) stability in
macrophages. Using genetic mouse models and pan-PI3K as well as isoform-specific 
inhibitors, inhibition of the PI3K/AKT pathway blocked the accumulation of HIFa
protein and its primary transcriptional target VEGF in response to hypoxia.
Moreover, blocking the PI3K/AKT signaling axis promoted the hypoxic degradation
of HIFa via the 26S proteasome. Mechanistically, a macrophage-dominant PI3K
isoform (p110<U+03B3>) directed tumor growth, angiogenesis, metastasis, and the
HIFa/VEGF axis. Moreover, a pan-PI3K inhibitor (SF1126) blocked tumor-induced
angiogenesis and inhibited VEGF and other proangiogenic factors secreted by
macrophages. These data define a novel molecular mechanism by which PTEN/PI3K/AKT
regulates the proteasome-dependent stability of HIFa under hypoxic conditions, a 
signaling pathway in macrophages that controls tumor-induced angiogenesis and
metastasis.IMPLICATIONS: This study indicates that PI3K inhibitors are excellent 
candidates for the treatment of cancers where macrophages promote tumor
progression.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25103499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Genome Biol Evol. 2014 Aug;6(8):2122-8. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evu162.

Genetic convergence in the adaptation of dogs and humans to the high-altitude
environment of the tibetan plateau.

Wang GD(1), Fan RX(2), Zhai W(3), Liu F(1), Wang L(2), Zhong L(2), Wu H(2), Yang 
HC(4), Wu SF(1), Zhu CL(1), Li Y(2), Gao Y(1), Ge RL(5), Wu CI(6), Zhang YP(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, and Yunnan Laboratory
of Molecular Biology of Domestic Animals, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China. (2)Laboratory for Conservation and
Utilization of Bio-resources, Yunnan University, Kunming, China. (3)Center for
Computational Biology and Laboratory of Disease Genomics and Individualized
Medicine, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and Research,
Singapore. (4)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, and Yunnan
Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Domestic Animals, Kunming Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China Department of Molecular and 
Cell Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei, China. (5)Key Laboratory for High Altitude Medicine of Ministry of 
Chinese Education and Research Center for High Altitude Medicine, Qinghai
University, Xining, China. (6)Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of
Bio-resources, Yunnan University, Kunming, China Department of Ecology and
Evolution, University of Chicago. (7)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources
and Evolution, and Yunnan Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Domestic Animals,
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China
Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-resources, Yunnan University, 
Kunming, China Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and 
Research, Singapore zhangyp@mail.kiz.ac.cn.

The high-altitude hypoxic environment represents one of the most extreme
challenges for mammals. Previous studies of humans on the Tibetan plateau and in 
the Andes Mountains have identified statistical signatures of selection in
different sets of loci. Here, we first measured the hemoglobin levels in village 
dogs from Tibet and those from Chinese lowlands. We found that the hemoglobin
levels are very similar between the two groups, suggesting that Tibetan dogs
might share similar adaptive strategies as the Tibetan people. Through a
whole-genome sequencing approach, we have identified EPAS1 and HBB as candidate
genes for the hypoxic adaptation on the Tibetan plateau. The population genetic
analysis shows a significant convergence between humans and dogs in Tibet. The
similarities in the sets of loci that exhibit putative signatures of selection
and the hemoglobin levels between humans and dogs of the same environment, but
not between human populations in different regions, suggests an extraordinary
landscape of convergent evolution between human beings and their best friend on
the Tibetan plateau.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

PMCID: PMC4231634
PMID: 25091388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jul 31;10(7):e1004466. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004466.
eCollection 2014.

Hypoxia adaptations in the grey wolf (Canis lupus chanco) from Qinghai-Tibet
Plateau.

Zhang W(1), Fan Z(2), Han E(3), Hou R(4), Zhang L(4), Galaverni M(5), Huang J(6),
Liu H(4), Silva P(7), Li P(6), Pollinger JP(3), Du L(6), Zhang X(8), Yue B(8),
Wayne RK(3), Zhang Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sichuan Key Laboratory of Conservation Biology on Endangered Wildlife, Chengdu
research base of giant panda breeding, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, P. R. China;
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, UCLA, Los Angeles, California,
United States of America. (2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology,
UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States of America; Key Laboratory of
Bioresources and Ecoenvironment (Ministry of Education), College of Life
Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, People's Republic of China. (3)Department 
of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States
of America. (4)Sichuan Key Laboratory of Conservation Biology on Endangered
Wildlife, Chengdu research base of giant panda breeding, Chengdu, Sichuan
Province, P. R. China. (5)ISPRA, Ozzano dell'Emilia, Italy. (6)Sichuan Key
Laboratory of Conservation Biology on Endangered Wildlife, College of Life
Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, P. R. China. (7)CIBIO-UP, University of
Porto, Vairão, Portugal. (8)Key Laboratory of Bioresources and Ecoenvironment
(Ministry of Education), College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
People's Republic of China.

The Tibetan grey wolf (Canis lupus chanco) occupies habitats on the Qinghai-Tibet
Plateau, a high altitude (>3000 m) environment where low oxygen tension exerts
unique selection pressure on individuals to adapt to hypoxic conditions. To
identify genes involved in hypoxia adaptation, we generated complete genome
sequences of nine Chinese wolves from high and low altitude populations at an
average coverage of 25× coverage. We found that, beginning about 55,000 years
ago, the highland Tibetan grey wolf suffered a more substantial population
decline than lowland wolves. Positively selected hypoxia-related genes in
highland wolves are enriched in the HIF signaling pathway (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.57E-6), ATP
binding (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>5.62E-5), and response to an oxygen-containing compound (P=5.30E-4).
Of these positively selected hypoxia-related genes, three genes (EPAS1, ANGPT1,
and RYR2) had at least one specific fixed non-synonymous SNP in highland wolves
based on the nine genome data. Our re-sequencing studies on a large panel of
individuals showed a frequency difference greater than 58% between highland and
lowland wolves for these specific fixed non-synonymous SNPs and a high degree of 
LD surrounding the three genes, which imply strong selection. Past studies have
shown that EPAS1 and ANGPT1 are important in the response to hypoxic stress, and 
RYR2 is involved in heart function. These three genes also exhibited significant 
signals of natural selection in high altitude human populations, which suggest
similar evolutionary constraints on natural selection in wolves and humans of the
Qinghai-Tibet Plateau.

PMCID: PMC4117439
PMID: 25078401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Nature. 2014 Aug 14;512(7513):194-7. doi: 10.1038/nature13408. Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Altitude adaptation in Tibetans caused by introgression of Denisovan-like DNA.

Huerta-Sánchez E(1), Jin X(2), Asan(3), Bianba Z(4), Peter BM(5), Vinckenbosch
N(5), Liang Y(6), Yi X(6), He M(7), Somel M(8), Ni P(9), Wang B(9), Ou X(9),
Huasang(9), Luosang J(9), Cuo ZX(10), Li K(11), Gao G(12), Yin Y(9), Wang W(9),
Zhang X(13), Xu X(9), Yang H(14), Li Y(9), Wang J(15), Wang J(16), Nielsen R(17).

Author information: 
(1)1] BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China [2] Department of Integrative Biology,
University of California, Berkeley, California 94720 USA [3] School of Natural
Sciences, University of California, Merced, California 95343 USA [4]. (2)1]
BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China [2] School of Bioscience and Bioengineering,
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China [3]. (3)1]
BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China [2] Binhai Genomics Institute, BGI-Tianjin, 
Tianjin 300308, China [3] Tianjin Translational Genomics Center, BGI-Tianjin,
Tianjin 300308, China [4]. (4)1] The People's Hospital of Lhasa, Lhasa 850000,
China [2]. (5)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California,
Berkeley, California 94720 USA. (6)1] BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China [2]
Binhai Genomics Institute, BGI-Tianjin, Tianjin 300308, China [3] Tianjin
Translational Genomics Center, BGI-Tianjin, Tianjin 300308, China. (7)1]
BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China [2] Bioinformatics and Computational Biology
Program, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA. (8)Department of
Biological Sciences, Middle East Technical University, 06800 Ankara, Turkey.
(9)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China. (10)The Second People's Hospital of
Tibet Autonomous Region, Lhasa 850000, China. (11)The People's Hospital of the
Tibet Autonomous Region, Lhasa 850000, China. (12)The hospital of XiShuangBanNa
Dai Nationalities, Autonomous Jinghong, 666100 Yunnan, China. (13)1]
BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China [2] The Guangdong Enterprise Key Laboratory 
of Human Disease Genomics, BGI-Shenzhen, 518083 Shenzhen, China [3] Shenzhen Key 
Laboratory of Transomics Biotechnologies, BGI-Shenzhen, 518083 Shenzhen, China.
(14)1] BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China [2] Princess Al Jawhara Center of
Excellence in the Research of Hereditary Disorders, King Abdulaziz University,
Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia [3] James D. Watson Institute of Genome Science,
310008 Hangzhou, China. (15)1] BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China [2] James D. 
Watson Institute of Genome Science, 310008 Hangzhou, China. (16)1] BGI-Shenzhen, 
Shenzhen 518083, China [2] Princess Al Jawhara Center of Excellence in the
Research of Hereditary Disorders, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi 
Arabia [3] Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Ole MaaløesVej 5,
2200 Copenhagen, Denmark [4] Macau University of Science and Technology,
AvenidaWai long, Taipa, Macau 999078, China [5] Department of Medicine,
University of Hong Kong 999077, Hong Kong. (17)1] BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, 
China [2] Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720 USA [3] Department of Statistics, University of California,
Berkeley, California 94720, USA [4] Department of Biology, University of
Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Sep;15(9):573.
    Curr Biol. 2014 Sep 22;24(18):R845-8.

As modern humans migrated out of Africa, they encountered many new environmental 
conditions, including greater temperature extremes, different pathogens and
higher altitudes. These diverse environments are likely to have acted as agents
of natural selection and to have led to local adaptations. One of the most
celebrated examples in humans is the adaptation of Tibetans to the hypoxic
environment of the high-altitude Tibetan plateau. A hypoxia pathway gene, EPAS1, 
was previously identified as having the most extreme signature of positive
selection in Tibetans, and was shown to be associated with differences in
haemoglobin concentration at high altitude. Re-sequencing the region around EPAS1
in 40 Tibetan and 40 Han individuals, we find that this gene has a highly unusual
haplotype structure that can only be convincingly explained by introgression of
DNA from Denisovan or Denisovan-related individuals into humans. Scanning a
larger set of worldwide populations, we find that the selected haplotype is only 
found in Denisovans and in Tibetans, and at very low frequency among Han Chinese.
Furthermore, the length of the haplotype, and the fact that it is not found in
any other populations, makes it unlikely that the haplotype sharing between
Tibetans and Denisovans was caused by incomplete ancestral lineage sorting rather
than introgression. Our findings illustrate that admixture with other hominin
species has provided genetic variation that helped humans to adapt to new
environments.

PMCID: PMC4134395
PMID: 25043035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Angiogenesis. 2014 Oct;17(4):909-20. doi: 10.1007/s10456-014-9438-1. Epub 2014
Jul 11.

Genetic variability of VEGF pathway genes in six randomized phase III trials
assessing the addition of bevacizumab to standard therapy.

de Haas S(1), Delmar P, Bansal AT, Moisse M, Miles DW, Leighl N, Escudier B, Van 
Cutsem E, Carmeliet P, Scherer SJ, Pallaud C, Lambrechts D.

Author information: 
(1)F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Despite extensive translational research, no validated biomarkers
predictive of bevacizumab treatment outcome have been identified.
METHODS: We performed a meta-analysis of individual patient data from six
randomized phase III trials in colorectal, pancreatic, lung, renal, breast, and
gastric cancer to explore the potential relationships between 195 common genetic 
variants in the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway and bevacizumab
treatment outcome.
RESULTS: The analysis included 1,402 patients (716 bevacizumab-treated and 686
placebo-treated). Twenty variants were associated (P < 0.05) with
progression-free survival (PFS) in bevacizumab-treated patients. Of these, 4
variants in EPAS1 survived correction for multiple testing (q < 0.05).
Genotype-by-treatment interaction tests revealed that, across these 20 variants, 
3 variants in VEGF-C (rs12510099), EPAS1 (rs4953344), and IL8RA (rs2234671) were 
potentially predictive (P < 0.05), but not resistant to multiple testing (q >
0.05). A weak genotype-by-treatment interaction effect was also observed for
rs699946 in VEGF-A, whereas Bayesian genewise analysis revealed that genetic
variability in VHL was associated with PFS in the bevacizumab arm (q < 0.05).
Variants in VEGF-A, EPAS1, and VHL were located in expression quantitative loci
derived from lymphoblastoid cell lines, indicating that they affect the
expression levels of their respective gene.
CONCLUSIONS: This large genetic analysis suggests that variants in VEGF-A, EPAS1,
IL8RA, VHL, and VEGF-C have potential value in predicting bevacizumab treatment
outcome across tumor types. Although these associations did not survive
correction for multiple testing in a genotype-by-interaction analysis, they are
among the strongest predictive effects reported to date for genetic variants and 
bevacizumab efficacy.

PMID: 25012543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Oct;12(10):1398-406. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0184.
Epub 2014 Jul 3.

Decreased expression of cystathionine ß-synthase promotes glioma tumorigenesis.

Takano N(1), Sarfraz Y(2), Gilkes DM(3), Chaturvedi P(3), Xiang L(3), Suematsu
M(4), Zagzag D(5), Semenza GL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland. McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. Department of
Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Microvascular
and Molecular Neuro-Oncology Laboratory, New York University School of Medicine, 
New York, New York. (3)Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic
Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Microvascular and Molecular Neuro-Oncology Laboratory, New York University
School of Medicine, New York, New York. Division of Neuropathology, Department of
Pathology and Neurosurgery, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York. (6)gsemenza@jhmi.edu.

Cystathionine ß-synthase (CBS) catalyzes metabolic reactions that convert
homocysteine to cystathionine. To assess the role of CBS in human glioma, cells
were stably transfected with lentiviral vectors encoding shRNA targeting CBS or a
nontargeting control shRNA, and subclones were injected into immunodeficient
mice. Interestingly, decreased CBS expression did not affect proliferation in
vitro but decreased the latency period before rapid tumor xenograft growth after 
subcutaneous injection and increased tumor incidence and volume following
orthotopic implantation into the caudate-putamen. In soft-agar colony formation
assays, CBS knockdown subclones displayed increased anchorage-independent growth.
Molecular analysis revealed that CBS knockdown subclones expressed higher basal
levels of the transcriptional activator hypoxia-inducible factor 2a
(HIF2a/EPAS1). HIF2a knockdown counteracted the effect of CBS knockdown on
anchorage-independent growth. Bioinformatic analysis of mRNA expression data from
human glioma specimens revealed a significant association between low expression 
of CBS mRNA and high expression of angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4) and VEGF
transcripts, which are HIF2 target gene products that were also increased in CBS 
knockdown subclones. These results suggest that decreased CBS expression in
glioma increases HIF2a protein levels and HIF2 target gene expression, which
promotes glioma tumor formation.IMPLICATIONS: CBS loss-of-function promotes
glioma growth.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4274393
PMID: 24994751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS Biol. 2014 Jun 10;12(6):e1001881. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001881.
eCollection 2014.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-2a is an essential catabolic regulator of inflammatory
rheumatoid arthritis.

Ryu JH(1), Chae CS(2), Kwak JS(2), Oh H(2), Shin Y(2), Huh YH(2), Lee CG(2), Park
YW(3), Chun CH(4), Kim YM(5), Im SH(6), Chun JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Dynamics Research Center and School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute
of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Republic of Korea; Research Center for
Biomineralization Disorders and Dental Science Research Institute, School of
Dentistry, Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Republic of Korea. (2)Cell
Dynamics Research Center and School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of
Science and Technology, Gwangju, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Rheumatology, Chonnam National University Medical School and Hospital, Gwangju,
Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Wonkwang University
School of Medicine, Iksan, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Kangwon National University,
Chuncheon, Republic of Korea. (6)Academy of Immunology and Microbiology,
Institute for Basic Science, and Department of Integrative Biosciences and
Biotechnology, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Republic of
Korea.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disorder that manifests as
chronic inflammation and joint tissue destruction. However, the etiology and
pathogenesis of RA have not been fully elucidated. Here, we explored the role of 
the hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs), HIF-1a (encoded by HIF1A) and HIF-2a
(encoded by EPAS1). HIF-2a was markedly up-regulated in the intimal lining of RA 
synovium, whereas HIF-1a was detected in a few cells in the sublining and deep
layer of RA synovium. Overexpression of HIF-2a in joint tissues caused an RA-like
phenotype, whereas HIF-1a did not affect joint architecture. Moreover, a HIF-2a
deficiency in mice blunted the development of experimental RA. HIF-2a was
expressed mainly in fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) of RA synovium and
regulated their proliferation, expression of RANKL (receptor activator of nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B ligand) and various catabolic factors, and osteoclastogenic potential. 
Moreover, HIF-2a-dependent up-regulation of interleukin (IL)-6 in FLS stimulated 
differentiation of TH17 cells-crucial effectors of RA pathogenesis. Additionally,
in the absence of IL-6 (Il6-/- mice), overexpression of HIF-2a in joint tissues
did not cause an RA phenotype. Thus, our results collectively suggest that HIF-2a
plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of RA by regulating FLS functions,
independent of HIF-1a.

PMCID: PMC4051611
PMID: 24914685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. BMC Genomics. 2014 May 18;15:382. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-382.

EPAS1 gene variants are associated with sprint/power athletic performance in two 
cohorts of European athletes.

Voisin S, Cieszczyk P, Pushkarev VP, Dyatlov DA, Vashlyayev BF, Shumaylov VA,
Maciejewska-Karlowska A, Sawczuk M, Skuza L, Jastrzebski Z, Bishop DJ, Eynon
N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sport, Exercise and Active Living (ISEAL), Victoria University,
Melbourne, Australia. nir.eynon@vu.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: The endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) activates genes that are
involved in erythropoiesis and angiogenesis, thus favoring a better delivery of
oxygen to the tissues and is a plausible candidate to influence athletic
performance. Using innovative statistical methods we compared genotype
distributions and interactions of EPAS1 SNPs rs1867785, rs11689011, rs895436,
rs4035887 and rs1867782 between sprint/power athletes (n=338), endurance athletes
(n=254), and controls (603) in Polish and Russian samples. We also examined the
association between these SNPs and the athletes' competition level ('elite' and
'sub-elite' level). Genotyping was performed by either Real-Time PCR or by
Single-Base Extension (SBE) method.
RESULTS: In the pooled cohort of Polish and Russian athletes, 1) rs1867785 was
associated with sprint/power athletic status; the AA genotype in rs1867785 was
underrepresented in the sprint/power athletes, 2) rs11689011 was also associated 
with sprint/power athletic status; the TT genotype in rs11689011 was
underrepresented sprint/power athletes, and 3) the interaction between rs1867785,
rs11689011, and rs4035887 was associated with sprint/power athletic performance; 
the combinations of the AA genotype in rs4035887 with either the AG or GG
genotypes in rs1867785, or with the CT or CC genotypes in rs11689011, were
underrepresented in two cohorts of sprint/power athletes.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the unique statistical model rs1867785/rs11689011 are
strong predictors of sprint/power athletic status, and the interaction between
rs1867785, rs11689011, and rs4035887 might contribute to success in sprint/power 
athletic performance.

PMCID: PMC4035083
PMID: 24884370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Sep;12(9):1233-43. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0149. Epub 
2014 May 21.

Hypoxia regulates alternative splicing of HIF and non-HIF target genes.

Sena JA(1), Wang L(2), Heasley LE(2), Hu CJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Graduate Program and. (2)Department of Craniofacial Biology,
School of Dental Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, Colorado. (3)Molecular Biology Graduate Program and Department of
Craniofacial Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado Cheng-jun.hu@ucdenver.edu.

Hypoxia is a common characteristic of many solid tumors. The hypoxic
microenvironment stabilizes hypoxia-inducible transcription factor 1a (HIF1a) and
2a (HIF2a/EPAS1) to activate gene transcription, which promotes tumor cell
survival. The majority of human genes are alternatively spliced, producing RNA
isoforms that code for functionally distinct proteins. Thus, an effective hypoxia
response requires increased HIF target gene expression as well as proper RNA
splicing of these HIF-dependent transcripts. However, it is unclear if and how
hypoxia regulates RNA splicing of HIF targets. This study determined the effects 
of hypoxia on alternative splicing (AS) of HIF and non-HIF target genes in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells and characterized the role of HIF in regulating AS
of HIF-induced genes. The results indicate that hypoxia generally promotes exon
inclusion for hypoxia-induced, but reduces exon inclusion for hypoxia-reduced
genes. Mechanistically, HIF activity, but not hypoxia per se is found to be
necessary and sufficient to increase exon inclusion of several HIF targets,
including pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDK1). PDK1 splicing reporters confirm
that transcriptional activation by HIF is sufficient to increase exon inclusion
of PDK1 splicing reporter. In contrast, transcriptional activation of a PDK1
minigene by other transcription factors in the absence of endogenous HIF target
gene activation fails to alter PDK1 RNA splicing.IMPLICATIONS: This study
demonstrates a novel function of HIF in regulating RNA splicing of HIF target
genes.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4163527
PMID: 24850901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Aug;12(8):1112-27. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0054. Epub 
2014 May 13.

Prognostic potential of DNA methylation and transcript levels of HIF1A and EPAS1 
in colorectal cancer.

Rawluszko-Wieczorek AA(1), Horbacka K(2), Krokowicz P(2), Misztal M(3),
Jagodzinski PP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and arawluszko@ump.edu.pl.
(2)General and Colorectal Surgery, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poland.
(3)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and.

Hypoxic conditions during the formation of colorectal cancer may support the
development of more aggressive tumors. Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) is a
heterodimeric complex, composed of oxygen-induced HIFa and constitutively
expressed HIFß subunits, which mediates the primary transcriptional response to
hypoxic stress. Among HIFa isoforms, HIF1a (HIF1A) and endothelial PAS
domain-containing protein 1 (EPAS1) are able to robustly activate
hypoxia-responsive gene signatures. Although posttranslational regulation of HIFa
subunits is well described, less is known about their transcriptional regulation.
Here, molecular analysis determined that EPAS1 mRNA was significantly reduced in 
primary colonic adenocarcinoma specimens compared with histopathologically
nonneoplastic tissue from 120 patients. In contrast, no difference in HIF1A mRNA 
levels was observed between cancerous and noncancerous tissue. Bisulfite DNA
sequencing and high-resolution melting analysis identified significant DNA
hypermethylation in the EPAS1 regulatory region from cancerous tissue compared
with nonneoplastic tissue. Importantly, multivariate Cox regression analysis
revealed a high HR for patients with cancer with low EPAS1 transcript levels (HR,
4.91; 95% confidence interval, CI, 0.42-56.15; P = 0.047) and hypermethylated
EPAS1 DNA (HR, 33.94; 95% CI, 2.84-405.95; P = 0.0054). Treatment with a DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC/Decitabine),
upregulated EPAS1 expression in hypoxic colorectal cancer cells that were
associated with DNA demethylation of the EPAS1 regulatory region. In summary,
EPAS1 is transcriptionally regulated by DNA methylation in colorectal
cancer.IMPLICATIONS: DNA methylation and mRNA status of EPAS1 have novel
prognostic potential for colorectal cancer.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24825851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 May 27;111(21):7783-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1322909111. Epub 2014 May 9.

DNMT3a epigenetic program regulates the HIF-2a oxygen-sensing pathway and the
cellular response to hypoxia.

Lachance G(1), Uniacke J(1), Audas TE(1), Holterman CE(1), Franovic A(1), Payette
J(1), Lee S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, K1H 8M5. (2)Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, K1H 8M5 
slee@uottawa.ca.

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression by DNA methylation plays a central role 
in the maintenance of cellular homeostasis. Here we present evidence implicating 
the DNA methylation program in the regulation of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)
oxygen-sensing machinery and hypoxic cell metabolism. We show that DNA
methyltransferase 3a (DNMT3a) methylates and silences the HIF-2a gene (EPAS1) in 
differentiated cells. Epigenetic silencing of EPAS1 prevents activation of the
HIF-2a gene program associated with hypoxic cell growth, thereby limiting the
proliferative capacity of adult cells under low oxygen tension. Naturally
occurring defects in DNMT3a, observed in primary tumors and malignant cells,
cause the unscheduled activation of EPAS1 in early dysplastic foci. This enables 
incipient cancer cells to exploit the HIF-2a pathway in the hypoxic tumor
microenvironment necessary for the formation of cellular masses larger than the
oxygen diffusion limit. Reintroduction of DNMT3a in DNMT3a-defective cells
restores EPAS1 epigenetic silencing, prevents hypoxic cell growth, and suppresses
tumorigenesis. These data support a tumor-suppressive role for DNMT3a as an
epigenetic regulator of the HIF-2a oxygen-sensing pathway and the cellular
response to hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC4040594
PMID: 24817692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Ophthalmology. 2014 Aug;121(8):1663-4.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.02.025. Epub
2014 May 9.

Endothelial PAS domain-containing protein 1 (EPAS1) gene polymorphisms and
response to anti-VEGF therapy in the comparison of AMD treatments trials (CATT).

Hagstrom SA(1), Ying GS(2), Pauer GJ(3), Huang J(2), Maguire MG(2), Martin DF(1);
CATT Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio; Department of
Ophthalmology, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.

PMCID: PMC4122574
PMID: 24813631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Physiol Rep. 2014 Mar 20;2(3):e00261. doi: 10.1002/phy2.261. Print 2014.

Dextran induces differentiation of circulating endothelial progenitor cells.

Obi S(1), Masuda H, Akimaru H, Shizuno T, Yamamoto K, Ando J, Asahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine Science, Tokai University School of
Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

Abstract Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) have been demonstrated to be
effective for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. However, the
differentiation process from circulation to adhesion has not been clarified
because circulating EPCs rarely attached to dishes in EPC cultures previously.
Here we investigated whether immature circulating EPCs differentiate into mature 
adhesive EPCs in response to dextran. When floating-circulating EPCs derived from
ex vivo expanded human cord blood were cultured with 5% and 10% dextran, they
attached to fibronectin-coated dishes and grew exponentially. The bioactivities
of adhesion, proliferation, migration, tube formation, and differentiated type of
EPC colony formation increased in EPCs exposed to dextran. The surface protein
expression rate of the endothelial markers vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2, ICAM1, VCAM1, and integrin av/ß3 increased in
EPCs exposed to dextran. The mRNA levels of VEGF-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2,
endothelial nitric oxide synthase, MMP9, and VEGF increased in EPCs treated with 
dextran. Those of endothelium-related transcription factors ID1/2, FOXM1, HEY1,
SMAD1, FOSL1, NFkB1, NRF2, HIF1A, EPAS1 increased in dextran-treated EPCs;
however, those of hematopoietic- and antiangiogenic-related transcription factors
TAL1, RUNX1, c-MYB, GATA1/2, ERG, FOXH1, HHEX, SMAD2/3 decreased in
dextran-exposed EPCs. Inhibitor analysis showed that PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and
p38 signal transduction pathways are involved in the differentiation in response 
to dextran. In conclusion, dextran induces differentiation of circulating EPCs in
terms of adhesion, migration, proliferation, and vasculogenesis. The
differentiation mechanism in response to dextran is regulated by multiple signal 
transductions including PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and p38. These findings indicate
that dextran is an effective treatment for EPCs in regenerative medicines.

PMCID: PMC4002241
PMID: 24760515  [PubMed]


78. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Jun;21(3):495-504. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0384. Epub 2014 
Apr 16.

Frequent EPAS1/HIF2a exons 9 and 12 mutations in non-familial pheochromocytoma.

Welander J(1), Andreasson A(2), Brauckhoff M(3), Bäckdahl M(2), Larsson C(2),
Gimm O(3), Söderkvist P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental MedicineFaculty of Health Sciences,
Linköping University, Linköping SE-58185, SwedenDepartment of
Oncology-PathologyKarolinska Institutet, CCK, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm SE-17176, SwedenDepartment of SurgeryHaukeland University Hospital,
Bergen, NorwayDepartment of Clinical ScienceUniversity of Bergen, Bergen NO-5021,
NorwayDepartment of Molecular Medicine and SurgeryKarolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm SE-17176, SwedenDepartment of
SurgeryCounty Council of Östergötland, Linköping SE-58185, Sweden
jenny.welander@liu.se. (2)Department of Clinical and Experimental MedicineFaculty
of Health Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping SE-58185, SwedenDepartment of
Oncology-PathologyKarolinska Institutet, CCK, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm SE-17176, SwedenDepartment of SurgeryHaukeland University Hospital,
Bergen, NorwayDepartment of Clinical ScienceUniversity of Bergen, Bergen NO-5021,
NorwayDepartment of Molecular Medicine and SurgeryKarolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm SE-17176, SwedenDepartment of
SurgeryCounty Council of Östergötland, Linköping SE-58185, Sweden. (3)Department 
of Clinical and Experimental MedicineFaculty of Health Sciences, Linköping
University, Linköping SE-58185, SwedenDepartment of Oncology-PathologyKarolinska 
Institutet, CCK, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm SE-17176,
SwedenDepartment of SurgeryHaukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
NorwayDepartment of Clinical ScienceUniversity of Bergen, Bergen NO-5021,
NorwayDepartment of Molecular Medicine and SurgeryKarolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm SE-17176, SwedenDepartment of
SurgeryCounty Council of Östergötland, Linköping SE-58185, SwedenDepartment of
Clinical and Experimental MedicineFaculty of Health Sciences, Linköping
University, Linköping SE-58185, SwedenDepartment of Oncology-PathologyKarolinska 
Institutet, CCK, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm SE-17176,
SwedenDepartment of SurgeryHaukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
NorwayDepartment of Clinical ScienceUniversity of Bergen, Bergen NO-5021,
NorwayDepartment of Molecular Medicine and SurgeryKarolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm SE-17176, SwedenDepartment of
SurgeryCounty Council of Östergötland, Linköping SE-58185, Sweden.

Pheochromocytomas are neuroendocrine tumors arising from the adrenal medulla.
While heritable mutations are frequently described, less is known about the
genetics of sporadic pheochromocytoma. Mutations in genes involved in the
cellular hypoxia response have been identified in tumors, and recently EPAS1,
encoding HIF2a, has been revealed to be a new gene involved in the pathogenesis
of pheochromocytoma and abdominal paraganglioma. The aim of this study was to
further characterize EPAS1 alterations in non-familial pheochromocytomas. Tumor
DNA from 42 adrenal pheochromocytoma cases with apparently sporadic presentation,
without known hereditary mutations in predisposing genes, were analyzed for
mutations in EPAS1 by sequencing of exons 9 and 12, which contain the two
hydroxylation sites involved in HIF2a degradation, and also exon 2. In addition, 
the copy number at the EPAS1 locus as well as transcriptome-wide gene expression 
were studied by DNA and RNA microarray analyses, respectively. We identified six 
missense EPAS1 mutations, three in exon 9 and three in exon 12, in five of 42
pheochromocytomas (12%). The mutations were both somatic and constitutional, and 
had no overlap in 11 cases (26%) with somatic mutations in NF1 or RET. One sample
had two different EPAS1 mutations, shown by cloning to occur in cis, possibly
indicating a novel mechanism of HIF2a stabilization through inactivation of both 
hydroxylation sites. One of the tumors with an EPAS1 mutation also had a gain in 
DNA copy number at the EPAS1 locus. All EPAS1-mutated tumors displayed a
pseudo-hypoxic gene expression pattern, indicating an oncogenic role of the
identified mutations.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 24741025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Genome Res. 2014 Aug;24(8):1308-15. doi: 10.1101/gr.171876.113. Epub 2014 Apr 10.

Whole-genome sequencing of six dog breeds from continuous altitudes reveals
adaptation to high-altitude hypoxia.

Gou X(1), Wang Z(2), Li N(3), Qiu F(4), Xu Z(5), Yan D(6), Yang S(6), Jia J(7),
Kong X(6), Wei Z(8), Lu S(6), Lian L(6), Wu C(3), Wang X(6), Li G(6), Ma T(6),
Jiang Q(6), Zhao X(6), Yang J(6), Liu B(5), Wei D(5), Li H(2), Yang J(6), Yan
Y(6), Zhao G(6), Dong X(6), Li M(6), Deng W(6), Leng J(6), Wei C(9), Wang C(10), 
Mao H(6), Zhang H(3), Ding G(2), Li Y(11).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yunnan Agricultural University,
Kunming 650201, China; College of Animal Science and Technology/State Key
Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094, 
China; (2)Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, Shanghai Institute for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; Shanghai Center
for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai Industrial Technology Institute, Shanghai
201203, China; (3)College of Animal Science and Technology/State Key Laboratory
for Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094, China;
(4)Shanghai Center for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai Industrial Technology 
Institute, Shanghai 201203, China; EG Information Technology Enterprise (EGI),
Encode Genomics Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Shanghai 200235, China; (5)EG
Information Technology Enterprise (EGI), Encode Genomics Biotechnology Co., Ltd.,
Shanghai 200235, China; (6)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yunnan
Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China; (7)Shanghai Center for
Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai Industrial Technology Institute, Shanghai
201203, China; (8)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest
Agricultural and Forestry University, Yangling 712100, China; (9)Shanghai Center 
for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai Industrial Technology Institute, Shanghai
201203, China; School of Life Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai 200240, China; (10)National Center for Protein Science
Shanghai, National Facility for Protein Science in Shanghai, Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China; (11)Key Laboratory of Systems Biology, Shanghai Institute for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; Shanghai Center
for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai Industrial Technology Institute, Shanghai
201203, China; School of Life Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai 200240, China; School of Life Science and Technology,
Shanghai Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China.

The hypoxic environment imposes severe selective pressure on species living at
high altitude. To understand the genetic bases of adaptation to high altitude in 
dogs, we performed whole-genome sequencing of 60 dogs including five breeds
living at continuous altitudes along the Tibetan Plateau from 800 to 5100 m as
well as one European breed. More than 150× sequencing coverage for each breed
provides us with a comprehensive assessment of the genetic polymorphisms of the
dogs, including Tibetan Mastiffs. Comparison of the breeds from different
altitudes reveals strong signals of population differentiation at the locus of
hypoxia-related genes including endothelial Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain protein 1
(EPAS1) and beta hemoglobin cluster. Notably, four novel nonsynonymous mutations 
specific to high-altitude dogs are identified at EPAS1, one of which occurred at 
a quite conserved site in the PAS domain. The association testing between EPAS1
genotypes and blood-related phenotypes on additional high-altitude dogs reveals
that the homozygous mutation is associated with decreased blood flow resistance, 
which may help to improve hemorheologic fitness. Interestingly, EPAS1 was also
identified as a selective target in Tibetan highlanders, though no amino acid
changes were found. Thus, our results not only indicate parallel evolution of
humans and dogs in adaptation to high-altitude hypoxia, but also provide a new
opportunity to study the role of EPAS1 in the adaptive processes.

© 2014 Gou et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4120084
PMID: 24721644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jul;99(7):E1352-60. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4375. Epub
2014 Apr 2.

Rare germline mutations identified by targeted next-generation sequencing of
susceptibility genes in pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma.

Welander J(1), Andreasson A, Juhlin CC, Wiseman RW, Bäckdahl M, Höög A, Larsson
C, Gimm O, Söderkvist P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine (J.W., O.G., P.S.), Faculty
of Health Sciences, Linköping University, Departments of Surgery (O.G.) and
Clinical Genetics (P.S.), County Council of Östergötland, Linköping SE-58185,
Sweden; Department of Oncology-Pathology (A.A., C.C.J., A.H., C.L.), Karolinska
Institutet, Cancer Center Karolinska (A.A., C.C.J., A.H., C.L.), Karolinska
University Hospital Solna, and Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery
(A.A., C.C.J., M.B., C.L.), Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm SE-17176, Sweden; and Wisconsin National Primate Research
Center (R.W.W.), University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53715.

CONTEXT: Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas have a highly diverse genetic
background, with a third of the cases carrying a germline mutation in 1 of 14
identified genes.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate next-generation sequencing for more
efficient genetic testing of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma and to establish 
germline and somatic mutation frequencies for all known susceptibility genes.
DESIGN: A targeted next-generation sequencing approach on an Illumina MiSeq
instrument was used for a mutation analysis in 86 unselected pheochromocytoma and
paraganglioma tumor samples. The study included the genes EGLN1, EPAS1, KIF1Bß,
MAX, MEN1, NF1, RET, SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, TMEM127, and VHL. RESULTS
were verified in tumor and constitutional DNA with Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: In all cases with clinical syndromes or known germline mutations, a
mutation was detected in the expected gene. Among 68 nonfamilial tumors, 32
mutations were identified in 28 of the samples (41%), including germline
mutations in EGLN1, KIF1Bß, SDHA, SDHB, and TMEM127 and somatic mutations in
EPAS1, KIF1Bß, MAX, NF1, RET, and VHL, including one double monoallelic EPAS1
mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Targeted next-generation sequencing proved to be fast and cost
effective for the genetic analysis of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. More
than half of the tumors harbored mutations in the investigated genes. Notably, 7%
of the apparently sporadic cases carried germline mutations, highlighting the
importance of comprehensive genetic testing. KIF1Bß, which previously has not
been investigated in a large cohort, appears to be an equally important tumor
suppressor as MAX and TMEM127 and could be considered for genetic testing of
these patients.

PMID: 24694336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Gene. 2014 Jun 1;542(2):173-81. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.03.037. Epub 2014 Mar
21.

Sox9 and Hif-2a regulate TUBB3 gene expression and affect ovarian cancer
aggressiveness.

Raspaglio G(1), Petrillo M(2), Martinelli E(2), Li Puma DD(2), Mariani M(3), De
Donato M(2), Filippetti F(2), Mozzetti S(2), Prislei S(2), Zannoni GF(4), Scambia
G(5), Ferlini C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Centre in Gynecological Cancer, Department of
Gynecology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: giuseppina.raspaglio@rm.unicatt.it. (2)Translational Research Centre in 
Gynecological Cancer, Department of Gynecology, Catholic University of the Sacred
Heart, Rome, Italy. (3)Danbury Hospital Research Institute, Danbury, CT, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(5)Translational Research Centre in Gynecological Cancer, Department of
Gynecology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy; Department of
Oncology, Jean Paul II Research Foundation, Campobasso, Italy. (6)Danbury
Hospital Research Institute, Danbury, CT, USA; Department of Oncology, Jean Paul 
II Research Foundation, Campobasso, Italy.

SOX9 [(sex determining region Y)-box9] gene has been implicated in the
development and progression of different neoplasms. This study investigated the
role of Sox9 in the expression of TUBB3 gene, a marker of aggressiveness in
ovarian cancer (OC), encoding ßIII-tubulin protein. Gene expression was assessed 
by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) in OC models. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) we found that Sox9 engages TUBB3 promoter at minus 980
base pairs from the transcriptional start site with transcriptional enhancing
effects. Furthermore we found that Sox9 is a downstream target of Hif-2a, a
transcription factor encoded by endothelial PAS domain protein-1 (EPAS1). Hypoxic
microenvironment is a common feature of solid tumors associated with cancer
aggressiveness. In the present work we found that knockdown of either SOX9 or
EPAS1 abolished TUBB3 gene induction in hypoxia. This phenomenon was associated
with a decrease in the number of cell colonies capable of growing in an
anchorage-independent way. Using a nanofluidic genetic analyzer, the expression
of SOX9, TUBB3 and EPAS1 was evaluated in 182 OC specimens. Double staining
immunohistochemistry was employed to evaluate the expression and prognostic role 
of both Sox9 and ßIII-tubulin. Results obtained in cellular models matched the
pattern of clinical specimens. We documented a direct correlation among the
expression of EPAS1, SOX9 and TUBB3 at mRNA level. Patients displaying no
expression for the three genes had the best outcome. A poor prognosis significant
in multivariate analysis was visible in patients featuring high expression of
ßIII-tubulin and nuclear Sox9.CONCLUSIONS: Sox9 allows the survival of OC cells
upon hypoxic condition, through the activation of ßIII-tubulin expression and its
aberrant activation in OC is prominent in patients with aggressive OC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24661907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Nov;29(6):481-93.

A genetic adaptive pattern-low hemoglobin concentration in the Himalayan
highlanders.

Wu TY, Liu FY, Ouzhou-Loubu, Cui CY, Qi XB, Su B.

Mean hemoglobin (Hb) concentration of about 3 500 subjects derived from 17
studies of Himalayan highlanders (Tibetans, Sherpas, and Ladakhis) was compared
with lowlanders (Chinese Han, Indian Tamils) lived in the Himalayas, and European
climbers during Everest expeditions as well as Andean natives. The results found 
that Hb concentration in Himalayan highlanders was systemically lower than those 
reported for Andean natives and lowland immigrants. These comparative data
demonstrated that a healthy native population may successfully reside at high
altitude without a significant elevation in Hb, and the lower Hb levels of
Himalayan highlanders than those of migrated lowlanders and Andean natives are an
example of favourable adaptation over the generations. In addition, excessive
polycythemia has frequently been used as a marker of chronic mountain sickness
(CMS). Altitude populations who have a higher Hb concentration also have a higher
incidence of CMS. The low Hb in Himalayans suggested as showing adaptation over
many generations in Tibetan stock. Recent work in Tibet, suggested that Tibetans 
there may have adapted to high altitude as a result of evolutionary pressure
selecting for genes which give an advantage at altitude. All of the population
genomic and statistical analysis indicated that EPAS1 and EGLN1 are mostly likely
responsible for high altitude adaptation and closely related to low Hb
concentration in Tibetans. These data supported the hypothesis that Himalayan
highlanders have evolved a genetically different erythropoietic response to
chronic hypoxia by virtue of their much longer exposure to high altitude.

PMID: 24654529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 18;9(3):e88252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088252. eCollection
2014.

Shared and unique signals of high-altitude adaptation in geographically distinct 
Tibetan populations.

Wuren T(1), Simonson TS(2), Qin G(1), Xing J(3), Huff CD(3), Witherspoon DJ(3),
Jorde LB(3), Ge RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for High-Altitude Medicine, Qinghai University Medical School,
Xining, Qinghai, People's Republic of China. (2)Division of Physiology,
Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California,
United States of America; Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah School
of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America. (3)Department of
Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah,
United States of America.

Recent studies have used a variety of analytical methods to identify genes
targeted by selection in high-altitude populations located throughout the Tibetan
Plateau. Despite differences in analytic strategies and sample location,
hypoxia-related genes, including EPAS1 and EGLN1, were identified in multiple
studies. By applying the same analytic methods to genome-wide SNP information
used in our previous study of a Tibetan population (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>31) from the township of 
Maduo, located in the northeastern corner of the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau (4200
m), we have identified common targets of natural selection in a second
geographically and linguistically distinct Tibetan population (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>46) in the Tuo
Tuo River township (4500 m). Our analyses provide evidence for natural selection 
based on iHS and XP-EHH signals in both populations at the p<0.02 significance
level for EPAS1, EGLN1, HMOX2, and CYP17A1 and for PKLR, HFE, and HBB and HBG2,
which have also been reported in other studies. We highlight differences (i.e.,
stratification and admixture) in the two distinct Tibetan groups examined here
and report selection candidate genes common to both groups. These findings should
be considered in the prioritization of selection candidate genes in future
genetic studies in Tibet.

PMCID: PMC3958363
PMID: 24642866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Biol Evol. 2014 May;31(5):1200-5. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msu070. Epub 2014 Feb
11.

Population variation revealed high-altitude adaptation of Tibetan mastiffs.

Li Y(1), Wu DD, Boyko AR, Wang GD, Wu SF, Irwin DM, Zhang YP.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2014 May;31(5):1327-8.
    Mol Biol Evol. 2014 May;31(5):1328.

With the assistance of their human companions, dogs have dispersed into new
environments during the expansion of human civilization. Tibetan Mastiff (TM), a 
native of the Tibetan Plateau, was derived from the domesticated Chinese native
dog and, like Tibetans, has adapted to the extreme environment of high altitude. 
Here, we genotyped genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from 32 TMs
and compared them with SNPs from 20 Chinese native dogs and 14 gray wolves (Canis
lupus). We identified 16 genes with signals of positive selection in the TM, with
12 of these candidate genes associated with functions that have roles in
adaptation to high-altitude adaptation, such as EPAS1, SIRT7, PLXNA4, and MAFG
that have roles in responses to hypoxia. This study provides important
information on the genetic diversity of the TM and potential mechanisms for
adaptation to hypoxia.

PMID: 24520091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3281. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4281.

Admixture facilitates genetic adaptations to high altitude in Tibet.

Jeong C(1), Alkorta-Aranburu G(1), Basnyat B(2), Neupane M(3), Witonsky DB(1),
Pritchard JK(4), Beall CM(5), Di Rienzo A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, 
USA. (2)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Patan Hospital, Lal Durbar
marg, GPO Box 3596, Kathmandu, Nepal. (3)Mountain Medicine Society of Nepal,
Maharajgunj, Kathmandu, Nepal. (4)1] Department of Human Genetics, University of 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy 
Chase, Maryland 20815, USA [3]. (5)Department of Anthropology, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-7125, USA.

Admixture is recognized as a widespread feature of human populations, renewing
interest in the possibility that genetic exchange can facilitate adaptations to
new environments. Studies of Tibetans revealed candidates for high-altitude
adaptations in the EGLN1 and EPAS1 genes, associated with lower haemoglobin
concentration. However, the history of these variants or that of Tibetans remains
poorly understood. Here we analyse genotype data for the Nepalese Sherpa, and
find that Tibetans are a mixture of ancestral populations related to the Sherpa
and Han Chinese. EGLN1 and EPAS1 genes show a striking enrichment of
high-altitude ancestry in the Tibetan genome, indicating that migrants from low
altitude acquired adaptive alleles from the highlanders. Accordingly, the Sherpa 
and Tibetans share adaptive haemoglobin traits. This admixture-mediated
adaptation shares important features with adaptive introgression. Therefore, we
identify a novel mechanism, beyond selection on new mutations or on standing
variation, through which populations can adapt to local environments.

PMCID: PMC4643256
PMID: 24513612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Ann Hematol. 2014 Jun;93(6):931-5. doi: 10.1007/s00277-014-2006-3. Epub 2014 Jan 
31.

Hereditary gene mutations in Korean patients with isolated erythrocytosis.

Jang JH(1), Seo JY, Jang J, Jung CW, Lee KO, Kim SH, Kim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Genetics, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 50 Irwon-dong, Gangnam-gu, Seoul,
South Korea, 135-710.

Most cases of erythrocytosis occur secondary to chronic tissue hypoxia or as a
clonal disease such as polycythemia vera with somatic mutations in the Janus
kinase 2 (JAK2) gene. Rarely, erythrocytosis is caused by hereditary gene
mutations. This study investigated hereditary gene mutations in 38 unrelated
Korean patients with isolated erythrocytosis without (1) JAK2 mutation and (2)
secondary causes of erythrocytosis other than smoking history. Direct sequencing 
analyses were performed on six genes associated with hereditary erythrocytosis
[HBB, exon 2 and exon 3 of HBA2, VHL, EGLN1 (previously PHD2), exon 12 of EPAS1
(previously HIF2A), and exons 5-8 of EPOR]. As a result, mutations were detected 
in five patients (three never smokers and two current smokers) out of 38 patients
(13.2 %). The mutations detected in those five patients were EPOR:p.W439*,
EPOR:p.G212C, HBB:p.H98Q (or conventionally H97Q, Hb Malmö [ß 97(FG4) His >
Gln]), HBB:p.V138M (V137M), and EGLN1:p.L279Tfs43*, all in heterozygous state. No
patient had mutations in HBA2, VHL, or in EPAS1. This study indicates that workup
for hereditary gene mutations is needed for isolated erythrocytosis with or
without smoking history.

PMID: 24482100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 22;9(1):e86756. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086756. eCollection
2014.

Integrative genetic characterization and phenotype correlations in
pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma tumours.

Crona J(1), Nordling M(2), Maharjan R(1), Granberg D(3), Stålberg P(1), Hellman
P(1), Björklund P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg,
Sweden. (3)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: About 60% of Pheochromocytoma (PCC) and Paraganglioma (PGL) patients 
have either germline or somatic mutations in one of the 12 proposed disease
causing genes; SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, VHL, EPAS1, RET, NF1, TMEM127, MAX
and H-RAS. Selective screening for germline mutations is routinely performed in
clinical management of these diseases. Testing for somatic alterations is not
performed on a regular basis because of limitations in interpreting the results.
AIM: The purpose of the study was to investigate genetic events and phenotype
correlations in a large cohort of PCC and PGL tumours.
METHODS: A total of 101 tumours from 89 patients with PCC and PGL were
re-sequenced for a panel of 10 disease causing genes using automated Sanger
sequencing. Selected samples were analysed with Multiplex Ligation-dependent
Probe Amplification and/or SNParray.
RESULTS: Pathogenic genetic variants were found in tumours from 33 individual
patients (37%), 14 (16%) were discovered in constitutional DNA and 16 (18%) were 
confirmed as somatic. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) was observed in 1/1 SDHB,
11/11 VHL and 3/3 NF1-associated tumours. In patients with somatic mutations
there were no recurrences in contrast to carriers of germline mutations
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.022). SDHx/VHL/EPAS1 associated cases had higher norepinephrine output
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03) and lower epinephrine output (P<0.001) compared to RET/NF1/H-RAS
cases.
CONCLUSION: Somatic mutations are frequent events in PCC and PGL tumours. Tumour 
genotype may be further investigated as prognostic factors in these diseases.
Growing evidence suggest that analysis of tumour DNA could have an impact on the 
management of these patients.

PMCID: PMC3899286
PMID: 24466223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Mar;74(3):595-602. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204355. Epub
2013 Dec 17.

NAMPT (visfatin), a direct target of hypoxia-inducible factor-2a, is an essential
catabolic regulator of osteoarthritis.

Yang S(1), Ryu JH(2), Oh H(3), Jeon J(3), Kwak JS(3), Kim JH(3), Kim HA(4), Chun 
CH(5), Chun JS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Dynamics Research Center and School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute
of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Korea Division of Immunology, Department of
Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. (2)Research Center for Biomineralization Disorders and Dental Science
Research Institute, School of Dentistry, Chonnam National University, Gwangju,
Korea. (3)Cell Dynamics Research Center and School of Life Sciences, Gwangju
Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Korea. (4)Division of Rheumatology,
Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Kyunggi, Korea. (5)Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Wonkwang University School of Medicine, Iksan, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Hypoxia-inducible factor 2a (HIF-2a), encoded by Epas1, causes
osteoarthritic cartilage destruction by regulating the expression of
matrix-degrading enzymes. We undertook this study to explore the role of
nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT or visfatin) in HIF-2a-mediated
osteoarthritic cartilage destruction.
METHODS: The expression of HIF-2a, NAMPT and matrix-degrading enzymes was
determined at the mRNA and protein levels in human osteoarthritis (OA) cartilage,
mouse experimental OA cartilage and primary cultured mouse chondrocytes.
Experimental OA in mice was induced by destabilisation of the medial meniscus
(DMM) surgery or intra-articular injection of Ad-Epas1 or Ad-Nampt in wild-type, 
Epas1(+/-), Epas1(fl/fl);Col2a1-Cre and Col2a1-Nampt transgenic (TG) mice.
Primary cultured mouse chondrocytes were treated with recombinant NAMPT protein
or were infected with adenoviruses.
RESULTS: We found that the Nampt gene is a direct target of HIF-2a in articular
chondrocytes and OA cartilage. NAMPT protein, in turn, increased mRNA levels and 
activities of MMP3, MMP12 and MMP13 in chondrocytes, an action that was necessary
for HIF-2a-induced expression of catabolic enzymes. Gain-of-function studies
(intra-articular injection of Ad-Nampt; Col2a1-Nampt TG mice) and
loss-of-function studies (intra-articular injection of the NAMPT inhibitor FK866)
demonstrated that NAMPT is an essential catabolic regulator of osteoarthritic
cartilage destruction caused by HIF-2a or DMM surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that NAMPT, whose corresponding gene is a
direct target of HIF-2a, plays an essential catabolic role in OA pathogenesis and
acts as a crucial mediator of osteoarthritic cartilage destruction caused by
HIF-2a or DMM surgery.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4345811
PMID: 24347567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. BMC Evol Biol. 2013 Dec 17;13:273. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-13-273.

A genome wide study of genetic adaptation to high altitude in feral Andean Horses
of the páramo.

Hendrickson SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Shepherd University, Shepherdstown WV 25443, USA.
shendric@shepherd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Life at high altitude results in physiological and metabolic
challenges that put strong evolutionary pressure on performance due to oxidative 
stress, UV radiation and other factors dependent on the natural history of the
species. To look for genes involved in altitude adaptation in a large herbivore, 
this study explored genome differentiation between a feral population of Andean
horses introduced by the Spanish in the 1500s to the high Andes and their Iberian
breed relatives.
RESULTS: Using allelic genetic models and Fst analyses of ~50 K single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) across the horse genome, 131 candidate genes for altitude
adaptation were revealed (Bonferoni of p<U+2009>=<U+2009>2<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7)). Significant signals
included the EPAS1 in the hypoxia-induction-pathway (HIF) that was previously
discovered in human studies (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.27<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)); validating the approach and
emphasizing the importance of this gene to hypoxia adaptation. Strong signals in 
the cytochrome P450 3A gene family (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.5 ×10(-8)) indicate that other factors,
such as highly endemic vegetation in altitude environments are also important in 
adaptation. Signals in tenuerin 2 (TENM2, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.9<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-14)) along with several
other genes in the nervous system (gene categories representation
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>5.1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)) indicate the nervous system is important in altitude
adaptation.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study of a large introduced herbivore, it becomes apparent
that some gene pathways, such as the HIF pathway are universally important for
high altitude adaptation in mammals, but several others may be selected upon
based on the natural history of a species and the unique ecology of the altitude 
environment.

PMCID: PMC3878729
PMID: 24344830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Tumour Biol. 2014 Mar;35(3):2607-17. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1344-4. Epub 2013
Dec 8.

FUT11 as a potential biomarker of clear cell renal cell carcinoma progression
based on meta-analysis of gene expression data.

Zodro E(1), Jaroszewski M, Ida A, Wrzesinski T, Kwias Z, Bluyssen H, Wesoly J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of High Throughput Technologies, Institute of Biotechnology and
Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Umultowska 89,
61-614, Poznan, Poland.

In this paper, we provide a comprehensive summary of available clear cell renal
cell carcinoma (ccRCC) microarray data in the form of meta-analysis of genes
differentially regulated in tumors as compared to healthy tissue, using effect
size to measure the strength of a relationship between the disease and gene
expression. We identified 725 differentially regulated genes, with a number of
interesting targets, such as TMEM213, SMIM5, or ATPases: ATP6V0A4 and ATP6V1G3,
of which limited or no information is available in terms of their function in
ccRCC pathology. Downregulated genes tended to represent pathways related to
tissue remodeling, blood clotting, vasodilation, and energy metabolism, while
upregulated genes were classified into pathways generally deregulated in cancers:
immune system response, inflammatory response, angiogenesis, and apoptosis. One
hundred fifteen deregulated genes were included in network analysis, with EGLN3, 
AP-2, NR3C1, HIF1A, and EPAS1 (gene encoding HIF2-a) as points of functional
convergence, but, interestingly, 610 genes failed to join previously identified
molecular networks. Furthermore, we validated the expression of 14 top
deregulated genes in independent sample set of 32 ccRCC tumors by qPCR and tested
if it could serve as a marker of disease progression. We found a correlation of
high fucosyltransferase 11 (FUT11) expression with non-symptomatic course of the 
disease, which suggests that FUT11's expression might be potentially used as a
biomarker of disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3967067
PMID: 24318988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 10;110(50):E4922-30. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1314197110. Epub 2013 Nov 26.

Intestinal HIF2a promotes tissue-iron accumulation in disorders of iron overload 
with anemia.

Anderson ER(1), Taylor M, Xue X, Ramakrishnan SK, Martin A, Xie L, Bredell BX,
Gardenghi S, Rivella S, Shah YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology and Division of
Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.

Several distinct congenital disorders can lead to tissue-iron overload with
anemia. Repeated blood transfusions are one of the major causes of iron overload 
in several of these disorders, including ß-thalassemia major, which is
characterized by a defective ß-globin gene. In this state, hyperabsorption of
iron is also observed and can significantly contribute to iron overload. In
ß-thalassemia intermedia, which does not require blood transfusion for survival, 
hyperabsorption of iron is the leading cause of iron overload. The mechanism of
increased iron absorption in ß-thalassemia is unclear. We definitively
demonstrate, using genetic mouse models, that intestinal hypoxia-inducible
factor-2a (HIF2a) and divalent metal transporter-1 (DMT1) are activated early in 
the pathogenesis of ß-thalassemia and are essential for excess iron accumulation 
in mouse models of ß-thalassemia. Moreover, thalassemic mice with established
iron overload had significant improvement in tissue-iron levels and anemia
following disruption of intestinal HIF2a. In addition to repeated blood
transfusions and increased iron absorption, chronic hemolysis is the major cause 
of tissue-iron accumulation in anemic iron-overload disorders caused by hemolytic
anemia. Mechanistic studies in a hemolytic anemia mouse model demonstrated that
loss of intestinal HIF2a/DMT1 signaling led to decreased tissue-iron accumulation
in the liver without worsening the anemia. These data demonstrate that
dysregulation of intestinal hypoxia and HIF2a signaling is critical for
progressive iron overload in ß-thalassemia and may be a novel therapeutic target 
in several anemic iron-overload disorders.

PMCID: PMC3864280
PMID: 24282296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2014 Apr 1;116(7):875-84. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00605.2013. Epub 2013 Nov 7.

Human adaptation to the hypoxia of high altitude: the Tibetan paradigm from the
pregenomic to the postgenomic era.

Petousi N(1), Robbins PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.

The Tibetan Plateau is one of the highest regions on Earth. Tibetan highlanders
are adapted to life and reproduction in a hypoxic environment and possess a suite
of distinctive physiological traits. Recent studies have identified genomic loci 
that have undergone natural selection in Tibetans. Two of these loci, EGLN1 and
EPAS1, encode major components of the hypoxia-inducible factor transcriptional
system, which has a central role in oxygen sensing and coordinating an organism's
response to hypoxia, as evidenced by studies in humans and mice. An association
between genetic variants within these genes and hemoglobin concentration in
Tibetans at high altitude was demonstrated in some of the studies (8, 80, 96).
Nevertheless, the functional variants within these genes and the underlying
mechanisms of action are still not known. Furthermore, there are a number of
other possible phenotypic traits, besides hemoglobin concentration, upon which
natural selection may have acted. Integration of studies at the genomic level
with functional molecular studies and studies in systems physiology has the
potential to provide further understanding of human evolution in response to
high-altitude hypoxia. The Tibetan paradigm provides further insight on the role 
of the hypoxia-inducible factor system in humans in relation to oxygen
homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3972749
PMID: 24201705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Hum Mutat. 2014 Jan;35(1):15-26. doi: 10.1002/humu.22448. Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Genetic basis of congenital erythrocytosis: mutation update and online databases.

Bento C(1), Percy MJ, Gardie B, Maia TM, van Wijk R, Perrotta S, Della Ragione F,
Almeida H, Rossi C, Girodon F, Aström M, Neumann D, Schnittger S, Landin B,
Minkov M, Randi ML, Richard S, Casadevall N, Vainchenker W, Rives S, Hermouet S, 
Ribeiro ML, McMullin MF, Cario H; ECE-Consortium, Chauveau A, Gimenez-Roqueplo
AP, Bressac-de-Paillerets B, Altindirek D, Lorenzo F, Lambert F, Dan H,
Gad-Lapiteau S, Catarina Oliveira A, Rossi C, Fraga C, Taradin G, Martin-Nuñez G,
Vitória H, Diaz Aguado H, Palmblad J, Vidán J, Relvas L, Ribeiro ML, Luigi
Larocca M, Luigia Randi M, Pedro Silveira M, Percy M, Gross M, Marques da Costa
R, Beshara S, Ben-Ami T, Ugo V; ECE-Consortium.

Collaborators: Chauveau A, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Bressac-de-Paillerets B,
Altindirek D, Lorenzo F, Lambert F, Della Ragione F, Harlev D, Minkov M, Perrotta
S, Gad-Lapiteau S, Rives S, Hermouet S, Oliveira AC, Gardie B, Landin B, Rossi C,
Bento C, Fraga C, Neuman D, Girodon F, Taradin G, Martin-Nuñez G, Almeida H,
Vitória H, Diaz Aguado H, Cario H, Palmblad J, Vidán J, Relvas L, Astrom M,
Ribeiro ML, Larocca ML, Randi ML, Silveira MP, McMullin MF, Percy M, Gross M,
Casadevall N, da Costa RM, Richard S, van Wijk R, Beshara S, Schnittger S,
Magalhães Maia T, Ben-Ami T, Ugo V, Vainchenker W.

Congenital erythrocytosis (CE), or congenital polycythemia, represents a rare and
heterogeneous clinical entity. It is caused by deregulated red blood cell
production where erythrocyte overproduction results in elevated hemoglobin and
hematocrit levels. Primary congenital familial erythrocytosis is associated with 
low erythropoietin (Epo) levels and results from mutations in the Epo receptor
gene (EPOR). Secondary CE arises from conditions causing tissue hypoxia and
results in increased Epo production. These include hemoglobin variants with
increased affinity for oxygen (HBB, HBA mutations), decreased production of
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate due to BPGM mutations, or mutations in the genes involved
in the hypoxia sensing pathway (VHL, EPAS1, and EGLN1). Depending on the affected
gene, CE can be inherited either in an autosomal dominant or recessive mode, with
sporadic cases arising de novo. Despite recent important discoveries in the
molecular pathogenesis of CE, the molecular causes remain to be identified in
about 70% of the patients. With the objective of collecting all the published and
unpublished cases of CE the COST action MPN&MPNr-Euronet developed a
comprehensive Internet-based database focusing on the registration of clinical
history, hematological, biochemical, and molecular data
(http://www.erythrocytosis.org/). In addition, unreported mutations are also
curated in the corresponding Leiden Open Variation Database.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMID: 24115288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Ophthalmology. 2013 Dec;120(12):2637-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2013.07.046. Epub 
2013 Sep 23.

Pharmacogenetic associations with vascular endothelial growth factor inhibition
in participants with neovascular age-related macular degeneration in the IVAN
Study.

Lotery AJ(1), Gibson J, Cree AJ, Downes SM, Harding SP, Rogers CA, Reeves BC,
Ennis S, Chakravarthy U; Alternative Treatments to Inhibit VEGF in Patients with 
Age-Related Choroidal Neovascularisation (IVAN) Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Neurosciences Research Group, Clinical and Experimental Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: A.J.Lotery@soton.ac.uk.

PURPOSE: To determine if prespecified genetic polymorphisms influence
responsiveness to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibition in
neovascular age-related macular degeneration (nAMD). The objectives were to
replicate 3 reported pharmacogenetic associations of response in nAMD and to test
for novel associations.
DESIGN: Cohort study, combining information about patients' genotypes with
information from a randomized controlled trial about responsiveness to anti-VEGF 
therapy for nAMD.
PARTICIPANTS: Five hundred nine participants with nAMD, enrolled in the
Alternative Treatments to Inhibit VEGF in Patients with Age-Related Choroidal
Neovascularisation (IVAN) trial.
METHODS: Participants were classified as responders or nonresponders to VEGF
inhibition based on the optical coherence tomography (OCT) metric of total
retinal thickness (TRT). We computed the change in TRT from baseline to the
latest time point for which OCT data were available (3, 6, 9, or 12 months). Eyes
with changes in TRT greater than or equal to the 75th percentile or more were
classified as responders, and those with changes less than or equal to the 25th
percentile or lower were classified as non-responders. Three previously reported 
associations of response to VEGF inhibition in nAMD involving single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) at the CFH, FZD4, and HTRA1/ARMS2 loci were tested for
replication. An additional 482 SNPs also were tested using a candidate gene
approach. Associations were estimated as odds ratios (ORs) with confidence
intervals (CIs).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome was evidence of a genetic association 
with response to VEGF inhibition as measured by change in TRT.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-six participants were classified as responders and
128 were classified as nonresponders. The SNP rs10490924 in HTRA1/ARMS2 showed a 
borderline association with responsiveness after Bonferroni correction (OR, 1.53;
CI, 0.99-2.36; P = 0.055, Bonferroni correction). None of the other 484
additional SNPs tested for association was significant after Bonferroni
correction for multiple testing. The smallest corrected P value was 0.84 (P =
0.002, uncorrected) for rs9679290 in the EPAS1 (HIF2A) gene on chromosome 2. Four
of the 10 most significant results were in this gene.
CONCLUSIONS: We estimated pharmacogenetic associations using high-quality
phenotype data from a randomized controlled clinical trial of nAMD. No
significant association or replication of previous associations were observed.
Further investigation of the EPAS1 (HIF2A) gene, however, may, be merited.

Copyright © 2013 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24070809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Wilderness Environ Med. 2013 Dec;24(4):315-20. doi: 10.1016/j.wem.2013.05.006.
Epub 2013 Sep 13.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 Chr2:46441523(hg18) polymorphism is associated
with susceptibility to high altitude pulmonary edema in Han Chinese.

Yang YZ(1), Wang YP, Qi YJ, Du Y, Ma L, Ga Q, Ge RL.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for High Altitude Medical Sciences, Qinghai University School 
of Medicine, Qinghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that
polymorphisms in the endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) gene are associated
with the susceptibility to high altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) in Han Chinese.
METHODS: This study enrolled 153 HAPE patients (HAPE-p), matched with Han Chinese
resistant to HAPE (HAPE-r) and local highland Tibetans from Yushu earthquake
construction population in Qinghai where the altitude is more than 3500 m above
sea level. The polymorphism of EPAS1 chr2:46441523(hg18) was genotyped by
polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism and confirmed 
by DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: The frequencies of EPAS1 chr2:46441523(hg18) polymorphism C allele were 
significantly higher in the HAPE-p group than in the HAPE-r group (P < .001), but
the frequencies of heterozygous C/G were significantly higher in the HAPE-r group
than in the HAPE-p group (P < .001). Moreover, the frequencies of the EPAS1
chr2:46441523(hg18) polymorphism G allele were significantly higher in the
highland Tibetan group than in the HAPE-p and HAPE-r groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The EPAS1 chr2:46441523(hg18) polymorphism C is strongly associated 
with susceptibility to HAPE in Han Chinese, and the EPAS1 chr2:46441523(hg18)
polymorphism G is present at high frequency and may be associated with high
altitude adaptation in the Tibetans.

Copyright © 2013 Wilderness Medical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 24041620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nat Med. 2013 Oct;19(10):1331-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.3295. Epub 2013 Sep 15.

A liver Hif-2a-Irs2 pathway sensitizes hepatic insulin signaling and is modulated
by Vegf inhibition.

Wei K(1), Piecewicz SM, McGinnis LM, Taniguchi CM, Wiegand SJ, Anderson K, Chan
CW, Mulligan KX, Kuo D, Yuan J, Vallon M, Morton LC, Lefai E, Simon MC, Maher JJ,
Mithieux G, Rajas F, Annes JP, McGuinness OP, Thurston G, Giaccia AJ, Kuo CJ.

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Hematology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA. [2].

Insulin initiates diverse hepatic metabolic responses, including gluconeogenic
suppression and induction of glycogen synthesis and lipogenesis. The liver
possesses a rich sinusoidal capillary network with a higher degree of hypoxia and
lower gluconeogenesis in the perivenous zone as compared to the rest of the
organ. Here, we show that diverse vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
inhibitors improved glucose tolerance in nondiabetic C57BL/6 and diabetic db/db
mice, potentiating hepatic insulin signaling with lower gluconeogenic gene
expression, higher glycogen storage and suppressed hepatic glucose production.
VEGF inhibition induced hepatic hypoxia through sinusoidal vascular regression
and sensitized liver insulin signaling through hypoxia-inducible factor-2a
(Hif-2a, encoded by Epas1) stabilization. Notably, liver-specific constitutive
activation of HIF-2a, but not HIF-1a, was sufficient to augment hepatic insulin
signaling through direct and indirect induction of insulin receptor substrate-2
(Irs2), an essential insulin receptor adaptor protein. Further, liver Irs2 was
both necessary and sufficient to mediate Hif-2a and Vegf inhibition effects on
glucose tolerance and hepatic insulin signaling. These results demonstrate an
unsuspected intersection between Hif-2a-mediated hypoxic signaling and hepatic
insulin action through Irs2 induction, which can be co-opted by Vegf inhibitors
to modulate glucose metabolism. These studies also indicate distinct roles in
hepatic metabolism for Hif-1a, which promotes glycolysis, and Hif-2a, which
suppresses gluconeogenesis, and suggest new treatment approaches for type 2
diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC3795838
PMID: 24037094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2014 Apr 1;116(7):893-904. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00535.2013. Epub 2013 Sep 12.

Tibetans living at sea level have a hyporesponsive hypoxia-inducible factor
system and blunted physiological responses to hypoxia.

Petousi N(1), Croft QP, Cavalleri GL, Cheng HY, Formenti F, Ishida K, Lunn D,
McCormack M, Shianna KV, Talbot NP, Ratcliffe PJ, Robbins PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom;

Comment in
    J Appl Physiol (1985). 2014 Apr 1;116(7):711-2.

Tibetan natives have lived on the Tibetan plateau (altitude ~ 4,000 m) for at
least 25,000 years, and as such they are adapted to life and reproduction in a
hypoxic environment. Recent studies have identified two genetic loci, EGLN1 and
EPAS1, that have undergone natural selection in Tibetans, and further
demonstrated an association of EGLN1/EPAS1 genotype with hemoglobin
concentration. Both genes encode major components of the hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF) transcriptional pathway, which coordinates an organism's response to
hypoxia. Patients living at sea level with genetic disease of the HIF pathway
have characteristic phenotypes at both the integrative-physiology and cellular
level. We sought to test the hypothesis that natural selection to hypoxia within 
Tibetans results in related phenotypic differences. We compared Tibetans living
at sea level with Han Chinese, who are Tibetans' most closely related major
ethnic group. We found that Tibetans had a lower hemoglobin concentration, a
higher pulmonary ventilation relative to metabolism, and blunted pulmonary
vascular responses to both acute (minutes) and sustained (8 h) hypoxia. At the
cellular level, the relative expression and hypoxic induction of HIF-regulated
genes were significantly lower in peripheral blood lymphocytes from Tibetans
compared with Han Chinese. Within the Tibetans, we found a significant
correlation between both EPAS1 and EGLN1 genotype and the induction of
erythropoietin by hypoxia. In conclusion, this study provides further evidence
that Tibetans respond less vigorously to hypoxic challenge. This is evident at
sea level and, at least in part, appears to arise from a hyporesponsive HIF
transcriptional system.

PMCID: PMC3972739
PMID: 24030663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Urol. 2014 Feb;191(2):487-92. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.07.064. Epub 2013 Aug 1.

Germline genetic variations at 11q13 and 12p11 locus modulate age at onset for
renal cell carcinoma.

Audenet F(1), Cancel-Tassin G(2), Bigot P(2), Audouin M(2), Gaffory C(2), Ondet
V(2), Thibault F(2), Auribault K(2), Gazut S(2), Benhabiles N(2), Azzouzi AR(2), 
Méjean A(2), Rouprêt M(2), Cussenot O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche pour les Pathologies Prostatiques (FA, GC-T, PB, MA, CG,
VO, FT, ARA, MR, OC), Paris, France; Academic Department of Urology,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (MR),
Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Université Paris 06), Paris, France;
ONCOTYPE-Uro (FA, GC-T, MA, CG, VO, MR, OC), Université Pierre et Marie Curie
(Université Paris 06), Paris, France; ER 2 (FA, GC-T, MA, FT, KA, OC), Université
Pierre et Marie Curie (Université Paris 06), Paris, France; Academic Department
of Urology, Georges Pompidou European Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris, Faculté de Médecine Paris Descartes, University Paris V (FA, AM), Paris,
France; Academic Department of Urology, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Hôpital Tenon, Groupement Hospitalier Universitaire Est (CG, VO, OC), Paris,
France; Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers, Academic Department of Urology
(PB, ARA), Angers, France; Sensors Signal and Information Processing Department, 
Information Models and Learning Laboratory, CEA LIST Institute, Saclay, France.
Electronic address: francois.audenet@gmail.com. (2)Centre de Recherche pour les
Pathologies Prostatiques (FA, GC-T, PB, MA, CG, VO, FT, ARA, MR, OC), Paris,
France; Academic Department of Urology, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (MR), Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Université
Paris 06), Paris, France; ONCOTYPE-Uro (FA, GC-T, MA, CG, VO, MR, OC), Université
Pierre et Marie Curie (Université Paris 06), Paris, France; ER 2 (FA, GC-T, MA,
FT, KA, OC), Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Université Paris 06), Paris,
France; Academic Department of Urology, Georges Pompidou European Hospital,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Faculté de Médecine Paris Descartes,
University Paris V (FA, AM), Paris, France; Academic Department of Urology,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Tenon, Groupement Hospitalier
Universitaire Est (CG, VO, OC), Paris, France; Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
d'Angers, Academic Department of Urology (PB, ARA), Angers, France; Sensors
Signal and Information Processing Department, Information Models and Learning
Laboratory, CEA LIST Institute, Saclay, France.

PURPOSE: Few risk factors have been identified for renal cell carcinoma. We
performed a validation study in a population with a European background to
identify the most significant variants previously identified in association with 
renal cell carcinoma risk.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a case-control validation study after
recruiting 463 controls and 463 patients with a histologically confirmed
diagnosis of clear cell renal cell carcinoma. For each patient and matched
control we genotyped 8 single nucleotide polymorphisms selected from previous
studies to evaluate the association between candidate single nucleotide
polymorphisms and renal cell carcinoma susceptibility.
RESULTS: After adjusting for patient age, gender, smoking status and body mass
index the AG + AA genotypes from rs7105934 (11q13) were associated with a
decreased risk of renal cell carcinoma (OR 0.50, 95% CI 0.33-0.75, p = 0.001)
and the AC + CC genotypes from rs1049380 (ITPR2) were associated with an
increased risk (OR 1.66, 95% CI 1.28-2.16, p <0.001). Kidney cancer developed at 
an older age in patients carrying the dominant risk allele A for rs7105934 (mean 
age at diagnosis 73.1 vs 68.9 years, p = 0.002) and at a younger age in those
carrying the dominant allele C for rs1049380 (mean 68.1 vs 70.8 years, p =
0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: In what is to our knowledge the first validation study of the main
8 single nucleotide polymorphism variants associated with renal cell carcinoma
susceptibility we confirmed the association of 2 single nucleotide polymorphisms 
with the risk of renal cell carcinoma. Each variant influenced patient age at
disease diagnosis.

Copyright © 2014 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23911636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Biol Reprod. 2013 Sep 27;89(3):69. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.111260. Print 2013
Sep.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in candidate genes associated with fertilizing
ability of sperm and subsequent embryonic development in cattle.

Cochran SD(1), Cole JB, Null DJ, Hansen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, D.H. Barron Reproductive and Perinatal Biology 
Research Program, and Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida.

Fertilization and development of the preimplantation embryo is under genetic
control. The present goal was to test 434 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
for association with genetic variation in fertilization and early embryonic
development. The approach was to produce embryos from 93 bulls using in vitro
procedures (n = 3-6 replicates per bull) and relate cleavage rate (CR) and
development of cleaved embryos to the blastocyst stage (BDRC) to the genotype for
each SNP. Bulls were selected to have either high or low estimates for predicted 
transmitted ability for daughter pregnancy rate (DPR), an estimate of female
fertility. The repeatability was 0.84 for CR and 0.55 for BDRC. Semen extender
affected CR, with lower results for milk extender than yolk extender. There was
no significant correlation between DPR and either CR or BDRC. A total of 100 SNPs
had a minor allele frequency sufficiently high (>5%) to allow association
analysis. There were nine genes with SNPs associated with CR (AVP, DEPP, EPAS1,
HSD17B6, NT5E, SERPINE2, SLC18A2, TBC1D24, and a noncharacterized gene) and 12
genes with SNPs associated with BDRC (C1QB, FAM5C, HSPA1A, IRF9, MON1B, PARM1,
PCCB, PMM2, SLC18A2, TBC1D24, TTLL3, and WBP1). Results demonstrate that in vitro
fertilization and blastocyst development are under genetic control and point out 
the potential importance of some previously unknown genes in these processes.
Selection of cattle based on the genotype at one or more of these 19 loci may
prove useful in conjunction with other genetic markers for improving genetic
ability for fertility.

PMID: 23904513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(7):e1003634. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003634. Epub 2013 Jul 
18.

Genomic analysis of natural selection and phenotypic variation in high-altitude
mongolians.

Xing J(1), Wuren T, Simonson TS, Watkins WS, Witherspoon DJ, Wu W, Qin G, Huff
CD, Jorde LB, Ge RL.

Author information: 
(1)Eccles Institute of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Deedu (DU) Mongolians, who migrated from the Mongolian steppes to the
Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau approximately 500 years ago, are challenged by
environmental conditions similar to native Tibetan highlanders. Identification of
adaptive genetic factors in this population could provide insight into
coordinated physiological responses to this environment. Here we examine genomic 
and phenotypic variation in this unique population and present the first complete
analysis of a Mongolian whole-genome sequence. High-density SNP array data
demonstrate that DU Mongolians share genetic ancestry with other Mongolian as
well as Tibetan populations, specifically in genomic regions related with
adaptation to high altitude. Several selection candidate genes identified in DU
Mongolians are shared with other Asian groups (e.g., EDAR), neighboring Tibetan
populations (including high-altitude candidates EPAS1, PKLR, and CYP2E1), as well
as genes previously hypothesized to be associated with metabolic adaptation
(e.g., PPARG). Hemoglobin concentration, a trait associated with high-altitude
adaptation in Tibetans, is at an intermediate level in DU Mongolians compared to 
Tibetans and Han Chinese at comparable altitude. Whole-genome sequence from a DU 
Mongolian (Tianjiao1) shows that about 2% of the genomic variants, including more
than 300 protein-coding changes, are specific to this individual. Our analyses of
DU Mongolians and the first Mongolian genome provide valuable insight into
genetic adaptation to extreme environments.

PMCID: PMC3715426
PMID: 23874230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 4;8(7):e66774. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066774. Print 2013.

Prospective validation of candidate SNPs of VEGF/VEGFR pathway in metastatic
colorectal cancer patients treated with first-line FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab.

Loupakis F(1), Cremolini C, Yang D, Salvatore L, Zhang W, Wakatsuki T, Bohanes P,
Schirripa M, Benhaim L, Lonardi S, Antoniotti C, Aprile G, Graziano F, Ruzzo A,
Lucchesi S, Ronzoni M, De Vita F, Tonini G, Falcone A, Lenz HJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Southern California Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America. fotiosloupakis@gmail.com

PURPOSE: The potential impact of different SNPs of VEGF/VEGFR pathway on the
clinical outcome of mCRC patients receiving bev-containing regimens has been
investigated in retrospective experiences with contrasting results. We previously
reported the association of VEGFA rs833061 C/T variants with PFS in metastatic
colorectal cancer patients treated with first-line FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab. The 
primary objective of this work was to prospectively validate that retrospective
finding. A confirmatory analysis of other SNPs of VEGF/VEGFR pathway genes was
included.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To detect a HR for PFS of 1.7 for VEGFA rs833061 T/T
compared to C- variants in metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated with
first-line FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab, setting two-sided a<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.05 and ß<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.20, 199
events were required. VEGFA rs699946 A/G, rs699947 A/C, VEGFR1 rs9582036 A/C and 
rs7993418 A/G, VEGFR2 rs11133360 C/T, rs12505758 C/T and rs2305948 C/T and EPAS1 
rs4145836 A/G were also tested. Germ-line DNA was extracted from peripheral
blood. SNPs were analyzed by PCR and sequencing.
RESULTS: Four-hundred-twenty-four pts were included. At the univariate analysis, 
no differences according to VEGFA rs833061 C/T variants were observed in PFS
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.38) or OS (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.95). Among analyzed SNPs, only VEGFR2 rs12505758 C-
variants, compared to T/T, were associated to shorter PFS (HR: 1.36 [1.05-1.75], 
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.015, dominant genetic model) and OS, with a trend toward significance (HR: 
1.34 [0.95-1.88], p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.088). In the multivariate model, this association
retained significance (HR: 1.405 [1.082-1.825], p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.012) in PFS, that was lost 
by applying multiple testing correction (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.14).
CONCLUSION: This prospective experience failed to validate the hypothesized
predictive impact of VEGFA rs833061 variants. Retrospective findings on different
candidate SNPs were not confirmed. Only VEGFR2 rs12505758 variants, whose
prognostic and not predictive impact was previously reported, correlated with
PFS. Given the complexity of angiogenesis, it is rather unlike that a single
germ-line SNP might be a good predictor of benefit from bevacizumab.

PMCID: PMC3701556
PMID: 23861747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Gastroenterology. 2013 Oct;145(4):831-41. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.07.010. Epub
2013 Jul 13.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 activates the inflammatory response in the
intestinal epithelium to promote colitis in mice.

Xue X(1), Ramakrishnan S, Anderson E, Taylor M, Zimmermann EM, Spence JR, Huang
S, Greenson JK, Shah YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hypoxic inflammation (decreased oxygen tension at sites of
inflammation) is a feature of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The hypoxia
response is mediated by the transcription factors hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) 
1a and endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1 or HIF2a), which are induced in
intestinal tissues of patients with IBD. HIF1a limits intestinal barrier
dysfunction, but the role of EPAS1 has not been assessed under conditions of
hypoxic inflammation or in models of IBD.
METHODS: Acute colitis was induced by administration of Citrobacter rodentium or 
dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) to transgenic hypoxia reporter mice
(oxygen-dependent degradation-luciferase), mice with conditional overexpression
of Epas1 (Epas1(LSL/LSL)), mice with intestinal epithelium-specific deletion of
Epas1 (Epas1(<U+0394>IE) ), or wild-type littermates (controls). Colon tissues from
these mice and from patients with ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease were
assessed by histologic and immunoblot analyses, immunohistochemistry, and
quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Levels of hypoxia and EPAS1 were increased in colon tissues of mice
after induction of colitis and patients with ulcerative colitis or Crohn's
disease compared with controls. Epas1(<U+0394>IE) mice had attenuated colonic
inflammation and were protected from DSS-induced colitis. Intestine-specific
overexpression of EPAS1, but not HIF-1a, led to spontaneous colitis, increased
susceptibility to induction of colitis by C rodentium or DSS, and reduced
survival times compared with controls. Disruption of intestinal epithelial EPAS1 
attenuated the inflammatory response after administration of DSS or C rodentium, 
and intestine-specific overexpression of EPAS1 increased this response. We found 
EPAS1 to be a positive regulator of tumor necrosis factor-a production by the
intestinal epithelium. Blocking tumor necrosis factor-a completely reduced
hypoxia-induced intestinal inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: EPAS1 is a transcription factor that activates mediators of
inflammation, such as tumor necrosis factor-a, in the intestinal epithelium and
promotes development of colitis in mice.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3799890
PMID: 23860500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Eur J Haematol. 2013 Oct;91(4):361-8. doi: 10.1111/ejh.12170. Epub 2013 Aug 20.

Molecular study of congenital erythrocytosis in 70 unrelated patients revealed a 
potential causal mutation in less than half of the cases (Where is/are the
missing gene(s)?).

Bento C(1), Almeida H, Maia TM, Relvas L, Oliveira AC, Rossi C, Girodon F,
Fernandez-Lago C, Aguado-Diaz A, Fraga C, Costa RM, Araújo AL, Silva J, Vitória
H, Miguel N, Silveira MP, Martin-Nuñez G, Ribeiro ML.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Hematologia, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra,
Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: Congenital erythrocytosis can be classified as primary, when the
defect is intrinsic to the RBC progenitors and independent of the serum
erythropoietin (Epo) concentration, or secondary, when the erythrocytosis is the 
result of an upregulation of Epo production. Primary erythrocytosis is associated
with mutations in the EPOR gene, secondary CE can de due to mutations that
stabilize the hemoglobin in the oxygenated form or to mutations in the genes that
control the transcriptional activation of the EPO gene - VHL, EGLN1, EPAS1.
Chuvash polycythemia, caused by mutations in VHL gene, shares features of both
primary and secondary erythrocytosis, with increased Epo production but also
hypersensitivity of progenitors to Epo.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: With the main objective of describing the etiology and
molecular basis of CE, we have studied 70 consecutive unrelated patients
presenting with idiopathic erythrocytosis from our hematology clinic or referred 
from other centers. According to a study algorithm, we have sequenced all the
genes described as associated with CE.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Erythrocytosis molecular etiology was identify in 25
(36%) of the 70 subjects. High-affinity Hb variants were the most common cause,
present in 20% of the cases. New mutations were identified in the JAK2, EPOR,
VHL, and EGLN1 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: High-affinity hemoglobin variants are a very rare cause of secondary
CE, but it seems likely that their incidence may be underestimated. Our
experience shows that in erythrocytosis with a dominant inheritance and normal or
inappropriate high Epo levels, the HBB and HBA genes should be the first to be
studied. In spite of the seven genes known to be involved in CE, the majority of 
the cases have unknown etiology.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23859443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Endocr Connect. 2013 May 28;2(2):104-11. doi: 10.1530/EC-13-0009. Print 2013 Jun 
1.

Next-generation sequencing in the clinical genetic screening of patients with
pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma.

Crona J(1), Verdugo AD, Granberg D, Welin S, Stålberg P, Hellman P, Björklund P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences Uppsala University S-751 85, Uppsala Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Recent findings have shown that up to 60% of pheochromocytomas (PCCs)
and paragangliomas (PGLs) are caused by germline or somatic mutations in one of
the 11 hitherto known susceptibility genes: SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2, VHL, 
HIF2A (EPAS1), RET, NF1, TMEM127 and MAX. This list of genes is constantly
growing and the 11 genes together consist of 144 exons. A genetic screening test 
is extensively time consuming and expensive. Hence, we introduce next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) as a time-efficient and cost-effective alternative.
METHODS: Tumour lesions from three patients with apparently sporadic PCC were
subjected to whole exome sequencing utilizing Agilent Sureselect target
enrichment system and Illumina Hi seq platform. Bioinformatics analysis was
performed in-house using commercially available software. Variants in PCC and PGL
susceptibility genes were identified.
RESULTS: We have identified 16 unique genetic variants in PCC susceptibility loci
in three different PCC, spending less than a 30-min hands-on, in-house time. Two 
patients had one unique variant each that was classified as probably and possibly
pathogenic: NF1 Arg304Ter and RET Tyr791Phe. The RET variant was verified by
Sanger sequencing.
CONCLUSIONS: NGS can serve as a fast and cost-effective method in the clinical
genetic screening of PCC. The bioinformatics analysis may be performed without
expert skills. We identified process optimization, characterization of unknown
variants and determination of additive effects of multiple variants as key issues
to be addressed by future studies.

PMCID: PMC3682230
PMID: 23781326  [PubMed]


105. Mol Hum Reprod. 2013 Oct;19(10):697-708. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gat044. Epub 2013
Jun 13.

Widespread DNA hypomethylation at gene enhancer regions in placentas associated
with early-onset pre-eclampsia.

Blair JD(1), Yuen RK, Lim BK, McFadden DE, von Dadelszen P, Robinson WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada V5Z 4H4.

Pre-eclampsia is a serious complication of pregnancy that can affect both
maternal and fetal outcomes. Early-onset pre-eclampsia (EOPET) is a severe form
of pre-eclampsia that is associated with altered physiological characteristics
and gene expression in the placenta. DNA methylation is a relatively stable
epigenetic modification to DNA that can reflect gene expression, and can provide 
insight into the mechanisms underlying such expression changes. This case-control
study focused on DNA methylation and gene expression of whole chorionic villi
samples from 20 EOPET placentas and 20 gestational age-matched controls from
pre-term births. DNA methylation was also assessed in placentas affected by
late-onset pre-eclampsia (LOPET) and normotensive intrauterine growth restriction
(nIUGR). The Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip was used to assess DNA
methylation at >480 000 cytosine-guanine dinucleotide (CpG) sites. The Illumina
HT-12v4 Expression BeadChip was used to assess gene expression of >45 000
transcripts in a subset of cases and controls. DNA methylation analysis by
pyrosequencing was used to follow-up the initial findings in four genes with a
larger cohort of cases and controls, including nIUGR and LOPET placentas.
Bioinformatic analysis was used to identify overrepresentation of gene ontology
categories and transcription factor binding motifs. We identified 38 840 CpG
sites with significant (false discovery rate <0.01) DNA methylation alterations
in EOPET, of which 282 had >12.5% methylation difference compared with the
controls. Significant sites were enriched at the enhancers and low CpG density
regions of the associated genes and the majority (74.5%) of these sites were
hypomethylated in EOPET. EOPET, but not associated clinical features, such as
intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), presented a distinct DNA methylation
profile. CpG sites from four genes relevant to pre-eclampsia (INHBA, BHLHE40,
SLC2A1 and ADAM12) showed different extent of changes in LOPET and nIUGR.
Genome-wide expression in a subset of samples showed that some of the gene
expression changes were negatively correlated with DNA methylation changes,
particularly for genes that are responsible for angiogenesis (such as EPAS1 and
FLT1). Results could be confounded by altered cell populations in abnormal
placentas. Larger sample sizes are needed to fully address the possibility of
sub-profiles of methylation within the EOPET cohort. Based on DNA methylation
profiling, we conclude that there are widespread DNA methylation alterations in
EOPET that may be associated with changes in placental function. This property
may provide a useful tool for early screening of such placentas. This study
identifies DNA methylation changes at many loci previously reported to have
altered gene expression in EOPET placentas, as well as in novel biologically
relevant genes we confirmed to be differentially expressed. These results may be 
useful for DNA- methylation-based non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of at-risk
pregnancies.

PMCID: PMC3779005
PMID: 23770704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Fam Cancer. 2014 Mar;13(1):121-5. doi: 10.1007/s10689-013-9666-3.

MAX mutations status in Swedish patients with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma 
tumours.

Crona J(1), Maharjan R, Delgado Verdugo A, Stålberg P, Granberg D, Hellman P,
Björklund P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical, Uppsala University, Akademiska sjukhuset, ing 70, 3tr,
FOA2, 75185, Uppsala, Sweden, joakim.crona@surgsci.uu.se.

Pheochromocytoma (PCC) and Paraganglioma are rare tumours originating from
neuroendocrine cells. Up to 60% of cases have either germline or somatic mutation
in one of eleven described susceptibility loci, SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, SDHAF2,
VHL, EPAS1, RET, NF1, TMEM127 and MYC associated factor-X (MAX). Recently,
germline mutations in MAX were found to confer susceptibility to PCC and
paraganglioma (PGL). A subsequent multicentre study found about 1% of PCCs and
PGLs to have germline or somatic mutations in MAX. However, there has been no
study investigating the frequency of MAX mutations in a Scandinavian cohort. We
analysed tumour specimens from 63 patients with PCC and PGL treated at Uppsala
University hospital, Sweden, for re-sequencing of MAX using automated Sanger
sequencing. Our results show that 0% (0/63) of tumours had mutations in MAX.
Allele frequencies of known single nucleotide polymorphisms rs4902359,
rs45440292, rs1957948 and rs1957949 corresponded to those available in the Single
Nucleotide Polymorphism Database. We conclude that MAX mutations remain unusual
events and targeted genetic screening should be considered after more common
genetic events have been excluded.

PMID: 23743562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013 May 30;20(3):C5-7. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0146. Print 2013
Jun.

HIF2 and endocrine neoplasia: an evolving story.

Maher ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
erm1000@medschl.cam.ac.uk

Comment on
    Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013 Jun;20(3):349-59.

In this issue of Endocrine-Related Cancer, Toledo et al. report the
identification of activating mutations in the HIF2 (EPAS1) transcription factor
in a subset of sporadic pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. These findings add 
significantly to an evolving and complex story of the role of hypoxic gene
response pathways in human endocrine neoplasia.

PMID: 23653463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 30;32:23. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-32-23.

Genotyping analysis and ¹8FDG uptake in breast cancer patients: a preliminary
research.

Bravatà V(1), Stefano A, Cammarata FP, Minafra L, Russo G, Nicolosi S, Pulizzi S,
Gelfi C, Gilardi MC, Messa C.

Author information: 
(1)IBFM CNR - LATO, Cefalù, PA, Italy. valentina.bravata@polooncologicocefalu.it

BACKGROUND: Diagnostic imaging plays a relevant role in the care of patients with
breast cancer (BC). Positron Emission Tomography (PET) with
18F-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) has been widely proven to be a clinical tool
suitable for BC detection and staging in which the glucose analog supplies
metabolic information about the tumor. A limited number of studies, sometimes
controversial, describe possible associations between FDG uptake and single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). For this reason this field has to be explored
and clarified. We investigated the association of SNPs in GLUT1, HIF-1a, EPAS1,
APEX1, VEGFA and MTHFR genes with the FDG uptake in BC.
METHODS: In 26 caucasian individuals with primary BC, whole-body PET-CT scans
were obtained and quantitative analysis was performed by calculating the maximum 
Standardized Uptake Value normalized to body-weight (SUVmax) and the mean SUV
normalized to body-weight corrected for partial volume effect (SUVpvc). Human
Gene Mutation Database and dbSNP Short Genetic Variations database were used to
analyze gene regions containing the selected SNPs. Patient genotypes were
obtained using Sanger DNA sequencing analysis performed by Capillary
Electrophoresis.
RESULTS: BC patients were genotyped for the following nine SNPs: GLUT1: rs841853 
and rs710218; HIF-1a: rs11549465 and rs11549467; EPAS1: rs137853037 and
rs137853036; APEX1: rs1130409; VEGFA: rs3025039 and MTHFR: rs1801133. In this
work correlations between the nine potentially useful polymorphisms selected and 
previously suggested with tracer uptake (using both SUVmax and SUVpvc) were not
found.
CONCLUSIONS: The possible functional influence of specific SNPs on FDG uptake
needs further studies in human cancer. In summary, this is the first pilot study,
to our knowledge, which investigates the association between a large panel of
SNPs and FDG uptake specifically in BC patients. This work represents a
multidisciplinary and translational medicine approach to study BC where, the
possible correlation between SNPs and tracer uptake, may be considered to improve
personalized cancer treatment and care.

PMCID: PMC3646684
PMID: 23631762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;28(6):488-93.

[Energy power in mountains: difference in metabolism pattern results in different
adaption traits in Tibetans].

Bai ZZ(1), Jin GE, Wu-Ren T, Ga Q, Ge RL.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Center for High Altitude Medicine, Medical School, Qinghai
University, Xining 810001, China.

Energy metabolism plays an important role in life survival for species living in 
high altitude hypoxia condition. Air-breathing organisms require oxygen to create
energy. Tibetans are the well-adapted highlanders in Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. It 
was thought that different metabolic approaches could lead to different
adaptation traits to high altitude hypoxia. Recently identified hypoxia inducible
factors pathway regulators, endothelial PAS domain protein1 (EPAS1)/HIF-2a and
PPARA, were involved in decreasing hemoglobin concentrations in Tibetans. Because
EPAS1 and PPARA also modulated the energy metabolism during hypoxia, we
hypothesized that positive selected EPAS1 and PPARA genes were also involved in
unique energy metabolisms in Tibetans. In this brief review, we take a look into 
genetic determinations to energy metabolisms for hypoxia adaptations traits in
Tibetans and mal-adaptive conditions such as high altitude diseases.

PMID: 23581177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013 May 21;20(3):349-59. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0101. Print
2013 Jun.

In vivo and in vitro oncogenic effects of HIF2A mutations in pheochromocytomas
and paragangliomas.

Toledo RA(1), Qin Y, Srikantan S, Morales NP, Li Q, Deng Y, Kim SW, Pereira MA,
Toledo SP, Su X, Aguiar RC, Dahia PL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine,
University of Texas Health Science Center, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, MC 7880, San
Antonio, Texas 78229-3900, USA.

Comment in
    Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013 Jun;20(3):C5-7.

Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas are highly vascular tumors of the autonomic 
nervous system. Germline mutations, including those in hypoxia-related genes,
occur in one third of the cases, but somatic mutations are infrequent in these
tumors. Using exome sequencing of six paired constitutive and tumor DNA from
sporadic pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas, we identified a somatic mutation
in the HIF2A (EPAS1) gene. Screening of an additional 239
pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas uncovered three other HIF2A variants in sporadic
(4/167, 2.3%) but not in hereditary tumors or controls. Three of the mutations
involved proline 531, one of the two residues that controls HIF2a stability by
hydroxylation. The fourth mutation, on Ser71, was adjacent to the DNA binding
domain. No mutations were detected in the homologous regions of the HIF1A gene in
132 tumors. Mutant HIF2A tumors had increased expression of HIF2a target genes,
suggesting an activating effect of the mutations. Ectopically expressed HIF2a
mutants in HEK293, renal cell carcinoma 786-0, or rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cell 
lines showed increased stability, resistance to VHL-mediated degradation, target 
induction, and reduced chromaffin cell differentiation. Furthermore, mice
injected with cells expressing mutant HIF2A developed tumors, and those with
Pro531Thr and Pro531Ser mutations had shorter latency than tumors from mice with 
wild-type HIF2A. Our results support a direct oncogenic role for HIF2A in human
neoplasia and strengthen the link between hypoxic pathways and pheochromocytomas 
and paragangliomas.

PMID: 23533246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056984. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Downregulation of carbonic anhydrase IX promotes Col10a1 expression in
chondrocytes.

Maruyama T(1), Miyamoto Y, Yamamoto G, Yamada A, Yoshimura K, Suzawa T, Takami M,
Akiyama T, Hoshino M, Iwasa F, Ikumi N, Tachikawa T, Mishima K, Baba K, Kamijo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Showa University, Shinagawa, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Carbonic anhydrase (CA) IX is a transmembrane isozyme of CAs that catalyzes
reversible hydration of CO(2). While it is known that CA IX is distributed in
human embryonic chondrocytes, its role in chondrocyte differentiation has not
been reported. In the present study, we found that Car9 mRNA and CA IX were
expressed in proliferating but not hypertrophic chondrocytes. Next, we examined
the role of CA IX in the expression of marker genes of chondrocyte
differentiation in vitro. Introduction of Car9 siRNA to mouse primary
chondrocytes obtained from costal cartilage induced the mRNA expressions of
Col10a1, the gene for type X collagen a-1 chain, and Epas1, the gene for
hypoxia-responsible factor-2a (HIF-2a), both of which are known to be
characteristically expressed in hypertrophic chondrocytes. On the other hand,
forced expression of CA IX had no effect of the proliferation of chondrocytes or 
the transcription of Col10a1 and Epas1, while the transcription of Col2a1 and
Acan were up-regulated. Although HIF-2a has been reported to be a potent
activator of Col10a1 transcription, Epas1 siRNA did not suppress Car9
siRNA-induced increment in Col10a1 expression, indicating that down-regulation of
CA IX induces the expression of Col10a1 in chondrocytes in a HIF-2a-independent
manner. On the other hand, cellular cAMP content was lowered by Car9 siRNA.
Furthermore, the expression of Col10a1 mRNA after Car9 silencing was augmented by
an inhibitor of protein kinase A, and suppressed by an inhibitor for
phosphodiesterase as well as a brominated analog of cAMP. While these results
suggest a possible involvement of cAMP-dependent pathway, at least in part, in
induction of Col10a1 expression by down-regulation of Car9, more detailed study
is required to clarify the role of CA IX in regulation of Col10a1 expression in
chondrocytes.

PMCID: PMC3575511
PMID: 23441228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jun 1;22(11):2169-76. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt069. Epub 2013 Feb 
14.

Tumoral EPAS1 (HIF2A) mutations explain sporadic pheochromocytoma and
paraganglioma in the absence of erythrocytosis.

Comino-Méndez I(1), de Cubas AA, Bernal C, Álvarez-Escolá C, Sánchez-Malo C,
Ramírez-Tortosa CL, Pedrinaci S, Rapizzi E, Ercolino T, Bernini G, Bacca A, Letón
R, Pita G, Alonso MR, Leandro-García LJ, Gómez-Graña A, Inglada-Pérez L,
Mancikova V, Rodríguez-Antona C, Mannelli M, Robledo M, Cascón A.

Author information: 
(1)Hereditary Endocrine Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre
CNIO, Madrid 28029, Spain.

Pheochromocytomas (PCCs) and paragangliomas (PGLs) are chromaffin-cell tumors
that arise from the adrenal medulla and extra-adrenal paraganglia, respectively. 
The dysfunction of genes involved in the cellular response to hypoxia, such as
VHL, EGL nine homolog 1, and the succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) genes, leads to a 
direct abrogation of hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) degradation, resulting in a
pseudo-hypoxic state implicated in PCC/PGL development. Recently, somatic
post-zygotic mutations in EPAS1 (HIF2A) have been found in patients with multiple
PGLs and congenital erythrocytosis. We assessed 41 PCCs/PGLs for mutations in
EPAS1 and herein describe the clinical, molecular and genetic characteristics of 
the 7 patients found to carry somatic EPAS1 mutations; 4 presented with multiple 
PGLs (3 of them also had congenital erythrocytosis), whereas 3 were single
sporadic PCC/PGL cases. Gene expression analysis of EPAS1-mutated tumors revealed
similar mRNA EPAS1 levels to those found in SDH-gene- and VHL-mutated cases and a
significant up-regulation of two hypoxia-induced genes (PCSK6 and GNA14).
Interestingly, single nucleotide polymorphism array analysis revealed an
exclusive gain of chromosome 2p in three EPAS1-mutated tumors. Furthermore,
multiplex-PCR screening for small rearrangements detected a specific EPAS1 gain
in another EPAS1-mutated tumor and in three non-EPAS1-mutated cases. The finding 
that EPAS1 is involved in the sporadic presentation of the disease not only
increases the percentage of PCCs/PGLs with known driver mutations, but also
highlights the relevance of studying other hypoxia-related genes in apparently
sporadic tumors. Finally, the detection of a specific copy number alteration
affecting chromosome 2p in EPAS1-mutated tumors may guide the genetic diagnosis
of patients with this disease.

PMID: 23418310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Am J Hum Biol. 2013 Mar-Apr;25(2):190-7. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.22358. Epub 2013 Jan
24.

Andean and Tibetan patterns of adaptation to high altitude.

Bigham AW(1), Wilson MJ, Julian CG, Kiyamu M, Vargas E, Leon-Velarde F,
Rivera-Chira M, Rodriquez C, Browne VA, Parra E, Brutsaert TD, Moore LG, Shriver 
MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

OBJECTIVES: High-altitude hypoxia, or decreased oxygen levels caused by low
barometric pressure, challenges the ability of humans to live and reproduce.
Despite these challenges, human populations have lived on the Andean Altiplano
and the Tibetan Plateau for millennia and exhibit unique circulatory,
respiratory, and hematological adaptations to life at high altitude. We and
others have identified natural selection candidate genes and gene regions for
these adaptations using dense genome scan data. One gene previously known to be
important in cellular oxygen sensing, egl nine homolog 1 (EGLN1), shows evidence 
of positive selection in both Tibetans and Andeans. Interestingly, the pattern of
variation for this gene differs between the two populations. Continued research
among Tibetan populations has identified statistical associations between
hemoglobin concentration and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotype at
EGLN1 and a second gene, endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1).
METHODS: To measure for the effects of EGLN1 and EPAS1 altitude genotypes on
hemoglobin concentration among Andean highlanders, we performed a multiple linear
regression analysis of 10 candidate SNPs in or near these two genes.
RESULTS: Our analysis did not identify significant associations between EPAS1 or 
EGLN1 SNP genotypes and hemoglobin concentration in Andeans.
CONCLUSIONS: These results contribute to our understanding of the unique set of
adaptations developed in different highland groups to the hypoxia of high
altitude. Overall, the results provide key insights into the patterns of genetic 
adaptation to high altitude in Andean and Tibetan populations.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23348729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Nov 27;92(44):3125-7.

[Expression of SDHB, EPAS1 and MIB-1 in Zuckerkandl paragangliomas].

[Article in Chinese]

Deng JH(1), Li HZ, Zhang YS, Xu WF, Cui QC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology & Pathology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the significance of succinate dehydrogenase B (SDHB)
mutation and EPAS1 overexpression in Zuckerkandl paragangliomas (PGL) and examine
their correlations with malignant infiltration and metastasis.
METHODS: From March 2008 to July 2011, the clinical profiles of 16 Zuckerkandl
PGL patients were analyzed retrospectively. For increased diagnostic specificity,
a complex immunohistochemical panel of tissue microarray was performed for SDHB, 
EPAS1 and MIB-1. Positive expression identified as a granular cytoplasmic
staining. Greater than or equal to 50% as strongly positive (+++), 1% to 10% as
weakly positive (+).
RESULTS: Tissue microarray immunohistochemical staining showed SDHB
immunoreactivity in the cytoplasm, whereas EPAS1 and MIB-1 in the nuclear of
tumor cells. Positive expression of EPAS1 in which 13 cases of Zuckerkandl PGL.
And high expression strongly associated with malignancy. SDHB mutation of 7 cases
are all EPAS1 positive staining. Non-gene mutation 9 cases tumor specimens, 6
cases were EPAS1 positive expression (P < 0.05). CgA positive expression in 11
cases benign Zuckerkandl PGL, strongly positive in 4 malignant cases (4/4). MIB-1
below 1% in 12 cases of benign Zuckerkandl PGL. And in 4 malignant cases, MIB-1
was about 3%. Malignant neoplasms had significantly higher EPAS1, CgA and MIB-1
expression compared to benign counterparts (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The SDHB mutation causes the EPAS1 over expression in PGL and
correlation with higher positive expression of CgA and MIB-1. It may be one of
the mechanisms of malignant invasiveness and metastasis in PGL.

PMID: 23328423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e50566. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050566. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Genetic variants in EPAS1 contribute to adaptation to high-altitude hypoxia in
Sherpas.

Hanaoka M(1), Droma Y, Basnyat B, Ito M, Kobayashi N, Katsuyama Y, Kubo K, Ota M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan.

Sherpas comprise a population of Tibetan ancestry in the Himalayan region that is
renowned for its mountaineering prowess. The very small amount of available
genetic information for Sherpas is insufficient to explain their physiological
ability to adapt to high-altitude hypoxia. Recent genetic evidence has indicated 
that natural selection on the endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) gene was
occurred in the Tibetan population during their occupation in the Tibetan Plateau
for millennia. Tibetan-specific variations in EPAS1 may regulate the
physiological responses to high-altitude hypoxia via a hypoxia-inducible
transcription factor pathway. We examined three significant tag single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs, rs13419896, rs4953354, and rs4953388) in the EPAS1 gene in
Sherpas, and compared these variants with Tibetan highlanders on the Tibetan
Plateau as well as with non-Sherpa lowlanders. We found that Sherpas and Tibetans
on the Tibetan Plateau exhibit similar patterns in three EPAS1 significant tag
SNPs, but these patterns are the reverse of those in non-Sherpa lowlanders. The
three SNPs were in strong linkage in Sherpas, but in weak linkage in non-Sherpas.
Importantly, the haplotype structured by the Sherpa-dominant alleles was present 
in Sherpas but rarely present in non-Sherpas. Surprisingly, the average level of 
serum erythropoietin in Sherpas at 3440 m was equal to that in non-Sherpas at
1300 m, indicating a resistant response of erythropoietin to high-altitude
hypoxia in Sherpas. These observations strongly suggest that EPAS1 is under
selection for adaptation to the high-altitude life of Tibetan populations,
including Sherpas. Understanding of the mechanism of hypoxia tolerance in
Tibetans is expected to provide lights to the therapeutic solutions of some
hypoxia-related human diseases, such as cardiovascular disease and cancer.

PMCID: PMC3515610
PMID: 23227185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Mol Med (Berl). 2013 Apr;91(4):507-12. doi: 10.1007/s00109-012-0967-z. Epub
2012 Oct 23.

A novel EPAS1/HIF2A germline mutation in a congenital polycythemia with
paraganglioma.

Lorenzo FR(1), Yang C, Ng Tang Fui M, Vankayalapati H, Zhuang Z, Huynh T,
Grossmann M, Pacak K, Prchal JT.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, University of Utah School of Medicine and VAH, 30N 1900E,
5C402, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Congenital polycythemias have diverse etiologies, including mutations in the
hypoxia sensing pathway. These include HIF2A at exon 12, VHL gene (Chuvash
polycythemia), and PHD2 mutations, which in one family was also associated with
recurrent pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma (PHEO/PGL). Over the past two decades,
we have studied seven unrelated patients with sporadic congenital polycythemia
who subsequently developed PHEO/PGL with, until now, no discernible molecular
basis. We now report a polycythemic patient with a novel germline HIF2A (F374Y)
(exon 9) mutation, inherited from his mother, who developed PHEO/PGL. We show
that this is a gain-of-function mutation and demonstrate no
loss-of-heterozygosity or additional somatic mutation of HIF2A in the tumor,
indicating HIF2A (F374Y) may be predisposing rather than causative of PHEO/PGL.
This report, in view of two other concomitantly reported PHEO/PGL patients with
somatic mutations of HIF2A and polycythemia, underscores the PHEO/PGL-promoting
potential of mutations of HIF2A that alone are not sufficient for PHEO/PGL
development.

PMCID: PMC3570726
PMID: 23090011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Vis. 2012;18:2119-26. Epub 2012 Jul 26.

Screening of candidate genes for primary open angle glaucoma.

Liu T(1), Xie L, Ye J, Liu Y, He X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Daping Hospital, Research Institute of Surgery,
Third Military Medical University of PLA, Chongqing, China.

PURPOSE: Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is one of the leading causes of
irreversible blindness in the world. To make progress in understanding POAG, it
is necessary to identify more POAG-causing genes.
METHODS: Using haplotype analysis, we found that mutational region is located on 
chromosome 2 in two families. Furthermore, we screened 11 candidate genes on
chromosome 2 by protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis, including mutS
homolog 6 (MSH6), mutS homolog 2 (MSH2), v-rel reticuloendotheliosis viral
oncogene homolog (REL), endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1), vaccinia
related kinase 2 (VRK2), F-box protein 11 (FBXO11), EGF containing fibulin-like
extracellular matrix protein 1 (EFEMP1), reticulon 4 (RTN4), RAB1A, member RAS
oncogene family (RAB1A), ARP2 actin-related protein 2 homolog (ACTR2), and
calmodulin 2 (phosphorylase kinase, delta; CALM2). These 11 genes are all
predicted to be related to trabecular meshwork changes and progressive loss of
retinal ganglion cells in POAG patients.
RESULTS: According to our study, FBXO11 and VRK2 may interact with tumor protein 
p53 to regulate mitochondrial membrane permeability, mitochondrial membrane
organization, and apoptosis. MSH2 is responsible for repairing DNA mismatches and
RTN4 is for neuronal regeneration. Therefore, they are supposed to play a
negative role in cellular process in POAG. CALM2 may be involved in retinal
ganglion cell death and oxidative damage to cell communication.
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate that the genes above may be associated with 
pathogenesis of POAG.

PMCID: PMC3413431
PMID: 22876139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncol Lett. 2011 Jul;2(4):719-724. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

EPAS1 mRNA in plasma from colorectal cancer patients is associated with poor
outcome in advanced stages.

Mohammed N(1), Rodriguez M, Garcia V, Garcia JM, Dominguez G, Peña C, Herrera M, 
Gomez I, Diaz R, Soldevilla B, Herrera A, Silva J, Bonilla F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Puerta de Hierro
Majadahonda, E-28222 Madrid, Spain.

The presence of free nucleic acids in plasma has been detected in cancer patients
and is associated with poor prognosis. In the present study, the mRNA levels of
three genes (EPAS1, KIAA0101 and UBE2D3) in plasma from colorectal cancer
patients were analyzed. These genes were selected from a previous study of
genomic profiles, discriminating between healthy controls and colorectal cancer
patients. mRNA levels were analyzed by real-time PCR in the plasma of 154
patients with colorectal cancer. The association of plasma mRNA levels with
clinicopathological parameters and patient survival were analyzed. High levels of
EPAS1 in the plasma were associated with patients aged over 50 years, relapse of 
disease and patient mortality. When patients were divided into two groups, early 
(I and II) and advanced (III and IV) stages, an association was observed between 
high levels of EPAS1 mRNA and worse disease-free and overall survival in advanced
stages. The expression of KIAA0101 and UBE2D3 was not associated with poor
prognosis. Thus, our results suggest that EPAS1 mRNA levels may be an indicator
of poor prognosis in colorectal cancer patients at advanced stages, obtained by a
non-invasive method.

PMCID: PMC3406439
PMID: 22848255  [PubMed]


119. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 17;287(34):29003-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.373365. Epub
2012 Jun 28.

Functional importance of Dicer protein in the adaptive cellular response to
hypoxia.

Ho JJ(1), Metcalf JL, Yan MS, Turgeon PJ, Wang JJ, Chalsev M,
Petruzziello-Pellegrini TN, Tsui AK, He JZ, Dhamko H, Man HS, Robb GB, Teh BT,
Ohh M, Marsden PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5B 
1W8, Canada.

The processes by which cells sense and respond to ambient oxygen concentration
are fundamental to cell survival and function, and they commonly target gene
regulatory events. To date, however, little is known about the link between the
microRNA pathway and hypoxia signaling. Here, we show in vitro and in vivo that
chronic hypoxia impairs Dicer (DICER1) expression and activity, resulting in
global consequences on microRNA biogenesis. We show that von
Hippel-Lindau-dependent down-regulation of Dicer is key to the expression and
function of hypoxia-inducible factor a (HIF-a) subunits. Specifically, we show
that EPAS1/HIF-2a is regulated by the Dicer-dependent microRNA miR-185, which is 
down-regulated by hypoxia. Full expression of hypoxia-responsive/HIF target genes
in chronic hypoxia (e.g. VEGFA, FLT1/VEGFR1, KDR/VEGFR2, BNIP3L, and
SLC2A1/GLUT1), the function of which is to regulate various adaptive responses to
compromised oxygen availability, is also dependent on hypoxia-mediated
down-regulation of Dicer function and changes in post-transcriptional gene
regulation. Therefore, functional deficiency of Dicer in chronic hypoxia is
relevant to both HIF-a isoforms and hypoxia-responsive/HIF target genes,
especially in the vascular endothelium. These findings have relevance to emerging
therapies given that we show that the efficacy of RNA interference under chronic 
hypoxia, but not normal oxygen availability, is Dicer-dependent. Collectively,
these findings show that the down-regulation of Dicer under chronic hypoxia is an
adaptive mechanism that serves to maintain the cellular hypoxic response through 
HIF-a- and microRNA-dependent mechanisms, thereby providing an essential
mechanistic insight into the oxygen-dependent microRNA regulatory pathway.

PMCID: PMC3436557
PMID: 22745131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2012 Aug 15;49(2):67-73. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2012.04.004.
Epub 2012 May 15.

EPAS1 and EGLN1 associations with high altitude sickness in Han and Tibetan
Chinese at the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau.

Buroker NE(1), Ning XH, Zhou ZN, Li K, Cen WJ, Wu XF, Zhu WZ, Scott CR, Chen SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
nburoker@u.washington.edu

High altitude sickness (HAS) occurs among humans visiting or inhabiting high
altitude environments. Genetic differences in the EPAS1 and EGLN1 genes have been
found between lowland (Han) and highland (Tibetan) Chinese. Three SNPs within
EPAS1 and EGLN1 were evaluated in Han and Tibetan patients with acute mountain
sickness (AMS) and chronic mountain sickness (CMS). We compared 85 patients with 
AMS to 79 Han unaffected with mountain sickness (MS) as well as 45 CMS patients
to 34 unaffected Tibetan subjects. The three SNPs studied were EPAS1 [ch2:
46441523 (hg18], EGLN1 (rs480902) and (rs516651). Direct sequencing was used to
identify individual genotypes for the three SNPs. Age was found to be
significantly associated with the EPAS1 SNP in the CMS patients while heart rate 
(HR) and oxygen saturation level of hemoglobin (SaO(2)) were found to be
significantly associated with the EGLN1 (rs480902) SNP in the Han patients with
AMS. The individuals with CMS were found to diverge significantly for the EPAS1
SNP compared to their Tibetan control group as measured by genetic distance
(0.123) indicating positive selection of the EPAS-G allele with age and illness. 
The EGLN1 (rs480902) SNP had a significant correlation with hematocrit (HCT), HR 
and SaO(2) in AMS patients. AMS and CMS were found to be significantly associated
with the EPAS1 and EGLN1 SNPs compared to their Han and Tibetan control groups,
respectively, indicating these nucleotide alterations have a physiological effect
for the development of high altitude sickness.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22595196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Genet Metab. 2012 Jun;106(2):244-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.03.003. Epub
2012 Mar 17.

Metabolic insight into mechanisms of high-altitude adaptation in Tibetans.

Ge RL(1), Simonson TS, Cooksey RC, Tanna U, Qin G, Huff CD, Witherspoon DJ, Xing 
J, Zhengzhong B, Prchal JT, Jorde LB, McClain DA.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for High-Altitude Medicine, Qinghai University Medical School,
Xining, Qinghai 810001, People's Republic of China.

Recent studies have identified genes involved in high-altitude adaptation in
Tibetans. Genetic variants/haplotypes within regions containing three of these
genes (EPAS1, EGLN1, and PPARA) are associated with relatively decreased
hemoglobin levels observed in Tibetans at high altitude, providing corroborative 
evidence for genetic adaptation to this extreme environment. The mechanisms that 
afford adaptation to high-altitude hypoxia, however, remain unclear. Considering 
the strong metabolic demands imposed by hypoxia, we hypothesized that a shift in 
fuel preference to glucose oxidation and glycolysis at the expense of fatty acid 
oxidation would improve adaptation to decreased oxygen availability. Correlations
between serum free fatty acid and lactate concentrations in Tibetan groups living
at high altitude and putatively selected haplotypes provide insight into this
hypothesis. An EPAS1 haplotype that exhibits a signal of positive selection is
significantly associated with increased lactate concentration, the product of
anaerobic glycolysis. Furthermore, the putatively advantageous PPARA haplotype is
correlated with serum free fatty acid concentrations, suggesting a possible
decrease in the activity of fatty acid oxidation. Although further studies are
required to assess the molecular mechanisms underlying these patterns, these
associations suggest that genetic adaptation to high altitude involves alteration
in energy utilization pathways.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3437309
PMID: 22503288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Aug;64(8):2568-78. doi: 10.1002/art.34481.

Dkk-1 expression in chondrocytes inhibits experimental osteoarthritic cartilage
destruction in mice.

Oh H(1), Chun CH, Chun JS.

Author information: 
(1)Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Dkk is a family of canonical Wnt antagonists with 4 members (Dkk-1,
Dkk-2, Dkk-3, and Dkk-4). We undertook this study to explore the roles of Dkk-1
and Dkk-2 in osteoarthritic (OA) cartilage destruction in mice.
METHODS: Expression of Dkk and other catabolic factors was determined at the
messenger RNA and protein levels in human and mouse OA cartilage. Experimental OA
in mice was induced by destabilization of the medial meniscus (DMM) or by
intraarticular injection of Epas1 adenovirus (AdEPAS-1). The role of Dkk in OA
pathogenesis was examined by intraarticular injection of AdDkk-1 or by using
chondrocyte-specific Dkk1 (Col2a1-Dkk1)-transgenic mice and Dkk2
(Col2a1-Dkk2)-transgenic mice. Primary culture mouse chondrocytes were also
treated with recombinant Dkk proteins.
RESULTS: We found opposite patterns of Dkk1 and Dkk2 expression in human and
mouse experimental OA cartilage: Dkk1 was up-regulated and Dkk2 was
down-regulated. Overexpression of Dkk1 by intraarticular injection of AdDkk-1
significantly inhibited DMM-induced experimental OA. DMM-induced OA was also
significantly inhibited in Col2a1-Dkk1-transgenic mice compared with their
wild-type littermates. However, Col2a1-Dkk2-transgenic mice showed no significant
difference in OA pathogenesis. Wnt-3a, which activates the canonical Wnt pathway,
induced Mmp13 and Adamts4 expression in primary culture chondrocytes, an effect
that was significantly inhibited by Dkk-1 pretreatment or Dkk1 overexpression.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that expression of Dkk1, but not Dkk2, in
chondrocytes inhibits OA cartilage destruction. The protective effect of Dkk-1
appears to be associated with its capacity to inhibit Wnt-mediated expression of 
catabolic factors, such as Mmp13, providing evidence that Dkk-1 might serve as a 
therapeutic target for OA treatment.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 22488261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2012 Feb;31(2):213-21. doi:
10.1016/j.healun.2011.11.011.

Searching for novel molecular targets of chronic rejection in an orthotopic
experimental lung transplantation model.

Santana-Rodríguez N(1), García-Herrera R, Clavo B, Llontop P, Ponce-González MA, 
Villar J, López-García A, Fiuza MD, Rodríguez-Bermejo JC, García-Castellano JM,
Machín RP, Ruíz-Caballero JA, Brito Y, Fernández-Pérez L.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, Experimental Surgery, Hospital Dr Negrín, Las Palmas de Gran
Canaria, Spain. norbesr@terra.es

BACKGROUND: Chronic rejection (CR) is the main reason for the limited survival
rates among lung transplant (LT) recipients. There remains no effective treatment
for CR. The aim of this study was to identify new molecular mechanisms involved
in CR by using DNA microarray analysis.
METHODS: We performed 10 left LTs using the microsurgical cuff technique in
inbred Sprague-Dawley rats. Lung isograft samples were obtained 3 months after
surgery. We analyzed histologic, apoptotic and gene expression changes by DNA
microarray and quantitative PCR analysis.
RESULTS: Histologic analyses confirmed signs of CR in all lungs and positive
labeling for apoptotic and anti-apoptotic markers. A total of 702 genes were
regulated in the CR lungs: 317 genes were upregulated and 385 were downregulated.
Significant changes for about 30 biologic processes, including regulation of the 
cytoskeleton, and 15 signaling pathways, such as adherens junctions, were
observed. We found significantly increased mRNA expression of the Cldn5, Epas1,
Tgfb1, Vegf, Selp1, Hsp27 and Igf1 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first experimental study performed in an orthotopic
model of LT using DNA microarray analysis. The individual genes, biologic process
and pathways identified may represent novel targets that could be manipulated and
contribute to the development of treatments capable of providing protection from 
CR.

Copyright © 2012 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22305384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Genome Biol. 2012 Jan 20;13(1):R1. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-1-r1.

Genetic adaptation to high altitude in the Ethiopian highlands.

Scheinfeldt LB(1), Soi S, Thompson S, Ranciaro A, Woldemeskel D, Beggs W, Lambert
C, Jarvis JP, Abate D, Belay G, Tishkoff SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genomic analysis of high-altitude populations residing in the Andes
and Tibet has revealed several candidate loci for involvement in high-altitude
adaptation, a subset of which have also been shown to be associated with
hemoglobin levels, including EPAS1, EGLN1, and PPARA, which play a role in the
HIF-1 pathway. Here, we have extended this work to high- and low-altitude
populations living in Ethiopia, for which we have measured hemoglobin levels. We 
genotyped the Illumina 1M SNP array and employed several genome-wide scans for
selection and targeted association with hemoglobin levels to identify genes that 
play a role in adaptation to high altitude.
RESULTS: We have identified a set of candidate genes for positive selection in
our high-altitude population sample, demonstrated significantly different
hemoglobin levels between high- and low-altitude Ethiopians and have identified a
subset of candidate genes for selection, several of which also show suggestive
associations with hemoglobin levels.
CONCLUSIONS: We highlight several candidate genes for involvement in
high-altitude adaptation in Ethiopia, including CBARA1, VAV3, ARNT2 and THRB.
Although most of these genes have not been identified in previous studies of
high-altitude Tibetan or Andean population samples, two of these genes (THRB and 
ARNT2) play a role in the HIF-1 pathway, a pathway implicated in previous work
reported in Tibetan and Andean studies. These combined results suggest that
adaptation to high altitude arose independently due to convergent evolution in
high-altitude Amhara populations in Ethiopia.

PMCID: PMC3334582
PMID: 22264333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Mar 1;21(5):1190-200. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr551. Epub 2011 Nov 
23.

The chromosome 2p21 region harbors a complex genetic architecture for association
with risk for renal cell carcinoma.

Han SS(1), Yeager M, Moore LE, Wei MH, Pfeiffer R, Toure O, Purdue MP, Johansson 
M, Scelo G, Chung CC, Gaborieau V, Zaridze D, Schwartz K, Szeszenia-Dabrowska N, 
Davis F, Bencko V, Colt JS, Janout V, Matveev V, Foretova L, Mates D, Navratilova
M, Boffetta P, Berg CD, Grubb RL 3rd, Stevens VL, Thun MJ, Diver WR, Gapstur SM, 
Albanes D, Weinstein SJ, Virtamo J, Burdett L, Brisuda A, McKay JD, Fraumeni JF
Jr, Chatterjee N, Rosenberg PS, Rothman N, Brennan P, Chow WH, Tucker MA, Chanock
SJ, Toro JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, Department of Health and Human
Services, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892-7231, USA.

In follow-up of a recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) that identified a
locus in chromosome 2p21 associated with risk for renal cell carcinoma (RCC), we 
conducted a fine mapping analysis of a 120 kb region that includes EPAS1. We
genotyped 59 tagged common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 2278 RCC and
3719 controls of European background and observed a novel signal for rs9679290 [P
= 5.75 × 10(-8), per-allele odds ratio (OR) = 1.27, 95% confidence interval (CI):
1.17-1.39]. Imputation of common SNPs surrounding rs9679290 using HapMap 3 and
1000 Genomes data yielded two additional signals, rs4953346 (P = 4.09 × 10(-14)) 
and rs12617313 (P = 7.48 × 10(-12)), both highly correlated with rs9679290 (r(2) 
> 0.95), but interestingly not correlated with the two SNPs reported in the GWAS:
rs11894252 and rs7579899 (r(2) < 0.1 with rs9679290). Genotype analysis of
rs12617313 confirmed an association with RCC risk (P = 1.72 × 10(-9), per-allele 
OR = 1.28, 95% CI: 1.18-1.39) In conclusion, we report that chromosome 2p21
harbors a complex genetic architecture for common RCC risk variants.

PMCID: PMC3277315
PMID: 22113997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dev Biol. 2012 Feb 1;362(1):24-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.033. Epub 2011
Nov 6.

Conditional hypoxia inducible factor-1a induction in embryonic pulmonary
epithelium impairs maturation and augments lymphangiogenesis.

Bridges JP(1), Lin S, Ikegami M, Shannon JM.

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Institute, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. james.bridges@cchmc.org

Hypoxia inducible factor (HIF) 1a, EPAS1 and NEPAS are expressed in the embryonic
mouse lung and each isoform exhibits distinct spatiotemporal expression patterns 
throughout morphogenesis. To further assess the role of the HIF1a isoform in lung
epithelial cell differentiation and homeostasis, we created transgenic mice that 
express a constitutively active isoform of human HIF-1a (HIF-1a three point
mutant (TPM)), in a doxycycline-dependent manner. Expression of HIF1a TPM in the 
developing pulmonary epithelium resulted in lung hypoplasia characterized by
defective branching morphogenesis, altered cellular energetics and impaired
epithelial maturation, culminating in neonatal lethality at birth from severe
respiratory distress. Histological and biochemical analyses revealed expanded
glycogen pools in the pulmonary epithelial cells at E18.5, concomitant with
decreased pulmonary surfactant, suggesting a delay or an arrest in maturation.
Importantly, these defects occurred in the absence of apoptosis or necrosis. In
addition, sub-pleural hemorrhaging was evident as early as E14.5 in HIF1a TPM
lungs, despite normal patterning of the blood vasculature, consistent with
defects in endothelial barrier function. Epithelial expression of HIF1a TPM also 
resulted in increased VEGFA and VEGFC production, an increase in the number of
lymphatic vessels and indirect activation of the multiple Notch pathway
components in endothelial precursor cells. Collectively, these data indicate that
HIF-1a protein levels in the pulmonary epithelium must be tightly controlled for 
proper development of the epithelial and mesenchymal compartments.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3262673
PMID: 22094019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Hum Genet. 2012 Apr;131(4):527-33. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-1109-3. Epub 2011 Nov 
9.

Genetic determinants of Tibetan high-altitude adaptation.

Simonson TS(1), McClain DA, Jorde LB, Prchal JT.

Author information: 
(1)Eccles Institute of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Some highland populations have genetic adaptations that enable their successful
existence in a hypoxic environment. Tibetans are protected against many of the
harmful responses exhibited by non-adapted populations upon exposure to severe
hypoxia, including elevated hemoglobin concentration (i.e., polycythemia). Recent
studies have highlighted several genes subject to natural selection in native
high-altitude Tibetans. Three of these genes, EPAS1, EGLN1 and PPARA, regulate or
are regulated by hypoxia inducible factor, a principal controller of
erythropoiesis and other organismal functions. Uncovering the molecular basis of 
hypoxic adaptation should have implications for understanding hematological and
other adaptations involved in hypoxia tolerance. Because the hypoxia response
involves a variety of cardiovascular, pulmonary and metabolic functions, this
knowledge would improve our understanding of disease mechanisms and could
ultimately be translated into targeted therapies for oxygen deprivation,
cardiopulmonary and cerebral pathologies, and metabolic disorders such as
diabetes and obesity.

PMID: 22068265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Oct;28(5):583-8. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2011.05.026.

[Association between diversity of hypoxia at different altitude and the
polymorphism of EPAS1 gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Ke JK(1), Yao YF, Liu SY, Shi L, Yu L, Lin KQ, Tao YF, Shi L, Yi W, Huang XQ, Chu
JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Kunming, 
Yunnan, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the selection effect of endothelial PAS domain protein 1
(EPAS1) gene induced by high altitude hypoxia environment.
METHODS: Fourteen single nucleotide polymorphism sites (SNPs) of the EPAS1 gene
were genotyped using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) in
three Tibetan groups (58 samples from Tibetan living in an altitude of about 3700
meters above sea level, 47 from Qinghai province, about 3100 meters above sea
level, 43 from Yunnan province, about 2500 meters above sea level), and Han of
Shandong (47 samples, about 50 meters above sea level).
RESULTS: There were significant differences of most SNP allelic, genotypic and
haplotypic frequencies when comparing Han of Shandong, Tibetan of Yunnan with
Tibetan of Tibetan and Qinghai. But no difference between Han of Shandong and
Tibetan of Yunnan was found.
CONCLUSION: The EPAS1 gene might be under hypoxic selection induced by high
altitude.

PMID: 21983741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Mar;19(3):440-50. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.111. Epub 2011
Aug 26.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-2a regulates Fas-mediated chondrocyte apoptosis during
osteoarthritic cartilage destruction.

Ryu JH(1), Shin Y, Huh YH, Yang S, Chun CH, Chun JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Dynamics Research Center and School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute
of Science and Technology, Gwangju, Korea.

Apoptosis of articular chondrocytes is associated with the pathogenesis of
osteoarthritis (OA). Recently, we demonstrated that hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-2a, encoded by Epas1, causes OA cartilage destruction by regulating the
expression of various matrix-degrading enzymes. Here, we investigated the
involvement of HIF-2a in chondrocyte apoptosis and OA cartilage destruction.
HIF-2a levels in human and mouse OA chondrocytes were markedly elevated in
association with increased apoptosis of articular chondrocytes. Overexpression or
knockdown of HIF-2a alone did not cause chondrocyte apoptosis. However, HIF-2a
expression markedly increased chondrocyte apoptosis in the presence of an
agonistic anti-Fas (CD95) antibody. HIF-2a enhanced Fas expression and
potentiated downstream signaling pathways, increasing the activity of initiator
and executioner caspases. Overexpression of HIF-2a in mouse cartilage tissue,
either by intra-articular injection of Epas1 adenovirus (Ad-Epas1) or in the
context of chondrocyte-specific Epas1 transgenic mice, increased chondrocyte
apoptosis and cartilage destruction. In contrast, chondrocyte-specific knockout
of Epas1 in mice suppressed DMM (destabilization of the medial meniscus)-induced 
chondrocyte apoptosis and inhibited OA cartilage destruction. Moreover,
Fas-deficient mice exhibited diminished chondrocyte apoptosis and OA cartilage
destruction in response to Ad-Epas1 injection or DMM surgery. Taken together, our
results demonstrate that HIF-2a potentiates Fas-mediated chondrocyte apoptosis,
which is associated with OA cartilage destruction.

PMCID: PMC3278727
PMID: 21869830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mod Pathol. 2011 Nov;24(11):1470-9. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.107. Epub 2011
Jul 1.

Chromosome 14q loss defines a molecular subtype of clear-cell renal cell
carcinoma associated with poor prognosis.

Monzon FA(1), Alvarez K, Peterson L, Truong L, Amato RJ, Hernandez-McClain J,
Tannir N, Parwani AV, Jonasch E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston,
TX, USA. famonzon@tmhs.org

Loss of chromosome 14 has been associated with poor outcomes in clear-cell renal 
cell carcinoma. Expression of HIFa isoforms has been linked to distinct molecular
phenotypes of clear-cell renal cell carcinoma. We hypothesized that chromosome 14
loss could lead to a decrease in HIF1a levels, as its gene (HIF1A) resides in
this chromosome. We analyzed 112 archival clear-cell renal cell carcinoma tumor
specimens with 250K SNP microarrays. We also evaluated expression of HIFa
isoforms by qPCR and immunohistochemistry in a subset of 30 patients. Loss of
chromosome 14q was associated with high stage (III-IV, P=0.001), high risk for
recurrence (P=0.002, RR 2.78 (1.506-5.153)) and with decreased overall survival
(P=0.030) in non-metastatic clear-cell renal cell carcinoma. HIF1a mRNA and
protein expression was reduced in specimens with loss of 14q (P=0.014) whereas
HIF2a was not. Gain of 8q was associated with decreased overall survival
(P<0.0001). Our studies confirm an association between 14q loss and clinical
outcome in non-metastatic clear-cell renal cell carcinoma patients and that 8q
gain is a candidate prognostic marker for decreased overall survival and appears 
to further decrease survival in patients with 14q loss. We have also identified
that differential expression of HIF1a is associated with 14q loss. Further
exploration of 8q gain, 14q loss, MYC, HIF1A and EPAS1 (HIF2a) as molecular
markers of tumor behavior and prognosis could aid in personalizing medicine for
patients with clear-cell renal cell carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4639322
PMID: 21725288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. High Alt Med Biol. 2011 Summer;12(2):133-9. doi: 10.1089/ham.2010.1090.

'ome on the Range: altitude adaptation, positive selection, and Himalayan
genomics.

MacInnis MJ(1), Rupert JL.

Author information: 
(1)University of British Columbia, School of Kinesiology, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. mmacinni@interchange.ubc.ca

In 2010, a number of papers were published describing data from genome-wide
studies designed to identify genes and genetic variants that contribute (or
contributed) to human adaptation to altitude in the Himalaya. The results were
exciting, intriguing, and controversial. Several genes, most notably EGLN1 and
EPAS1, were identified as strong candidates for a role in evolutionary adaptation
to high altitude, and the time course over which this adaptation occurred was
calculated by one team to be remarkably brief. Overall, the data suggest that, at
least in the ancestors of the modern Tibetans, there was a powerful selective
pressure favoring variants in genes central to the molecular response to hypoxia.
The most obvious manifestation of this selection seems to be the Tibetan's well
known blunted erythropoietic response to hypoxemia. This article briefly reviews 
recent developments in 'omic' analysis of Tibetan highland natives, with a focus 
both on the answers found and the questions raised.

© Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.

PMID: 21718161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Sep;63(9):2732-43. doi: 10.1002/art.30451.

Interleukin-6 plays an essential role in hypoxia-inducible factor 2a-induced
experimental osteoarthritic cartilage destruction in mice.

Ryu JH(1), Yang S, Shin Y, Rhee J, Chun CH, Chun JS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju, 
Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Hypoxia-inducible factor 2a (HIF-2a) (encoded by Epas1) causes
osteoarthritic (OA) cartilage destruction by regulating the expression of
catabolic factor genes. We undertook this study to explore the role of
interleukin-6 (IL-6) in HIF-2a-mediated OA cartilage destruction in mice.
METHODS: The expression of HIF-2a, IL-6, and catabolic factors was determined at 
the messenger RNA and protein levels in primary culture mouse chondrocytes, human
OA cartilage, and mouse experimental OA cartilage. Experimental OA in wild-type, 
HIF-2a-knockdown (Epas1+/-), and Il6-/- mice was caused by intraarticular
injection of Epas1 adenovirus or destabilization of the medial meniscus. The role
of IL-6 was determined by treating with recombinant IL-6 protein or by injecting 
HIF-2a adenovirus (AdEpas1) intraarticularly in mice with or without
IL-6-neutralizing antibody.
RESULTS: We found that Il6 is a direct target gene of HIF-2a in articular
chondrocytes. Both Epas1 and Il6 were up-regulated in human and mouse OA
cartilage, whereas HIF-2a knockdown in mice led to inhibition of both Il6
expression and cartilage destruction. Treatment with IL-6 enhanced Mmp3 and Mmp13
expression; conversely, Il6 knockdown inhibited HIF-2a-induced up-regulation of
Mmp3 and Mmp13. Injection of IL-6 protein into mouse knee joints triggered OA
cartilage destruction, whereas IL-6 neutralization led to blocking of
HIF-2a-induced cartilage destruction with concomitant modulation of Mmp3 and
Mmp13 expression. Moreover, Il6 knockout resulted in inhibition of
AdEpas1-induced and destabilization of the medial meniscus-induced cartilage
destruction as well as inhibition of Mmp3 and Mmp13 expression.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that IL-6 acts as a crucial mediator of
HIF-2a-induced experimental OA cartilage destruction in mice via regulation of
Mmp3 and Mmp13 levels.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21590680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Jul;50(7):479-88. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20865. Epub
2011 Mar 31.

Copy number profiling in von Hippel-Lindau disease renal cell carcinoma.

Shuib S(1), Wei W, Sur H, Morris MR, McMullan D, Rattenberry E, Meyer E, Maxwell 
PH, Kishida T, Yao M, Latif F, Maher ER.

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Molecular Genetics, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK.

Germline mutations in the VHL tumor suppressor gene cause von Hippel-Lindau (VHL)
disease and somatic VHL mutations occur in the majority of clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma (cRCC). To compare copy number abnormalities (CNAs) between cRCC from
VHL patients and sporadic cRCC cases without detectable somatic VHL mutations, we
analyzed 34 cRCC with Affymetrix 250K arrays. To increase the power of the study,
we then combined our results with those of a previously published study and
compared CNAs in VHL and non-VHL related cRCC using the genomic identification of
significant targets in cancer (GISTIC) program. In VHL, cRCC GISTIC analysis
identified four statistically significant regions of copy number gain and four
statistically significant regions of deletion that occurred in >10% of tumors
analyzed. Sporadic cRCC without detectable VHL mutations had, on average, more
copy number abnormalities than VHL cRCC though the most common regions of
loss/gain (e.g., 3p and 14q loss and 5q gain) were present in both tumor sets.
However, CNAs on chromosome arms 7p (gain) and 8p (loss) were only detected in
VHL RCC. Although individual copy number abnormality peaks contained clear
candidate cancer genes in some cases (e.g., the 3p loss peak in VHL cRCC
contained only six genes including VHL), most peaks contained many genes. To
date, only a minority of the candidate genes included in these peaks have been
analyzed for mutation or epigenetic inactivation in cRCC but TNFRSF10C and DUSP4 
map to the 8p region deleted in VHL cRCC and TP53 and HIF2A (EPAS1) mapped to CNA
loss and gain peaks (chromosomes 17 and 2, respectively) detected in sporadic VHL
wild-type cRCC.

PMID: 21456047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cancer Res. 2011 May 1;71(9):3287-95. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2646. Epub
2011 Mar 3.

Large-scale exploration of gene-gene interactions in prostate cancer using a
multistage genome-wide association study.

Ciampa J(1), Yeager M, Amundadottir L, Jacobs K, Kraft P, Chung C, Wacholder S,
Yu K, Wheeler W, Thun MJ, Divers WR, Gapstur S, Albanes D, Virtamo J, Weinstein
S, Giovannucci E, Willett WC, Cancel-Tassin G, Cussenot O, Valeri A, Hunter D,
Hoover R, Thomas G, Chanock S, Chatterjee N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Human Services, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, USA.

Recent genome-wide association studies have identified independent susceptibility
loci for prostate cancer that could influence risk through interaction with
other, possibly undetected, susceptibility loci. We explored evidence of
interaction between pairs of 13 known susceptibility loci and single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) across the genome to generate hypotheses about the
functionality of prostate cancer susceptibility regions. We used data from Cancer
Genetic Markers of Susceptibility: Stage I included 523,841 SNPs in 1,175 cases
and 1,100 controls; Stage II included 27,383 SNPs in an additional 3,941 cases
and 3,964 controls. Power calculations assessed the magnitude of interactions our
study is likely to detect. Logistic regression was used with alternative methods 
that exploit constraints of gene-gene independence between unlinked loci to
increase power. Our empirical evaluation demonstrated that an empirical Bayes
(EB) technique is powerful and robust to possible violation of the independence
assumption. Our EB analysis identified several noteworthy interacting SNP pairs, 
although none reached genome-wide significance. We highlight a Stage II
interaction between the major prostate cancer susceptibility locus in the
subregion of 8q24 that contains POU5F1B and an intronic SNP in the transcription 
factor EPAS1, which has potentially important functional implications for 8q24.
Another noteworthy result involves interaction of a known prostate cancer
susceptibility marker near the prostate protease genes KLK2 and KLK3 with an
intronic SNP in PRXX2. Overall, the interactions we have identified merit
follow-up study, particularly the EPAS1 interaction, which has implications not
only in prostate cancer but also in other epithelial cancers that are associated 
with the 8q24 locus.

PMCID: PMC3085580
PMID: 21372204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biomaterials. 2011 May;32(14):3547-54. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.01.056.
Epub 2011 Feb 15.

In vivo molecular evidence of delayed titanium implant osseointegration in
compromised bone.

Vandamme K(1), Holy X, Bensidhoum M, Logeart-Avramoglou D, Naert IE, Duyck JA,
Petite H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bioengineering and Biomechanics for Bone Articulation (B2OA -
UMR CNRS 7052), University Paris Diderot, 10 Avenue de Verdun, 75010 Paris,
France. katleen.vandamme@med.kuleuven.be

Optimization of implant osseointegration in patients with reduced bone healing
potential is a challenge remaining in implant dentistry. Identification of the
genes that are modulated during implant osseointegration in normal versus
osteopenic bone is needed to successfully address these pertinent clinical needs.
The present study aimed to assess the initial and early molecular events
following titanium implant installation in normal and compromised bone in a rat
tibia model. Peri-implant tissue from a well-defined tissue regeneration
compartment was analyzed at 2 and 7 days post-surgery for the expression of
select markers of inflammation, angiogenesis, bone resorption and bone formation.
Impaired bone was induced by hindlimb unloading and validated using µCT. The
essential step of angiogenesis preceding bone regeneration was evidenced for the 
peri-implant setting in healthy bone. Compromised bone significantly affected the
angiogenesis-osteogenesis coupling in the initial phase (2 days post-surgery),
with altered expressions of Vegfa and Epas1 coinciding with downregulated
expressions of Col1a1, Bmp2, Bmp4, Alpl and Bglap. At 7 days post-implantation,
differences between normal and compromised peri-implant bone were no longer
observed. This in vivo molecular evidence of delayed implant osseointegration in 
compromised bone reassert modern strategies in implant development, such as
surface modifications and bioengineered approaches, to improve implant
osseointegration in compromised conditions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21324523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Apr 4;52(5):2109-17. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-6222.

HIF1A is essential for the development of the intermediate plexus of the retinal 
vasculature.

Caprara C(1), Thiersch M, Lange C, Joly S, Samardzija M, Grimm C.

Author information: 
(1)Lab for Retinal Cell Biology, Department of Ophthalmology, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. christian.caprara@usz.ch

PURPOSE: HIF1A is one of the major transcription factors that regulate tissue
response to low oxygen tension. It controls expression of a large number of genes
involved in cell survival, proliferation, angiogenesis, and other cellular
processes. HIF1A is present at increased levels in the early postnatal retina. In
this study its potential function during postnatal development of the mouse
retina and retinal vasculature was analyzed.
METHODS: A mouse line was generated with a Cre-mediated Hif1a knockdown in the
peripheral retina. Retinal morphology and vasculature were analyzed in sections
and flat mount preparations. Gene and protein expression were determined by
real-time PCR and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: The Cre-mediated knockdown caused a significant reduction in Hif1a gene 
expression and HIF1A protein levels in the early postnatal retina. Retinal
morphology was normal but the Hif1a knockdown prevented the formation of the
intermediate vascular plexus in the peripheral retina. The primary plexus and the
outer plexus were less affected. The Hif1a knockdown did not affect expression of
such angiogenesis-related genes as vascular endothelial growth factor (Vegf) but 
strongly induced expression of erythropoietin (Epo). At the protein level, EPAS1 
(HIF2A) was stabilized in the Hif1a knockdown mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that HIF1A may be directly or indirectly
required for normal development of the retinal vasculature, especially of the
intermediate plexus. EPO but not VEGF may play a significant role in the
development of this phenotype. HIF1A may not be the main factor that regulates
Vegf expression during retinal development in the mouse.

PMID: 21212189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nat Genet. 2011 Jan;43(1):60-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.723. Epub 2010 Dec 5.

Genome-wide association study of renal cell carcinoma identifies two
susceptibility loci on 2p21 and 11q13.3.

Purdue MP, Johansson M, Zelenika D, Toro JR, Scelo G, Moore LE, Prokhortchouk E, 
Wu X, Kiemeney LA, Gaborieau V, Jacobs KB, Chow WH, Zaridze D, Matveev V,
Lubinski J, Trubicka J, Szeszenia-Dabrowska N, Lissowska J, Rudnai P, Fabianova
E, Bucur A, Bencko V, Foretova L, Janout V, Boffetta P, Colt JS, Davis FG,
Schwartz KL, Banks RE, Selby PJ, Harnden P, Berg CD, Hsing AW, Grubb RL 3rd,
Boeing H, Vineis P, Clavel-Chapelon F, Palli D, Tumino R, Krogh V, Panico S,
Duell EJ, Quirós JR, Sanchez MJ, Navarro C, Ardanaz E, Dorronsoro M, Khaw KT,
Allen NE, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, Peeters PH, Trichopoulos D, Linseisen J,
Ljungberg B, Overvad K, Tjønneland A, Romieu I, Riboli E, Mukeria A, Shangina O, 
Stevens VL, Thun MJ, Diver WR, Gapstur SM, Pharoah PD, Easton DF, Albanes D,
Weinstein SJ, Virtamo J, Vatten L, Hveem K, Njølstad I, Tell GS, Stoltenberg C,
Kumar R, Koppova K, Cussenot O, Benhamou S, Oosterwijk E, Vermeulen SH, Aben KK, 
van der Marel SL, Ye Y, Wood CG, Pu X, Mazur AM, Boulygina ES, Chekanov NN,
Foglio M, Lechner D, Gut I, Heath S, Blanche H, Hutchinson A, Thomas G, Wang Z,
Yeager M, Fraumeni JF Jr, Skryabin KG, McKay JD, Rothman N, Chanock SJ, Lathrop
M, Brennan P.

We conducted a two-stage genome-wide association study of renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) in 3,772 affected individuals (cases) and 8,505 controls of European
background from 11 studies and followed up 6 SNPs in 3 replication studies of
2,198 cases and 4,918 controls. Two loci on the regions of 2p21 and 11q13.3 were 
associated with RCC susceptibility below genome-wide significance. Two correlated
variants (r² = 0.99 in controls), rs11894252 (P = 1.8 × 10<U+207B>8) and rs7579899 (P = 
2.3 × 10<U+207B><U+2079>), map to EPAS1 on 2p21, which encodes hypoxia-inducible-factor-2
alpha, a transcription factor previously implicated in RCC. The second locus,
rs7105934, at 11q13.3, contains no characterized genes (P = 7.8 × 10<U+207B>¹4). In
addition, we observed a promising association on 12q24.31 for rs4765623, which
maps to SCARB1, the scavenger receptor class B, member 1 gene (P = 2.6 × 10<U+207B>8).
Our study reports previously unidentified genomic regions associated with RCC
risk that may lead to new etiological insights.

PMCID: PMC3049257
PMID: 21131975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Physiol Genomics. 2011 Jan 1;43(2):77-86. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00077.2010. Epub 2010 Nov 16.

Combined mRNA and microRNA profiling reveals that miR-148a and miR-20b control
human mesenchymal stem cell phenotype via EPAS1.

Giraud-Triboult K(1), Rochon-Beaucourt C, Nissan X, Champon B, Aubert S, Piétu G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM/UEVE U, Evry, France.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are present in a wide variety of tissues during
development of the human embryo starting as early as the first trimester. Gene
expression profiling of these cells has focused primarily on the molecular signs 
characterizing their potential heterogeneity and their differentiation potential.
In contrast, molecular mechanisms participating in the emergence of MSC identity 
in embryo are still poorly understood. In this study, human embryonic stem cells 
(hESs) were differentiated toward MSCs (ES-MSCs) to compare the genetic patterns 
between pluripotent hESs and multipotent MSCs by a large genomewide expression
profiling of mRNAs and microRNAs (miRNAs). After whole genome differential
transcriptomic analysis, a stringent protocol was used to search for genes
differentially expressed between hESs and ES-MSCs, followed by several validation
steps to identify the genes most specifically linked to the MSC phenotype. A
network was obtained that encompassed 74 genes in 13 interconnected
transcriptional systems that are likely to contribute to MSC identity. Pairs of
negatively correlated miRNAs and mRNAs, which suggest miRNA-target relationships,
were then extracted and validation was sought with the use of Pre-miRs. We report
here that underexpression of miR-148a and miR-20b in ES-MSCs, compared with ESs, 
allows an increase in expression of the EPAS1 (Endothelial PAS domain 1)
transcription factor that results in the expression of markers of the MSC
phenotype specification.

PMID: 21081659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Biol Res Nurs. 2011 Apr;13(2):134-9. doi: 10.1177/1099800410385448. Epub 2010 Nov
1.

Gene expression in first trimester preeclampsia placenta.

Founds SA(1), Terhorst LA, Conrad KP, Hogge WA, Jeyabalan A, Conley YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Promotion and Development, School of Nursing, University 
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. foundss@pitt.edu

BACKGROUND: The goal of this study was to further validate eight candidate genes 
identified in a microarray analysis of first trimester placentas in preeclampsia.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Surplus chorionic villus sampling (CVS) specimens of 4 women
subsequently diagnosed with preeclampsia (PE) and 8 control women (C) without
preeclampsia analyzed previously by microarray and 24 independent additional
control samples (AS) were submitted for confirmatory studies by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: Downregulation was significant in FSTL3 in PE as compared to C and AS (p
= .04). PAEP was downregulated, but the difference was only significant between C
and AS (p = .002) rather than between PE and either of the control groups.
Expression levels for CFH, EPAS1, IGFBP1, MMP12, and SEMA3C were not
statistically different among groups, but trends were consistent with microarray 
results; there was no anti-correlation. S100A8 was not measurable in all samples,
probably because different probes and primers were needed.
CONCLUSIONS: This study corroborates reduced FSTL3 expression in the first
trimester of preeclampsia. Nonsignificant trends in the other genes may require
follow-up in studies powered for medium or medium/large effect sizes. qRT-PCR
verification of the prior microarray of CVS may support the placental origins of 
preeclampsia hypothesis. Replication is needed for the candidate genes as
potential biomarkers of susceptibility, early detection, and/or individualized
care of maternal-infant preeclampsia.

PMCID: PMC3598011
PMID: 21044967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Biol Evol. 2011 Feb;28(2):1075-81. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msq290. Epub 2010 Oct 
28.

Genetic variations in Tibetan populations and high-altitude adaptation at the
Himalayas.

Peng Y(1), Yang Z, Zhang H, Cui C, Qi X, Luo X, Tao X, Wu T, Ouzhuluobu, Basang, 
Ciwangsangbu, Danzengduojie, Chen H, Shi H, Su B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology and Kunming Primate Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Kunming, China.

Modern humans have occupied almost all possible environments globally since
exiting Africa about 100,000 years ago. Both behavioral and biological
adaptations have contributed to their success in surviving the rigors of climatic
extremes, including cold, strong ultraviolet radiation, and high altitude. Among 
these environmental stresses, high-altitude hypoxia is the only condition in
which traditional technology is incapable of mediating its effects. Inhabiting at
>3,000-m high plateau, the Tibetan population provides a widely studied example
of high-altitude adaptation. Yet, the genetic mechanisms underpinning long-term
survival in this environmental extreme remain unknown. We performed an analysis
of genome-wide sequence variations in Tibetans. In combination with the reported 
data, we identified strong signals of selective sweep in two hypoxia-related
genes, EPAS1 and EGLN1. For these two genes, Tibetans show unusually high
divergence from the non-Tibetan lowlanders (Han Chinese and Japanese) and possess
high frequencies of many linked sequence variations as reflected by the
Tibetan-specific haplotypes. Further analysis in seven Tibetan populations (1,334
individuals) indicates the prevalence of selective sweep across the Himalayan
region. The observed indicators of natural selection on EPAS1 and EGLN1 suggest
that during the long-term occupation of high-altitude areas, the functional
sequence variations for acquiring biological adaptation to high-altitude hypoxia 
have been enriched in Tibetan populations.

PMID: 21030426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Biol Evol. 2011 Feb;28(2):1003-11. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msq277. Epub 2010 Oct 
20.

A genome-wide search for signals of high-altitude adaptation in Tibetans.

Xu S(1), Li S, Yang Y, Tan J, Lou H, Jin W, Yang L, Pan X, Wang J, Shen Y, Wu B, 
Wang H, Jin L.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Sciences and Max Planck Society Partner Institute for
Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. xushua@picb.ac.cn

Genetic studies of Tibetans, an ethnic group with a long-lasting presence on the 
Tibetan Plateau which is known as the highest plateau in the world, may offer a
unique opportunity to understand the biological adaptations of human beings to
high-altitude environments. We conducted a genome-wide study of 1,000,000 genetic
variants in 46 Tibetans (TBN) and 92 Han Chinese (HAN) for identifying the
signals of high-altitude adaptations (HAAs) in Tibetan genomes. We discovered the
most differentiated variants between TBN and HAN at chromosome 1q42.2 and 2p21.
EGLN1 (or HIFPH2, MIM 606425) and EPAS1 (or HIF2A, MIM 603349), both related to
hypoxia-inducible factor, were found most differentiated in the two regions,
respectively. Strong positive correlations were also observed between the
frequency of TBN-dominant haplotypes in the two gene regions and altitude in East
Asian populations. Linkage disequilibrium and further haplotype network analyses 
of world-wide populations suggested the antiquity of the TBN-dominant haplotypes 
and long-term persistence of the natural selection. Finally, a "dominant
haplotype carrier" hypothesis could describe the role of the two genes in HAA.
All of our population genomic and statistical analyses indicate that EPAS1 and
EGLN1 are most likely responsible for HAA of Tibetans. Interestingly, one each
but not both of the two genes were also identified by three recent studies. We
reanalyzed the available data and found the escaped top signal (EPAS1) could be
recaptured with data quality control and our approaches. Based on this
experience, we call for more attention to be paid to controlling data quality and
batch effects introduced in public data integration. Our results also suggest
limitations of extended haplotype homozygosity-based method due to its
compromised power in case the natural selection initiated long time ago and
particularly in genomic regions with recombination hotspots.

PMID: 20961960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2010 Dec;18(12):1552-6. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2010.10.006. Epub 2010 Oct 13.

HIF-2a as a possible therapeutic target of osteoarthritis.

Saito T(1), Kawaguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Bone & Cartilage Regenerative Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Endochondral ossification, a conversion process from nonvascularized
and hypoxic cartilage to highly vascularized bone, plays a crucial role in
osteoarthritis (OA) development as well as in physiological skeletal growth. We
have shown that hypoxia-inducible factor-2a (HIF-2a, encoded by EPAS1) is an
extensive regulator of the endochondal ossification process. Here we review the
possible signaling network regulating OA development on the axis of HIF-2a.
METHODS: Peer reviewed publications published prior to August 2010 were searched 
in the Pubmed database. Articles that were relevant to HIF and molecular
mechanisms of the endochondral ossification and OA were selected.
RESULTS: As a trigger of OA, mechanical stress may induce the upstream NF-<U+03BA>B
signal and HIF-2a expression in joint cartilage of mice and humans, which causes 
transactivation of endochondral ossification-related molecules with the most
potent ß-subunit partner aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator-like (ARNTL). In
contrast to HIF-2a, HIF-1a functions to maintain cartilage via a distinct
mechanism, so that the shifting of the HIFs might possibly be involved in an OA
pathogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Signals on the HIF-2a axis from NF-<U+03BA>B signaling to the endochondral
ossification-related molecules, possibly in combination with HIF-2a and ARNTL,
may represent a rational therapeutic target for OA with minimal effects on
physiological skeletal homeostasis.

Copyright © 2010 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20950696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Science. 2010 Jul 2;329(5987):75-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1190371.

Sequencing of 50 human exomes reveals adaptation to high altitude.

Yi X(1), Liang Y, Huerta-Sanchez E, Jin X, Cuo ZX, Pool JE, Xu X, Jiang H,
Vinckenbosch N, Korneliussen TS, Zheng H, Liu T, He W, Li K, Luo R, Nie X, Wu H, 
Zhao M, Cao H, Zou J, Shan Y, Li S, Yang Q, Asan, Ni P, Tian G, Xu J, Liu X,
Jiang T, Wu R, Zhou G, Tang M, Qin J, Wang T, Feng S, Li G, Huasang, Luosang J,
Wang W, Chen F, Wang Y, Zheng X, Li Z, Bianba Z, Yang G, Wang X, Tang S, Gao G,
Chen Y, Luo Z, Gusang L, Cao Z, Zhang Q, Ouyang W, Ren X, Liang H, Zheng H, Huang
Y, Li J, Bolund L, Kristiansen K, Li Y, Zhang Y, Zhang X, Li R, Li S, Yang H,
Nielsen R, Wang J, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China.

Comment in
    Science. 2010 Sep 17;329(5998):1467; author reply 1467-8.
    High Alt Med Biol. 2010 Winter;11(4):307-8.
    Science. 2010 Jul 2;329(5987):40-1.

Residents of the Tibetan Plateau show heritable adaptations to extreme altitude. 
We sequenced 50 exomes of ethnic Tibetans, encompassing coding sequences of 92%
of human genes, with an average coverage of 18x per individual. Genes showing
population-specific allele frequency changes, which represent strong candidates
for altitude adaptation, were identified. The strongest signal of natural
selection came from endothelial Per-Arnt-Sim (PAS) domain protein 1 (EPAS1), a
transcription factor involved in response to hypoxia. One single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) at EPAS1 shows a 78% frequency difference between Tibetan and 
Han samples, representing the fastest allele frequency change observed at any
human gene to date. This SNP's association with erythrocyte abundance supports
the role of EPAS1 in adaptation to hypoxia. Thus, a population genomic survey has
revealed a functionally important locus in genetic adaptation to high altitude.

PMCID: PMC3711608
PMID: 20595611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 22;107(25):11459-64. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1002443107. Epub 2010 Jun 7.

Natural selection on EPAS1 (HIF2alpha) associated with low hemoglobin
concentration in Tibetan highlanders.

Beall CM(1), Cavalleri GL, Deng L, Elston RC, Gao Y, Knight J, Li C, Li JC, Liang
Y, McCormack M, Montgomery HE, Pan H, Robbins PA, Shianna KV, Tam SC, Tsering N, 
Veeramah KR, Wang W, Wangdui P, Weale ME, Xu Y, Xu Z, Yang L, Zaman MJ, Zeng C,
Zhang L, Zhang X, Zhaxi P, Zheng YT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
44106-7125, USA.

Comment in
    High Alt Med Biol. 2010 Winter;11(4):307-8.

By impairing both function and survival, the severe reduction in oxygen
availability associated with high-altitude environments is likely to act as an
agent of natural selection. We used genomic and candidate gene approaches to
search for evidence of such genetic selection. First, a genome-wide allelic
differentiation scan (GWADS) comparing indigenous highlanders of the Tibetan
Plateau (3,200-3,500 m) with closely related lowland Han revealed a genome-wide
significant divergence across eight SNPs located near EPAS1. This gene encodes
the transcription factor HIF2alpha, which stimulates production of red blood
cells and thus increases the concentration of hemoglobin in blood. Second, in a
separate cohort of Tibetans residing at 4,200 m, we identified 31 EPAS1 SNPs in
high linkage disequilibrium that correlated significantly with hemoglobin
concentration. The sex-adjusted hemoglobin concentration was, on average, 0.8
g/dL lower in the major allele homozygotes compared with the heterozygotes. These
findings were replicated in a third cohort of Tibetans residing at 4,300 m. The
alleles associating with lower hemoglobin concentrations were correlated with the
signal from the GWADS study and were observed at greatly elevated frequencies in 
the Tibetan cohorts compared with the Han. High hemoglobin concentrations are a
cardinal feature of chronic mountain sickness offering one plausible mechanism
for selection. Alternatively, as EPAS1 is pleiotropic in its effects, selection
may have operated on some other aspect of the phenotype. Whichever of these
explanations is correct, the evidence for genetic selection at the EPAS1 locus
from the GWADS study is supported by the replicated studies associating function 
with the allelic variants.

PMCID: PMC2895075
PMID: 20534544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. BMC Genomics. 2010 May 26;11:331. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-331.

Functional and gene network analyses of transcriptional signatures characterizing
pre-weaned bovine mammary parenchyma or fat pad uncovered novel inter-tissue
signaling networks during development.

Piantoni P(1), Bionaz M, Graugnard DE, Daniels KM, Everts RE, Rodriguez-Zas SL,
Lewin HA, Hurley HL, Akers M, Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

BACKGROUND: The neonatal bovine mammary fat pad (MFP) surrounding the mammary
parenchyma (PAR) is thought to exert proliferative effects on the PAR through
secretion of local modulators of growth induced by systemic hormones. We used
bioinformatics to characterize transcriptomics differences between PAR and MFP
from approximately 65 d old Holstein heifers. Data were mined to uncover
potential crosstalk through the analyses of signaling molecules preferentially
expressed in one tissue relative to the other.
RESULTS: Over 9,000 differentially expressed genes (DEG; False discovery rate
<or= 0.05) were found of which 1,478 had a >or=1.5-fold difference between PAR
and MFP. Within the DEG highly-expressed in PAR vs. MFP (n = 736) we noted
significant enrichment of functions related to cell cycle, structural
organization, signaling, and DNA/RNA metabolism. Only actin cytoskeletal
signaling was significant among canonical pathways. DEG more highly-expressed in 
MFP vs. PAR (n = 742) belong to lipid metabolism, signaling, cell movement, and
immune-related functions. Canonical pathways associated with metabolism and
signaling, particularly immune- and metabolism-related were
significantly-enriched. Network analysis uncovered a central role of MYC, TP53,
and CTNNB1 in controlling expression of DEG highly-expressed in PAR vs. MFP.
Similar analysis suggested a central role for PPARG, KLF2, EGR2, and EPAS1 in
regulating expression of more highly-expressed DEG in MFP vs. PAR. Gene network
analyses revealed putative inter-tissue crosstalk between cytokines and growth
factors preferentially expressed in one tissue (e.g., ANGPTL1, SPP1, IL1B in PAR 
vs. MFP; ADIPOQ, IL13, FGF2, LEP in MFP vs. PAR) with DEG preferentially
expressed in the other tissue, particularly transcription factors or pathways
(e.g., MYC, TP53, and actin cytoskeletal signaling in PAR vs. MFP; PPARG and
LXR/RXR Signaling in MFP vs. PAR).
CONCLUSIONS: Functional analyses underscored a reciprocal influence in
determining the biological features of MFP and PAR during neonatal development.
This was exemplified by the potential effect that the signaling molecules
(cytokines, growth factors) released preferentially (i.e., more highly-expressed)
by PAR or MFP could have on molecular functions or signaling pathways enriched in
the MFP or PAR. These bidirectional interactions might be required to coordinate 
mammary tissue development under normal circumstances or in response to
nutrition.

PMCID: PMC2890563
PMID: 20504330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Nat Med. 2010 Jun;16(6):678-86. doi: 10.1038/nm.2146. Epub 2010 May 23.

Transcriptional regulation of endochondral ossification by HIF-2alpha during
skeletal growth and osteoarthritis development.

Saito T(1), Fukai A, Mabuchi A, Ikeda T, Yano F, Ohba S, Nishida N, Akune T,
Yoshimura N, Nakagawa T, Nakamura K, Tokunaga K, Chung UI, Kawaguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Sensory & Motor System Medicine, University of Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2010 Jun;16(6):641-4.
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010 Jul;9(7):517.
    Nat Med. 2011 Jan;17(1):26-7; author reply 27-9.
    Nat Med. 2011 Jan;17(1):25-6; author reply 27-9.
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010 Aug;6(8):435.

Chondrocyte hypertrophy followed by cartilage matrix degradation and vascular
invasion, characterized by expression of type X collagen (COL10A1), matrix
metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
respectively, are central steps of endochondral ossification during normal
skeletal growth and osteoarthritis development. A COL10A1 promoter assay
identified hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha (HIF-2alpha, encoded by EPAS1) as the 
most potent transactivator of COL10A1. HIF-2alpha enhanced promoter activities of
COL10A1, MMP13 and VEGFA through specific binding to the respective
hypoxia-responsive elements. HIF-2alpha, independently of oxygen-dependent
hydroxylation, was essential for endochondral ossification of cultured
chondrocytes and embryonic skeletal growth in mice. HIF-2alpha expression was
higher in osteoarthritic cartilages versus nondiseased cartilages of mice and
humans. Epas1-heterozygous deficient mice showed resistance to osteoarthritis
development, and a functional single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the human
EPAS1 gene was associated with knee osteoarthritis in a Japanese population. The 
EPAS1 promoter assay identified RELA, a nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) family 
member, as a potent inducer of HIF-2alpha expression. Hence, HIF-2alpha is a
central transactivator that targets several crucial genes for endochondral
ossification and may represent a therapeutic target for osteoarthritis.

PMID: 20495570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nat Med. 2010 Jun;16(6):687-93. doi: 10.1038/nm.2153. Epub 2010 May 23.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha is a catabolic regulator of osteoarthritic
cartilage destruction.

Yang S(1), Kim J, Ryu JH, Oh H, Chun CH, Kim BJ, Min BH, Chun JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Dynamics Research Center, School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of
Science and Technology, Gwangju, Korea.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010 Jul;9(7):517.
    Nat Med. 2011 Jan;17(1):25-6; author reply 27-9.
    Nat Med. 2010 Jun;16(6):641-4.

Osteoarthritic cartilage destruction is caused by an imbalance between anabolic
and catabolic factors. Here, we show that hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha
(HIF-2alpha, encoded by EPAS1) is a catabolic transcription factor in the
osteoarthritic process. HIF-2alpha directly induces the expression in
chondrocytes of genes encoding catabolic factors, including matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP1, MMP3, MMP9, MMP12 and MMP13), aggrecanase-1 (ADAMTS4), 
nitric oxide synthase-2 (NOS2) and prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase-2 (PTGS2).
HIF-2alpha expression was markedly increased in human and mouse osteoarthritic
cartilage, and its ectopic expression triggered articular cartilage destruction
in mice and rabbits. Moreover, mice transgenic for Epas1 only in chondrocytes
showed spontaneous cartilage destruction, whereas heterozygous genetic deletion
of Epas1 in mice suppressed cartilage destruction caused by destabilization of
the medial meniscus (DMM) or collagenase injection, with concomitant modulation
of catabolic factors. Our results collectively demonstrate that HIF-2alpha causes
cartilage destruction by regulating crucial catabolic genes.

PMID: 20495569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Am J Pathol. 2010 May;176(5):2292-301. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090972. Epub 2010
Apr 2.

HIF1A overexpression is associated with poor prognosis in a cohort of 731
colorectal cancers.

Baba Y(1), Nosho K, Shima K, Irahara N, Chan AT, Meyerhardt JA, Chung DC,
Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Tissue hypoxia commonly occurs in tumors. Hypoxia- inducible factor (HIF)-1 and
HIF-2, which are essential mediators of cellular response to hypoxia, regulate
gene expression for tumor angiogenesis, glucose metabolism, and resistance to
oxidative stress. Their key regulatory subunits, HIF1A (HIF-1alpha) and
endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1; HIF-2alpha), are overexpressed and
associated with patient prognosis in a variety of cancers. However, prognostic or
molecular features of colon cancer with HIF expression remain uncertain. Among
731 colorectal cancers in two prospective cohort studies, 142 (19%) tumors showed
HIF1A overexpression, and 322 (46%) showed EPAS1 overexpression by
immunohistochemistry. HIF1A overexpression was significantly associated with
higher colorectal cancer-specific mortality in Kaplan-Meier analysis (log-rank
test, P < 0.0001), univariate Cox regression (hazard ratio = 1.84; 95% confidence
interval, 1.37 to 2.47; P < 0.0001) and multivariate analysis (adjusted hazard
ratio = 1.72; 95% confidence interval, 1.26 to 2.36; P = 0.0007) that adjusted
for clinical and tumoral features, including microsatellite instability, TP53
(p53), PTGS2 (cyclooxygenase-2), CpG island methylator phenotype, and KRAS, BRAF,
PIK3CA, and LINE-1 methylation. In contrast, EPAS1 expression was not
significantly associated with patient survival. In addition, HIF1A expression was
independently associated with PTGS2 expression (P = 0.0035), CpG island
methylator phenotype-high (P = 0.013), and LINE-1 hypomethylation (P = 0.017).
EPAS1 expression was inversely associated with high tumor grade (P = 0.0017) and 
obesity (body mass index > or = 30 kg/m2) (P = 0.039). In conclusion, HIF1A
expression is independently associated with poor prognosis in colorectal cancer, 
suggesting HIF1A as a biomarker with potentially important therapeutic
implications.

PMCID: PMC2861094
PMID: 20363910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jun;82(6):1227-36. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.079202. Epub
2010 Feb 24.

EPAS1 Is Required for Spermatogenesis in the Postnatal Mouse Testis.

Gruber M(1), Mathew LK, Runge AC, Garcia JA, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Spermatogenesis, a process involving the differentiation of spermatogonial stem
cells into mature spermatozoa, takes place throughout masculine life. A complex
system in the testis, including endocrine signaling, physical interactions
between germ and somatic cells, spermatocyte meiosis, and timely release of
spermatozoa, controls this cycle. We demonstrate herein that decreased O(2)
levels and Epas1 activation are critical components of spermatogenesis. Postnatal
Epas1 ablation leads to male infertility, with reduced testis size and weight.
While immature spermatogonia and spermatocytes are present in Epas1(Delta/Delta) 
testes, spermatid and spermatozoan numbers are dramatically reduced. This is not 
due to germ cell-intrinsic defects. Rather, Epas(Delta/Delta) Sertoli cells
exhibit decreased ability to form tight junctions, thereby disrupting the
blood-testis barrier necessary for proper spermatogenesis. Reduced numbers of
tight junction complexes are due to decreased expression of multiple genes
encoding tight junction proteins, including TJP1 (ZO1), TJP2 (ZO2), and occludin.
Furthermore, Epas1(Delta/Delta) testes exhibit disrupted basement membranes
surrounding the seminiferous tubules, causing the premature release of
incompletely differentiated germ cells. We conclude that low O(2) levels in the
male gonad regulate germ cell homeostasis in this organ via EPAS1.

PMCID: PMC2874504
PMID: 20181618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Hepatology. 2010 Jan;51(1):255-66. doi: 10.1002/hep.23249.

Inhibition of poly adenosine diphosphate-ribose polymerase decreases
hepatocellular carcinoma growth by modulation of tumor-related gene expression.

Quiles-Perez R(1), Muñoz-Gámez JA, Ruiz-Extremera A, O'Valle F, Sanjuán-Nuñez L, 
Martín-Alvarez AB, Martín-Oliva D, Caballero T, Muñoz de Rueda P, León J,
Gonzalez R, Muntané J, Oliver FJ, Salmerón J.

Author information: 
(1)San Cecilio University Hospital, Granada, Spain.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is associated with a poor prognosis due to a lack 
of effective treatment options. In HCC a significant role is played by DNA damage
and the inflammatory response. Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) is an
important protein that regulates both these mechanisms. The objective of this
study was to examine the effect of pharmacology PARP-1 inhibition on the
reduction of tumor volume of HCC xenograft and on the hepatocarcinogenesis
induced by diethyl-nitrosamine (DEN). Pharmacologic PARP-1 inhibition with DPQ
greatly reduces tumor xenograft volume with regard to a nontreated xenograft (394
mm(3) versus 2,942 mm(3), P < 0.05). This observation was paralleled by
reductions in xenograft mitosis (P = 0.02) and tumor vasculogenesis (P = 0.007,
confirmed by in vitro angiogenesis study), as well as by an increase in the
number of apoptotic cells in DPQ-treated mice (P = 0.04). A substantial
difference in key tumor-related gene expression (transformed 3T3 cell double
minute 2 [MDM2], FLT1 [vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1, VEGFR1],
epidermal growth factor receptor [EPAS1]/hypoxia-inducible factor 2 [HIF2A],
EGLN1 [PHD2], epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR], MYC, JUND, SPP1 [OPN],
hepatocyte growth factor [HGF]) was found between the control tumor xenografts
and the PARP inhibitor-treated xenografts (data confirmed in HCC cell lines using
PARP inhibitors and PARP-1 small interfering RNA [siRNA]). Furthermore, the
results obtained in mice treated with DEN to induce hepatocarcinogenesis showed, 
after treatment with a PARP inhibitor (DPQ), a significant reduction both in
preneoplastic foci and in the expression of preneoplastic markers and
proinflammatory genes (Gstm3, Vegf, Spp1 [Opn], IL6, IL1b, and Tnf),
bromodeoxyuridine incorporation, and NF-kappaB activation in the initial steps of
carcinogenesis (P < 0.05).CONCLUSION: This study shows that PARP inhibition is
capable of controlling HCC growth and preventing tumor vasculogenesis by
regulating the activation of different genes involved in tumor progression.

PMID: 20034026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 17;4(11):e7856. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007856.

Correlating global gene regulation to angiogenesis in the developing chick
extra-embryonic vascular system.

Javerzat S(1), Franco M, Herbert J, Platonova N, Peille AL, Pantesco V, De Vos J,
Assou S, Bicknell R, Bikfalvi A, Hagedorn M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U920, Laboratoire des Mécanismes Moléculaires de l'Angiogenèse,
Université Bordeaux 1, Talence, France.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2010;5(3). doi:
10.1371/annotation/110bdc8c-b16e-4043-816c-a3f8105ca061.

BACKGROUND: Formation of blood vessels requires the concerted regulation of an
unknown number of genes in a spatial-, time- and dosage-dependent manner.
Determining genes, which drive vascular maturation is crucial for the
identification of new therapeutic targets against pathological angiogenesis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: [corrected] We accessed global gene regulation
throughout maturation of the chick chorio-allantoic membrane (CAM), a highly
vascularized tissue, using pan genomic microarrays. Seven percent of analyzed
genes showed a significant change in expression (>2-fold, FDR<5%) with a peak
occurring from E7 to E10, when key morphogenetic and angiogenic genes such as
BMP4, SMO, HOXA3, EPAS1 and FGFR2 were upregulated, reflecting the state of an
activated endothelium. At later stages, a general decrease in gene expression
occurs, including genes encoding mitotic factors or angiogenic mediators such as 
CYR61, EPAS1, MDK and MYC. We identified putative human orthologs for 77% of
significantly regulated genes and determined endothelial cell enrichment for 20% 
of the orthologs in silico. Vascular expression of several genes including ENC1, 
FSTL1, JAM2, LDB2, LIMS1, PARVB, PDE3A, PRCP, PTRF and ST6GAL1 was demonstrated
by in situ hybridization. Up to 9% of the CAM genes were also overexpressed in
human organs with related functions, such as placenta and lung or the thyroid.
21-66% of CAM genes enriched in endothelial cells were deregulated in several
human cancer types (P<.0001). Interfering with PARVB (encoding parvin, beta)
function profoundly changed human endothelial cell shape, motility and
tubulogenesis, suggesting an important role of this gene in the angiogenic
process.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study underlines the complexity of gene regulation 
in a highly vascularized organ during development. We identified a restricted
number of novel genes enriched in the endothelium of different species and
tissues, which may play crucial roles in normal and pathological angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2774277
PMID: 19924294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Physiol Genomics. 2009 Dec 30;40(1):48-60. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00094.2009. Epub 2009 Oct 13.

Effect of PPARgamma inhibition on pulmonary endothelial cell gene expression:
gene profiling in pulmonary hypertension.

Tian J(1), Smith A, Nechtman J, Podolsky R, Aggarwal S, Snead C, Kumar S, Elgaish
M, Oishi P, Göerlach A, Fratz S, Hess J, Catravas JD, Verin AD, Fineman JR, She
JX, Black SM.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Vascular Disease Program, Vascular Biology Center, Medical College
of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor type gamma (PPARgamma) is a subgroup
of the PPAR transcription factor family. Recent studies indicate that loss of
PPARgamma is associated with the development of pulmonary hypertension (PH). We
hypothesized that the endothelial dysfunction associated with PPARgamma
inhibition may play an important role in the disease process by altering cellular
gene expression and signaling cascades. We utilized microarray analysis to
determine if PPARgamma inhibition induced changes in gene expression in pulmonary
arterial endothelial cells (PAEC). We identified 100 genes and expressed sequence
tags (ESTs) that were upregulated by >1.5-fold and 21 genes and ESTs that were
downregulated by >1.3-fold (P < 0.05) by PPARgamma inhibition. The upregulated
genes can be broadly classified into four functional groups: cell cycle,
angiogenesis, ubiquitin system, and zinc finger proteins. The genes with the
highest fold change in expression: hyaluronan-mediated motility receptor (HMMR), 
VEGF receptor 2 (Flk-1), endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1), basic
fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2), and caveolin-1 in PAEC were validated by real
time RT-PCR. We further validated the upregulation of HMMR, Flk-1, FGF2, and
caveolin-1 by Western blot analysis. In keeping with the microarray results,
PPARgamma inhibition led to re-entry of cell cycle at G(1)/S phase and cyclin C
upregulation. PPARgamma inhibition also exacerbated VEGF-induced endothelial
barrier disruption. Finally we confirmed the downregulation of PPARgamma and the 
upregulation of HMMR, Flk-1, FGF2, and Cav-1 proteins in the peripheral lung
tissues of an ovine model of PH. In conclusion, we have identified an array of
endothelial genes modulated by attenuated PPARgamma signaling that may play
important roles in the development of PH.

PMCID: PMC2807211
PMID: 19825830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Kardiologiia. 2009;49(9):27-38.

[Comparative transcriptome analysis of human aorta atherosclerotic lesions and
peripheral blood leukocytes from essential hypertension patients].

[Article in Russian]

Timofeeva AV, Goriunova LE, Khaspekov GL, Il'inskaia OP, Sirotkin VN, Andreeva
ER, Tararak EM, Bulkina OS, Buza VV, Britareva VV, Karpov IuA, Bibilashvili RSh.

One of the major cardiovascular risk factor which predisposes to and accelerates 
atherosclerosis is arterial hypertension (AH). To determine the molecular basis
of the crosslink between AH and atherosclerosis for the development of new
treatment strategies large-scale transcriptome analysis of the cells implicated
in atherogenesis is needed. We used cDNA microarray technique for simultaneous
analysis of gene expression in human abdominal aorta normal sites and
atherosclerotic lesions of different histological types, as well as in peripheral
blood leukocytes from patients with essential hypertension (EH) and donors. The
microarray data were verified by quantitative RT-PCR (reverse transcription
coupled with polymerase chain reaction) and immunohistochemical analysis.
Differential expression of 40 genes has been found, among which twenty two genes 
demonstrated up-regulation and 18 genes demonstrated down-regulation in
atherosclerotic aorta compared with normal vessel. New gene-candidates,
implicated in atherogenesis, have been identified - FPRL2, CD37, CD53, RGS1,
LCP1, SPI1, CTSA, EPAS1, FHL1, GEM, RHOB, SPARCL1, ITGA8, PLN, and COL14A1. These
genes participate in cell migration and adhesion, phenotypic changes of smooth
muscle cells, immune and inflammatory reactions, oxidative processes and
extracellular matrix remodeling. We have found increased expression levels of
CD53, SPI1, FPRL2, SPP1, CTSD, ACP5, LCP1, CTSA and LIPA genes in peripheral
blood leukocytes from EH patients and in atherosclerotic lesions of human aorta. 
The majority of these genes significantly (p<0.005) positively (r>0.5) correlated
with AH stage as well as with histological grading of atherosclerotic lesions.

PMID: 19772500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Reproduction. 2010 Jan;139(1):85-97. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0300.

Hypoxia inducible factors regulate pluripotency and proliferation in human
embryonic stem cells cultured at reduced oxygen tensions.

Forristal CE(1), Wright KL, Hanley NA, Oreffo RO, Houghton FD.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Development, Stem Cells and Regeneration, School of Medicine,
University of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, Duthie Building (MP
808), Tremona Road, Southampton, SO16 6YD, UK.

Human embryonic stem (hES) cells are routinely cultured under atmospheric, 20%
oxygen tensions but are derived from embryos which reside in a 3-5% oxygen
(hypoxic) environment. Maintenance of oxygen homeostasis is critical to ensure
sufficient levels for oxygen-dependent processes. This study investigates the
importance of specific hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) in regulating the hypoxic
responses of hES cells. We report that culture at 20% oxygen decreased hES cell
proliferation and resulted in a significantly reduced expression of SOX2, NANOG
and POU5F1 (OCT4) mRNA as well as POU5F1 protein compared with hypoxic
conditions. HIF1A protein was not expressed at 20% oxygen and displayed only a
transient, nuclear localisation at 5% oxygen. HIF2A (EPAS1) and HIF3A displayed a
cytoplasmic localisation during initial hypoxic culture but translocated to the
nucleus following long-term culture at 5% oxygen and were significantly
upregulated compared with cells cultured at 20% oxygen. Silencing of HIF2A
resulted in a significant decrease in both hES cell proliferation and POU5F1,
SOX2 and NANOG protein expression while the early differentiation marker, SSEA1, 
was concomitantly increased. HIF3A upregulated HIF2A and prevented HIF1A
expression with the knockdown of HIF3A resulting in the reappearance of HIF1A
protein. In summary, these data demonstrate that a low oxygen tension is
preferential for the maintenance of a highly proliferative, pluripotent
population of hES cells. While HIF3A was found to regulate the expression of both
HIF1A and HIF2A, it is HIF2A which regulates hES cell pluripotency as well as
proliferation under hypoxic conditions.

PMCID: PMC2791494
PMID: 19755485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biochem. 2009 Dec;146(6):839-44. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvp129. Epub 2009 Aug 11.

Cyclic AMP represses the hypoxic induction of hypoxia-inducible factors in PC12
cells.

Torii S(1), Okamura N, Suzuki Y, Ishizawa T, Yasumoto K, Sogawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku 
University, Japan.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is a master regulator for hypoxic activation
of genes for angiogenesis, hormone synthesis, glycolysis and cell survival. In
addition to hypoxic stimulus, various effectors and reagents were reported to
affect HIF-1 activity. Here, we show that cyclic AMP (cAMP) down-regulates the
HIF-1 activity in pheochromocytoma PC12 cells but not in Hep3B and HeLa cells.
Hypoxia response element-dependent reporter activity was decreased by the
addition of dibutyryl cAMP. Expression of protein kinase A (PKA) catalytic
alpha-subunits repressed the HIF-1 activity. HIF-1alpha and HLF (HIF-2alpha or
EPAS1) protein levels were decreased by the treatment with dibutyryl cAMP.
Although CREB was served as a negative factor for the HIF-1 activity, it may not 
be a major PKA target in the cAMP-dependent HIF-alpha repression pathway.
Induction of hypoxia responsive genes was suppressed by dibutyryl cAMP. Our
results provide additional insight into a regulatory mechanism of hypoxic
response.

PMID: 19671538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Placenta. 2009 Sep;30(9):806-15. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2009.06.006. Epub 2009
Jul 18.

Ablation of Stat3 by siRNA alters gene expression profiles in JEG-3 cells: a
systems biology approach.

Jiang K(1), Krous LC, Knowlton N, Chen Y, Frank MB, Cadwell C, Centola M, Jarvis 
JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Rheumatology Research, University of
Oklahoma College of Medicine, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. kaiyu-jiang@ouhsc.edu

Control of inflammation at the maternal-fetal interface is a critical element in 
mammalian pregnancy. Previous work from our laboratory has shown that Stat3 may
be a placental mediator involved in maintaining immunologic homeostasis at the
maternal-fetal interface. The aim of the current study is to further elucidate
the role of Stat3 in response to inflammation. As ablation of Stat3 in mice
results in embryonic lethality, we evaluated the role of Stat3 in vitro using an 
siRNA approach. Trophoblast-like JEG-3 cells were transfected with an siRNA
construct specific to Stat3. Experimental and control cells were exposed to
conditioned medium from PHA-activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells and
incubated for 45 min. Cells were then collected and RNA isolated for
transcriptional profiling using human Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 GeneChips.
Differences in gene expression between control and Stat3-ablated cells were
evaluated using conventional statistical methods. Fifty-two genes were detected
as up-regulated in conditioned medium in both mock transfected and in Stat3 siRNA
transfected JEG-3 cells. Two genes (EPAS1 and RASGEF1B) were up-regulated only in
cells transfected with negative control siRNA, while 36 genes were up-regulated
only in cells transfected with Stat3 siRNA. Sixty genes were differentially
expressed between Stat3 siRNA transfected cells relative to mock transfected
cells both in basal and conditioned medium. These included 31 genes up-regulated 
with Stat3 siRNA transfected cells and 29 genes down-regulated with Stat3 siRNA. 
Eleven genes were differentially expressed only in basal medium. Seven of these
were up-regulated in the presence of Stat3 siRNA and four were down-regulated.
Nine genes were differentially expressed only in conditioned medium. Six of these
were up-regulated and three down-regulated in the presence of Stat3 siRNA.
Off-target effects were excluded in a second set of experiments in which Stat3
mRNA was targeted at a different site and quantitative real-time PCR performed on
selected genes derived from the microarray analysis. While some of the genes that
showed differential expression between Stat3-ablated cells and mock transfected
controls were genes typically associated with immune response (e.g., CCR7 and
IRAK1), in silico modeling of the microarray data also revealed complex networks 
of signaling molecules and molecules associated with cellular metabolism
previously seen in transcription factor ablation in model organisms. We conclude 
thus: Stat3 controls a specific gene set in trophoblast-like JEG-3 cells. While
some differentially expressed genes and in silico models of their functions are
consistent with the hypothesis that Stat3 plays a role in regulating
inflammation, Stat3-mediated response to inflammation appears to also involve
complex homeostatic adaptations of a non-immunologic nature.

PMID: 19616846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Cell Mol Med. 2009 Sep;13(9B):3541-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2009.00742.x.
Epub 2009 Mar 6.

Derivation of a novel undifferentiated human foetal phenotype in serum-free
cultures with BMP-2.

Mirmalek-Sani SH(1), Stokes PJ, Tare RS, Ralph EJ, Inglis S, Hanley NA, Houghton 
FD, Oreffo RO.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Development, Stem Cells and Regeneration, Bone and Joint
Research Group, Developmental Origins of Health and Disease Division, University 
of Southampton, Southampton, UK.

Skeletal stem and progenitor populations provide a platform for cell-based tissue
regeneration strategies. Optimized conditions for ex vivo expansion will be
critical and use of serum-free culture may allow enhanced modelling of
differentiation potential. Maintenance of human foetal femur-derived cells in a
chemically defined medium (CDM) with activin A and fibroblast growth factor-2
generated a unique undifferentiated cell population in comparison to basal
cultures, with significantly reduced amino acid depletion, appearance and
turnover, reduced alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and loss of type I and II
collagen expression demonstrated by fluorescence immunocytochemistry. Microarray 
analysis demonstrated up-regulation of CLU, OSR2, POSTN and RABGAP1 and
down-regulation of differentiation-associated genes CRYAB, CSRP1, EPAS1, GREM1,
MT1X and SRGN as validated by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction.
Application of osteogenic conditions to CDM cultures demonstrated partial rescue 
of ALP activity. In contrast, the addition of bone morphogenetic protein-2
(BMP-2) resulted in reduced ALP levels, increased amino acid metabolism and,
strikingly, a marked shift to a cobblestone-like cellular morphology, with
expression of SOX-2 and SOX-9 but not STRO-1 as shown by immunocytochemistry, and
significantly altered expression of metabolic genes (GFPT2, SC4MOL and SQLE),
genes involved in morphogenesis (SOX15 and WIF1) and differentiation potential
(C1orf19, CHSY-2,DUSP6, HMGCS1 and PPL). These studies demonstrate the use of an 
intermediary foetal cellular model for differentiation studies in chemically
defined conditions and indicate the in vitro reconstruction of the mesenchymal
condensation phenotype in the presence of BMP-2, with implications therein for
rescue studies, screening assays and skeletal regeneration research.

PMCID: PMC3430854
PMID: 19438813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Neuroscience. 2009 Aug 18;162(2):396-403. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.04.055. Epub 2009 May 3.

Neuroglobin-overexpression alters hypoxic response gene expression in primary
neuron culture following oxygen glucose deprivation.

Yu Z(1), Liu J, Guo S, Xing C, Fan X, Ning M, Yuan JC, Lo EH, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroprotection Research Laboratory, Department of Neurology and Radiology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Program in Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, 
149 13th Street, Room 2411A, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Neuroglobin (Ngb) is a tissue globin specifically expressed in neurons. Our
laboratory and others have shown that Ngb overexpression protects neurons against
hypoxia/ischemia, but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Recent 
studies demonstrate that hypoxia/ischemia induces a multitude of spatially and
temporally regulated responses in gene expression, and initial evidence suggested
that Ngb might function in altering biological processes of gene expression. In
this study, we asked how Ngb may help regulate genes responsive to hypoxia.
Expression of hypoxic response genes following oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD)
was examined using mRNA arrays in neuroglobin-overexpressing transgenic (Ngb-Tg) 
and wild type (WT) mouse neurons. From a total of 113 genes on the microarray,
mRNA expression of 65 genes was detected. Under rest condition, 14 genes were
downregulated in Ngb-Tg neurons compared to WT. In WT neurons, after 4-h OGD
followed by 4-h reoxygenation (O4/R4), 20 genes were significantly downregulated,
and only Fos mRNA was significantly increased. However, out of the 20
downregulated genes in WT neurons, 12 of them were no longer significantly
changed in Ngb-Tg neurons: Add1, Arnt2, Camk2g, Cstb, Dr1, Epas1, Gna11, Hif1a,
Il6st, Khsrp, Mars and Rara. Among these 12 genes, 8 (Add1, Camk2g, Cstb, Dr1,
Epas1, Gna11, Hif1a, Khsrp) were already reduced in Ngb-Tg neurons compared to WT
under rest conditions. Additionally, three genes that initially showed no changes
in WT neurons (Ctgf, Egfr and Pea15) were downregulated after OGD in the Ngb-Tg
neurons. These findings suggest that Ngb overexpression modulates mRNA expression
of multiple hypoxic response genes in the early phase after OGD/reoxygenation.
Further studies on these gene networks and interactions may lead to better
understanding of Ngb in signaling pathways that contribute to neuroprotection.

PMCID: PMC2787411
PMID: 19401220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Chin Med J (Engl). 2008 Nov 20;121(22):2258-64.

Effect of endothelial PAS domain protein 1 and hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha on
vascular endothelial growth factor expression in human pancreatic carcinoma.

Zhu DM(1), Li DC, Zhang ZX, Zhang XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, China.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factors hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha (HIF 1alpha)
and endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) promote the transcription of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). VEGF enhances angiogenesis and
vascular permeability of tumours, which promotes tumour growth and facilitates
entry of cancer cells into blood circulation and metastasizing. This study
examined whether HIF 1alpha and EPAS1 stimulated angiogenesis through activation 
of VEGF in human pancreatic carcinoma.
METHODS: Specimens from pancreatic carcinoma and healthy parts of same pancreas
were taken from 60 patients. Real time quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction estimated expression of HIF 1alpha, EPAS1, and VEGF
mRNAs. Western blotting and immunohistochemical, streptavidin peroxidase method
assessed expression of HIF 1alpha, EPAS1, and VEGF proteins. Microvessel density 
(MVD) was assessed.
RESULTS: Highly significant increases in expression of EPAS1, VEGF, and MVD were 
found in pancreatic carcinoma tissue but not in normal pancreatic tissue: VEGF at
mRNA and protein levels (t = 17.32, P = 0.0001; t = 98.41, P = 0.0001); EPAS1
protein level (t = 22.51, P = 0.0001). Expression of HIF 1alpha was similar in
pancreatic carcinoma and normal pancreatic tissues at both mRNA and protein
levels. Significant correlations were observed between EPAS1 and VEGF (r = 0.736,
P = 0.0041), between VEGF and MVD (r = 0.858, P = 0.0001), and between EPAS1 and 
MVD (r = 0.641, P = 0.0003). No significant correlations were observed between
HIF 1alpha and VEGF, or between HIF 1alpha and MVD. MVD and expression of EPAS1
and VEGF were significantly related with TNM staging, so was EPASI and VEGF with 
size of tumour.
CONCLUSIONS: EPAS1 and VEGF, but not HIF1alpha, are overexpressed in pancreatic
carcinoma. The expression of EPAS1 is correlated with that of VEGF and MVD. EPAS1
may be involved in the angiogenesis of pancreatic carcinoma by upregulating the
expression of VEGF. Targeting EPAS1 may be a new method of antiangiogenic tumour 
therapy for pancreatic carcinoma.

PMID: 19080330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Pediatr Res. 2009 Feb;65(2):193-7. doi: 10.1203/PDR.0b013e31818d1dbd.

Genetic contributions to the development of retinopathy of prematurity.

Mohamed S(1), Schaa K, Cooper ME, Ahrens E, Alvarado A, Colaizy T, Marazita ML,
Murray JC, Dagle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa 52242, USA.

There is growing support for the role of genetic factors in the development of
retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), a serious visual morbidity resulting from
preterm birth. We used both candidate gene and data-mining approaches to
investigate the role of genetic polymorphisms in the development of ROP. Our
study population consisted of 330 infants, less than 32 wk gestation, and their
parents. We initially studied 24 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 11
candidate genes. Using a family-based analysis strategy, we found an association 
between SNPs in the EPAS1 gene and the development of ROP (p = 0.007). Logistic
regression analysis showed three SNPs associated with development of ROP, two in 
the CFH gene (p = 0.01) and one in the EPAS1 gene (p = 0.001). Extending this
analysis to include genotyping data from a larger genetic study of prematurity
(455 SNPs in 153 genes), we found SNPs in five genes associated with the
development of ROP: IHH (p = 0.003), AGTR1 (p = 0.005), TBX5 (p = 0.003), CETP (p
= 0.004), and GP1BA (p = 0.005). Our data suggest that genetic risk factors
contribute to the development of ROP.

PMCID: PMC2671288
PMID: 18787502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Jul 15;34(2):185-92. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.90201.2008. Epub 2008 May 27.

Serial analysis of the vascular endothelial transcriptome under static and shear 
stress conditions.

Chu TJ(1), Peters DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

We have utilized serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) to analyze the
response of human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs) to laminar shear
stress (LSS). Primary cultures of HCAECs were exposed to 15 dyn/cm(2) LSS for 24 
h in a parallel plate flow chamber and compared with identical same passage cells
cultured under static conditions. The expression levels of a number of functional
categories of genes were reduced by shear stress including those encoding
proteins involved in cell proliferation (CDC10, CDC20, CDC23, CCND1, CCNB1),
angiogenesis (ANGPTL4, CTGF, CYR61, ENG, EPAS1, EGFR, LGALS3, PGK1, and SPARC),
extracellular matrix and cell-matrix adhesion (EFEMP1, LOXL2, P4HB, FBN1, FN1,
ITGA5, ITGAE, ITGAV, ILK, LAMR1) and ATP synthesis (ATP5G3, ATP5J2, ATP5L,
ATP5D). We also observed an increase in the LSS-responsive expression of genes
encoding stress response proteins, including HMOX1, which is significant since
HMOX1 may have anti-inflammatory and vasodilatory vascular effects. The autosomal
dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) genes PKD1 and PKD2 were also elevated
by LSS. ADPKD is associated with vascular malfunction, including the impairment
of vasoreactive processes. To our knowledge, this is the first SAGE-based
analysis of the shear stress-responsive endothelial cell transcriptome. These
immortal data provide a resource for further analyses of the molecular mechanisms
underlying the biological response to LSS and contribute to the expanding
collection of publicly available SAGE data.

PMID: 18505769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008 Jun;49(6):2714-20. doi: 10.1167/iovs.07-1469.
Epub 2008 Feb 15.

HIF-2alpha-haploinsufficient mice have blunted retinal neovascularization due to 
impaired expression of a proangiogenic gene battery.

Dioum EM(1), Clarke SL, Ding K, Repa JJ, Garcia JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390-8573, USA.

PURPOSE: To characterize the effect of HIF-2alpha haploinsufficiency on retinal
neovascularization and angiogenic signaling in neonatal mice.
METHODS: Retinal samples were obtained from HIF-2alpha-haploinsufficient
(Epas1+/-) and wild-type (Epas1+/+) neonatal mice subjected to an oxygen-induced 
retinopathy (OIR) protocol. Histologic and molecular studies were performed
immediately, 12 hours, or 5 days after initiation of the hypoxia phase of the OIR
protocol. Molecular profiling was performed in mouse brain endothelial cells
maintained in normoxia or hypoxia. Transfection studies assessed the response of 
isolated promoter regions from proangiogenic genes to HIF-1alpha or -2alpha
overexpression.
RESULTS: Epas1+/- mice exhibited no significant differences in retinal
vasculature during normal development but had reduced retinal neovascularization 
in an OIR protocol. Multiple proangiogenic factors were induced during the
hypoxia phase in Epas1+/+ OIR retinal samples, whereas Epas1+/- OIR retinal
samples had absent or blunted induction of these same factors. Several, but not
all, proangiogenic factors were induced in mouse brain endothelial cells after
hypoxia. In transfection assays, most proangiogenic promoter regions were
preferentially activated by HIF-2alpha relative to HIF-1alpha.
CONCLUSIONS: HIF-2alpha deficiency results in reduced neovascularization and
blunted inducibility of multiple proangiogenic factors in the retinas of mice
with OIR. The authors propose that HIF-2alpha is a master regulator of
proangiogenic factors in retinal vascular endothelial cells, the predominant cell
type of the retina in which HIF-2alpha is expressed. Future studies will address 
whether the molecular and functional roles for HIF-2alpha identified from these
studies can be generalized to other pathophysiological states involving
neovascularization.

PMID: 18281611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Reproduction. 2008 Feb;135(2):225-40. doi: 10.1530/REP-07-0415.

Dynamic changes in messenger RNA profiles of bovine endometrium during the
oestrous cycle.

Mitko K(1), Ulbrich SE, Wenigerkind H, Sinowatz F, Blum H, Wolf E, Bauersachs S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology, LMU Munich,
Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 25, 81377 Munich, Germany.

During the oestrous cycle, the bovine endometrium exhibits characteristic
morphological and functional changes, which are mainly induced by progesterone
(P(4)), oestrogens and oxytocin. We studied the response of the endometrium to
this changing hormonal environment at the transcriptome level using a custom-made
cDNA microarray. Endometrium samples were recovered from Simmental heifers on
days 0 (oestrus), 3.5 (metoestrus), 12 (dioestrus) and 18. The latter group was
divided into animals with high (late dioestrus) and low P(4) levels (preoestrus).
Significance analysis of microarrays revealed 269 genes exhibiting significant
changes in their transcript levels during the oestrous cycle in distinct temporal
patterns. Two major types of expression profiles were observed, which showed the 
highest mRNA levels during the oestrus phase or the highest levels during the
luteal phase respectively. A minor group of genes exhibited the highest mRNA
levels on day 3.5. Gene ontology (GO) analyses revealed GO categories related to 
extracellular matrix remodelling, transport, and cell growth and morphogenesis
enriched at oestrus, whereas immune response and particular metabolic pathways
were overrepresented at dioestrus. Generation of gene interaction networks
uncovered the genes possibly involved in endometrial remodelling (e.g. collagen
genes, TNC, SPARC, MMP2, MEP1B, TIMP1, TIMP2, HTRA1), regulation of angiogenesis 
(e.g. ANGPTL2, TEK, NPY, AGT, EPAS1, KLF5 ), regulation of invasive growth (e.g. 
PCSK5, tight junction proteins, GRP, LGALS1, ANXA2, NOV, PLAT, MET, TDGF1, CST6, 
ITGB4), cell adhesion (e.g. MUC16, LGALS3BP) and embryo feeding (e.g. SLC1A1,
SLC11A2, SLC16A1, SEPP1, ENPP1). Localisation of mRNA expression in the
endometrium was analysed for CLDN4, CLDN10, TJP1, PCSK5, MAGED1, and LGALS1.

PMID: 18239051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton. 2008 Feb;65(2):143-55.

Novel interaction partners of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins.

Oeffner F(1), Moch C, Neundorf A, Hofmann J, Koch M, Grzeschik KH.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Human Genetics, University of Marburg, 35037 Marburg, Germany.
oeffner@staff.uni-marburg.de

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare, developmental disorder characterized by
six major symptoms: rod-cone dystrophy, obesity, polydactyly, renal
abnormalities, learning difficulties, and hypogonadism. Secondary features
include cardiac and hepatic anomalies, metabolic disturbancies, and hearing loss.
BBS is genetically heterogeneous with 12 disease genes (BBS1-BBS12) described
thus far. Current data suggest a functional disturbance in ciliary function and
intraflagellar transport being associated with the phenotype. However, the
precise functions of the BBS proteins have yet to be elucidated. This study
focuses on the detection of protein factors interacting with BBS proteins.
Applying yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) technology we found a series of novel,
functionally potentially plausible binding partners of BBS1, BBS2, BBS4, and
BBS7. Protein interactions were supported by coimmunoprecipitation analyses
(ALDOB, EPAS1) and substantiated by colocalization studies at the subcellular
level (ALDOB, EXOC7, FLOT1, KRT18, PAX2). Our work provides new insights into the
understanding of BBS interactions and thus their biological function.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18000879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Int J Oncol. 2007 Dec;31(6):1457-63.

Oncostatin M-induced genes in human astrocytomas.

Krona A(1), Aman P, Orndal C, Josefsson A.

Author information: 
(1)Lundberg Laboratory for Cancer Research, Department of Pathology, Institute of
Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg University, 413 45,
Gothenburg, Sweden. annika.krona@llcr.med.gu.se

Oncostatin M (OSM) is a member of the interleukin-6 (IL-6) cytokine family and
known to be induced in the nervous system as a result of cell stress. OSM is
expressed in most human brain tumors, but the effects on tumor cells are unclear.
The cytokine is known to activate the JAK/STAT signaling pathway by binding to
its receptors gp130/OSMbeta or gp130/LIFRbeta and thereby initiating activation
or suppression of a number of STAT target genes. The objective of the study was
to identify OSM-regulated genes that could help in understanding the function of 
OSM in glioma cells. The glioma cell line, U1242MG was stimulated by OSM and the 
gene expression patterns were analyzed by microarray. In total, nineteen
differentially expressed genes were selected due to high intensity, level of
up/down-regulation and biological functions. The differentially expressed genes
were verified using quantitative PCR. Additional validation of the confirmed
OSM-induced proteins was performed in human astrocytoma tissues by
immunohistochemistry. Among the up-regulated genes were CHI3L1, PLAU, MT2A and
EPAS1. These genes are known to be involved in cell matrix remodeling, migration,
proliferation control and angiogenesis. The results suggest that OSM induces
genes that might contribute to the development and progression of astrocytomas.

PMID: 17982672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Histochem Cytochem. 2007 Dec;55(12):1207-11. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

LacZ transgenic mice and immunoelectron microscopy: an ultrastructural method for
dual localization of beta-galactosidase and horseradish peroxidase.

St John PL(1), Abrahamson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center,
3901 Rainbow Boulevard, MS 3038, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Transgenic animals bearing the reporter gene, LacZ, encoding the histochemical
enzyme, beta-galactosidase, are increasingly becoming available. Similarly,
antibody conjugates consisting of specific IgGs coupled to horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) are widely used for Western blotting, ELISA, and immunohistochemistry. Here
we provide a detailed fixation and histochemical protocol for the simultaneous
electron microscopic visualization and discrimination of beta-galactosidase and
peroxidase reaction products within mouse kidney. After incubation of transgenic 
LacZ tissues with IgG-HRP conjugates, samples were lightly fixed with 2%
paraformaldehyde and 0.4% glutaraldehyde and processed for peroxidase
histochemistry. Tissues underwent beta-galactosidase histochemistry, were refixed
with glutaraldehyde, osmicated, and embedded. In Flk1/LacZ mice, we
immunolocalized anti-laminin beta1 chain IgG-HRP specifically to developing
glomerular basement membranes, whereas Flk1/LacZ was expressed only by glomerular
endothelial cells. In Epas1/LacZ mice, we immunolocalized anti-platelet
endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 specifically to glomerular endothelial
plasma membranes, whereas Epas1/LacZ was expressed by both glomerular endothelial
and mesangial cells. This dual ultrastructural localization technique should be
broadly applicable for immunoelectron microscopic studies in LacZ transgenic
animals, particularly those where LacZ expression and antibody-HRP binding are
both relatively abundant.

PMID: 17827164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Clin Chem. 2007 Oct;53(10):1860-3. Epub 2007 Aug 23.

Genomic profiling of circulating plasma RNA for the analysis of cancer.

Collado M(1), Garcia V, Garcia JM, Alonso I, Lombardia L, Diaz-Uriarte R,
Fernández LA, Zaballos A, Bonilla F, Serrano M.

Author information: 
(1)Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The blood of cancer patients is known to contain fragments of RNA
released from the tumor. The application of genomic profiling techniques to
plasma RNA may allow the unbiased selection of cancer markers in the blood, but
the informative value of genomic profiling of plasma RNA is currently unknown.
METHODS: We used cDNA microarray hybridization to perform genomic profiling of
plasma RNA from colorectal cancer (CRC) patients and from healthy donors. From a 
list of 40 genes differentially upregulated in cancer patients, we randomly
selected 4 genes for further characterization. These 4 markers were analyzed by
quantitative reverse-transcription PCR in a wide set of samples including paired 
samples from the same CRC patients before and after surgical resection of the
tumor.
RESULTS: Three of the selected markers - EPAS1, UBE2D3, and KIAA0101 - were
confirmed by PCR to be significantly increased in cancer compared to healthy
donors. Importantly, 2 of the markers, EPAS1 and UBE2D3, showed a significant
decrease after surgery, returning to the levels of healthy donors. Finally,
supervised class prediction using these 3 markers correctly (77%) assigned
presurgery samples to the CRC group and assigned postsurgery samples from the
same patients to the healthy group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate the usefulness of gene expression profiling
of circulating plasma RNA to find cancer markers of potential clinical value.

PMID: 17717129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. BMC Cancer. 2007 Jul 26;7:139.

HIF2 alpha reduces growth rate but promotes angiogenesis in a mouse model of
neuroblastoma.

Favier J(1), Lapointe S, Maliba R, Sirois MG.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Montreal Heart Institute, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
judith.favier@college-de-france.fr

BACKGROUND: HIF2alpha/EPAS1 is a hypoxia-inducible transcription factor involved 
in catecholamine homeostasis, vascular remodelling, physiological angiogenesis
and adipogenesis. It is overexpressed in many cancerous tissues, but its exact
role in tumour progression remains to be clarified.
METHODS: In order to better establish its function in tumourigenesis and tumour
angiogenesis, we have stably transfected mouse neuroblastoma N1E-115 cells with
the native form of HIF2alpha or with its dominant negative mutant, HIF2alpha
(1-485) and studied their phenotype in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: In vitro studies reveal that HIF2alpha induces neuroblastoma cells
hypertrophy and decreases their proliferation rate, while its inactivation by the
HIF2alpha (1-485) mutant leads to a reduced cell size, associated with an
accelerated proliferation. However, our in vivo experiments show that
subcutaneous injection of cells overexpressing HIF2alpha into syngenic mice,
leads to the formation of tumour nodules that grow slower than controls, but that
are well structured and highly vascularized. In contrast, HIF2alpha
(1-485)-expressing neuroblastomas grow fast, but are poorly vascularized and
quickly tend to extended necrosis.
CONCLUSION: Together, our data reveal an unexpected combination between an
antiproliferative and a pro-angiogenic function of HIF2alpha that actually seems 
to be favourable to the establishment of neuroblastomas in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1950713
PMID: 17655754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Gene Expr Patterns. 2007 Aug;7(7):761-6. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

Expression and hypoxic regulation of hif1alpha and hif2alpha during early blood
and endothelial cell differentiation in chick.

Ota K(1), Nagai H, Sheng G.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, Laboratory for Early Embryogenesis,
Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

HIF1 and HIF2 are major mediators for hypoxia sensing and response. Their roles
in early differentiation of two key cell types involved in oxygen supply in
amniotes, the primitive blood cells and endothelial cells, are unclear. We show
that, in pre-circulation avian embryos, hif1alpha and hif2alpha are expressed in 
embryonic and extraembryonic tissues, respectively. hif2alpha, first identified
as epas1, is not present in endothelial cells at any pre-circulation stage under 
either normoxia or hypoxia conditions. Differentiating blood cells express low
levels of hif2alpha under normoxia, but show a strong and rapid upregulation
under hypoxia. Blood cell differentiation, however, is not affected under either 
hypoxia or hyperoxia conditions.

PMID: 17625986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2007 Jun;23(6):351-5.

Altered expression of angiogenesis-related placental genes in pre-eclampsia
associated with intrauterine growth restriction.

Jarvenpaa J(1), Vuoristo JT, Savolainen ER, Ukkola O, Vaskivuo T, Ryynanen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu,
Finland. jarvenpaa@ppshp.fi

AIM: The normal endovascular invasion of trophoblast cells and spiral artery
remodeling are impaired in pre-eclampsia. Neither the circulating factor secreted
by the placenta nor the cause of the widespread endothelial dysfunction in
pre-eclampsia has yet been identified. In an attempt to identify novel factors,
we performed a gene expression profiling study of placental tissue from women
with and without pre-eclampsia.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study group comprised two pre-eclamptic patients with
intrauterine growth restriction while the control group comprised three healthy
women with uncomplicated pregnancies. Gene expression was studied using
Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2 micro arrays. We focused on genes associated 
with angiogenesis. Some of the micro array analysis results were verified using
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Gene expression profiling revealed that the expression level of nine
genes--ECGF1, JAG1, Palladin, COL18A1, TNFSF12, VEGF, ANPEP, PDGFRA and SERPIN12 
- was downregulated whereas the level of four genes--EPAS1, FLT1, SIGLE10 and
ANG4--was upregulated in the study group compared with the control group. The
real-time RT-PCR results from JAG1, COL18A1 and FLT1 genes were in accordance
with the gene expression results.
CONCLUSION: Our results show new targets for research to understand the
mechanisms leading to pre-eclampsia.

PMID: 17616861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 Jun 21;13(23):3176-82.

Prognostic significance of HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 expression in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Bangoura G(1), Liu ZS, Qian Q, Jiang CQ, Yang GF, Jing S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery and Liver Cancer Laboratory, Zhong Nan Hospital,
Wuhan University School of Medicine, Wuhan 430071, Hubei Province, China.

AIM: To evaluate the prognostic significance of HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 expression in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: Surgical specimens from 315 patients with HCC as well as 196 adjacent
noncancerous lesions and 22 cases of normal liver tissue were investigated by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) for HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 using a standard detection
system. Correlations with clinicopathological factors, VEGF, microvessel density 
(MVD), and prognosis were analyzed.
RESULTS: Immunoreactivity of HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 was positive in 69.5% of HCC, 55.6%
of adjacent noncancerous tissue, and 0% of normal liver tissue. And it was
significantly correlated with tumor grade, venous invasion, intrahepatic
metastasis, necrosis, and capsule infiltration. Correlation analysis of
HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 with angiogenic factor VEGF (P<0.001), and MVD (P=0.016) was
also noted. HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 protein was less frequently expressed in low MVD
cases, whereas a high rate of expression was noted in cases with both medium and 
high MVD (P=0.042). By Kaplan-Meier analysis, strong HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 staining
(>50% of tumor cells) in HCC correlated with a shortened survival in patients
(Cox's regression, P<0.001, r=3.699).
CONCLUSION: We conclude that HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 expression may play an important
role in tumor progression and prognosis of HCC. Assessment of HIF-2alpha/EPAS1
expression in HCC may be used as a diagnostic tool and possibly a target in the
treatment of HCC.

PMCID: PMC4436602
PMID: 17589895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007 May;14(5):420-6. Epub 2007 Apr 8.

Iron-regulatory proteins limit hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha expression in iron
deficiency.

Sanchez M(1), Galy B, Muckenthaler MU, Hentze MW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, Im Neuenheimer Feld 153, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

Hypoxia stimulates erythropoiesis, the major iron-utilization pathway. We report 
the discovery of a conserved, functional iron-responsive element (IRE) in the 5' 
untranslated region of the messenger RNA encoding endothelial PAS domain
protein-1, EPAS1 (also called hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha, HIF2alpha). Via
this IRE, iron regulatory protein binding controls EPAS1 mRNA translation in
response to cellular iron availability. Our results uncover a regulatory link
that permits feedback control between iron availability and the expression of a
key transcription factor promoting iron utilization. They also show that an IRE
that is structurally distinct from, for example, the ferritin mRNA IRE and that
has been missed by in silico approaches, can mediate mechanistically similar
responses.

PMID: 17417656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Clin Invest. 2007 Apr;117(4):1068-77.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-2 (HIF-2) regulates hepatic erythropoietin in vivo.

Rankin EB(1), Biju MP, Liu Q, Unger TL, Rha J, Johnson RS, Simon MC, Keith B,
Haase VH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6144, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2007 Apr;117(4):862-5.

Erythropoiesis is critically dependent on erythropoietin (EPO), a glycoprotein
hormone that is regulated by hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF). Hepatocytes are the 
primary source of extrarenal EPO in the adult and express HIF-1 and HIF-2, whose 
roles in the hypoxic induction of EPO remain controversial. In order to define
the role of HIF-1 and HIF-2 in the regulation of hepatic EPO expression, we have 
generated mice with conditional inactivation of Hif-1alpha and/or Hif-2alpha
(Epas1) in hepatocytes. We have previously shown that inactivation of the von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor pVHL, which targets both HIFs for proteasomal
degradation, results in increased hepatic Epo production and polycythemia
independent of Hif-1alpha. Here we show that conditional inactivation of
Hif-2alpha in pVHL-deficient mice suppressed hepatic Epo and the development of
polycythemia. Furthermore, we found that physiological Epo expression in infant
livers required Hif-2alpha but not Hif-1alpha and that the hypoxic induction of
liver Epo in anemic adults was Hif-2alpha dependent. Since other Hif target genes
such phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (Pgk) were Hif-1alpha dependent, we provide
genetic evidence that HIF-1 and HIF-2 have distinct roles in the regulation of
hypoxia-inducible genes and that EPO is preferentially regulated by HIF-2 in the 
liver.

PMCID: PMC1838939
PMID: 17404621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 20;282(16):11750-6. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha regulates expression of the mitochondrial
aconitase chaperone protein frataxin.

Oktay Y(1), Dioum E, Matsuzaki S, Ding K, Yan LJ, Haller RG, Szweda LI, Garcia
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Mice lacking Epas1, encoding the transcription factor Hypoxia-inducible Factor
2alpha (HIF-2alpha), exhibit an apparent mitochondrial disease state.
Similarities between knock-outs of Epas1 and of Sod2, encoding the mitochondrial 
antioxidant enzyme manganese superoxide dismutase, led to the identification of
Sod2 as a HIF-2alpha target gene. However, Sod2 levels in Epas1(-)(/)(-) liver
are intermediate between that of Sod(+)(/)(-) and Sod2(-)(/)(-) mice, which have 
subtle or severe phenotypes, respectively. This suggests that additional
HIF-2alpha target genes besides Sod2 contribute to the Epas1(-)(/)(-)
mitochondrial disease state. To define the nature of the mitochondrial defect in 
Epas1(-)(/)(-) liver, we performed biophysical, biochemical, and molecular
studies. In the setting of decreased Sod2 levels and increased oxidative stress, 
we found reduced respiration, sensitized mitochondrial permeability transition
pore opening, intact electron transport chain activities, and impaired
mitochondrial aconitase activity. Mitochondrial aconitase protein levels were
preserved, whereas mRNA and protein levels for frataxin, the oxidative
stress-regulated mitochondrial aconitase chaperone protein, were markedly reduced
in Epas1(-)(/)(-) livers. The mouse Fxn promoter was preferentially activated by 
HIF-2alpha through a consensus HIF-responsive enhancer element. In summary, the
studies reveal that Fxn, like Sod2, is a nuclear-encoded, mitochondrial-localized
HIF-2alpha target gene required for optimal mitochondrial homeostasis. These
findings expand upon the previously defined role of HIF-2alpha in the cellular
response to oxidative stress and identify a novel link of HIF-2alpha with
mitochondrial homeostasis.

PMID: 17322295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Oncogene. 2007 Jun 7;26(27):3998-4008. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

HOXA1-stimulated oncogenicity is mediated by selective upregulation of components
of the p44/42 MAP kinase pathway in human mammary carcinoma cells.

Mohankumar KM(1), Xu XQ, Zhu T, Kannan N, Miller LD, Liu ET, Gluckman PD, Sukumar
S, Emerald BS, Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)The Liggins Institute and National Research Centre for Growth and Development,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Expression of homeobox A1 (HOXA1) results in oncogenic transformation of
immortalized human mammary epithelial cells with aggressive tumor formation in
vivo. However, the mechanisms by which HOXA1 mediates oncogenic transformation is
not well defined. To identify molecules that could potentially be involved in
HOXA1-mediated oncogenic transformation, microarray analysis was utilized to
characterize and compare the gene expression pattern in response to forced
expression or depletion of HOXA1 in human mammary carcinoma cells. Gene
expression profiling identified that genes involved in the p44/42
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activation pathway (GRB2, MAP kinase
kinase (MEK1) and SDFR1) or p44/42 MAP kinase-regulated genes (IER3, EPAS1, PCNA 
and catalase) are downstream expression targets of HOXA1. Forced expression of
HOXA1 increased GRB2 and MEK1 mRNA and protein expression and increased p44/42
MAP kinase phosphorylation, activity and Elk-1-mediated transcription. Use of a
MEK1 inhibitor demonstrated that increased p44/42 MAP kinase activity is required
for the HOXA1-mediated increase in cell proliferation, survival, oncogenicity and
oncogenic transformation. Thus, modulation of the p44/42 MAP kinase pathway is
one mechanism by which HOXA1 mediates oncogenic transformation of the human
mammary epithelial cell.

PMID: 17213808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2007 Jan;127(1):143-51.

[Transcription factor EPAS1 regulates insulin signaling pathway].

[Article in Japanese]

Wada T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Health Science, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University,
Funabashi City, Japan. taw20@pitt.edu

Obesity, which results from adipose differentiation and adipocyte hypertrophy, is
a primary risk factor of these life-style-diseases. Obesity, is primary risk
factor of these life-style-diseases, results from adipose differentiation and
adipocyte hypertrophy. Adipose differentiation is regulated by several
transcriptional factors, and we have focused here on the roles played by
endothelial PAS domain protein1 (EPAS1) in adipogenesis. EPAS1 was identified as 
a factor responsible for hypoxia responses, such as angiogenesis, here we
demonstrated that EPAS1 is highly induced during adipose differentiation in vivo 
and in vitro. We then analyzed EPAS1 promoter activity during adipose
differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells. We showed that the sequence -478/-445 is
responsible for the up-regulation of EPAS1 expression during adipose
differentiation and that the activity of this region is controlled by Sp1 and
Sp3. To examine whether EPAS1 exerts an influence on adipogenesis, we
overexpressed dominant negative form of EPAS1 in 3T3-L1 cells. The expression of 
EPAS1 (1-485) allowed cells to accumulate only a minimum amount of lipid
droplets. Therefore, induction of EPAS1 expression is necessary for execution of 
adipose differentiation program. The mechanism involves the direct
transcriptional regulation of Glut1, Glut4 and IRS3 genes by EPAS1. These results
also confirmed that the protein level of EPAS1 was increased by insulin
stimulation in adipocytes. Taken together, this result also indicated that EPAS1 
plays a role in the part of insulin action. Therefore, these results suggest that
the quantitative and functional alteration of EPAS1 are involved in metabolic
syndrome occurrence.

PMID: 17202795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Nov;91(11):4593-8. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Expression of HIF-1alpha, HIF-2alpha (EPAS1), and their target genes in
paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma with VHL and SDH mutations.

Pollard PJ(1), El-Bahrawy M, Poulsom R, Elia G, Killick P, Kelly G, Hunt T,
Jeffery R, Seedhar P, Barwell J, Latif F, Gleeson MJ, Hodgson SV, Stamp GW,
Tomlinson IP, Maher ER.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Populations Genetics laboratory, London Research Institute,
Cancer Research UK, London, UK.

CONTEXT: Activation of the hypoxia-inducible transcription factors HIF-1 and
HIF-2 and a HIF-independent defect in developmental apoptosis have been
implicated in the pathogenesis of pheochromocytoma (PCC) associated with VHL,
SDHB, and SDHD mutations.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to compare protein (HIF-1alpha, EPAS1, SDHB, JunB,
CCND1, CD34, CLU) and gene (VEGF, BNIP3) expression patterns in VHL and SDHB/D
associated tumors.
RESULTS: Overexpression of HIF-2 was relatively more common in VHL than SDHB/D
PCC (12 of 13 vs. 14 of 20, P = 0.02), whereas nuclear HIF-1 staining was
relatively more frequent in SDHB/D PCC (19 of 20 vs. 13 of 16, P = 0.04). In
addition, CCND1 and VEGF expression (HIF-2 target genes) was significantly higher
in VHL than in SDHB/D PCC. These findings suggest that VHL inactivation leads to 
preferential HIF-2 activation and CCND1 expression as described previously in
VHL-defective renal cell carcinoma cell lines but not in other cell types. These 
similarities between the downstream consequences of VHL inactivation and HIF
dysregulation in renal cell carcinoma and PCC may explain how inactivation of the
ubiquitously expressed VHL protein results in susceptibility to specific tumor
types. Both VHL and SDHB/D PCC demonstrated reduced CLU and SDHB expression. SDHB
PCC are associated with a high risk of malignancy, and expression of
(proapototic) BNIP3 was significantly lower in SDHB than VHL PCC.
CONCLUSION: Although inactivation of VHL and SDHB/D may disrupt similar
HIF-dependent and HIF-independent signaling pathways, their effects on target
gene expression are not identical, and this may explain the observed clinical
differences in PCC and associated tumors seen with germline VHL and SDHB/D
mutations.

PMID: 16954163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Hum Genet. 2005 Dec;118(3-4):416-23. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

The EPAS1 gene influences the aerobic-anaerobic contribution in elite endurance
athletes.

Henderson J(1), Withford-Cave JM, Duffy DL, Cole SJ, Sawyer NA, Gulbin JP, Hahn
A, Trent RJ, Yu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Clinical Genetics, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital and 
Central Clinical School, The University of Sydney (K25), Camperdown, 2050,
Australia.

EPAS1 is a gene involved in complex oxygen sensing. It is expressed in
microvascular endothelial cells, lung epithelial cells, cardiac myocytes and the 
brain. An association study was undertaken comparing elite endurance athletes
classified into two groups according to a power-time model of performance
intensity: power-time-maximum (PT-MAX; N=242, event duration 50 s to 10 min) and 
power-time-steady state (PT-SS; N=151, event duration ~2-10 h), with normal
controls (N=444) using 12 SNPs across EPAS1. Ordinal regression analysis of
allele frequencies revealed significant differences at SNPs 2 and 3 (P=0.01).
Haplotype analysis revealed the presence of haplotypes involving SNPs 2-5 that
significantly differentiated (P<0.05) the groups based on an ordinal ranking
using the power-time classification. These same haplotypes differentiated the
PT-MAX group in which a significant decrease in a haplotype (F: G-C-C-G; OR=0.57,
P=0.02, 95% CI 0.36-0.92) and increase in a second haplotype (G: A-T-G-G;
OR=1.75, P=0.03, 95% CI 1.05-2.91) was observed compared to controls. The PT-SS
group was differentiated from the PT-MAX group by a third haplotype (H: A-T-G-A; 
OR=0.46, P=0.04, 95% CI 0.22-0.96). Since EPAS1 has a role as a sensor capable of
integrating cardiovascular function, energetic demand, muscle activity and oxygen
availability into physiological adaptation, we propose that DNA variants in EPAS1
influence the relative contribution of aerobic and anaerobic metabolism and hence
the maximum sustainable metabolic power for a given event duration.

PMID: 16208515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Blood. 2005 Apr 15;105(8):3133-40. Epub 2004 Dec 30.

HIF-2alpha regulates murine hematopoietic development in an
erythropoietin-dependent manner.

Scortegagna M(1), Ding K, Zhang Q, Oktay Y, Bennett MJ, Bennett M, Shelton JM,
Richardson JA, Moe O, Garcia JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-8573, USA.

Erythropoiesis in the adult mammal depends critically on erythropoietin, an
inducible cytokine with pluripotent effects. Erythropoietin gene expression
increases under conditions associated with lowered oxygen content such as anemia 
and hypoxia. HIF-1alpha, the founding member of the hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF) alpha class, was identified by its ability to bind and activate the
hypoxia-responsive enhancer in the erythropoietin regulatory region in vitro. The
existence of multiple HIF alpha members raises the question of which HIF alpha
member or members regulates erythropoietin expression in vivo. We previously
reported that mice lacking wild-type HIF-2alpha, encoded by the EPAS1 gene,
exhibit pancytopenia. In this study, we have characterized the etiology of this
hematopoietic phenotype. Molecular studies of EPAS1-null kidneys reveal
dramatically decreased erythropoietin gene expression. EPAS1-null as well as
heterozygous mice have impaired renal erythropoietin induction in response to
hypoxia. Treatment of EPAS1-null mice with exogenous erythropoietin reverses the 
hematopoietic and other defects. We propose that HIF-2alpha is an essential
regulator of murine erythropoietin production. Impairments in HIF signaling,
involving either HIF-1alpha or HIF-2alpha, may play a prominent role in
conditions involving altered hematopoietic or erythropoietin homeostasis.

PMID: 15626745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 24;279(39):40946-53. Epub 2004 Jul 15.

EPAS1 promotes adipose differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells.

Shimba S(1), Wada T, Hara S, Tezuka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University, 7-7-1
Narashinodai, Funabashi, Chiba 274-8555, Japan.

Adipose differentiation is regulated by several transcription factors, such as
the CAAT/enhancer-binding protein family and peroxisome proliferator activator
(PPAR) gamma2. Several recent studies have shown that the basic
helix-loop-helix-PAS superfamily is also involved in the regulation of adipose
differentiation. In this study, we investigated the roles played by EPAS1
(endothelial PAS domain protein 1) in adipogenesis. EPAS1, also referred to as
hypoxia-inducible factor 2alpha, is a transcription factor known to play
essential roles in catecholamine homeostasis, vascular remodeling, and the
maintenance of reactive oxygen species, and so forth. During adipose
differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells, the level of EPAS1 mRNA began to increase 6 days
after the induction, and EPAS1 was highly expressed in differentiated cells. To
examine whether EPAS1 is involved in adipogenesis, we first isolated stable
clones from 3T3-L1 cells in which we could induce the expression of an EPAS1
C-terminal deletion mutant (designated EPAS1-(1-485)) with the insect hormone.
The induction of EPAS1-(1-485) allowed the cells to accumulate only minimum
amounts of intracellular lipid droplets. Consistent with the morphological
observations, a minimum amount of aP2 and PPARgamma2 mRNA was induced in the
EPAS1-(1-485) cells. We then examined whether or not EPAS1 was able to promote
adipogenesis in NIH 3T3 cells, a relatively nonadipogenic cell line.
Overexpression of EPAS1 in NIH 3T3 cells induced a significant amount of lipid
accumulation compared with that of the control cells in the presence of the
PPARgamma ligand. The results were also confirmed by measuring the expression of 
adipocyte-related genes. Adenovirus-mediated EPAS1-(1-485) expression resulted in
the reduction of basal and insulin-dependent glucose transport in 3T3-L1
adipocytes. The mechanism involved the transcriptional regulation of GLUT1,
GLUT4, and IRS3 expression by EPAS1. Taken together, these results suggest that
EPAS1 plays several supporting roles in maintaining specific aspects of
adipogenesis and adipocyte function including regulation of glucose uptake
followed by lipid synthesis.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 15258146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Circ Res. 2004 Jul 23;95(2):146-53. Epub 2004 Jun 10.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 gene promotes angiogenesis through the
transactivation of both vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptor,
Flt-1.

Takeda N(1), Maemura K, Imai Y, Harada T, Kawanami D, Nojiri T, Manabe I, Nagai
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Japan.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) is a basic-helix-loop-helix/PAS domain
transcription factor that is expressed preferentially in vascular endothelial
cells. EPAS1 shares high homology with hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
(HIF-1alpha) and is reported to transactivate vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF), fetal liver kinase-1 (Flk-1), and Tie2 promoters. In this study, we
analyzed the role of EPAS1 in the process of angiogenesis. Using microarray
technology, we looked for target genes regulated by EPAS1 in vascular endothelial
cells. A total of 130 genes were upregulated by EPAS1, including fms-like
tyrosine kinase-1 (Flt-1). Reporter analysis using human Flt-1 promoter and gel
mobility shift assays showed that the heterodimer of EPAS1 and aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator binds directly to HIF-1-binding site upstream of
Flt-1 promoter and transactivates it. Small interfering RNA targeted to EPAS1 but
not HIF-1alpha attenuated desferrioxamine-induced Flt-1 mRNA expression, thus
EPAS1 is thought to play an essential role in hypoxic induction of Flt-1 gene.
Furthermore, using mouse wound healing models, we demonstrated that
adenovirus-mediated delivery of EPAS1 gene significantly induced the expression
of VEGF, Flt-1, Flk-1, and Tie2 mRNA at the wound site and promoted mature
angiogenesis. The proportion of the number of mural cells in newly formed vessels
was significantly higher in EPAS1-treated wound area than VEGF-treated area. In
conclusion, EPAS1 promotes Flt-1 gene expression and induces mRNA expression of
VEGF, Flk-1, and Tie2, leading to enhancement of mature angiogenesis in vivo.
Thus, EPAS1 may contribute to the construction of mature vessels by modulating
the coordinated expressions of VEGF, Flt-1, Flk-1, and Tie2.

PMID: 15192019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2004 Aug;31(2):209-15. Epub 2004 Mar 23.

The PAI-1 gene as a direct target of endothelial PAS domain protein-1 in
adenocarcinoma A549 cells.

Sato M(1), Tanaka T, Maemura K, Uchiyama T, Sato H, Maeno T, Suga T, Iso T,
Ohyama Y, Arai M, Tamura J, Sakamoto H, Nagai R, Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Gunma University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Endothelial PAS domain protein-1 (EPAS1) regulates transcription of the genes
encoding erythropoietin and vascular endothelial growth factor, which are
important for maintaining oxygen homeostasis. We have previously shown that
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) gene expression is induced by hypoxia. 
In this study, we sought to determine whether PAI-1 gene expression is directly
regulated by EPAS1 in cancer cells because activities of proteases and their
inhibitors are tightly regulated for tumor invasion. Hypoxia increased the PAI-1 
mRNA levels in human adenocarcinoma A549 cells. Overexpression of EPAS1
significantly increased the PAI-1 mRNA and protein levels. Transient transfection
assays revealed that EPAS1 increased PAI-1 gene transcription through a sequence 
containing 5'-CACGTACA-3' located at -194 (we refer to it as site HREPAI-1) and
GT-box located at -78. Electrophoretic gel mobility shift assays revealed that
HREPAI-1 serves as a binding site for EPAS1, and Sp1 constitutively binds to
GT-box. In conclusion, PAI-1 expression is induced by EPAS1 through HREPAI-1 and 
through an Sp1-binding site. These results indicate that the PAI-1 gene is a
direct target of EPAS1 and suggest the role of EPAS1 and Sp1 in the hypoxic
response of cancer cells.

PMID: 15039136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. World J Gastroenterol. 2004 Feb 15;10(4):525-30.

Expression of HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Bangoura G(1), Yang LY, Huang GW, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery and Liver Cancer Laboratory, Xiangya Hospital,
Central South University, Changsha 410008, Hunan Province, China.

AIM: To investigate the expression of hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-2alpha/endothelial PAS domain protein1 (EPAS1) in hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC).
METHODS: Expression of HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 was investigated immunohistochemically on
paraffin-embedded sections from 97 patients with HCC. To further confirm that
HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 in HCC tissues also correlated with angiogenesis, a parallel
immunohistchemistry study of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was
performed on these 97 cases.
RESULTS: HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 could be detected in 50 of 97 cases (51.6%), including 
19 weakly positive (19.8%), and 31 strongly positive (31.1%), the other 47 cases 
were negative (48.4%). The expression of HIF-2alpha/EPAS1was significantly
correlated with tumor size, capsule infiltration, portal vein invasion, and
necrosis. A parallel immunohistochemical analysis of VEGF demonstrated its
positive correlation with capsule infiltration, portal vein invasion, and
HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 overexpression, which supported the correlation of
HIF-2alpha/EPAS1up-regulation with tumor angiogenesis. No apparent correlation
was observed between HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 and capsular formation, presence of
cirrhosis, and histological grade.
CONCLUSION: HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 is expressed in most of HCC with capsular
infiltration and portal vein invasion, which indicates a possible role of
HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 in HCC metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4716973
PMID: 14966910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Urol. 2004 Mar;171(3):1080-4.

Prognostic significance of endothelial Per-Arnt-sim domain protein
1/hypoxia-inducible factor-2alpha expression in a subset of tumor associated
macrophages in invasive bladder cancer.

Koga F(1), Kageyama Y, Kawakami S, Fujii Y, Hyochi N, Ando N, Takizawa T, Saito
K, Iwai A, Masuda H, Kihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Reproductive Medicine, Graduate School, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: Endothelial Per-Arnt-Sim domain protein 1 (EPAS1) is induced under
hypoxia and it transactivates a series of genes involved in angiogenesis and
energy metabolism. Recent studies showed that EPAS1 is expressed in tumor
associated macrophages (TAMs), which have multifaceted roles in tumor
progression. We hypothesized that EPAS1 expressed in TAMs may contribute to
bladder cancer progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Clinicopathological and followup data on 69 patients
undergoing radical cystectomy for T1-4N0-2M0 high grade bladder urothelial
carcinoma were reviewed. Quantitative immunohistochemical analysis of TAMs and
EPAS1 was performed separately in invasive front and in other superficial parts
of carcinoma tissues. TAM counts and EPAS1 positive cell counts were compared
with pathological variables and cancer specific survival (CSS).
RESULTS: The 5-year CSS rate in the 69 patients was 69% at a median followup of
58 months (range 2 to 196). EPAS1 expression was restricted to a small subset of 
TAMs. Although TAM counts were not associated with T stage or lymph node
metastasis, EPAS1 expressing TAM counts were significantly associated with higher
T stage. On univariate and multivariate analyses higher EPAS1 expressing TAM
counts in invasive front along with higher T stage and positive lymph node
metastasis were significantly associated with shorter CSS, while total TAM counts
or EPAS1 expressing TAM counts in other superficial parts did not.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite limited prognostic effects of total TAMs EPAS1 expressing
TAMs were associated with a poor prognosis of invasive bladder cancer, suggesting
that EPAS1 expressed in a subset of TAMs mediates bladder cancer progression.

PMID: 14767275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Genomics. 2004 Jan;83(1):1-8.

Genetic amplification of the transcriptional response to hypoxia as a novel means
of identifying regulators of angiogenesis.

White JR(1), Harris RA, Lee SR, Craigon MH, Binley K, Price T, Beard GL, Mundy
CR, Naylor S.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Systems Group, Oxford BioMedica Ltd., OX4 4GA, Oxford, United
Kingdom. j.white@oxfordbiomedica.co.uk

The cellular response to hypoxia involves the promotion of angiogenesis, leading 
to increased blood flow and oxygenation. The macrophage has been identified as an
orchestrator of this response in several pathologies, through the release of
angiogenic factors in response to hypoxia. We have produced the first
comprehensive transcriptome analysis of hypoxic primary human macrophages with
respect to the regulation of angiogenesis. There is a marked induction of genes
encoding factors known to stimulate angiogenesis, rather than factors that
inhibit this process. We show that overexpression of the transcription factor
EPAS1 using a recombinant adenoviral vector amplifies the induction of genes
encoding angiogenic proteins in response to hypoxia. This defines a new strategy 
for enhancing transcriptome and proteome analyses by overexpressing
disease-implicated genes using viral gene transfer methodologies.

PMID: 14667803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Nat Genet. 2003 Dec;35(4):331-40. Epub 2003 Nov 9.

Multiple organ pathology, metabolic abnormalities and impaired homeostasis of
reactive oxygen species in Epas1-/- mice.

Scortegagna M(1), Ding K, Oktay Y, Gaur A, Thurmond F, Yan LJ, Marck BT,
Matsumoto AM, Shelton JM, Richardson JA, Bennett MJ, Garcia JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, Texas 75390-8573, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) transcription factors respond to multiple
environmental stressors, including hypoxia and hypoglycemia. We report that mice 
lacking the HIF family member HIF-2alpha (encoded by Epas1) have a syndrome of
multiple-organ pathology, biochemical abnormalities and altered gene expression
patterns. Histological and ultrastructural analyses showed retinopathy, hepatic
steatosis, cardiac hypertrophy, skeletal myopathy, hypocellular bone marrow,
azoospermia and mitochondrial abnormalities in these mice. Serum and urine
metabolite studies showed hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, altered Krebs cycle
function and dysregulated fatty acid oxidation. Biochemical assays showed
enhanced generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), whereas molecular analyses 
indicated reduced expression of genes encoding the primary antioxidant enzymes
(AOEs). Transfection analyses showed that HIF-2alpha could efficiently
transactivate the promoters of the primary AOEs. Prenatal or postnatal treatment 
of Epas1-/- mice with a superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimetic reversed several
aspects of the null phenotype. We propose a rheostat role for HIF-2alpha that
allows for the maintenance of ROS as well as mitochondrial homeostasis.

PMID: 14608355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Blood. 2003 Sep 1;102(5):1634-40. Epub 2003 May 15.

The HIF family member EPAS1/HIF-2alpha is required for normal hematopoiesis in
mice.

Scortegagna M(1), Morris MA, Oktay Y, Bennett M, Garcia JA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Department of Internal
Medicine, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Hypoxic stress plays a role in pathophysiologic states such as myocardial
infarction and cerebral vascular events as well as in normal physiologic
conditions including development and hematopoiesis. Members of the hypoxia
inducible factor (HIF) family function as transcriptional regulators of genes
involved in the hypoxic response. After generating adult mice that globally lack 
endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1, also known as HIF-2alpha/HRF/HLF/MOP3), 
the second member of the HIF family, characterization of the hematopoietic cell
population indicated that the loss of EPAS1/HIF-2alpha resulted in pancytopenia. 
Using bone marrow reconstitution experiments of lethally irradiated hosts, we
have defined the extent and site of hematopoietic impairment in the
EPAS1/HIF-2alpha null mice. These data suggest a critical role for
EPAS1/HIF-2alpha in maintaining a functional microenvironment in the bone marrow 
for effective hematopoiesis.

PMID: 12750163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Am J Pathol. 2002 Oct;161(4):1235-46.

Angiogenesis and vascular architecture in pheochromocytomas: distinctive traits
in malignant tumors.

Favier J(1), Plouin PF, Corvol P, Gasc JM.

Author information: 
(1)Collège de France and Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale U36, Paris, France. jean-marie.gasc@college-de-france.fr

Angiogenesis is a critical step in tumor growth and metastatic invasion. We here 
report the study of the vascular status of 10 benign and 9 malignant
pheochromocytomas. We examined the vascular architecture after immunostaining
endothelial cells (CD34) and vascular smooth muscle cells (alpha-actin) and
identified a vascular pattern characteristic of malignant lesions. To define a
gene expression profile indicative of the invasive phenotype, we studied by in
situ hybridization the expression of genes encoding several pro- and
anti-angiogenic factors [hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1 alpha), EPAS1, vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), VEGF receptors, angiopoietins and their
receptor Tie2, five genes of the endothelin system, and thrombospondin 1]. A
semiquantitative evaluation of the labeling revealed an induction of genes
encoding EPAS1, VEGF, VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2, endothelin receptor, type B (ETB) and
endothelin receptor, type A (ETA) in malignant pheochromocytomas as compared to
benign tumors. These differences were observed in tumor cells, in endothelial
cells, or in both. Quantification by real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction showed an increase of EPAS1, VEGF, and ETB transcripts of 4.5-,
3.5-, and 10-fold, respectively, in malignant versus benign tumors. Furthermore, 
we observed a strong correlation between the expression of EPAS1 and VEGF in
tumoral tissue and between EPAS1 and ETB in endothelial cells. Altogether, our
observations show that analysis of angiogenesis provides promising new criteria
for the diagnosis of malignant pheochromocytomas.

PMCID: PMC1867278
PMID: 12368197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Jul;34(7):739-48.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) induces adrenomedullin gene expression
in cardiac myocytes: role of EPAS1 in an inflammatory response in cardiac
myocytes.

Tanaka T(1), Akiyama H, Kanai H, Sato M, Takeda S, Sekiguchi K, Yokoyama T,
Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Gunma University School of Medicine,
3-39-15, Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Jul;34(7):703-7.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) has been identified as a member of the
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS protein family, and plays a critical role in
the regulation of hypoxia inducible genes. It remains unknown whether
physiological stimuli other than hypoxia modulate EPAS1 expression. This study
examined the inducible expression of EPAS1 by various cytokines and growth
factors, and determined the target gene for EPAS1 in cardiac myocytes. In
cultured cardiac myocytes, interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) but not tumor necrosis
factor alpha markedly increased the EPAS1 mRNA and protein levels in a time- and 
dose-dependent manner, whereas hypoxia increases the expression of EPAS1 protein 
but not its mRNA. Such an induction of EPAS1 by IL-1beta was efficiently
inhibited by the pretreatment of the cells with Src kinase inhibitors, such as
herbimycin A and PP1. The expression of adrenomedullin (AM) mRNA, which is also
upregulated by IL-1beta, was dramatically increased in cardiac myocytes
transduced with adenovirus expressing EPAS1. Transient transfection assays using 
the site-specific mutation of the AM promoter showed that EPAS1 overexpression
increases the transcriptional activity through a sequence similar to the
consensus HRE (hypoxia responsive element). These results suggest that IL-1beta
induces the EPAS1 at the transcriptional level, which in turn activates the AM
gene. Since IL-1beta has been implicated in the pathogenesis of heart failure and
AM can ameliorate the cardiac function, our results suggest that EPAS1 plays a
role in the adaptation of the cardiac myocytes during heart failure as well as in
the regulation of gene expression by hypoxia.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 12099714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Urology. 2002 May;59(5):774-8.

Positive expression of HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 in invasive bladder cancer.

Xia G(1), Kageyama Y, Hayashi T, Hyochi N, Kawakami S, Kihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Reproductive Medicine, Graduate School Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the expression of hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF)-2alpha/endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) in bladder cancer.
METHODS: Two bladder cancer cell lines (T24, EJ-1) were examined for the
expression of HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 mRNA by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction and HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 protein by Western blot analysis, respectively.
Expression of HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 protein was also investigated
immunohistochemically on paraffin-embedded sections from 24 patients with bladder
cancer.
RESULTS: HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 mRNA and protein could be detected in the two bladder
cell lines under normoxia. The normal urothelium and all 7 superficial cases
(pTis-pTa) were negative for HIF-2alpha/EPAS1. Five of the 8 pT1 cases (62.5%)
and all 9 muscle-invasive cases were positive. The invasive compartment showed
stronger HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 immunoreactivity compared with the superficial
compartment. All the tumor clusters infiltrating to the interstitial tissue among
muscle fibers showed moderate to strong positive staining.
CONCLUSIONS: HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 is mostly expressed in invasive bladder cancer,
which indicates a possible role for HIF-2alpha/EPAS1 in the invasion of bladder
cancer.

PMID: 11992927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 31;277(22):20087-94. Epub 2002 Mar 23.

Activation of vascular endothelial growth factor A transcription in tumorigenic
glioblastoma cell lines by an enhancer with cell type-specific DNase I
accessibility.

Liang Y(1), Li XY, Rebar EJ, Li P, Zhou Y, Chen B, Wolffe AP, Case CC.

Author information: 
(1)Sangamo BioSciences Incorporated, Richmond, California 94804, USA.

Unregulated expression of vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) plays an 
important role in tumor growth. We have identified a cell type-specific enhancer,
HS-1100, that contributes to VEGF-A transcriptional activation in tumorigenic
glioblastoma cell lines. This enhancer exhibits increased accessibility to DNase 
I in glioblastoma cell lines that express high levels of VEGF-A but not in
several other cell lines that express much lower levels of VEGF-A. HS-1100
contains a number of sequence elements that are highly conserved among human,
mouse, and rat, including the hypoxia-response element (HRE). We show that the
HRE contributes significantly to the cell type-specific enhancer activity of
HS-1100 in U87MG glioblastoma cells. We use chromatin immunoprecipitation assays 
to show that endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) can efficiently bind to the
endogenous HRE in U87MG cells but not in HEK293 cells in which the chromosomal
HS-1100 is not accessible to DNase I. A dominant negative EPAS1 significantly
reduces HS-1100 enhancer activity and VEGF-A levels in U87MG cells. Our results
provide insight into the molecular mechanisms of VEGF-A up-regulation during
cancer development.

PMID: 11912213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2002 Jan;26(1):127-34.

Inducible expression of endothelial PAS domain protein-1 by hypoxia in human lung
adenocarcinoma A549 cells. Role of Src family kinases-dependent pathway.

Sato M(1), Tanaka T, Maeno T, Sando Y, Suga T, Maeno Y, Sato H, Nagai R,
Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Gunma University School of Medicine,
Gunma, Japan.

Hypoxia is a potent inducer of tumor angiogenesis, the process of which is mostly
mediated by induction of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). In this
study, we investigated the effect of hypoxia on the expression of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha) and endothelial PAS domain protein-1
(EPAS1). These two similar but distinct basic helix-loop-helix-PAS proteins have 
been postulated to activate VEGF expression in response to hypoxia. We showed
that EPAS1, but not HIF-1alpha, is abundantly expressed in human lung
adenocarcinoma A549 cells. Exposure of cultured A549 cells to hypoxia increased
EPAS1 mRNA and protein levels. A specific inhibitor for Src family kinases, PP1, 
abolished the hypoxia-induced expression of EPAS1. Transient transfection assays 
revealed that forced expression of EPAS1 increased the reporter gene activity
driven by EPAS1 promoter as well as by VEGF promoter. Finally, overexpression of 
EPAS1 by infection of adenoviral vector expressing EPAS1 cDNA evidently induced
the endogenous EPAS1 gene expression. Together, these data demonstrate Src family
kinases mediate the hypoxia-mediated EPAS1 gene expression, which in turn
positively autoregulates its own expression. Given an EPAS1 as a potent activator
of the VEGF gene, these findings will provide a novel insight into the mechanisms
underlying the enhancement of growth property of EPAS1-expressing tumor cells
under the hypoxic environment.

PMID: 11751212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Dev Dyn. 2001 Nov;222(3):377-88.

Coexpression of endothelial PAS protein 1 with essential angiogenic factors
suggests its involvement in human vascular development.

Favier J(1), Kempf H, Corvol P, Gasc JM.

Author information: 
(1)Collège de France and INSERM U36, Paris, France.

Endothelial PAS protein 1 (EPAS1) is a bHLH-PAS transcription factor involved in 
cellular response to hypoxia. Its precise role in angiogenesis is unclear, but
several genes essential to vascular development, including those encoding
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), its receptor VEGFR-2 and Tie2, are
thought to be targets of EPAS1. To investigate whether this transcription factor 
and its putative targets were expressed concomitantly, we performed in situ
hybridization on serial adjacent sections of human embryos at gestational ages of
3 to 6 weeks. We studied expression of the genes encoding EPAS1, VEGF, VEGFR-1,
and -2, Tie2, and its ligands, angiopoietin (Ang) 1 and 2. We also compared these
expression profiles with that of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha).
EPAS1 transcripts were detected in several types of endothelial cell: in blood
vessels walls, the endocardium, the glomeruli of the mesonephros, and the
sinusoids of the liver. In these endothelial cells, expression of EPAS1
systematically or partly coincided with Tie2 and the VEGF receptors expression.
There was also some overlap between the sites of synthesis of EPAS1 and VEGF
mRNAs, principally in hepatocytes and sympathetic ganglion cells. In addition, we
found that EPAS1 and HIF1alpha transcripts were often colocalized, suggesting a
functional redundancy of these two transcription factors during development.
These observations are consistent with transactivation by EPAS1 of the expression
of its putative target genes during embryogenesis, suggesting that this
transcription factor is involved in human angiogenesis. They provide evidence
that EPAS1 is involved in the regulation of vascular maturation, remodeling, or
stabilization rather than in the early steps of embryonic angiogenesis.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11747073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2000 Oct;31(4):334-6.

[A new transcriptional factor--EPAS1].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen W.

PMID: 11372426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;33(4):391-407.

The Ets family contains transcriptional activators and repressors involved in
angiogenesis.

Lelièvre E(1), Lionneton F, Soncin F, Vandenbunder B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1, rue du Professeur Calmette, BP 447, 59021,
Lille Cedex, France.

The Ets family contains a growing number of transcriptional activators and
inhibitors, which activity is regulated by phosphorylation and protein-protein
interactions. Among these factors, Ets1, Erg1 and Fli1 are expressed in
endothelial cells during angiogenesis in normal and pathological development. The
expression of these transcription factors is regulated by angiogenic factors in
cultured endothelial cells, as well as by various stresses occurring during
angiogenesis. Transfection experiments and transgenic mice analysis revealed that
Ets family members are involved in the transcriptional regulation of endothelial 
specific genes such as those encoding Tie1 and -2, VEGFR1 and -2 and VE-Cadherin.
In vitro studies plead for a role of Ets family members in endothelial cell
adhesion, spreading and motility. Gene inactivation experiments show that Ets1 is
dispensable for embryonic development. The phenotype of knocked-out embryos
indicates that Tel is required for maintenance of the developing vascular network
in the yolk sac. Altogether, we suggest that Ets family members act both
positively and negatively during the different steps of the angiogenic process.
The regulation of the initiation of gene transcription arises from the combined
activity of different transcriptional regulators. Therefore very few
transcription factors are specific for a physiological process, or a given cell
type. The transcriptional network that regulates blood vessel formation involves 
transcription factors which are expressed in a variety of situations. The Lung
Kruppel Like Factor (LKLF) which is required for blood vessel stabilisation
during murine development is also expressed in the primitive vertebrae and in the
lung of the adult (C.T. Kuo, M.L. Veselits, K.P. Barton, M.M. Lu, C. Clendenin,
J.M. Leiden, The LKLF transcription factor is required for normal tunica media
formation and blood vessel stabilisation during murine embryogenesis, Genes Dev. 
11 (22) (1997) 2996-3006). Scl/Tal1 which is essential for angiogenic remodelling
of the yolk sac capillary network (J.E. Visvader, Y. Fujiwara, S.H. Orkin,
Unsuspected role for the T-cell leukemia protein SCL/tal-1 in vascular
development, Genes Dev. 12 (4) (1998) 473-479), is involved in blood cell
development and is also expressed in the developing brain. The EPAS transcription
factor which was thought to be endothelial cell specific in the mouse embryo (H. 
Tian, S.L. McKnight, D.W. Russell, Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1), a
transcription factor selectively expressed in endothelial cells, Genes Dev. 11
(1) (1997) 72-82) is also expressed in the liver, kidney and cells of the
sympathetic nervous system of the chick embryo (J. Favier, H. Kempf, P. Corvol,
J.M. Gasc, Cloning and expression pattern of EPAS1 in the chicken embryo.
Colocalization with tyrosine hydroxylase, FEBS Lett. 462 (1-2) (1999) 19-24).
Ets1, which expression was originally detected in lymphoid cells of adult
tissues, has been the first transcription factor to be identified in endothelial 
cells during angiogenesis in the embryo (B. Vandenbunder, L. Pardanaud, T.
Jaffredo, M.A. Mirabel, D. Stehelin, Complementary patterns of expression of
c-etsl, c-myb and c-myc in the blood-forming system of the chick embryo,
Development 107 (1989) 265-274 [5]) and in tumours (N. Wernert, M.B. Raes, P.
Lassalle, M.P. Dehouck, B. Gosselin, B. Vandenbunder, D. Stehelin, The c-ets 1
proto-oncogene is a transcription factor expressed in endothelial cells during
tumor vascularisation and other forms of angiogenesis in man, Am. J. Path. 140
(1992) 119-127 [6]). Since then, the Ets family has extended and this review will
emphasise the relationships between these factors and angiogenesis.

PMID: 11312108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cancer. 2001 Apr 15;91(8):1429-36.

Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor transcription by endothelial PAS
domain protein 1 (EPAS1) and possible involvement of EPAS1 in the angiogenesis of
renal cell carcinoma.

Xia G(1), Kageyama Y, Hayashi T, Kawakami S, Yoshida M, Kihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Reproductive Medicine, Graduate School, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) is a basic
helix-loop-helix/PAS domain transcription factor that expressed most abundantly
in highly vascularized organs. The authors examined the effect of transfection of
EPAS1 cDNA on the endogenous expression of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) in the 293 Tet-Off cell line and the possible involvement of EPAS1 in the 
angiogenesis of renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
METHODS: Complete cDNA of EPAS1 was cloned and transfected to cells from the 293 
Tet-Off fetal kidney cell line, in which the expression of EPAS1 can be inhibited
by doxycycline. The subsequent changes in expression pattern of VEGF and
transferrin receptor (TfR), a target gene of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha
(HIF-1alpha), were examined by semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. In addition,
expression of EPAS1, HIF-1alpha, and VEGF were analyzed by semiquantitative
RT-PCR in five RCC cell lines and in 13 RCC tissue samples. In situ hybridization
was performed on 7 of the 13 RCC tissue samples.
RESULTS: Endogenous VEGF was increased significantly by the introduction of EPAS1
cDNA at both the mRNA level and the protein level. With the inhibition of EPAS1
by doxycycline treatment, the expression of VEGF was significantly decreased
accordingly, whereas the expression of TfR was not affected. EPAS1 was detected
in all of the RCC cell lines examined. In RCC tissue samples, EPAS1 mRNA and VEGF
mRNA were increased significantly in tumor tissues compared with normal adjacent 
kidney tissues. In situ hybridization showed that EPAS1 and VEGF were coexpressed
topographically in tumor tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that endogenous VEGF can be up-regulated
transcriptionally by EPAS1, and EPAS1 may be involved in the angiogenesis of RCC.

Copyright 2001 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 11301389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Cell Signal. 2001 Jan;13(1):23-7.

Hypoxia activates Akt and induces phosphorylation of GSK-3 in PC12 cells.

Beitner-Johnson D(1), Rust RT, Hsieh TC, Millhorn DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, College of Medicine,
University of Cincinnati, P.O. Box 67-0576, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0576, USA.
dana.johnson@uc.edu

Akt is a serine/threonine kinase that has been shown to play a central role in
promoting cell survival and opposing apoptosis. We evaluated the effect of
hypoxia on Akt in rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells. PC12 cells were exposed to
varying levels of hypoxia, including 21%, 15%, 10%, 5%, and 1% O(2). Hypoxia
dramatically increased phosphorylation of Akt (Ser(473)). This effect peaked
after 6 h exposure to hypoxia, but persisted strongly for up to 24 h.
Phosphorylation of Akt was paralleled with a progressive increase in
phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3), one of its downstream
substrates. The effect of hypoxia on phosphorylation of Akt was completely
blocked by pretreatment of the cells with wortmannin (100 nM), indicating that
this effect is mediated by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (P13K). In contrast,
whereas hypoxia also strongly induced phosphorylation of the transcription
factors CREB and EPAS1, these effects persisted in the presence of wortmannin.
Thus, hypoxia regulates both P13K-dependent and P13K-independent signaling
pathways. Furthermore, activation of the P13K and Akt signaling pathways may be
one mechanism by which cells adapt and survive under conditions of hypoxia.

PMID: 11257444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Mar 9;281(4):1057-62.

Cloning of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha cDNA from chick embryonic ventricular 
myocytes.

Takahashi T(1), Sugishita Y, Nojiri T, Shimizu T, Yao A, Kinugawa K, Harada K,
Nagai R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan. toshitak-tky@umin.ac.jp

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is composed of HIF-1alpha and arylhydrocarbon 
nuclear receptor translocator (ARNT), which belong to the
basic-helix-loop-helix-Per/ARNT/Sim (bHLH-PAS) family of transcription factors.
HIF plays key roles in oxygen homeostasis and embryonic cardiovascular
development. In this study, we have cloned cDNAs encoding the chick HIF-1alpha
from cultured embryonic ventricular myocytes (CEVM) and then examined its
expression in various embryonic tissues. The deduced amino acid sequence of the
chick HIF-1alpha cDNA showed 79% identity with that of the human HIF-1alpha cDNA.
In contrast, sequence homology between the chick HIF-1alpha and endothelial PAS
protein 1 (EPAS1), another member of the bHLH-PAS proteins, was only low (49%).
HIF-1alpha mRNA was expressed abundantly in CEVM, but scarcely in the liver,
which was quite different from expression pattern of EPAS1 mRNA. These data
suggest that HIF-1alpha may be involved in embryonic cardiovascular development. 
HIF-1alpha and EPAS1 may play distinct roles during developmental stages.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11237772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2001 Feb;128(2):187-204.

The molecular basis of O2-sensing and hypoxia tolerance in pheochromocytoma
cells.

Conrad PW(1), Conforti L, Kobayashi S, Beitner-Johnson D, Rust RT, Yuan Y, Kim
HW, Kim RH, Seta K, Millhorn DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati,
College of Medicine, P.O. Box 67-0576, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0576, USA.

Hypoxia is a common environmental stimulus. However, very little is known about
the mechanisms by which cells sense and respond to changes in oxygen. Our
laboratory has utilized the PC12 cell line in order to study the biophysical and 
molecular response to hypoxia. The current review summarizes our results. We
demonstrate that the O2-sensitive K(+) channel, Kv1.2, is present in PC12 cells
and plays a critical role in the hypoxia-induced depolarization of PC12 cells.
Previous studies have shown that PC12 cells secrete a variety of
autocrine/paracrine factors, including dopamine, norepinephrine, and adenosine
during hypoxia. We investigated the mechanisms by which adenosine modulates cell 
function and the effect of chronic hypoxia on this modulation. Finally, we
present results identifying the mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs and SAPKs) as hypoxia-regulated protein kinases. Specifically, we show
that p38 and an isoform, p38gamma, are activated by hypoxia. In addition, our
results demonstrate that the p42/p44 MAPK protein kinases are activated by
hypoxia. We further show that p42/p44 MAPK is critical for the hypoxia-induced
transactivation of endothelial PAS-domain protein 1 (EPAS1), a hypoxia-inducible 
transcription factor. Together, these results provide greater insight into the
mechanisms by which cells sense and adapt to hypoxia.

PMID: 11207433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 3;275(9):6381-7.

Cardiovascular basic helix loop helix factor 1, a novel transcriptional repressor
expressed preferentially in the developing and adult cardiovascular system.

Chin MT(1), Maemura K, Fukumoto S, Jain MK, Layne MD, Watanabe M, Hsieh CM, Lee
ME.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Developmental Cardiovascular Biology, Cardiovascular Program of
Developmental Cardiovascular Biology, Cardiology Division, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We have cloned a cardiovascular-restricted basic helix-loop-helix factor that
interacts with arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) in a yeast
two-hybrid screen. Cardiovascular helix-loop-helix factor 1 (CHF1) is distantly
related to the hairy family of transcriptional repressors. We analyzed its
expression pattern during mouse embryo development. At day 8.5, the expression of
CHF1 is first detected in the primitive ventricle of the primordial heart tube
and persists throughout gestation. In rat hearts, this expression is
down-regulated after birth, concurrent with terminal differentiation of
cardiomyocytes. In the developing vasculature, CHF1 first appears in the dorsal
aorta at day 9.0, which precedes the reported expression of smooth muscle cell
markers, and persists into adulthood. In an in vitro system of smooth muscle cell
differentiation, CHF1 mRNA was barely detectable in undifferentiated cells but
was induced highly in differentiated smooth muscle cells. To determine whether
CHF1 might affect the function of ARNT, we performed transfection studies.
Co-transfection of CHF1 inhibited ARNT/EPAS1-dependent transcription by 85%, and 
this inhibition is dose-dependent. In electrophoretic mobility studies, CHF1
inhibited the binding of the ARNT/EPAS1 heterodimer to its target site. Our data 
suggest that CHF1 functions as a transcriptional repressor and may play an
important role in cardiovascular development.

PMID: 10692439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. FEBS Lett. 1999 Nov 26;462(1-2):19-24.

Cloning and expression pattern of EPAS1 in the chicken embryo. Colocalization
with tyrosine hydroxylase.

Favier J(1), Kempf H, Corvol P, Gasc JM.

Author information: 
(1)Collège de France and INSERM U36, 3 rue d'Ulm, 75005, Paris, France.

EPAS1 is a hypoxia-inducible transcription factor, highly expressed in
vasculature and recently shown to be necessary for catecholamine production
during embryogenesis. We report here the cloning and detailed expression pattern 
of this factor in the chicken embryo. We show that chicken EPAS1 presents an
overall identity of 76% with the human sequence and that it is strongly expressed
in the blood vessel wall, mostly in endothelial cells, but also in vascular
smooth muscle cells. Moreover, we report non-vascular expression sites: liver,
kidney, and, quite interestingly, cells of the sympathetic nervous system where
EPAS1 is coexpressed with one of its putative target genes, the tyrosine
hydroxylase. EPAS1 could therefore represent the link between the vascular system
and the sympathetic nervous system, both sensitive to hypoxia.

PMID: 10580084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 19;274(47):33709-13.

EPAS1 trans-activation during hypoxia requires p42/p44 MAPK.

Conrad PW(1), Freeman TL, Beitner-Johnson D, Millhorn DE.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Department of Molecular and
Cellular Physiology, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0576, USA.

Hypoxia is a common environmental stress that regulates gene expression and cell 
function. A number of hypoxia-regulated transcription factors have been
identified and have been shown to play critical roles in mediating cellular
responses to hypoxia. One of these is the endothelial PAS-domain protein 1
(EPAS1/HIF2-alpha/HLF/HRF). This protein is 48% homologous to hypoxia-inducible
factor 1-alpha (HIF1-alpha). To date, virtually nothing is known about the
signaling pathways that lead to either EPAS1 or HIF1-alpha activation. Here we
show that EPAS1 is phosphorylated when PC12 cells are exposed to hypoxia and that
p42/p44 MAPK is a critical mediator of EPAS1 activation. Pretreatment of PC12
cells with the MEK inhibitor, PD98059, completely blocked hypoxia-induced
trans-activation of a hypoxia response element (HRE) reporter gene by transfected
EPAS1. Likewise, expression of a constitutively active MEK1 mimicked the effects 
of hypoxia on HRE reporter gene expression. However, pretreatment with PD98059
had no effect on EPAS1 phosphorylation during hypoxia, suggesting that MAPK
targets other proteins that are critical for the trans-activation of EPAS1. We
further show that hypoxia-induced trans-activation of EPAS1 is independent of
Ras. Finally, pretreatment with calmodulin antagonists nearly completely blocked 
both the hypoxia-induced phosphorylation of MAPK and the EPAS1 trans-activation
of HRE-Luc. These results demonstrate that the MAPK pathway is a critical
mediator of EPAS1 activation and that activation of MAPK and EPAS1 occurs through
a calmodulin-sensitive pathway and not through the GTPase, Ras. These results are
the first to identify a specific signaling pathway involved in EPAS1 activation.

PMID: 10559262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 29;274(44):31565-70.

Generation of a dominant-negative mutant of endothelial PAS domain protein 1 by
deletion of a potent C-terminal transactivation domain.

Maemura K(1), Hsieh CM, Jain MK, Fukumoto S, Layne MD, Liu Y, Kourembanas S, Yet 
SF, Perrella MA, Lee ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1) is a basic helix-loop-helix/PAS domain
transcription factor that is preferentially expressed in vascular endothelial
cells. EPAS1 shares high homology with hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
(HIF-1alpha) and, like HIF-1alpha, has been shown to bind to the HIF-1-binding
site and to activate its downstream genes such as vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) and erythropoietin. In this report, we show that EPAS1 increased
VEGF gene expression through the HIF-1-binding site. This transactivation was
enhanced further by cotransfection of an aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator expression plasmid. Deletion analysis of EPAS1 revealed a potent
activation domain (amino acids 486-639) essential for EPAS1 to transactivate the 
VEGF promoter. We confirmed the ability of this domain to activate transcription 
using a Gal4 fusion protein system. Because a truncated EPAS1 protein lacking the
transactivation domain at amino acids 486-639 eliminated induction of the VEGF
promoter by wild-type EPAS1, the truncated protein functions as a
dominant-negative mutant. Most important, infection of the cells with an
adenoviral construct expressing this mutant inhibited the induction of VEGF mRNA 
under conditions that mimic hypoxia. Our results suggest that EPAS1 is an
important regulator of VEGF gene expression. Since VEGF plays a crucial role in
angiogenesis, the ability of dominant-negative EPAS1 to inhibit VEGF promoter
activity raises the possibility of a novel approach to inhibiting pathological
angiogenesis.

PMID: 10531360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mech Dev. 1999 Sep;87(1-2):193-7.

mRNA cloning and expression studies of the quail homologue of HIF-2alpha.

Elvert G(1), Lanz S, Kappel A, Flamme I.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Medizin der Universität zu Köln,
Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 9, D-50931, Köln, Germany.

Hypoxia inducible factors (HIF) are candidate transcriptional regulators of
vascular development. Unlike HIF-1alpha - the founding member of the HIF family -
which is expressed more or less ubiquitously, HIF-2alpha (also called HRF, HLF
and EPAS1) is highly expressed by vascular endothelial cells and was shown to
activate the transcription of endothelial cell-specific receptor tyrosine kinases
(tie-2 and flk-1/VEGF receptor 2) and of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF). Therefore HIF-2alpha is a candidate dual regulator of vascular
development. Here we describe the quail homologue of HIF-2alpha. Sequence
analysis reveals that HIF-2alpha is highly conserved between birds and mammals.
Like the murine HIF-2alpha, the quail molecule is highly expressed by endothelial
cells but also detectable in certain epithelial cells such as in the endoderm.

PMID: 10495286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 22;274(4):2060-71.

Oxygen-regulated and transactivating domains in endothelial PAS protein 1:
comparison with hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha.

O'Rourke JF(1), Tian YM, Ratcliffe PJ, Pugh CW.

Author information: 
(1)Erythropoietin Group, Room 425, Institute of Molecular Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, United Kingdom.

Endothelial PAS protein 1 (EPAS1) is a basic helix-loop-helix Per-AHR-ARNT-Sim
transcription factor related to hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha). To 
analyze EPAS1 domains responsible for transactivation and oxygen-regulated
function, we constructed chimeric fusions of EPAS1 with a GAL4 DNA binding
domain, plus or minus the VP16 activation domain. Two transactivation domains
were defined in EPAS1; a C-terminal domain (amino acids 828-870), and a larger
internal domain (amino acids 517-682). These activation domains were interspersed
by functionally repressive sequences, several of which independently conveyed
oxygen-regulated activity. Two types of activity were defined. Sequences lying
N-terminal to and overlapping the internal transactivation domain conferred
regulated repression on the VP16 transactivator. Sequences lying C-terminal to
this internal domain conveyed repression and oxygen-regulated activity on the
native EPAS1 C-terminal activation domain, but not the Gal/VP16 fusion. Fusions
containing internal but not C-terminal regulatory domains manifested regulation
of fusion protein level. Comparison of EPAS1 with HIF-1alpha demonstrated a
similar organization for both proteins, and for the C terminus defined a
conserved RLL motif critical for inducibility. Overall, EPAS1 sequences were less
inducible than those of HIF-1alpha, and inducibility was strikingly reduced as
their expression level was increased. Despite these quantitative differences,
EPAS1 regulation appeared similar to HIF-1alpha, conforming to a model involving 
the modulation of both protein level and activity, through distinct internal and 
C-terminal domains.

PMID: 9890965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Genes Dev. 1998 Nov 1;12(21):3320-4.

The hypoxia-responsive transcription factor EPAS1 is essential for catecholamine 
homeostasis and protection against heart failure during embryonic development.

Tian H(1), Hammer RE, Matsumoto AM, Russell DW, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75235 USA.

Mice lacking the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor EPAS1 die at
mid-gestation. Despite normal morphological development of the circulatory
system, EPAS1-deficient mice display pronounced bradycardia. In addition to the
vascular endothelium, EPAS1 is expressed intensively in the organ of Zuckerkandl 
(OZ), the principle source of catecholamine production in mammalian embryos.
EPAS1-deficient embryos contained substantially reduced catecholamine levels.
Mid-gestational lethality was rescued by administration of the catecholamine
precursor DOPS to pregnant females. We hypothesize that EPAS1 expressed in the OZ
senses hypoxia during mid-gestational development and translates this signal into
an altered pattern of gene expression, leading to increases in circulating
catecholamine levels and proper cardiac function.

PMCID: PMC317225
PMID: 9808618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Genomics. 1998 Sep 1;52(2):159-65.

The human hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha gene: HIF1A structure and evolutionary 
conservation.

Iyer NV(1), Leung SW, Semenza GL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, 21287, USA.

The HIF1A gene encodes the HIF-1alpha subunit of hypoxia-inducible factor 1, a
transcription factor that is essential for cardiovascular development and
systemic O2 homeostasis. HIF1A consists of 15 exons that are interrupted by
introns at the same locations as in the mouse Hif1a gene, although sequences
mediating alternative splicing and alternative translation initiation events in
the mouse are not present in the human gene. Placement of introns differs between
HIF1A and EPAS1, which encodes the human HIF-2alpha protein. Transcription of the
HIF1A gene was initiated over a 15-nt region downstream of two SP1 sites. A
0.7-kb region of 5' flanking sequences functioned as a strong promoter in
transient expression assays. Comparison of 0.8 kb of 5' flanking and 5'
untranslated sequences from the HIF1A and Hif1a genes revealed 70% identity. The 
proximal 300 bp of 5' flanking sequences was 83% identical, including the SP1
sites and transcription initiation sites. These results suggest evolutionary
selection for maintenance of HIF1A structure, function, and regulation.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9782081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Gene Expr. 1997;6(5):287-99.

Molecular characterization of the murine Hif-1 alpha locus.

Luo G(1), Gu YZ, Jain S, Chan WK, Carr KM, Hogenesch JB, Bradfield CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University Medical School, Madison, WI, USA.

Hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha) is a basic helix-loop-helix-PAS
(bHLH-PAS) transcription factor that mediates certain cellular responses to low
oxygen tension, iron chelators, Co2+, Ni2+, Mg2+, and low intracellular glucose
concentration. Upon exposure to the above conditions, HIF-1 alpha is upregulated 
and heterodimerizes with the Ah receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT, also known
as HIF-1 beta), the heterodimeric complex binds TACGTG-containing genomic
enhancer elements, and activates transcription of target genes. As a first step
in developing genetic models to study the biology related to cellular hypoxia, we
have cloned the murine HIF-1 alpha cDNA, determined the tissue-specific
expression of its mRNA, functionally analyzed its protein product, and
characterized its promoter and its genomic structure. A comparison between the
murine and human HIF-1 alpha protein sequence reveals 95%, 99%, and 83% identity 
in the bHLH, PAS, and variable domains, respectively. RNAse protection assays
demonstrate that in adult mice, the mHIF-1 alpha mRNA is expressed at high levels
in kidney, heart, brain, thymus, and placenta, with moderate expression in liver,
spleen, testis, and lung and much lower expression in skeletal muscle testis.
Northern blot analysis indicates that the mRNA of the murine HIF-1 alpha is
transcribed in two forms, a major 4-kb species and a minor 5-kb species; both are
present in all tissues examined. The Hif-1 alpha promoter is GC rich, does not
have a TATA element near its transcriptional start site, and does not respond to 
hypoxia or Co2+. The mHIF-1 alpha structural gene is composed of 15 exons. The
splice junction sites within the bHLH and the PAS domains of HIF-1 alpha gene are
highly conserved with respect to a number of previously characterized members of 
the bHLH-PAS superfamily. However, unlike other bHLH-PAS genes, where the
variable domain is encoded by 2 exons, the variable region of the mHIF-1 alpha
gene is encoded by 7 exons. Furthermore, most of these splice junction sites in
the variable region are conserved with that of HIF-2 alpha, a recently cloned
hypoxia-responsive bHLH-PAS protein (also known as MOP2, EPAS1, and HLF). These
data suggest that HIF-1 alpha, along with HIF-2 alpha, represents a new subclass 
of the bHLH-PAS superfamily.

PMID: 9368100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Genes Dev. 1997 Jan 1;11(1):72-82.

Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1), a transcription factor selectively
expressed in endothelial cells.

Tian H(1), McKnight SL, Russell DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235, USA.

Here we describe the cloning and characterization of a PAS domain transcription
factor termed endothelial PAS-1 (EPAS1). This protein shares 48% sequence
identity with hypoxia inducible factor (HIF-1alpha) and lesser similarity with
other members of the basic helix-loop-helix/PAS domain family of transcription
factors. Like HIF-1alpha, EPAS1 binds to and activates transcription from a DNA
element originally isolated from the erythropoietin gene and containing the
sequence 5'-GCCCTACGTGCTGTCTCA-3'. Activation by both HIF-1alpha and EPAS1 is
stimulated by hypoxic conditions. EPAS1 forms a heterodimeric complex with the
aryl hydrocarbon nuclear transporter prior to transcriptional activation of
target genes. EPAS1 expression is limited to the endothelium of mouse embryos
and, in agreement with its cell type-specific expression pattern, is capable of
specifically activating the transcription of the endothelial tyrosine kinase gene
Tie-2. These observations raise the possibility that EPAS1 may represent an
important regulator of vascularization, perhaps involving the regulation of
endothelial cell gene expression in response to hypoxia.

PMID: 9000051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


