
1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2016 Apr 1;12(4):e1004849. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004849.
eCollection 2016.

A Simple and Accurate Model to Predict Responses to Multi-electrode Stimulation
in the Retina.

Maturana MI(1,)(2), Apollo NV(3), Hadjinicolaou AE(1), Garrett DJ(3), Cloherty
SL(1,)(2,)(4), Kameneva T(2), Grayden DB(2,)(5), Ibbotson MR(1,)(4), Meffin
H(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Vision Research Institute, Australian College of Optometry, Carlton, 
Victoria, Australia. (2)Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
NeuroEngineering Laboratory, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia. (3)Department of Physics, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia. (4)Department of Optometry and Vision Sciences, ARC Centre
of Excellence for Integrative Brain Function, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia. (5)Centre for Neural Engineering, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Implantable electrode arrays are widely used in therapeutic stimulation of the
nervous system (e.g. cochlear, retinal, and cortical implants). Currently, most
neural prostheses use serial stimulation (i.e. one electrode at a time) despite
this severely limiting the repertoire of stimuli that can be applied. Methods to 
reliably predict the outcome of multi-electrode stimulation have not been
available. Here, we demonstrate that a linear-nonlinear model accurately predicts
neural responses to arbitrary patterns of stimulation using in vitro recordings
from single retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) stimulated with a subretinal
multi-electrode array. In the model, the stimulus is projected onto a
low-dimensional subspace and then undergoes a nonlinear transformation to produce
an estimate of spiking probability. The low-dimensional subspace is estimated
using principal components analysis, which gives the neuron's electrical
receptive field (ERF), i.e. the electrodes to which the neuron is most sensitive.
Our model suggests that stimulation proportional to the ERF yields a higher
efficacy given a fixed amount of power when compared to equal amplitude
stimulation on up to three electrodes. We find that the model captures the
responses of all the cells recorded in the study, suggesting that it will
generalize to most cell types in the retina. The model is computationally
efficient to evaluate and, therefore, appropriate for future real-time
applications including stimulation strategies that make use of recorded neural
activity to improve the stimulation strategy.

PMID: 27035143  [PubMed - in process]


2. Mol Biol Evol. 2016 Mar 29. pii: msw059. [Epub ahead of print]

Evolution of the Apetala2 Gene Lineage in Seed Plants.

Zumajo-Cardona C(1), Pabón-Mora N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia, AA 1226. 
(2)Instituto de Biología, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia, AA 1226
lucia.pabon@udea.edu.co.

Gene duplication is a fundamental source of functional evolutionary change and
has been associated with organismal diversification and the acquisition of novel 
features. TheAPETALA2 / ETHYLENE RESPONSIVE ELEMENT- BINDING FACTOR(AP2/ERF)
genes are exclusive to vascular plants and have been classified into
theAP2-likeandERF-likeclades. TheAP2-likeclade includes theAINTEGUMENTA(ANT) and 
theeuAPETALA2(euAP2) genes, both regulated bymiR172 Arabidopsis has two paralogs 
in theeuAP2clade, namelyAPETALA2(AP2) andTARGET OF EAT3(TOE3) that control
flowering time, meristem determinacy, sepal and petal identity and fruit
development.euAP2genes are likely functionally divergent outside Brassicaceae, as
they control fruit development in tomato, and regulate inflorescence meristematic
activity in maize. We studied the evolution and expression patterns
ofeuAP2/TOE3genes to assess large scale and local duplications and evaluate
protein motifs likely related with functional changes across seed plants. We
sampledeuAP2/TOE3genes from vascular plants and have found three major
duplications and a few taxon-specific duplications. Here we report conserved and 
new motifs conserved across euAP2/TOE3 proteins and conclude that proteins
predating the Brassicaceae duplication are more similar to AP2 than TOE3.
Expression data shows a shift from restricted expression in leaves, carpels and
fruits in non-core eudicots and asterids to a broader expression ofeuAP2genes in 
leaves, all floral organs and fruits in rosids. Altogether, our data shows a
functional trend where the canonical A-function (sepal and petal identity) is
exclusive to Brassicaceae and it is likely not maintained outside of rosids.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 27030733  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Ter Arkh. 2016;88(3):47-51.

[Association of decreased external pulmonary function with cognitive
impairments].

[Article in Russian]

Koval'kova NA(1), Ragino YI(1), Shishkin SV(1), Voevoda MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Internal and Preventive Medicine, Novosibirsk, Russia.

AIM: To examine the association between the basic indicators of external
respiratory function (ERF) and cognitive impairments (CIs).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The materials of a population-based cross-sectional study 
were used in the investigation; a representative sample consisted of 3818 men and
women aged 45-69 years. Forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1), the 
ratio of FEV1 to forced vital capacity (FVC) were determined to assess ERF. CIs
were evaluated using the 10-word test described by A.R. Luria, Cog-sum indices
(the sum of correctly reproduced words with 3 attempts), and Cog-mean=Cog-sum/3.
RESULTS: In patients with an FEV1/FVC <70%, the probability of a Cog-sum of <20
scores was twice higher than in those with an FEV1/FVC =70%; in patients with an 
FEV1 <80%, the probability of a Cog-sum of <20 scores was also 2 times higher
than in those with an FEV1 =80%. Multiple regression analysis revealed no
significant associations between Cog-sum index and smoking index, body mass
index, and blood pressure. Cog-sum was inversely related to age and directly
related to FEV1 and female sex. Binary logistic regression analysis showed that
gender, age, and FEV1 were statistically significant variables. The relative risk
of a Cog-sum of <20 that was 1.7 times higher in the men than in the women, 1.8
times higher in the patients with an FEV1 <80% than in those with an FEV1 =80%
(model 1), 1.7 times higher in the patients with an FEV1/FVC <70% than in those
with FEV1/FVC =70% (model 2) increased with age.
CONCLUSION: The decrease in the basic indicators of ERF (FEV1, FEV1/FVC) is an
independent predictor of CIs.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 27030329  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Ter Arkh. 2016;88(3):40-46.

[Functional and laboratory characteristics in the concomitance of asthma and
obesity at a young age].

[Article in Russian]

Sobko EA(1), Solov'eva IA(2), Demko IV(2), Kraposhina AY(2), Ishchenko OP(1),
Razzakova NM(3), Egorov SA(2), Vtyurina SS(2), Prugova VL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Prof. V.F. Voino-Yasenetsky Krasnoyarsk State Medical University, Ministry of 
Health of Russia, Krasnoyarsk, Russia; Krasnoyarsk Territorial Hospital,
Krasnoyarsk, Russia. (2)Prof. V.F. Voino-Yasenetsky Krasnoyarsk State Medical
University, Ministry of Health of Russia, Krasnoyarsk, Russia. (3)Krasnoyarsk
Territorial Hospital, Krasnoyarsk, Russia.

AIM: To study the peripheral blood level of leptin and adiponectin and their
possible effect on the functional status of the respiratory system in young
asthmatic patients in relation to body mass index (BMI) for the optimization of
asthma therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Examinations were made in 133 people, including a study
group of 93 patients with asthma who were divided into 2 groups according to BMI:
1) those with a BMI of less 25 kg/m2 and 2) those with a BMI of 30 kg/m2 or more,
as well as a control group of 40 apparently healthy patients. The investigators
studied external respiratory function (ERF), the peripheral blood levels of
leptin and adiponectin, the biochemical composition of plasma, by determining
total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, and triglycerides.
RESULTS: Lipid metabolic disorders as dyslipidemia and hypercholesterolemia,
increased severity of disease, and decreased ERF were recorded in the
concomitance of obesity and asthma. The peripheral blood level of leptin in young
asthmatic patients with obesity was found to be associated with higher BMI.
CONCLUSION: A more severe course of disease presenting with decreased ERF,
impaired lipid metabolism, and elevated peripheral blood leptin levels were noted
in the concomitance of asthma and obesity at a young age.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 27030328  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Plant Cell Environ. 2016 Mar 22. doi: 10.1111/pce.12741. [Epub ahead of print]

Regulation of loquat fruit low temperature response and lignification involves
interaction of heat shock factors and genes associated with lignin biosynthesis.

Zeng JK(1,)(2), Li X(1,)(2,)(3), Zhang J(1), Ge H(1), Yin XR(1,)(2,)(3), Chen
KS(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Agriculture & Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus,
Hangzhou, 310058, PR China. (2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of
Horticultural Plant Integrative Biology, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus,
Hangzhou, 310058, PR China. (3)The State Agriculture Ministry Laboratory of
Horticultural Plant Growth, Development and Quality Improvement, Zhejiang
University, Zijingang Campus, Hangzhou, 310058, PR China.

Transcriptional regulatory mechanisms underlying lignin metabolism have been
widely studied in model plants and woody trees, as well as fruit, such as loquat 
(Eriobotrya japonica). Unlike the well-known NAC, MYB and AP2/ERF transcription
factors, the roles of heat shock factors (HSFs) in lignin regulation have been
rarely reported. Two treatments (heat treatment, HT; low temperature
conditioning, LTC) were applied to alleviate low temperature-induced
lignification in loquat fruit. Gene expression analysis indicated that EjHSF1
transcript abundance, in parallel with heat shock protein genes (EjHsp), was
induced by HT, while expression of EjHSF3 was repressed by LTC. Using
dual-luciferase assays, EjHSF1 and EjHSF3 trans-activated the promoters of EjHsp 
genes and lignin biosynthesis-related genes, respectively. Thus, two distinct
regulatory mechanisms of EjHSF transcription factors in chilling injury-induced
fruit lignification are proposed: EjHSF1 transcriptionally regulated EjHsp genes 
are involved in chilling tolerance, while EjHSF3 transcriptionally regulated
lignin biosynthesis. Furthermore, the relations between EjHSF3 and previously
characterized fruit lignification regulators, including EjAP2-1, EjMYB1 and
EjMYB2, were also investigated. Yeast-two hybrid (Y2H) and biomolecular
fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assays demonstrated protein-protein
interaction between EjHSF3 and EjAP2-1. Thus, the involvement of EjHSF3 in fruit 
lignification is via both lignin biosynthetic genes and the regulator, EjAP2-1.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27006258  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Protein Pept Lett. 2016 Mar 22. [Epub ahead of print]

Overexpression of the Lotus corniculatus soloist gene LcAP2/ERF107 enhances
tolerance to salt stress.

Sun ZM, Zhou ML, Dan-Wang, Tang YX, Lin M(1), Wu YM.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
(CAAS), Zhongguancun South Street No 12, Haidian district, Beijing, 100081,
China. linmin@caas.cn.

The AP2/ERF play a key role in multiple stress responses in plants. we here
report a novel salt stress-related gene, LcAP2/ERF107 that encodes an AP2/ERF
protein in Lotus corniculatus cultivar Leo. LcAP2/ERF107 was classified into the 
soloist subfamiliy based on phylogenetic relationship. The transcription of
LcAP2/ERF107 were strongly induced by salt and other phytohormones (ABA, ACC,
MeJA). A subcellular localization experiment indicated that LcAP2/ERF107 is a
nuclear protein that activates transcription. LcAP2/ERF107 overexpression in
Arabidopsis resulted in pleiotropic phenotypes, including higher seed germination
rate and transgenic plants with enhanced tolerance to salt stress. Further, under
salt tolerance the transgenic lines elevated the relative moisture content;
however, the relative electrolyte leakage was lower than in control plants. The
expression levels of indicative genes RD22, RD29A, LEA4-5, P5CS1 and P5CS2 were
found to be increased in the transgenic plants compared with the WT plants. These
results indicated that LcAP2/ERF107 play an important role in the responses of
plant to salt stress.

PMID: 27001406  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. BMC Plant Biol. 2016 Mar 22;16(1):72. doi: 10.1186/s12870-016-0763-y.

Abscisic acid transcriptomic signaling varies with grapevine organ.

Rattanakon S(1), Ghan R(1), Gambetta GA(2), Deluc LG(3), Schlauch KA(1), Cramer
GR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557, USA. (2)Bordeaux Sciences Agro, Institut des Sciences de la Vigne et
du Vin (ISVV), EGFV, UMR 1287, F-33140, Villenave d'Ornon, France. (3)Department 
of Horticulture, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, 97331, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557, USA. cramer@unr.edu.

BACKGROUND: Abscisic acid (ABA) regulates various developmental processes and
stress responses over both short (i.e. hours or days) and longer (i.e. months or 
seasons) time frames. To elucidate the transcriptional regulation of early
responses of grapevine (Vitis vinifera) responding to ABA, different organs of
grape (berries, shoot tips, leaves, roots and cell cultures) were treated with
10 µM (S)-(+)-ABA for 2 h. NimbleGen whole genome microarrays of Vitis vinifera
were used to determine the effects of ABA on organ-specific mRNA expression
patterns.
RESULTS: Transcriptomic analysis revealed 839 genes whose transcript abundances
varied significantly in a specific organ in response to ABA treatment. No single 
gene exhibited the same changes in transcript abundance across all organs in
response to ABA. The biochemical pathways affected by ABA were identified using
the Cytoscape program with the BiNGO plug-in software. The results indicated that
these 839 genes were involved in several biological processes such as flavonoid
metabolism, response to reactive oxygen species, response to light, and response 
to temperature stimulus. ABA affected ion and water transporters, particularly in
the root. The protein amino acid phosphorylation process was significantly
overrepresented in shoot tips and roots treated with ABA. ABA affected mRNA
abundance of genes (CYP707As, UGTs, and PP2Cs) associated with ABA degradation,
conjugation, and the ABA signaling pathway. ABA also significantly affected the
expression of several transcription factors (e.g. AP2/ERF, MYC/MYB, and
bZIP/AREB). The greatest number of significantly differentially expressed genes
was observed in the roots followed by cell cultures, leaves, berries, and shoot
tips, respectively. Each organ had a unique set of gene responses to ABA.
CONCLUSIONS: This study examined the short-term effects of ABA on different
organs of grapevine. The responses of each organ were unique indicating that ABA 
signaling varies with the organ. Understanding the ABA responses in an
organ-specific manner is crucial to fully understand hormone action and plant
responses to water deficit.

PMCID: PMC4802729
PMID: 27001301  [PubMed - in process]


8. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 16;6:23085. doi: 10.1038/srep23085.

An Ethylene-responsive Factor BpERF11 Negatively Modulates Salt and Osmotic
Tolerance in Betula platyphylla.

Zhang W(1,)(2), Yang G(1), Mu D(1), Li H(1), Zang D(1), Xu H(1), Zou X(1,)(3),
Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding, Northeast Forestry 
University, 150040 Harbin, China. (2)Agronomy College, Heilongjiang Bayi
Agricultural University, 163319 Daqing, China. (3)Liaoning Forestry
Vocation-Technical College, 110101 Shenyang, China.

Ethylene responsive factors (ERFs) play important roles in the abiotic stress;
however, only a few ERF genes from woody plants have been functionally
characterized. In the present study, an ERF gene from Betula platyphylla (birch),
BpERF11, was functionally characterized in response to abiotic stress. BpERF11 is
a nuclear protein, which could specifically bind to GCC boxes and DRE motifs.
BpERF11-overexpressing and BpERF11 RNA interference (RNAi) knockdown plants were 
generated for gain- and loss-of-function analysis. BpERF11 negatively regulates
resistance to salt and severe osmotic stress, and the transgenic birch plants
overexpressing BpERF11 shows increased electrolyte leakage and malondialdehyde
(MDA) contents. BpERF11 inhibits the expression of an AtMYB61 homologous gene,
resulting in increased stomatal aperture, which elevated the transpiration rate. 
Furthermore, BpERF11 downregulates the expression of P5CS, SOD and POD genes, but
upregulates the expression of PRODH and P5CDH, which results in reduced proline
levels and increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation. BpERF11 also
significantly inhibits the expression of LEA and dehydrin genes that involve in
abiotic stress tolerance. Therefore, BpERF11 serves as a transcription factor
that negatively regulates salt and severe osmotic tolerance by modulating various
physiological processes.

PMCID: PMC4793294
PMID: 26980058  [PubMed - in process]


9. New Phytol. 2016 Mar 8. doi: 10.1111/nph.13914. [Epub ahead of print]

ORA47 (octadecanoid-responsive AP2/ERF-domain transcription factor 47) regulates 
jasmonic acid and abscisic acid biosynthesis and signaling through binding to a
novel cis-element.

Chen HY(1), Hsieh EJ(1), Cheng MC(1), Chen CY(2), Hwang SY(3), Lin TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 10617, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Bio-lndustrial Mechatronics Engineering, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, 10617, Taiwan. (3)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan
Normal University, Taipei, 11677, Taiwan.

ORA47 (octadecanoid-responsive AP2/ERF-domain transcription factor 47) of
Arabidopsis thaliana is an AP2/ERF domain transcription factor that regulates
jasmonate (JA) biosynthesis and is induced by methyl JA treatment. The regulatory
mechanism of ORA47 remains unclear. ORA47 is shown to bind to the cis-element
(NC/GT)CGNCCA, which is referred to as the O-box, in the promoter of ABI2. We
proposed that ORA47 acts as a connection between ABA INSENSITIVE1 (ABI1) and ABI2
and mediates an ABI1-ORA47-ABI2 positive feedback loop. PORA47:ORA47-GFP
transgenic plants were used in a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay to
show that ORA47 participates in the biosynthesis and/or signaling pathways of
nine phytohormones. Specifically, many abscisic acid (ABA) and JA biosynthesis
and signaling genes were direct targets of ORA47 under stress conditions. The JA 
content of the P35S:ORA47-GR lines was highly induced under wounding and
moderately induced under water stress relative to that of the wild-type plants.
The wounding treatment moderately increased ABA accumulation in the transgenic
lines, whereas the water stress treatment repressed the ABA content. ORA47 is
proposed to play a role in the biosynthesis of JA and ABA and in regulating the
biosynthesis and/or signaling of a suite of phytohormone genes when plants are
subjected to wounding and water stress.

© 2016 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2016 New Phytologist Trust.

PMID: 26974851  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Appl Opt. 2016 Mar 1;55(7):1613-7. doi: 10.1364/AO.55.001613.

Time of flight dependent linearity in diffuse imaging: how effective is it to
evaluate the spatial resolution by measuring the edge response function?

Ortiz-Rascón E, Bruce NC, Rodríguez-Rosales AA, Garduño-Mejía J.

We describe the behavior of linearity in diffuse imaging by evaluating the
differences between time-resolved images produced by photons arriving at the
detector at different times. Two approaches are considered: Monte Carlo
simulations and experimental results. The images of two complete opaque bars
embedded in a transparent or in a turbid medium with a slab geometry are
analyzed; the optical properties of the turbid medium sample are close to those
of breast tissue. A simple linearity test was designed involving a direct
comparison between the intensity profile produced by two bars scanned at the same
time and the intensity profile obtained by adding two profiles of each bar
scanned one at a time. It is shown that the linearity improves substantially when
short time of flight photons are used in the imaging process, but even then the
nonlinear behavior prevails. As the edge response function (ERF) has been used
widely for testing the spatial resolution in imaging systems, the main
implication of a time dependent linearity is the weakness of the linearity
assumption when evaluating the spatial resolution through the ERF in diffuse
imaging systems, and the need to evaluate the spatial resolution by other
methods.

PMID: 26974619  [PubMed - in process]


11. Protein Pept Lett. 2016 Mar 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Simultaneous overexpression of the HhERF2 and PeDREB2a genes enhanced tolerances 
to salt and drought in transgenic cotton.

Li JB, Dong XN, Lei Z, Li YL, Yang PY, Tao F, Zhao L, Li SG, Du LF, Shao JR, Wu
YM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
(CAAS), Beijing 100081, China. wuyanmin211@hotmail.com.

A desert-grown Halimodendron halodendron ethylene-responsive element binding
factor gene (HhERF2), which encodes a 245 amino acids protein containing a
conserved AP2/EREBP domain, was isolated through the rapid amplification cDNA end
(RACE) method. Sequence and phylogenetic analysis indicated that HhERF2 was
classified into the B-2 group of ERF subfamily. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR showed
that HhERF2 was greatly induced by treatments with high-salt, drought and low
temperature in H. halodendron seedlings. The expression vector containing HhERF2 
and Populus euphratica dehydration-responsive element binding protein (PeDREB2a) 
genes driven by rd29A promoter was constructed and transferred into cotton
(Gossypium hirsutum L.) by non-tissue culture Agrobacterium-mediated genetic
transformation system. The transformation and expression of HhERF2 and PeDREB2a
were identified by PCR and RT-PCR. Analyses of physiological function indicated
that transgenic cottons had improved seeds germination, tolerance to drought and 
high-salt stresses. Agronomic evaluation in the field exhibited that transgenic
lines presented a dwarf phenotype and improved further in the yield and
characters. These results demonstrated that overexpressed both HhERF2 and
PeDREB2a transcription factor genes in cotton induced elevated tolerance to
drought and high-salt stresses.

PMID: 26972971  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 14;6:23036. doi: 10.1038/srep23036.

Selection of suitable reference genes for assessing gene expression in pearl
millet under different abiotic stresses and their combinations.

Shivhare R(1), Lata C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute, Rana Pratap Marg, Lucknow-226001, 
India. (2)National Research Centre on Plant Biotechnology, Pusa Campus, New
Delhi-110012, India.

Pearl millet [Pennisetum glaucum (L.) R. Br.] a widely used grain and forage
crop, is grown in areas frequented with one or more abiotic stresses, has
superior drought and heat tolerance and considered a model crop for stress
tolerance studies. Selection of suitable reference genes for quantification of
target stress-responsive gene expression through quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR
is important for elucidating the molecular mechanisms of improved stress
tolerance. For precise normalization of gene expression data in pearl millet, ten
candidate reference genes were examined in various developmental tissues as well 
as under different individual abiotic stresses and their combinations at 1<U+2009>h
(early) and 24<U+2009>h (late) of stress using geNorm, NormFinder and RefFinder
algorithms. Our results revealed EF-1a and UBC-E2 as the best reference genes
across all samples, the specificity of which was confirmed by assessing the
relative expression of a PgAP2 like-ERF gene that suggested use of these two
reference genes is sufficient for accurate transcript normalization under
different stress conditions. To our knowledge this is the first report on
validation of reference genes under different individual and multiple abiotic
stresses in pearl millet. The study can further facilitate fastidious discovery
of stress-tolerance genes in this important stress-tolerant crop.

PMCID: PMC4789795
PMID: 26972345  [PubMed - in process]


13. Bioresour Technol. 2016 Jun;209:172-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2016.02.123. Epub 
2016 Mar 4.

Evaluation of soluble fraction and enzymatic residual fraction of dilute dry
acid, ethylenediamine, and steam explosion pretreated corn stover on the
enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose.

Qin L(1), Liu L(1), Li WC(1), Zhu JQ(1), Li BZ(2), Yuan YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), School of
Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Weijin Road 92, Nankai
District, Tianjin 300072, PR China; SynBio Research Platform, Collaborative
Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin
University, Weijin Road 92, Nankai District, Tianjin 300072, PR China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering (Ministry of Education), School of Chemical 
Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Weijin Road 92, Nankai District, 
Tianjin 300072, PR China; SynBio Research Platform, Collaborative Innovation
Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin University, Weijin 
Road 92, Nankai District, Tianjin 300072, PR China. Electronic address:
bzli@tju.edu.cn.

This study is aimed to examine the inhibition of soluble fraction (SF) and
enzymatic residual fraction (ERF) in dry dilute acid (DDA), ethylenediamine (EDA)
and steam explosion (SE) pretreated corn stover (CS) on the enzymatic
digestibility of cellulose. SF of DDA, EDA and SE pretreated CS has high xylose, 
soluble lignin and xylo-oligomer content, respectively. SF of EDA pretreated CS
leads to the highest inhibition, followed by SE and DDA pretreated CS. Inhibition
of ERF of DDA and SE pretreated CS is higher than that of EDA pretreated CS. The 
inhibition degree (A0/A) of SF is 1.76 and 1.21 times to that of ERF for EDA and 
SE pretreated CS, respectively. The inhibition degree of ERF is 1.05 times to
that of SF in DDA pretreated CS. The quantitative analysis shows that SF of EDA
pretreated CS, SF and ERF of SE pretreated CS cause significant inhibition during
enzymatic hydrolysis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26970919  [PubMed - in process]


14. Front Plant Sci. 2016 Feb 26;7:203. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.00203. eCollection
2016.

De novo Transcriptome Assembly of Floral Buds of Pineapple and Identification of 
Differentially Expressed Genes in Response to Ethephon Induction.

Liu CH(1), Fan C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Fruit Tree Research, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural
SciencesGuangzhou, China; Key Laboratory of South Subtropical Fruit Biology,
Genetic Resource Utilization Ministry of AgricultureGuangzhou, China.

A remarkable characteristic of pineapple is its ability to undergo floral
induction in response to external ethylene stimulation. However, little
information is available regarding the molecular mechanism underlying this
process. In this study, the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in plants
exposed to 1.80 mL·L(-1) (T1) or 2.40 mL·L(-1) ethephon (T2) compared with Ct
plants (control, cleaning water) were identified using RNA-seq and gene
expression profiling. Illumina sequencing generated 65,825,224 high-quality reads
that were assembled into 129,594 unigenes with an average sequence length of 1173
bp. Of these unigenes, 24,775 were assigned to specific KEGG pathways, of which
metabolic pathways and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites were the most highly
represented. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the annotated unigenes revealed that 
the majority were involved in metabolic and cellular processes, cell and cell
part, catalytic activity and binding. Gene expression profiling analysis revealed
3788, 3062, and 758 DEGs in the comparisons of T1 with Ct, T2 with Ct, and T2
with T1, respectively. GO analysis indicated that these DEGs were predominantly
annotated to metabolic and cellular processes, cell and cell part, catalytic
activity, and binding. KEGG pathway analysis revealed the enrichment of several
important pathways among the DEGs, including metabolic pathways, biosynthesis of 
secondary metabolites and plant hormone signal transduction. Thirteen DEGs were
identified as candidate genes associated with the process of floral induction by 
ethephon, including three ERF-like genes, one ETR-like gene, one LTI-like gene,
one FT-like gene, one VRN1-like gene, three FRI-like genes, one AP1-like gene,
one CAL-like gene, and one AG-like gene. qPCR analysis indicated that the changes
in the expression of these 13 candidate genes were consistent with the
alterations in the corresponding RPKM values, confirming the accuracy and
credibility of the RNA-seq and gene expression profiling results.
Ethephon-mediated induction likely mimics the process of vernalization in the
floral transition in pineapple by increasing LTI, FT, and VRN1 expression and
promoting the up-regulation of floral meristem identity genes involved in flower 
development. The candidate genes screened can be used in investigations of the
molecular mechanisms of the flowering pathway and of various other biological
mechanisms in pineapple.

PMCID: PMC4767906
PMID: 26955375  [PubMed]


15. BMC Genomics. 2016 Mar 5;17(1):189. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2548-y.

An iNTT system for the large-scale screening of differentially expressed,
nuclear-targeted proteins: cold-treatment-induced nucleoproteins in Rye (Secale
cereale L.).

Cao X(1,)(2), Chen X(3,)(4), Liu Y(5), Xu Z(6), Li L(7), Zhou Y(8), Liu J(9),
Zhao Z(10), Chen M(11), Ma Y(12).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Facility for Crop Genetic Resources and Genetic Improvement, Key 
Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture/Institute of
Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100081, P.R.
China. cxytvs@163.com. (2)Crop Research Institute, Shandong Academy of
Agricultural Sciences/National Engineering Laboratory for Wheat and Maize/Key
Laboratory of Wheat Biology and Genetic Improvement in North Yellow and Huai
River Valley, Ministry of Agriculture, 250100, Jinan, China. cxytvs@163.com.
(3)Crop Research Institute, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences/National
Engineering Laboratory for Wheat and Maize/Key Laboratory of Wheat Biology and
Genetic Improvement in North Yellow and Huai River Valley, Ministry of
Agriculture, 250100, Jinan, China. chxytvs@163.com. (4)College of Agronomy,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 712100, P.R. China. chxytvs@163.com.
(5)National Key Facility for Crop Genetic Resources and Genetic Improvement, Key 
Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture/Institute of
Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100081, P.R.
China. 337108138@qq.com. (6)National Key Facility for Crop Genetic Resources and 
Genetic Improvement, Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of
Agriculture/Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing, 100081, P.R. China. xuzhaoshi@caas.cn. (7)National Key Facility for Crop
Genetic Resources and Genetic Improvement, Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and
Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture/Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100081, P.R. China. liliancheng@caas.cn.
(8)National Key Facility for Crop Genetic Resources and Genetic Improvement, Key 
Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture/Institute of
Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100081, P.R.
China. zhouyongbin@caas.cn. (9)Crop Research Institute, Shandong Academy of
Agricultural Sciences/National Engineering Laboratory for Wheat and Maize/Key
Laboratory of Wheat Biology and Genetic Improvement in North Yellow and Huai
River Valley, Ministry of Agriculture, 250100, Jinan, China. ljjsaas@163.com.
(10)Crop Research Institute, Shandong Academy of Agricultural Sciences/National
Engineering Laboratory for Wheat and Maize/Key Laboratory of Wheat Biology and
Genetic Improvement in North Yellow and Huai River Valley, Ministry of
Agriculture, 250100, Jinan, China. zhaozhendong925@163.com. (11)National Key
Facility for Crop Genetic Resources and Genetic Improvement, Key Laboratory of
Crop Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture/Institute of Crop Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100081, P.R. China.
chenming02@caas.cn. (12)National Key Facility for Crop Genetic Resources and
Genetic Improvement, Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of
Agriculture/Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing, 100081, P.R. China. mayouzhi@caas.cn.

BACKGROUND: Nuclear proteins play critical roles in regulating mRNA transcription
and processing, DNA replication, and epigenetic genome modification. Therefore,
the ability to monitor changes in nuclear proteins is helpful not only to
identify important regulatory proteins but also to study the mechanisms of
actions of nuclear proteins. However, no effective methods have been developed
yet. Rye is strongly resistant to various biotic and abiotic stresses; however,
few genes have been functionally characterized to date due to the complexity of
its genome and a lack of genomic sequence information.
RESULTS: We developed an integrative Nuclear Transportation Trap (iNTT) system
that includes an improved nuclear transportation trap and utilizes the "after
suppression subtraction" method. Oligonucleotides encoding a nuclear localization
signal (NLS) or a transcription factor, GmAREB, were inserted into pLexAD or
pLexAD-NES, respectively, and then transformed into yeast cells (EGY48). We
showed that the pLexAD vector expressing a cDNA library in the iNTT system was
more efficient for screening than the vector pLexAD-NES, which has previously
been used in an NTT system. We used the iNTT system to screen a cDNA library of
cold-treated rye. A total of 241 unique genes were identified, including 169
differentially expressed proteins; of these, 106 were of known and 63 were of
unknown function. Moreover, 82 genes (49 %) among the 169 differentially
expressed genes were predicted to contain an NLS domain. Thirty-three (31 %) of
the 106 functionally known proteins have DNA-binding activity. To test the
specificity of the nuclear proteins identified using the iNTT screen, four of the
proteins differentially expressed in response to temperature stress, ScT1 (a heat
shock protein), ScT36 (a MYB-like transcription factor), ScT133 (an ERF-like
transcription factor) and ScT196 (a protein of unknown function), were studied in
more depth. These proteins were shown to exclusively localize to the nucleus, and
their expression levels were increased in response to low-temperature stress. To 
identify the function of these screened nuclear proteins, ScT1- and
ScT36-transgenic Arabidopsis plants were constructed, and ScT1 or ScT36
overexpression was found to enhance tolerance to high-temperature or freezing
stresses, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The newly developed iNTT system provides an effective method for
identifying nuclear-targeted proteins and monitoring induced expression levels.
ScT1 and ScT36 might be good candidate genes for improving the stress tolerance
of plants by genetic transformation.

PMCID: PMC4779243
PMID: 26944261  [PubMed - in process]


16. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 4;11(3):e0150879. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150879.
eCollection 2016.

Genome-Wide Analysis of the AP2/ERF Gene Family in Physic Nut and Overexpression 
of the JcERF011 Gene in Rice Increased Its Sensitivity to Salinity Stress.

Tang Y(1,)(2), Qin S(1,)(2), Guo Y(1,)(2), Chen Y(1,)(2), Wu P(1), Chen Y(1), Li 
M(1), Jiang H(1), Wu G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources Conservation and Sustainable Utilization,
South China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510650, PR 
China. (2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, PR China.

The AP2/ERF transcription factors play crucial roles in plant growth, development
and responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. A total of 119 AP2/ERF genes
(JcAP2/ERFs) have been identified in the physic nut genome; they include 16 AP2, 
4 RAV, 1 Soloist, and 98 ERF genes. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that physic
nut AP2 genes could be divided into 3 subgroups, while ERF genes could be classed
into 11 groups or 43 subgroups. The AP2/ERF genes are non-randomly distributed
across the 11 linkage groups of the physic nut genome and retain many duplicates 
which arose from ancient duplication events. The expression patterns of several
JcAP2/ERF duplicates in the physic nut showed differences among four tissues
(root, stem, leaf, and seed), and 38 JcAP2/ERF genes responded to at least one
abiotic stressor (drought, salinity, phosphate starvation, and nitrogen
starvation) in leaves and/or roots according to analysis of digital gene
expression tag data. The expression of JcERF011 was downregulated by salinity
stress in physic nut roots. Overexpression of the JcERF011 gene in rice plants
increased its sensitivity to salinity stress. The increased expression levels of 
several salt tolerance-related genes were impaired in the JcERF011-overexpressing
plants under salinity stress.

PMCID: PMC4778941
PMID: 26943337  [PubMed - in process]


17. Tree Physiol. 2016 Mar 3. pii: tpw004. [Epub ahead of print]

Transgenic poplar overexpressing the endogenous transcription factor ERF76 gene
improves salinity tolerance.

Yao W(1), Wang S(1), Zhou B(1), Jiang T(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Tree Genetics and Breeding, Northeast Forestry
University, 51 Hexing Road, Harbin 150040, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Tree
Genetics and Breeding, Northeast Forestry University, 51 Hexing Road, Harbin
150040, China tbjiang@yahoo.com.

The ethylene response factor (ERF) family is one of the largest plant-specific
transcription factor families, playing an important role in plant development and
response to stresses. The ERF76 gene is a member of the poplar ERF transcription 
factor gene family. First, we validated that the ERF76 gene expressed in leaf and
root tissues is responsive to salinity stress. We then successfully cloned the
ERF76 cDNA fragment containing an open reading frame from di-haploid Populus
simonii × Populus nigra and proved that ERF76 protein is targeted to the nucleus.
Finally, we transferred the gene into the same poplar clone by the
Agrobacterium-mediated leaf disc method. Using both RNA-Seq and reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction, we validated that
expression level of ERF76 is significantly higher in transgenic plants than that 
in the nontransgenic control. Using RNA-Seq data, we have identified 375 genes
that are differentially expressed between the transgenic plants and the control
under salt treatment. Among the differentially expressed genes, 16 are
transcription factor genes and 45 are stress-related genes, both of which are
upregulated significantly in transgenic plants, compared with the control. Under 
salt stress, the transgenic plants showed significant increases in plant height, 
root length, fresh weight, and abscisic acid (ABA) and gibberellin (GA)
concentration compared with the control, suggesting that overexpression of ERF76 
in transgenic poplar upregulated the expression of stress-related genes and
increased the ability of ABA and GA biosynthesis, which resulted in stronger
tolerance to salt stress.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26941290  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Plant Cell Physiol. 2016 Mar 3. pii: pcw041. [Epub ahead of print]

Involvement of EARLY BUD-BREAK, an AP2/ERF Transcription Factor Gene, in Bud
Break in Japanese Pear (Pyrus pyrifolia Nakai) Lateral Flower Buds: Expression,
Histone Modifications and Possible Target Genes.

Anh Tuan P(1), Bai S(2), Saito T(3), Imai T(1), Ito A(1), Moriguchi T(4).

Author information: 
(1)NARO Institute of Fruit Tree Science, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8605 Japan.
(2)NARO Institute of Fruit Tree Science, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8605 Japan Present
address: Institute of Fruit Science, College of Agriculture & Biotechnology,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, China. (3)NARO Institute of Fruit
Tree Science, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8605 Japan Present address: Graduate School
of Horticulture, Chiba University, Matsudo, Chiba, 271-8510 Japan. (4)NARO
Institute of Fruit Tree Science, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8605 Japan
takaya@affrc.go.jp.

In the Japanese pear (Pyrus pyrifoliaNakai) 'Kosui', three developmental stages
of lateral flower buds have been proposed to occur during ecodormancy to the
flowering phase, i.e. rapid enlargement, sprouting and flowering. Here, we report
an APETALA2/ethylene-responsive factor (AP2/ERF) transcription factor gene, named
pearEARLY BUD-BREAK(PpEBB), which was highly expressed during the rapid
enlargement stage occurring prior to the onset of bud break in flower buds. Gene 
expression analysis revealed thatPpEBBexpression was dramatically increased
during the rapid enlargement stage in three successive growing
seasons.PpEBBtranscript levels peaked 1 week prior to onset of bud break in
'Kosui' potted plants treated with hydrogen cyanamide or water under forcing
conditions. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-quantitative PCR showed that higher
levels of active histone modifications (trimethylation of the histone H3 tail at 
Lys4) in the 5'-upstream and start codon regions of thePpEBBgene were associated 
with the induced expression level ofPpEBBduring the rapid enlargement stage. In
addition, we provide evidence thatPpEBBmay interact with and regulate pear
fourD-type cyclin(PpCYCD3) genes during bud break in 'Kosui' lateral flower buds.
PpEBB significantly increased the promoter activities of fourPpCYCD3genes in a
dual-luciferase assay using tobacco leaves. Taken together, our findings
uncovered aspects of the bud break regulatory mechanism in the Japanese pear and 
provided further evidence that the EBB family plays an important role in bud
break in perennial plants.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese
Society of Plant Physiologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26940832  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Plant Sci. 2016 Apr;245:61-70. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2016.01.004. Epub 2016 Jan
19.

Identification of candidate genes for dissecting complex branch number trait in
chickpea.

Bajaj D(1), Upadhyaya HD(2), Das S(1), Kumar V(3), Gowda CL(2), Sharma S(2),
Tyagi AK(1), Parida SK(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New 
Delhi 110067, India. (2)International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid 
Tropics (ICRISAT), Patancheru 502324, Telangana, India. (3)National Research
Centre on Plant Biotechnology (NRCPB), New Delhi 110012, India. (4)National
Institute of Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi
110067, India. Electronic address: swarup@nipgr.ac.in.

The present study exploited integrated genomics-assisted breeding strategy for
genetic dissection of complex branch number quantitative trait in chickpea.
Candidate gene-based association analysis in a branch number association panel
was performed by utilizing the genotyping data of 401 SNP allelic variants mined 
from 27 known cloned branch number gene orthologs of chickpea. The genome-wide
association study (GWAS) integrating both genome-wide GBS- (4556 SNPs) and
candidate gene-based genotyping information of 4957 SNPs in a structured
population of 60 sequenced desi and kabuli accessions (with 350-400kb LD decay), 
detected 11 significant genomic loci (genes) associated (41% combined PVE) with
branch number in chickpea. Of these, seven branch number-associated genes were
further validated successfully in two inter (ICC 4958×ICC 17160)- and intra (ICC 
12299×ICC 8261)-specific mapping populations. The axillary meristem and shoot
apical meristem-specific expression, including differential up- and
down-regulation (4-5 fold) of the validated seven branch number-associated genes 
especially in high branch number as compared to the low branch number-containing 
parental accessions and homozygous individuals of two aforesaid mapping
populations was apparent. Collectively, this combinatorial genomic approach
delineated diverse naturally occurring novel functional SNP allelic variants in
seven potential known/candidate genes [PIN1 (PIN-FORMED protein 1), TB1 (teosinte
branched 1), BA1/LAX1 (BARREN STALK1/LIKE AUXIN1), GRAS8 (gibberellic acid
insensitive/GAI, Repressor of ga13/RGA and Scarecrow8/SCR8), ERF
(ethylene-responsive element-binding factor), MAX2 (more axillary growth 2) and
lipase] governing chickpea branch number. The useful information generated from
this study have potential to expedite marker-assisted genetic enhancement by
developing high-yielding cultivars with more number of productive (pods and
seeds) branches in chickpea.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26940492  [PubMed - in process]


20. Neuroimage. 2016 Feb 24;132:175-189. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.02.055. [Epub
ahead of print]

Dynamic causal modelling of eye movements during pursuit: Confirming
precision-encoding in V1 using MEG.

Adams RA(1), Bauer M(2), Pinotsis D(3), Friston KJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, University
College London, 12 Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK. Electronic address:
rick.adams@ucl.ac.uk. (2)The Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, Institute of
Neurology, University College London, 12 Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK;
School of Psychology, University Park, Nottingham University, Nottingham, NG7
2RD, UK. Electronic address: Markus.Bauer@nottingham.ac.uk. (3)The Wellcome Trust
Centre for Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, University College London, 12
Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK. Electronic address: d.pinotsis@ucl.ac.uk.
(4)The Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, University
College London, 12 Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK. Electronic address:
k.friston@ucl.ac.uk.

This paper shows that it is possible to estimate the subjective precision
(inverse variance) of Bayesian beliefs during oculomotor pursuit. Subjects viewed
a sinusoidal target, with or without random fluctuations in its motion. Eye
trajectories and magnetoencephalographic (MEG) data were recorded concurrently.
The target was periodically occluded, such that its reappearance caused a visual 
evoked response field (ERF). Dynamic causal modelling (DCM) was used to fit
models of eye trajectories and the ERFs. The DCM for pursuit was based on
predictive coding and active inference, and predicts subjects' eye movements
based on their (subjective) Bayesian beliefs about target (and eye) motion. The
precisions of these hierarchical beliefs can be inferred from behavioural
(pursuit) data. The DCM for MEG data used an established biophysical model of
neuronal activity that includes parameters for the gain of superficial pyramidal 
cells, which is thought to encode precision at the neuronal level. Previous
studies (using DCM of pursuit data) suggest that noisy target motion increases
subjective precision at the sensory level: i.e., subjects attend more to the
target's sensory attributes. We compared (noisy motion-induced) changes in the
synaptic gain based on the modelling of MEG data to changes in subjective
precision estimated using the pursuit data. We demonstrate that imprecise target 
motion increases the gain of superficial pyramidal cells in V1 (across subjects).
Furthermore, increases in sensory precision - inferred by our behavioural DCM -
correlate with the increase in gain in V1, across subjects. This is a step
towards a fully integrated model of brain computations, cortical responses and
behaviour that may provide a useful clinical tool in conditions like
schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26921713  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Front Plant Sci. 2016 Feb 16;7:146. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.00146. eCollection
2016.

Extreme Hypoxic Conditions Induce Selective Molecular Responses and Metabolic
Reset in Detached Apple Fruit.

Cukrov D(1), Zermiani M(2), Brizzolara S(1), Cestaro A(3), Licausi F(1), Luchinat
C(4), Santucci C(4), Tenori L(5), Van Veen H(1), Zuccolo A(1), Ruperti B(2),
Tonutti P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Scienze della Vita, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna Pisa, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Agronomia Animali Alimenti Risorse Naturali e Ambiente,
University of Padova Padova, Italy. (3)Centro Ricerca e Innovazione, Fondazione
Edmund Mach di San Michele all'Adige Trento, Italy. (4)CERM, University of
Firenze Firenze, Italy. (5)Fondazione FiorGen Onlus Firenze, Italy.

The ripening physiology of detached fruit is altered by low oxygen conditions
with profound effects on quality parameters. To study hypoxia-related processes
and regulatory mechanisms, apple (Malus domestica, cv Granny Smith) fruit,
harvested at commercial ripening, were kept at 1°C under normoxic (control) and
hypoxic (0.4 and 0.8 kPa oxygen) conditions for up to 60 days. NMR analyses of
cortex tissue identified eight metabolites showing significantly different
accumulations between samples, with ethanol and alanine displaying the most
pronounced difference between hypoxic and normoxic treatments. A rapid
up-regulation of alcohol dehydrogenase and pyruvate-related metabolism (lactate
dehydrogenase, pyruvate decarboxylase, alanine aminotransferase) gene expression 
was detected under both hypoxic conditions with a more pronounced effect induced 
by the lowest (0.4 kPa) oxygen concentration. Both hypoxic conditions negatively 
affected ACC synthase and ACC oxidase transcript accumulation. Analysis of
RNA-seq data of samples collected after 24 days of hypoxic treatment identified
more than 1000 genes differentially expressed when comparing 0.4 vs. 0.8 kPa
oxygen concentration samples. Genes involved in cell-wall, minor and major CHO,
amino acid and secondary metabolisms, fermentation and glycolysis as well as
genes involved in transport, defense responses, and oxidation-reduction appeared 
to be selectively affected by treatments. The lowest oxygen concentration induced
a higher expression of transcription factors belonging to AUX/IAA, WRKY, HB,
Zinc-finger families, while MADS box family genes were more expressed when apples
were kept under 0.8 kPa oxygen. Out of the eight group VII ERF members present in
apple genome, two genes showed a rapid up-regulation under hypoxia, and western
blot analysis showed that apple MdRAP2.12 proteins were differentially
accumulated in normoxic and hypoxic samples, with the highest level reached under
0.4 kPa oxygen. These data suggest that ripe apple tissues finely and
specifically modulate sensing and regulatory mechanisms in response to different 
hypoxic stress conditions.

PMCID: PMC4754620
PMID: 26909091  [PubMed]


22. J Exp Bot. 2016 Apr;67(8):2367-86. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erw040. Epub 2016 Feb 19.

Characterization of a JAZ7 activation-tagged Arabidopsis mutant with increased
susceptibility to the fungal pathogen Fusarium oxysporum.

Thatcher LF(1), Cevik V(2), Grant M(3), Zhai B(4), Jones JD(2), Manners JM(5),
Kazan K(6).

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Agriculture, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, St. Lucia, Queensland 4067,
Australia louise.thatcher@csiro.au. (2)The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich Research
Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK. (3)College of Life and Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, UK. (4)College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural
University, Beijing 100093, China. (5)CSIRO Agriculture, Queensland Bioscience
Precinct, St. Lucia, Queensland 4067, Australia. (6)CSIRO Agriculture, Queensland
Bioscience Precinct, St. Lucia, Queensland 4067, Australia The Queensland
Alliance for Agriculture & Food Innovation (QAAFI), The University of Queensland,
Queensland Bioscience Precinct, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.

In Arabidopsis, jasmonate (JA)-signaling plays a key role in mediatingFusarium
oxysporumdisease outcome. However, the roles of JASMONATE ZIM-domain (JAZ)
proteins that repress JA-signaling have not been characterized in host resistance
or susceptibility to this pathogen. Here, we found mostJAZgenes are induced
followingF. oxysporumchallenge, and screening T-DNA insertion lines in
Arabidopsis JAZ family members identified a highly disease-susceptibleJAZ7mutant 
(jaz7-1D). This mutant exhibited constitutiveJAZ7expression and conferred
increased JA-sensitivity, suggesting activation of JA-signaling.
Unlikejaz7loss-of-function alleles,jaz7-1Dalso had enhanced JA-responsive gene
expression, altered development and increased susceptibility to the bacterial
pathogenPstDC3000 that also disrupts host JA-responses. We also demonstrate that 
JAZ7 interacts with transcription factors functioning as activators (MYC3, MYC4) 
or repressors (JAM1) of JA-signaling and contains a functional EAR repressor
motif mediating transcriptional repression via the co-repressor TOPLESS (TPL). We
propose through direct TPL recruitment, in wild-type plants JAZ7 functions as a
repressor within the JA-response network and that injaz7-1Dplants, misregulated
ectopic JAZ7 expression hyper-activates JA-signaling in part by disturbing
finely-tuned COI1-JAZ-TPL-TF complexes.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4809290
PMID: 26896849  [PubMed - in process]


23. Indian J Exp Biol. 2016 Jan;54(1):26-36.

Cloning and characterization of a water deficit stress responsive transcription
factor gene from Oryza sativa L.

Mawlong I, Ali K, Tyagi A.

Understanding the biochemical and molecular basis of drought mechanism in rice is
important as drought is one of the major causes affecting rice crop adversely. A 
1017 bp gene sequence encoding AP2/ERF family TF was isolated from Oryza sativa
sp. Indica cv N22 encoding a protein of 338 amino acid residues, with a molecular
weight of 36.58 kDa, and no intron in the ORF. The gene was named as
AP2/ERF-N22(2) different from the drought responsive gene AP2/ERF-N22 that we
reported earlier. AP2/ERF-N22(2) has entirely different characteristics from that
of AP2/ERF-N22. It has a single AP2 domain of 55 amino acid residues and a
cluster of acidic amino acid residues at the C-terminal region, which could
function as a trans-activation domain. Presence of NLS indicates that it is a
nuclear localized transcription factor encoding gene. It falls in group VI L,
sharing characteristic similarities. Arabidopsis members of group VI L have been 
shown to be involved in response to cytokinin under drought stress.

PMID: 26891550  [PubMed - in process]


24. J Exp Bot. 2016 Apr;67(8):2263-75. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erw032. Epub 2016 Feb 17.

The banana fruit Dof transcription factor MaDof23 acts as a repressor and
interacts with MaERF9 in regulating ripening-related genes.

Feng BH(1), Han YC(2), Xiao YY(2), Kuang JF(2), Fan ZQ(2), Chen JY(2), Lu WJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical
Agro-bioresources/Guangdong Key Laboratory for Postharvest Science, College of
Horticultural Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, PR 
China College of Agriculture, GuangXi University, Nanning 530004, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical
Agro-bioresources/Guangdong Key Laboratory for Postharvest Science, College of
Horticultural Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, PR 
China. (3)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical
Agro-bioresources/Guangdong Key Laboratory for Postharvest Science, College of
Horticultural Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, PR 
China wjlu@scau.edu.cn.

The DNA binding with one finger (Dof) proteins, a family of plant-specific
transcription factors, are involved in a variety of plant biological processes.
However, little information is available on their involvement in fruit ripening. 
We have characterized 25MaDofgenes from banana fruit (Musa acuminata), designated
asMaDof1-MaDof25 Gene expression analysis in fruit subjected to different
ripening conditions revealed thatMaDofs were differentially expressed during
different stages of ripening.MaDof10,23,24, and25were ethylene-inducible and
nuclear-localized, and their transcript levels increased during fruit ripening.
Moreover, yeast two-hybrid and bimolecular fluorescence complementation analyses 
demonstrated a physical interaction between MaDof23 and MaERF9, a potential
regulator of fruit ripening reported in a previous study. We determined that
MaDof23 is a transcriptional repressor, whereas MaERF9 is a transcriptional
activator. We suggest that they might act antagonistically in regulating 10
ripening-related genes, includingMaEXP1/2/3/5,MaXET7,MaPG1,MaPME3,MaPL2,MaCAT,
andMaPDC, which are associated with cell wall degradation and aroma formation.
Taken together, our findings provide new insight into the transcriptional
regulation network controlling banana fruit ripening.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4809287
PMID: 26889012  [PubMed - in process]


25. Plant Physiol. 2016 Feb 16. pii: pp.00031.2016. [Epub ahead of print]

Arabidopsis MYC Transcription Factors Are the Target of Hormonal SA/JA Crosstalk 
in Response to Pieris brassicae Egg Extract.

Schmiesing A(1), Emonet A(1), Gouhier-Darimont C(1), Reymond P(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Lausanne CITY: Lausanne Switzerland [CH]. (2)University of
Lausanne Biophore Building CITY: Lausanne POSTAL_CODE: 1015 Switzerland [CH]
philippe.reymond@unil.ch.

Arabidopsis thaliana plants recognize insect eggs and activate the salicylic acid
(SA) pathway. As a consequence, expression of defense genes regulated by the
jasmonic acid (JA) pathway is suppressed and larval performance is enhanced.
Crosstalk between defense signaling pathways is common in plant-pathogen
interactions but the molecular mechanism mediating this phenomenon is poorly
understood. Here, we demonstrate that egg-induced SA/JA antagonism works
independently of the APETALA2/ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR (AP2/ERF) transcription
factor ORA59, which controls the ERF branch of the JA pathway. In addition,
treatment with egg extract did not enhance expression or stability of JASMONATE
ZIM-domain transcriptional repressors (JAZs) and SA/JA crosstalk did not involve 
JASMONATE ASSOCIATED MYC2-LIKE (JAMs), which are negative regulators of the JA
pathway. Investigating the stability of MYC2, MYC3, and MYC4, three basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors that additively control jasmonate-related 
defense responses, we found that egg extract treatment strongly diminished MYC
protein levels in an SA-dependent manner. Furthermore, we identified WRKY75 as a 
novel and essential factor controlling SA/JA crosstalk. These data indicate that 
insect eggs target the MYC branch of the JA pathway and uncover an unexpected
modulation of SA/JA antagonism depending on the biological context in which the
SA pathway is activated.

© 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26884488  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. Biotechnol Adv. 2016 Feb 10. pii: S0734-9750(16)30011-8. doi:
10.1016/j.biotechadv.2016.02.004. [Epub ahead of print]

Jasmonate-responsive transcription factors regulating plant secondary metabolism.

Zhou M(1), Memelink J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Sylvius Laboratory, P.O. Box 9505,
2300 RA, Leiden, The Netherlands; Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China. Electronic address:
zhml39@hotmail.com. (2)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China. Electronic address:
j.memelink@biology.leidenuniv.nl.

Plants produce a large variety of secondary metabolites including alkaloids,
glucosinolates, terpenoids and phenylpropanoids. These compounds play key roles
in plant-environment interactions and many of them have pharmacological activity 
in humans. Jasmonates (JAs) are plant hormones which induce biosynthesis of many 
secondary metabolites. JAs-responsive transcription factors (TFs) that regulate
the JAs-induced accumulation of secondary metabolites belong to different
families including AP2/ERF, bHLH, MYB and WRKY. Here, we give an overview of the 
types and functions of TFs that have been identified in JAs-induced secondary
metabolite biosynthesis, and highlight their similarities and differences in
regulating various biosynthetic pathways. We review major recent developments
regarding JAs-responsive TFs mediating secondary metabolite biosynthesis, and
provide suggestions for further studies.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26876016  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 12;6:21623. doi: 10.1038/srep21623.

Expansion and stress responses of AP2/EREBP superfamily in Brachypodium
Distachyon.

Chen L(1), Han J(2), Deng X(3), Tan S(4), Li L(1), Li L(1), Zhou J(1), Peng H(1),
Yang G(2), He G(2), Zhang W(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Institute for Systems Biology, Jianghan University, Wuhan 430056, China.
(2)The Genetic Engineering International Cooperation Base of Chinese Ministry of 
Science and Technology, Chinese National Center of Plant Gene Research (Wuhan)
HUST Part, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science
&Technology (HUST), Wuhan 430074, China. (3)Ministry of Agriculture Key
Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Resources of Rubber Tree/State Key Laboratory
Breeding Base of Cultivation and Physiology for Tropical Crops, Rubber Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Danzhou 571737,
China. (4)School of Information Engineering, Hubei University of Economics, Wuhan
430205, China. (5)Department of Computer Science and Engineering and Department
of Genetics, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 36130, USA.

APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AP2/EREBP) transcription
factors constitute one of the largest and most conserved gene families in plant, 
and play essential roles in growth, development and stress response. Except a few
members, the AP2/EREBP family has not been characterized in Brachypodium
distachyon, a model plant of Poaceae. We performed a genome-wide study of this
family in B. distachyon by phylogenetic analyses, transactivation assays and
transcript profiling. A total of 149 AP2/EREBP genes were identified and divided 
into four subfamilies, i.e., ERF (ethylene responsive factor), DREB (dehydration 
responsive element binding gene), RAV (related to ABI3/VP) and AP2. Tandem
duplication was a major force in expanding B. distachyon AP2/EREBP (BdAP2/EREBP) 
family. Despite a significant expansion, genomic organizations of BdAP2/EREBPs
were monotonous as the majority of them, except those of AP2 subfamily, had no
intron. An analysis of transcription activities of several closely related and
duplicated BdDREB genes showed their functional divergence and redundancy in
evolution. The expression of BdAP2/EREBPs in different tissues and the expression
of DREB/ERF subfamilies in B. distachyon, wheat and rice under abiotic stresses
were investigated by next-generation sequencing and microarray profiling. Our
results are valuable for further function analysis of stress tolerant AP2/EREBP
genes in B. distachyon.

PMCID: PMC4751504
PMID: 26869021  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Deaf Stud Deaf Educ. 2016 Apr;21(2):156-70. doi: 10.1093/deafed/env072. Epub
2016 Feb 10.

Academic Achievement of Deaf and Hard-of-Hearing Students in an ASL/English
Bilingual Program.

Hrastinski I(1), Wilbur RB(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Zagreb and ihrastinski@erf.hr. (2)Purdue University.

There has been a scarcity of studies exploring the influence of students'
American Sign Language (ASL) proficiency on their academic achievement in
ASL/English bilingual programs. The aim of this study was to determine the
effects of ASL proficiency on reading comprehension skills and academic
achievement of 85 deaf or hard-of-hearing signing students. Two subgroups,
differing in ASL proficiency, were compared on the Northwest Evaluation
Association Measures of Academic Progress and the reading comprehension subtest
of the Stanford Achievement Test, 10th edition. Findings suggested that students 
highly proficient in ASL outperformed their less proficient peers in nationally
standardized measures of reading comprehension, English language use, and
mathematics. Moreover, a regression model consisting of 5 predictors including
variables regarding education, hearing devices, and secondary disabilities as
well as ASL proficiency and home language showed that ASL proficiency was the
single variable significantly predicting results on all outcome measures. This
study calls for a paradigm shift in thinking about deaf education by focusing on 
characteristics shared among successful deaf signing readers, specifically ASL
fluency.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26864688  [PubMed - in process]


29. BMC Genomics. 2016 Feb 9;17(1):102. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2420-0.

A toolbox of genes, proteins, metabolites and promoters for improving drought
tolerance in soybean includes the metabolite coumestrol and stomatal development 
genes.

Tripathi P(1,)(2), Rabara RC(3,)(4), Reese RN(5), Miller MA(6), Rohila JS(7),
Subramanian S(8), Shen QJ(9), Morandi D(10), Bücking H(11), Shulaev V(12),
Rushton PJ(13,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Microbiology, South Dakota State University,
Brookings, SD57007, USA. tprateek@dornsife.usc.edu. (2)Current address, Molecular
and Computational Biology, Dana & David Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and
Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA.
tprateek@dornsife.usc.edu. (3)Department of Biology and Microbiology, South
Dakota State University, Brookings, SD57007, USA. roel.rabara@tamu.edu.
(4)Current address: Texas A&M AgriLife Research and Extension Center, Dallas, TX,
75252, USA. roel.rabara@tamu.edu. (5)Department of Biology and Microbiology,
South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD57007, USA. Neil.Reese@sdstate.edu.
(6)Texas A&M AgriLife Research and Extension Center, Dallas, TX, 75252, USA.
Marissa.Miller@ag.tamu.edu. (7)Department of Biology and Microbiology, South
Dakota State University, Brookings, SD57007, USA. jai.rohila@sdstate.edu.
(8)Department of Biology and Microbiology, South Dakota State University,
Brookings, SD57007, USA. senthil.subramanian@sdstate.edu. (9)School of Life
Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 89154, USA. jeffery.shen@unlv.edu.
(10)INRA, UMR 1347 Agroécologie, 17 rue Sully, BP 86510, 21065, Dijon, CEDEX,
France. dmorandi@dijon.inra.fr. (11)Department of Biology and Microbiology, South
Dakota State University, Brookings, SD57007, USA. Heike.Bucking@sdstate.edu.
(12)Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton, TX,
76203, USA. Vladimir.Shulaev@unt.edu. (13)Texas A&M AgriLife Research and
Extension Center, Dallas, TX, 75252, USA. wrkypaul1@gmail.com. (14)Current
address, 22nd Century Group Inc., 9530 Main Street Clarence, New York, 14031,
USA. wrkypaul1@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this project was to identify metabolites, proteins,
genes, and promoters associated with water stress responses in soybean. A number 
of these may serve as new targets for the biotechnological improvement of drought
responses in soybean (Glycine max).
RESULTS: We identified metabolites, proteins, and genes that are strongly up or
down regulated during rapid water stress following removal from a hydroponics
system. 163 metabolites showed significant changes during water stress in roots
and 93 in leaves. The largest change was a root-specific 160-fold increase in the
coumestan coumestrol making it a potential biomarker for drought and a promising 
target for improving drought responses. Previous reports suggest that coumestrol 
stimulates mycorrhizal colonization and under certain conditions mycorrhizal
plants have improved drought tolerance. This suggests that coumestrol may be part
of a call for help to the rhizobiome during stress. About 3,000 genes were
strongly up-regulated by drought and we identified regulators such as ERF, MYB,
NAC, bHLH, and WRKY transcription factors, receptor-like kinases, and calcium
signaling components as potential targets for soybean improvement as well as the 
jasmonate and abscisic acid biosynthetic genes JMT, LOX1, and ABA1. Drought
stressed soybean leaves show reduced mRNA levels of stomatal development genes
including FAMA-like, MUTE-like and SPEECHLESS-like bHLH transcription factors and
leaves formed after drought stress had a reduction in stomatal density of 22.34 %
and stomatal index of 17.56 %. This suggests that reducing stomatal density may
improve drought tolerance. MEME analyses suggest that ABRE (CACGT/CG), CRT/DRE
(CCGAC) and a novel GTGCnTGC/G element play roles in transcriptional activation
and these could form components of synthetic promoters to drive expression of
transgenes. Using transformed hairy roots, we validated the increase in promoter 
activity of GmWRKY17 and GmWRKY67 during dehydration and after 20 µM ABA
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Our toolbox provides new targets and strategies for improving
soybean drought tolerance and includes the coumestan coumestrol, transcription
factors that regulate stomatal density, water stress-responsive WRKY gene
promoters and a novel DNA element that appears to be enriched in water stress
responsive promoters.

PMCID: PMC4746818
PMID: 26861168  [PubMed - in process]


30. Plant Biotechnol J. 2016 Feb 9. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12533. [Epub ahead of print]

Small RNA and degradome deep sequencing reveals drought-and tissue-specific
micrornas and their important roles in drought-sensitive and drought-tolerant
tomato genotypes.

Candar-Cakir B(1,)(2), Arican E(3), Zhang B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Programme of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Institute of Science, Istanbul
University, Vezneciler, Istanbul, Turkey. (2)Department of Biology, East Carolina
University, Greenville, NC, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Faculty of Science, Istanbul University, Vezneciler, Istanbul, Turkey.

Drought stress has adverse impacts on plant production and productivity.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are one class of noncoding RNAs regulating gene expression
post-transcriptionally. In this study, we employed small RNA and degradome
sequencing to systematically investigate the tissue-specific miRNAs responsible
to drought stress, which are understudied in tomato. For this purpose, root and
upground tissues of two different drought-responsive tomato genotypes
(Lycopersicon esculentum as sensitive and L. esculentum var. cerasiforme as
tolerant) were subjected to stress with 5% polyethylene glycol for 7 days. A
total of 699 conserved miRNAs belonging to 578 families were determined and 688
miRNAs were significantly differentially expressed between different treatments, 
tissues and genotypes. Using degradome sequencing, 44 target genes were
identified associated with 36 miRNA families. Drought-related miRNAs and their
targets were enriched functionally by Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analyses. Totally, 53 miRNAs targeted 23 key 
drought stress- and tissue development-related genes, including DRP
(dehydration-responsive protein), GTs (glycosyltransferases), ERF (ethylene
responsive factor), PSII (photosystem II) protein, HD-ZIP (homeodomain-leucine
zipper), MYB and NAC-domain transcription factors. miR160, miR165, miR166,
miR171, miR398, miR408, miR827, miR9472, miR9476 and miR9552 were the key miRNAs 
functioning in regulation of these genes and involving in tomato response to
drought stress. Additionally, plant hormone signal transduction pathway genes
were differentially regulated by miR169, miR172, miR393, miR5641, miR5658 and
miR7997 in both tissues of both sensitive and tolerant genotypes. These results
provide new insight into the regulatory role of miRNAs in drought response with
plant hormone signal transduction and drought-tolerant tomato breeding.

© 2016 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26857916  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


31. Physiol Behav. 2016 May 1;158:43-53. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2016.02.006. Epub
2016 Feb 6.

Within- and between-session replicability of cognitive brain processes: An MEG
study with an N-back task.

Ahonen L(1), Huotilainen M(2), Brattico E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Work Research Centre, Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Finland.
Electronic address: lauri.ahonen@ttl.fi. (2)Brain Work Research Centre, Finnish
Institute of Occupational Health, Finland; BioMag Laboratory, HUS Medical Imaging
Center, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland. (3)Center for Music in the
Brain (MIB), Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Denmark;
Cognitive Brain Research Unit, Institute of Behavioural Sciences, University of
Helsinki, Finland.

In the vast majority of electrophysiological studies on cognition, participants
are only measured once during a single experimental session. The dearth of
studies on test-retest reliability in magnetoencephalography (MEG) within and
across experimental sessions is a preventing factor for longitudinal designs,
imaging genetics studies, and clinical applications. From the recorded signals,
it is not straightforward to draw robust and steady indices of brain activity
that could directly be used in exploring behavioral effects or genetic
associations. To study the variations in markers associated with cognitive
functions, we extracted three event-related field (ERF) features from time-locked
global field power (GFP) epochs using MEG while participants were performing a
numerical N-back task in four consecutive measurements conducted during two
different days separated by two weeks. We demonstrate that the latency of the
M170, a neural correlate associated with cognitive functions such as working
memory, was a stable parameter and did not show significant variations over time.
In addition, the M170 peak amplitude and the mean amplitude of late positive
component (LPP) also expressed moderate-to-strong reliability across multiple
measures over time over many sensor spaces and between participants. The M170
amplitude varied more significantly between the measurements in some conditions
but showed consistency over the participants over time. In addition we
demonstrated significant correlation with the M170 and LPP parameters and
cognitive load. The results are in line with the literature showing less
within-subject fluctuation for the latency parameters and more consistency in
between-subject comparisons for amplitude based features. The within-subject
consistency was apparent also with longer delays between the measurements. We
suggest that with a few limitations the ERF features show sufficient reliability 
and stability for longitudinal research designs and clinical applications for
cognitive functions in single as well as cross-subject designs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26855266  [PubMed - in process]


32. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 3;11(2):e0147749. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147749.
eCollection 2016.

Genome-Wide Detection of SNP and SV Variations to Reveal Early Ripening-Related
Genes in Grape.

Xu Y(1,)(2), Gao Z(1), Tao J(1), Jiang W(3), Zhang S(1), Wang Q(3), Qu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, No. 1 Weigang,
Nanjing, 210095, P. R. China. (2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Horticultural Crop
Genetic Improvement, No.50 Zhongling Street, Nanjing, 210014, P.R. China.
(3)Agricultural Bureau & Forestry Workstation, Wujin District, Changzhou, 213000,
P. R. China.

Early ripening in grape (Vitis vinifera L.) is a crucial agronomic trait. The
fruits of the grape line 'Summer Black' (SBBM), which contains a bud mutation,
can be harvested approximately one week earlier than the 'Summer Black'
(SBC)control. To investigate the molecular mechanism of the bud mutation related 
to early ripening, we detected genome-wide genetic variations based on
re-sequencing. In total, 3,692,777 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
81,223 structure variations (SVs) in the SBC genome and 3,823,464 SNPs and 85,801
SVs in the SBBM genome were detected compared with the reference grape sequence. 
Of these, 635 SBC-specific genes and 665 SBBM-specific genes were screened.
Ripening and colour-associated unigenes with non-synonymous mutations (NS), SVs
or frame-shift mutations (F) were analysed. The results showed that 90 unigenes
in SBC, 76 unigenes in SBBM and 13 genes that mapped to large fragment indels
were filtered. The expression patterns of eight genes were confirmed using
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).The
re-sequencing data showed that 635 SBC-specific genes and 665 SBBM-specific genes
associated with early ripening were screened. Among these, NCED6 expression
appears to be related to NCED1 and is involved in ABA biosynthesis in grape,
which might play a role in the onset of anthocyanin accumulation. The SEP and ERF
genes probably play roles in ethylene response.

PMCID: PMC4740429
PMID: 26840449  [PubMed - in process]


33. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 3;6:20151. doi: 10.1038/srep20151.

The Citrus transcription factor, CitERF13, regulates citric acid accumulation via
a protein-protein interaction with the vacuolar proton pump, CitVHA-c4.

Li SJ(1,)(2,)(3), Yin XR(1,)(2,)(3), Xie XL(1), Allan AC(4,)(5), Ge H(1), Shen
SL(1), Chen KS(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Agriculture &Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus, 
Hangzhou 310058, P.R. China. (2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of
Horticultural Plant Integrative Biology, Zhejiang University, Zijingang Campus,
Hangzhou 310058, P.R. China. (3)The State Agriculture Ministry Laboratory of
Horticultural Plant Growth, Development and Quality Improvement, Zhejiang
University, Zijingang Campus, Hangzhou 310058, P.R. China. (4)New Zealand
Institute for Plant &Food Research Limited, Private Bag 92169, Auckland, New
Zealand. (5)School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New 
Zealand.

Organic acids are essential to fruit flavor. The vacuolar H(+) transporting
adenosine triphosphatase (V-ATPase) plays an important role in organic acid
transport and accumulation. However, less is known of V-ATPase interacting
proteins and their relationship with organic acid accumulation. The relationship 
between V-ATPase and citric acid was investigated, using the citrus tangerine
varieties 'Ordinary Ponkan (OPK)' and an early maturing mutant 'Zaoshu Ponkan
(ZPK)'. Five V-ATPase genes (CitVHA) were predicted as important to citric acid
accumulation. Among the genes, CitVHA-c4 was observed, using a yeast two-hybrid
screen, to interact at the protein level with an ethylene response factor,
CitERF13. This was verified using bimolecular fluorescence complementation
assays. A similar interaction was also observed between Arabidopsis AtERF017 (a
CitERF13 homolog) and AtVHA-c4 (a CitVHA-c4 homolog). A synergistic effect on
citric acid levels was observed between V-ATPase proteins and interacting ERFs
when analyzed using transient over-expression in tobacco and Arabidopsis mutants.
Furthermore, the transcript abundance of CitERF13 was concomitant with CitVHA-c4.
CitERF13 or AtERF017 over-expression leads to significant citric acid
accumulation. This accumulation was abolished in an AtVHA-c4 mutant background.
ERF-VHA interactions appear to be involved in citric acid accumulation, which was
observed in both citrus and Arabidopsis.

PMCID: PMC4738278
PMID: 26837571  [PubMed - in process]


34. Appl Opt. 2016 Feb 1;55(4):638-45. doi: 10.1364/AO.55.000638.

Study of a wheel-like electrorheological finishing tool and its applications to
small parts.

Su J, Cheng H, Feng Y, Tam HY.

A wheel-like electrorheological finishing (ERF) tool for small parts polishing is
proposed and thoroughly studied. First, the electrorheological polishing fluid is
tested, and its properties suggest usability for electrorheological
fluid-assisted finishing. Then, the mathematical removal model of the ERF tool is
built employing the conformal mapping method and high-order multipolar moment
theory. Finally, a micropattern of trough is fabricated on a slide glass (7 mm
wide and 1 mm thick). The trough is 70 nm deep, and its flat bottom is 1.5 m wide
(peak to valley of 3.16 nm and root mean square of 1.27 nm); the surface
roughness finally achieves 0.86 nm. The results demonstrate the stable machining 
capability of the ERF tool for miniature parts.

PMID: 26836063  [PubMed - in process]


35. Front Plant Sci. 2016 Jan 19;6:1247. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.01247. eCollection
2015.

Genome-Wide Analysis of the AP2/ERF Superfamily Genes and their Responses to
Abiotic Stress in Medicago truncatula.

Shu Y(1), Liu Y(1), Zhang J(1), Song L(1), Guo C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics and Genetic Breeding of Heilongjiang 
Province, College of Life Science and Technology, Harbin Normal University
Harbin, China.

The AP2/ERF superfamily is a large, plant-specific transcription factor family
that is involved in many important processes, including plant growth,
development, and stress responses. Using Medicago truncatula genome information, 
we identified and characterized 123 putative AP2/ERF genes, which were named as
MtERF1-123. These genes were classified into four families based on phylogenetic 
analysis, which is consistent with the results of other plant species. MtERF
genes are distributed throughout all chromosomes but are clustered on various
chromosomes due to genomic tandem and segmental duplication. Using transcriptome,
high-throughput sequencing data, and qRT-PCR analysis, we assessed the expression
patterns of the MtERF genes in tissues during development and under abiotic
stresses. In total, 87 MtERF genes were expressed in plant tissues, most of which
were expressed in specific tissues during development or under specific abiotic
stress treatments. These results support the notion that MtERF genes are involved
in developmental regulation and environmental responses in M. truncatula.
Furthermore, a cluster of DREB subfamily members on chromosome 6 was induced by
both cold and freezing stress, representing a positive gene regulatory response
under low temperature stress, which suggests that these genes might contribute to
freezing tolerance to M. truncatula. In summary, our genome-wide
characterization, evolutionary analysis, and expression pattern analysis of MtERF
genes in M. truncatula provides valuable information for characterizing the
molecular functions of these genes and utilizing them to improve stress tolerance
in plants.

PMCID: PMC4717309
PMID: 26834762  [PubMed]


36. BMC Plant Biol. 2016 Jan 28;16(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s12870-016-0720-9.

Transcriptome and comparative gene expression analysis of Phyllostachys edulis in
response to high light.

Zhao H(1,)(2), Lou Y(3,)(4), Sun H(5,)(6), Li L(7,)(8), Wang L(9,)(10), Dong
L(11,)(12), Gao Z(13,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)State Forestry Administration Key Open Laboratory on the Science and
Technology of Bamboo and Rattan, Beijing, 100102, China. zhaohansheng@icbr.ac.cn.
(2)Institute of Gene Science for Bamboo and Rattan Resources, International
Center for Bamboo and Rattan, Beijing, 100102, China. zhaohansheng@icbr.ac.cn.
(3)State Forestry Administration Key Open Laboratory on the Science and
Technology of Bamboo and Rattan, Beijing, 100102, China. 330403612@qq.com.
(4)Institute of Gene Science for Bamboo and Rattan Resources, International
Center for Bamboo and Rattan, Beijing, 100102, China. 330403612@qq.com. (5)State 
Forestry Administration Key Open Laboratory on the Science and Technology of
Bamboo and Rattan, Beijing, 100102, China. huayusun@126.com. (6)Institute of Gene
Science for Bamboo and Rattan Resources, International Center for Bamboo and
Rattan, Beijing, 100102, China. huayusun@126.com. (7)State Forestry
Administration Key Open Laboratory on the Science and Technology of Bamboo and
Rattan, Beijing, 100102, China. lilichao1991@126.com. (8)Institute of Gene
Science for Bamboo and Rattan Resources, International Center for Bamboo and
Rattan, Beijing, 100102, China. lilichao1991@126.com. (9)State Forestry
Administration Key Open Laboratory on the Science and Technology of Bamboo and
Rattan, Beijing, 100102, China. wangllawj@163.com. (10)Institute of Gene Science 
for Bamboo and Rattan Resources, International Center for Bamboo and Rattan,
Beijing, 100102, China. wangllawj@163.com. (11)State Forestry Administration Key 
Open Laboratory on the Science and Technology of Bamboo and Rattan, Beijing,
100102, China. lxhs0108@163.com. (12)Institute of Gene Science for Bamboo and
Rattan Resources, International Center for Bamboo and Rattan, Beijing, 100102,
China. lxhs0108@163.com. (13)State Forestry Administration Key Open Laboratory on
the Science and Technology of Bamboo and Rattan, Beijing, 100102, China.
gaozhimin@icbr.ac.cn. (14)Institute of Gene Science for Bamboo and Rattan
Resources, International Center for Bamboo and Rattan, Beijing, 100102, China.
gaozhimin@icbr.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Photosynthesis plays a vital role as an energy source for plant
metabolism, and its efficiency may be drastically reduced owing to abiotic
stresses. Moso bamboo (Phyllostachys edulis), is a renewable and versatile
resource with significant ecological and economic value, which encounters high
light stress with large amplitude in natural environment. However, the gene
expression profiles in response to high light were elusive in bamboo.
RESULTS: We firstly performed physiological experiments on moso bamboo leaves
treated with high light (1200 µmol<U+2009>·<U+2009>m(-2)<U+2009>·<U+2009>s(-1)). Based on the physiological
results, three samples of leaves treated with high light for 0 h (CK), 0.5 h
(0.5H), and 8 h (8H) were selected to perform further high-throughput RNA
sequencing (RNA-Seq), respectively. Then, the transcriptomic result demonstrated 
that the most genes were expressed at a statistically significant value
(FPKM<U+2009>=<U+2009>1) and the RNA-Seq data were validated via quantitative real time PCR.
Moreover, some significant gene expression changes were detected. For instance,
154 differentially expressed genes were detected in 0.5H vs. CK, those in 8H vs. 
CK were 710, and 429 differentially expressed genes were also identified in 0.5H 
vs.8 H. Besides, 47 gene annotations closely related to photosynthesis were
refined, including 35 genes annotated as light-harvesting chlorophyll a/b-binding
(LHC) proteins, 9 LHC-like proteins and 3 PsbSs. Furthermore, the pathway of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) in photosynthesis was further analyzed. A total of 
171 genes associated with ROS-scavenging were identified. Some up-regulated
transcript factors, such as NAC, WRKY, AR2/ERF, and bHLH, mainly concentrated in 
short-term response, while C2H2, HSF, bZIP, and MYB were largely involved in
short and middle terms response to high light.
CONCLUSION: Based on the gene expression analysis of moso bamboo in response to
high light, we thus identified the global gene expression patterns, refined the
annotations of LHC protein, LHC-like protein and PsbS, detected the pathway of
ROS as well as identified ROS-scavenging genes and transcription factors in the
regulation of photosynthetic and related metabolisms. These findings maybe
provide a starting point to interpret the molecular mechanism of photosynthesis
in moso bamboo under high light stress.

PMCID: PMC4730629
PMID: 26822690  [PubMed - in process]


37. BMC Plant Biol. 2016 Jan 27;16 Suppl 1:8. doi: 10.1186/s12870-015-0688-x.

Identification of new heading date determinants in wheat 5B chromosome.

Kiseleva AA(1), Shcherban AB(2), Leonova IN(2), Frenkel Z(3), Salina EA(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Federal Research Center "Institute of Cytology and Genetics of Siberian
Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences", Prospekt Lavrentyeva 10, Novosibirsk,
630090, Russian Federation. antkiseleva@bionet.nsc.ru. (2)The Federal Research
Center "Institute of Cytology and Genetics of Siberian Branch of the Russian
Academy of Sciences", Prospekt Lavrentyeva 10, Novosibirsk, 630090, Russian
Federation. (3)Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, 
31905, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Variability of heading date may assist in wheat adaptation to local
environments. Thereafter, discovery of new heading date determinants is important
for cereal improvement. In this study we used common wheat cultivar Chinese
Spring (CS) and the substitution line of CS with 5B chromosome from T.
dicoccoides (CS-5Bdic), different in their heading date by two weeks, to detect
determinants of heading date on 5B chromosome.
RESULTS: The possible influence of the VRN-B1 gene, the most powerful regulator
of flowering, located on 5B chromosome, to differences in heading time between CS
and CS-5Bdic was studied. The sequencing of this gene from CS-5Bdic showed that
an insertion of a nucleotide triplet produced an additional amino acid in the
corresponding protein. No changes in the transcription levels of each
homoeologous VRN-1 loci were found in CS-5Bdic by comparison with CS. To
ascertain the loci determining heading date difference, a set of 116 recombinant 
inbred 5<U+0412> chromosomal lines as a result of hybridization of CS with CS-5Bdic were
developed and their heading dates were estimated. Using the Illumina Infinium
15 k Wheat platform, 379 5B-specific polymorphic markers were detected and a
genetic map with 82 skeletal markers was constructed. Phenotype (heading date) - 
genotype association analysis revealed seventy eight markers in pericentromeric
region of 5B chromosome significantly associated with heading date variation.
Based on this estimation and synteny with model crop genomes we identified the
three best candidate genes: WRKY, ERF/AP2 and FHY3/FAR1.
CONCLUSIONS: We supposed that the difference in activity of WRKY, ERF/AP2 and/or 
FHY3/FAR1 transcription factors between CS and CS-5Bdic to be a probable reason
for the observed difference in heading dates. Data obtained in this study provide
a good basis for the subsequent investigation of heading time pathways in wheat.

PMID: 26821813  [PubMed - in process]


38. Exp Brain Res. 2016 Jan 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Event-related fields evoked by vocal response inhibition: a comparison of younger
and older adults.

Castro-Meneses LJ(1,)(2), Johnson BW(3), Sowman PF(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, Australian Research Council Centre of
Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders (CCD), Macquarie University, Sydney,
NSW, 2109, Australia. leidy-janeth.castro-meneses@students.mq.edu.au.
(2)Department of Cognitive Science, Perception in Action Research Centre (PARC), 
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 2109, Australia.
leidy-janeth.castro-meneses@students.mq.edu.au. (3)Department of Cognitive
Science, Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its
Disorders (CCD), Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 2109, Australia.
(4)Department of Cognitive Science, Perception in Action Research Centre (PARC), 
Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 2109, Australia.

The current study examined event-related fields (ERFs) evoked by vocal response
inhibition in a stimulus-selective stop-signal task. We compared
inhibition-related ERFs across a younger and an older group of adults.
Behavioural results revealed that stop-signal reaction times (RTs), go-RTs,
ignore-stop RTs and failed stop RTs were longer in the older, relative to the
younger group by 38, 123, 149 and 116 ms, respectively. The amplitude of the ERF 
M2 peak (approximately 200 ms after the stop signal) evoked on successful stop
trials was larger compared to that evoked on both failed stop and ignore-stop
trials. The M4 peak (approximately 450 ms after stop signal) was of larger
amplitude in both successful and failed stops compared to ignore-stop trials. In 
the older group, the M2, M3 and M4 peaks were smaller in amplitude and peaked
later in time (by 24, 50 and 76 ms, respectively). We demonstrate that vocal
response inhibition-related ERFs exhibit a similar temporal evolution to those
previously described for manual response inhibition: an early peak at 200 ms
(i.e. M2) that differentiates successful from failed stopping, and a later peak
(i.e. M4) that is consistent with a neural marker of response checking and error 
processing. Across groups, our data support a more general decline of stimulus
processing speed with age.

PMID: 26821315  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. G3 (Bethesda). 2016 Jan 22;6(3):755-65. doi: 10.1534/g3.115.025981.

Genome-Wide Investigation of MicroRNAs and Their Targets in Response to Freezing 
Stress in Medicago sativa L., Based on High-Throughput Sequencing.

Shu Y(1), Liu Y(2), Li W(2), Song L(2), Zhang J(2), Guo C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics and Genetic Breeding of Heilongjiang 
Province, College of Life Science and Technology, Harbin Normal University,
150025, China syjun2003@126.com kaku_2008@163.com. (2)Key Laboratory of Molecular
Cytogenetics and Genetic Breeding of Heilongjiang Province, College of Life
Science and Technology, Harbin Normal University, 150025, China.

Winter damage, especially in northern climates, is a major limitation of the
utilization of perennial forages such as alfalfa. Therefore, improving freezing
tolerance is imperative in alfalfa genetic breeding. However, freezing tolerance 
is a complex trait that is determined by many genes. To understand the complex
regulation mechanisms of freezing tolerance in alfalfa, we performed small RNA
sequencing analysis under cold (4°) and freezing (-8°) stress. The sequencing
results revealed that 173 known, and 24 novel miRNAs were expressed, and that the
expression of 35 miRNAs was affected by cold and/or freezing stress. Meanwhile,
105 target genes cleaved by these miRNAs were characterized by degradome
sequencing. These targets were associated with biological regulation, cellular
processes, metabolic processes, and response to stress. Interestingly, most of
them were characterized as transcription factors (TFs), including auxin response 
factors, SBP, NAC, AP2/ERF, and GRF, which play important roles in plant abiotic 
responses. In addition, important miRNAs and mRNAs involved in nodulation were
also identified, for example, the relationship between miR169 and the TF CCAAT
(also named as NF-YA/HAP2), which suggested that nodulation has an important
function in freezing tolerance in alfalfa. Our results provide valuable
information to help determine the molecular mechanisms of freezing tolerance in
alfalfa, which will aid the application of these miRNAs and their targets in the 
improvement of freezing tolerance in alfalfa and related plants.

Copyright © 2016 Shu et al.

PMCID: PMC4777136
PMID: 26801649  [PubMed - in process]


40. Plant Biotechnol J. 2016 Jan 23. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12520. [Epub ahead of print]

Genome-wide dissection of AP2/ERF and HSP90 gene families in five legumes and
expression profiles in chickpea and pigeonpea.

Agarwal G(1), Garg V(1), Kudapa H(1), Doddamani D(1), Pazhamala LT(1), Khan
AW(1), Thudi M(1), Lee SH(2,)(3), Varshney RK(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT),
Hyderabad, India. (2)Department of Plant Science, Research Institute for
Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. (3)Plant 
Genomics and Breeding Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
(4)School of Plant Biology, Institute of Agriculture, The University of Western
Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.

APETALA2/ethylene response factor (AP2/ERF) and heat-shock protein 90 (HSP90) are
two significant classes of transcription factor and molecular chaperone proteins 
which are known to be implicated under abiotic and biotic stresses. Comprehensive
survey identified a total of 147 AP2/ERF genes in chickpea, 176 in pigeonpea, 131
in Medicago, 179 in common bean and 140 in Lotus, whereas the number of HSP90
genes ranged from 5 to 7 in five legumes. Sequence alignment and phylogenetic
analyses distinguished AP2, ERF, DREB, RAV and soloist proteins, while HSP90
proteins segregated on the basis of their cellular localization. Deeper insights 
into the gene structure allowed ERF proteins to be classified into AP2s based on 
DNA-binding domains, intron arrangements and phylogenetic grouping. RNA-seq and
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analyses in heat-stressed chickpea as well
as Fusarium wilt (FW)- and sterility mosaic disease (SMD)-stressed pigeonpea
provided insights into the modus operandi of AP2/ERF and HSP90 genes. This study 
identified potential candidate genes in response to heat stress in chickpea while
for FW and SMD stresses in pigeonpea. For instance, two DREB genes (Ca_02170 and 
Ca_16631) and three HSP90 genes (Ca_23016, Ca_09743 and Ca_25602) in chickpea can
be targeted as potential candidate genes. Similarly, in pigeonpea, a HSP90 gene, 
C.cajan_27949, was highly responsive to SMD in the resistant genotype ICPL 20096,
can be recommended for further functional validation. Also, two DREB genes,
C.cajan_41905 and C.cajan_41951, were identified as leads for further
investigation in response to FW stress in pigeonpea.

© 2016 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26800652  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


41. Front Plant Sci. 2016 Jan 8;6:1217. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.01217. eCollection
2015.

A New Ethylene-Responsive Factor CaPTI1 Gene of Pepper (Capsicum annuum L.)
Involved in the Regulation of Defense Response to Phytophthora capsici.

Jin JH(1), Zhang HX(1), Tan JY(1), Yan MJ(1), Li DW(1), Khan A(1), Gong ZH(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Northwest A&F University Yangling, China.

Ethylene-responsive factors (ERF) are usually considered to play diverse roles in
plant response to biotic and abiotic stresses. In this study, an ERF gene CaPTI1 
was isolated from pepper transcriptome database. CaPTI1 contains an open reading 
frame (ORF) of 543 bp, which encodes a putative polypeptide of 180 amino acids
with a theoretical molecular weight of 20.30 kDa. Results of expression profile
showed that CaPTI1 had a highest expression level in roots and this gene could
not only response to the infection of Phytophthora capsici and the stresses of
cold and drought, but also be induced by the signaling molecule (salicylic acid, 
Methyl Jasmonate, Ethephon, and hydogen peroxide). Furthermore, virus-induce gene
silencing (VIGS) of CaPTI1 in pepper weakened the defense response significantly 
by reducing the expression of defense related genes CaPR1, CaDEF1 and CaSAR82 and
also the root activity. These results suggested that CaPTI1 is involved in the
regulation of defense response to P. capsici in pepper.

PMCID: PMC4705296
PMID: 26779241  [PubMed]


42. J Neurosci Methods. 2016 Jan 8. pii: S0165-0270(15)00443-4. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2015.12.003. [Epub ahead of print]

High-pass filters and baseline correction in M/EEG analysis. Commentary on: "How 
inappropriate high-pass filters can produce artefacts and incorrect conclusions
in ERP studies of language and cognition".

Maess B(1), Schröger E(2), Widmann A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
Electronic address: maess@cbs.mpg.de. (2)Cognitive and Biological Psychology,
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Tanner et al. (2015. Psychophysiology, 52(8), 1009. doi: 10.1111/psyp.12437)
convincingly demonstrate how a late deflection like the N400 or the P600 is
reflected into both earlier and later latencies by the application of high-pass
filters with cutoff frequencies higher than 0.1Hz. It nicely underlines the
importance of test-wise application of filters with different parameters to
electrophysiological data to identify such unwanted filter effects. In general,
we agree with their approach and conclusions, particularly with the notions that 
the application of a high-pass filter is reasonable if it improves the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the signal of interest, and that low frequency
signals may carry important information. However, we disagree in two aspects:
First, the test data of Tanner et al. are not optimally suited to demonstrate the
benefits of high-pass filtering as they are only minimally contaminated by low
frequency noise, and second, the standard baseline correction for particular
applications in M/EEG data analysis should be replaced with high-pass
filtering-as recommended by Widmann et al. (2015. J Neurosci Methods, 250, 46.
doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2014.08.002).

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26774029  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. Curr Protoc Cytom. 2016 Jan 6;75:1.29.1-1.29.14. doi:
10.1002/0471142956.cy0129s75.

Quantitative Flow Cytometry Measurements in Antibodies Bound per Cell Based on a 
CD4 Reference.

Wang L(1), Degheidy H(2), Abbasi F(2), Mostowski H(2), Marti G(3), Bauer S(2),
Hoffman RA(4), Gaigalas AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, Maryland.
(2)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland. (3)Center for Devices and Radiological
Health, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland.
(4)Consultant, Livermore, California.

Multicolor flow cytometer assays with fluorescently labeled antibodies are
routinely used in clinical laboratories to measure the cell number of specific
immunophenotypes and to estimate expression levels of specific receptors/antigens
either on the cell surface or intracellularly. The cell number and specific
receptors/antigens serve as biomarkers for pathological conditions at various
stages of a disease. Existing methods and cell reference materials for
quantitative expression measurements have not yet produced results that are of
wide clinical interest or are instrument-independent across all fluorescence
channels. This unit details a procedure for quantifying surface and intracellular
biomarkers by calibrating the output of a multicolor flow cytometer in units of
antibody bound per cell (ABC). The procedure includes (1) quality control of the 
flow cytometer, (2) fluorescence intensity calibration using hard dyed
microspheres assigned with fluorescence intensity values, (3) compensation for
fluorescence spillover between adjacent fluorescence channels, and (4)
application of a biological reference calibrator to establish an ABC scale. The
unit also points out current efforts for quantifying biomarkers in a manner that 
is independent of instrument platforms and reagent differences. © 2016 by John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

PMID: 26742654  [PubMed - in process]


44. BMC Genomics. 2016 Jan 7;17(1):36. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2334-2.

Genome-wide analysis of tomato NF-Y factors and their role in fruit ripening.

Li S(1), Li K(2), Ju Z(3), Cao D(4), Fu D(5), Zhu H(6), Zhu B(7), Luo Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)The College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural
University, No. 17 Tsinghua East Road, Beijing, 100083, Peoples Republic of
China. lishan@cau.edu.cn. (2)The College of Food Science and Nutritional
Engineering, China Agricultural University, No. 17 Tsinghua East Road, Beijing,
100083, Peoples Republic of China. 1280331905@qq.com. (3)The College of Food
Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural University, No. 17
Tsinghua East Road, Beijing, 100083, Peoples Republic of China. 469095437@qq.com.
(4)The College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural
University, No. 17 Tsinghua East Road, Beijing, 100083, Peoples Republic of
China. 1019075246@qq.com. (5)The College of Food Science and Nutritional
Engineering, China Agricultural University, No. 17 Tsinghua East Road, Beijing,
100083, Peoples Republic of China. daqifu@126.com. (6)The College of Food Science
and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural University, No. 17 Tsinghua East 
Road, Beijing, 100083, Peoples Republic of China. hlzhu@cau.edu.cn. (7)The
College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural
University, No. 17 Tsinghua East Road, Beijing, 100083, Peoples Republic of
China. zbz@cau.edu.cn. (8)The College of Food Science and Nutritional
Engineering, China Agricultural University, No. 17 Tsinghua East Road, Beijing,
100083, Peoples Republic of China. lyb@cau.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Fruit ripening is a complex developmental process that depends on a
coordinated regulation of numerous genes, including ripening-related
transcription factors (TFs), fruit-related microRNAs, DNA methylation and
chromatin remodeling. It is known that various TFs, such as MADS-domain, MYB,
AP2/ERF and SBP/SPL family proteins play key roles in modulating ripening.
However, little attention has been given to members of the large NF-Y TF family
in this regard, although genes in this family are known to have important
functions in regulating plant growth, development, and abiotic or biotic stress
responses.
RESULTS: In this study, the evolutionary relationship between Arabidopsis
thaliana and tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) NF-Y genes was examined to predict
similarities in function. Furthermore, through gene expression analysis, 13
tomato NF-Y genes were identified as candidate regulators of fruit ripening.
Functional studies involving suppression of NF-Y gene expression using virus
induced gene silencing (VIGS) indicated that five NF-Y genes, including two
members of the NF-YB subgroup (Solyc06g069310, Solyc07g065500) and three members 
of the NF-YA subgroup (Solyc01g087240, Solyc08g062210, Solyc11g065700), influence
ripening. In addition, subcellular localization analyses using NF-Y proteins
fused to a green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter showed that the three NF-YA
proteins accumulated in the nucleus, while the two NF-YB proteins were observed
in both the nucleus and cytoplasm.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we identified tomato NF-Y genes by analyzing the
tomato genome sequence using bioinformatics approaches, and characterized their
chromosomal distribution, gene structures, phylogenetic relationship and
expression patterns. We also examined their biological functions in regulating
tomato fruit via VIGS and subcellular localization analyses. The results
indicated that five NF-Y transcription factors play roles in tomato fruit
ripening. This information provides a platform for further investigation of their
biological functions.

PMCID: PMC4705811
PMID: 26742635  [PubMed - in process]


45. Plant Physiol. 2016 Mar;170(3):1732-44. doi: 10.1104/pp.15.01859. Epub 2016 Jan
6.

Comprehensive Profiling of Ethylene Response Factor Expression Identifies
Ripening-Associated ERF Genes and Their Link to Key Regulators of Fruit Ripening 
in Tomato.

Liu M(1), Gomes BL(2), Mila I(2), Purgatto E(2), Peres LE(2), Frasse P(2), Maza
E(2), Zouine M(2), Roustan JP(2), Bouzayen M(2), Pirrello J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of the Ministry of
Education, College of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Hydraulics and
Mountain River Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610014, China
(M.L.);Université de Toulouse, Institut National Polytechnique de Toulouse-Ecole 
Nationale Supérieure Agronomique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 990 Génomique et
Biotechnologie des Fruits, Castanet-Tolosan, F-31326, France (M.L., B.L.G., I.M.,
P.F., E.M., M.Z., J.-P.R., M.B., J.P.);Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 990 Génomique et Biotechnologie des Fruits,
Castanet-Tolosan, F-31326, France (M.L., B.L.G., I.M., P.F., E.M., M.Z., J.-P.R.,
M.B., J.P.);Department of Food and Experimental Nutrition, NAPAN/FoRC Food
Research Center, Universidade de São Paulo, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
05508-000 Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil (B.L.G., E.P.); andDepartamento de
Ciências Biológicas, Escola Superior de Agricultura Luiz de Queiroz, Universidade
de São Paulo, 13418-900 Piracicaba, Sao Paulo, Brazil (L.E.P.P.)
liumingchun1982102@163.com julien.pirrello@ensat.fr. (2)Key Laboratory of
Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of the Ministry of Education, College of Life
Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Hydraulics and Mountain River Engineering,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610014, China (M.L.);Université de Toulouse, Institut
National Polytechnique de Toulouse-Ecole Nationale Supérieure Agronomique, Unité 
Mixte de Recherche 990 Génomique et Biotechnologie des Fruits, Castanet-Tolosan, 
F-31326, France (M.L., B.L.G., I.M., P.F., E.M., M.Z., J.-P.R., M.B.,
J.P.);Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 990
Génomique et Biotechnologie des Fruits, Castanet-Tolosan, F-31326, France (M.L., 
B.L.G., I.M., P.F., E.M., M.Z., J.-P.R., M.B., J.P.);Department of Food and
Experimental Nutrition, NAPAN/FoRC Food Research Center, Universidade de São
Paulo, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 05508-000 Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil 
(B.L.G., E.P.); andDepartamento de Ciências Biológicas, Escola Superior de
Agricultura Luiz de Queiroz, Universidade de São Paulo, 13418-900 Piracicaba, Sao
Paulo, Brazil (L.E.P.P.).

Our knowledge of the factors mediating ethylene-dependent ripening of climacteric
fruit remains limited. The transcription of ethylene-regulated genes is mediated 
by ethylene response factors (ERFs), but mutants providing information on the
specific role of the ERFs in fruit ripening are still lacking, likely due to
functional redundancy among this large multigene family of transcription factors.
We present here a comprehensive expression profiling of tomato (Solanum
lycopersicum) ERFs in wild-type and tomato ripening-impaired tomato mutants
(Never-ripe [Nr], ripening-inhibitor [rin], and non-ripening [nor]), indicating
that out of the 77 ERFs present in the tomato genome, 27 show enhanced expression
at the onset of ripening while 28 display a ripening-associated decrease in
expression, suggesting that different ERFs may have contrasting roles in fruit
ripening. Among the 19 ERFs exhibiting the most consistent up-regulation during
ripening, the expression of 11 ERFs is strongly down-regulated in rin, nor, and
Nr tomato ripening mutants, while only three are consistently up-regulated.
Members of subclass E, SlERF.E1, SlERF.E2, and SlERF.E4, show dramatic
down-regulation in the ripening mutants, suggesting that their expression might
be instrumental in fruit ripening. This study illustrates the high complexity of 
the regulatory network connecting RIN and ERFs and identifies subclass E members 
as the most active ERFs in ethylene- and RIN/NOR-dependent ripening.

© 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4775140
PMID: 26739234  [PubMed - in process]


46. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Dec 17;6:989. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00989. eCollection
2015.

Extensive Transcriptome Changes During Natural Onset and Release of Vegetative
Bud Dormancy in Populus.

Howe GT(1), Horvath DP(2), Dharmawardhana P(3), Priest HD(4), Mockler TC(5),
Strauss SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forest Ecosystems and Society, Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR, USA. (2)Biosciences Research Laboratory, United States Department 
of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service Fargo, ND, USA. (3)Department of
Forest Ecosystems and Society, Oregon State UniversityCorvallis, OR, USA;
Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Oregon State UniversityCorvallis, OR,
USA. (4)Donald Danforth Plant Science CenterSaint Louis, MO, USA; Division of
Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University in Saint LouisSaint Louis,
MO, USA. (5)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Oregon State
UniversityCorvallis, OR, USA; Donald Danforth Plant Science CenterSaint Louis,
MO, USA.

To survive winter, many perennial plants become endodormant, a state of suspended
growth maintained even in favorable growing environments. To understand
vegetative bud endodormancy, we collected paradormant, endodormant, and
ecodormant axillary buds from Populus trees growing under natural conditions. Of 
44,441 Populus gene models analyzed using NimbleGen microarrays, we found that
1,362 (3.1%) were differentially expressed among the three dormancy states, and
429 (1.0%) were differentially expressed during only one of the two dormancy
transitions (FDR p-value < 0.05). Of all differentially expressed genes, 69% were
down-regulated from paradormancy to endodormancy, which was expected given the
lower metabolic activity associated with endodormancy. Dormancy transitions were 
accompanied by changes in genes associated with DNA methylation (via RNA-directed
DNA methylation) and histone modifications (via Polycomb Repressive Complex 2),
confirming and extending knowledge of chromatin modifications as major features
of dormancy transitions. Among the chromatin-associated genes, two genes similar 
to SPT (SUPPRESSOR OF TY) were strongly up-regulated during endodormancy.
Transcription factor genes and gene sets that were atypically up-regulated during
endodormancy include a gene that seems to encode a trihelix transcription factor 
and genes associated with proteins involved in responses to ethylene, cold, and
other abiotic stresses. These latter transcription factors include ETHYLENE
INSENSITIVE 3 (EIN3), ETHYLENE-RESPONSIVE ELEMENT BINDING PROTEIN (EBP), ETHYLENE
RESPONSE FACTOR (ERF), ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 10 (ZAT10), ZAT12, and WRKY
DNA-binding domain proteins. Analyses of phytohormone-associated genes suggest
important changes in responses to ethylene, auxin, and brassinosteroids occur
during endodormancy. We found weaker evidence for changes in genes associated
with salicylic acid and jasmonic acid, and little evidence for important changes 
in genes associated with gibberellins, abscisic acid, and cytokinin. We
identified 315 upstream sequence motifs associated with eight patterns of gene
expression, including novel motifs and motifs associated with the circadian clock
and responses to photoperiod, cold, dehydration, and ABA. Analogies between
flowering and endodormancy suggest important roles for genes similar to
SQUAMOSA-PROMOTER BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE (SPL), DORMANCY ASSOCIATED MADS-BOX (DAM),
and SUPPRESSOR OF OVEREXPRESSION OF CONSTANS 1 (SOC1).

PMCID: PMC4681841
PMID: 26734012  [PubMed]


47. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 6;6:18878. doi: 10.1038/srep18878.

Genome-wide analysis of the AP2/ERF family in Musa species reveals divergence and
neofunctionalisation during evolution.

Lakhwani D(1,)(2), Pandey A(1), Dhar YV(1), Bag SK(1,)(2), Trivedi PK(1,)(2),
Asif MH(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR-NBRI), Rana Pratap Marg, Lucknow-226001, INDIA.
(2)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Anusandhan Bhawan, 2
Rafi Marg, New Delhi-110 001, India.

AP2/ERF domain containing transcription factor super family is one of the
important regulators in the plant kingdom. The involvement of AP2/ERF family
members has been elucidated in various processes associated with plant growth,
development as well as in response to hormones, biotic and abiotic stresses. In
this study, we carried out genome-wide analysis to identify members of AP2/ERF
family in Musa acuminata (A genome) and Musa balbisiana (B genome) and changes
leading to neofunctionalisation of genes. Analysis identified 265 and 318 AP2/ERF
encoding genes in M. acuminata and M. balbisiana respectively which were further 
classified into ERF, DREB, AP2, RAV and Soloist groups. Comparative analysis
indicated that AP2/ERF family has undergone duplication, loss and divergence
during evolution and speciation of the Musa A and B genomes. We identified nine
genes which are up-regulated during fruit ripening and might be components of the
regulatory machinery operating during ethylene-dependent ripening in banana.
Tissue-specific expression analysis of the genes suggests that different
regulatory mechanisms might be involved in peel and pulp ripening process through
recruiting specific ERFs in these tissues. Analysis also suggests that MaRAV-6
and MaERF026 have structurally diverged from their M. balbisiana counterparts and
have attained new functions during ripening.

PMCID: PMC4702079
PMID: 26733055  [PubMed - in process]


48. World J Surg. 2016 Jan 5. [Epub ahead of print]

Retrospective Analyses of Esophageal Bypass Surgery for Patients with
Esophagorespiratory Fistulas Caused by Esophageal Carcinomas.

Nakajima Y(1), Kawada K(2), Tokairin Y(2), Miyawaki Y(2), Okada T(2), Miyake
S(3), Kawano T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Esophageal Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 
Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8519, Japan. yasu.nakajima.srg1@tmd.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Esophageal Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 
Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8519, Japan. (3)Department of Clinical Oncology,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Esophagorespiratory fistula (ERF) caused by esophageal carcinoma is a
fatal complication. In our institution, esophageal bypass surgery has been
indicated when possible. We herein retrospectively describe the clinical results 
of esophageal bypass surgery for ERF.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between April 2001 and March 2015, 20 patients with ERF
underwent esophageal bypass surgery. For these patients, the clinical safety,
validity, and effectiveness of esophageal bypass surgery were examined and
compared with the results of bypass surgery without ERF.
RESULTS: Eight patients developed ERF at the initial diagnosis, while 10 patients
developed ERF during and after chemoradiotherapy. Postoperative complications
such as pneumonia, surgical site infection, and anastomotic leakage developed in 
12, 5, and 1 patient, respectively. All the patients could eat solid foods at a
median of 9 postoperative days. Two patients died within 30 days after the
operation and 1 patient developed in-hospital death. Fourteen patients received
chemo(radio)therapy after the operation. The median overall survival was 244 days
and the one-year and three-year overall survival rates were 45.7 and 15.3 %,
respectively. There was no significant difference in terms of the intraoperative 
findings, postoperative morbidities, and short-term and long-term clinical
results between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Esophageal bypass surgery for ERF is not considered to be highly
invasive or risky compared with bypass surgery without ERF. After the operation, 
respiratory symptoms caused by ERF may improve and oral intake can be achieved.
Esophageal bypass surgery should therefore be aggressively performed for patients
with a tolerable performance status.

PMID: 26732670  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


49. Mol Genet Genomics. 2016 Jan 4. [Epub ahead of print]

Dynamic transcriptome analysis reveals AP2/ERF transcription factors responsible 
for cold stress in rapeseed (Brassica napus L.).

Du C(1,)(2), Hu K(1), Xian S(2), Liu C(1), Fan J(2), Tu J(3), Fu T(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, College of Plant Science 
and Technology, National Center of Rapeseed Improvement in Wuhan, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China. (2)Cotton Research
Institute, Shanxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Yuncheng, 044000, People's
Republic of China. (3)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement,
College of Plant Science and Technology, National Center of Rapeseed Improvement 
in Wuhan, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
tujx@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

The APETALA2/ethylene response factor (AP2/ERF) transcription factor (TF)
superfamily plays an important regulatory role in signal transduction of the
plant responses to various stresses including low temperature. Significant
progress has been made in understanding the mechanism of cold resistance in
Brassica napus, an important oilseed crop. However, comprehensive studies on the 
induction and activity of these TFs under low temperature have been lacking. In
this study, 132 AP2/ERF genes were identified by transcriptome sequencing of
rapeseed leaves exposed to 0, 2, 6, 12, and 24 h of low (4 °C) temperature
stress. The genes were classified into 4 subfamilies (AP2, DREB, ERF, and RAV)
and 13 subgroups, among which the DREB subfamily and ERF subfamily contained 114 
genes, no genes were assigned to soloist or DREB A3 subgroups. One hundred and
eighteen genes were located on chromosomes A1 to C9. GO functional analysis and
promoter sequence analysis revealed that these genes are involved in many
molecular pathways that may enhance cold resistance in plants, such as the
low-temperature responsiveness, methyl jasmonate, abscisic acid, and
ethylene-responsiveness pathways. Their expression patterns revealed dynamic
control at different times following initiation of cold stress; the RAV and DREB 
subfamilies were expressed at the early stage of cold stress, whereas the AP2
subfamily was expressed later. Quantitative PCR analyses of 13 cold-induced
AP2/ERF TFs confirmed the accuracy of above results. This study is the first
dynamic analysis of the AP2/ERF TFs responsible for cold stress in rapeseed.
These findings will serve as a reference for future functional research on
transcription in rapeseed.

PMID: 26728151  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


50. Sci Adv. 2015 Nov 13;1(10):e1500677. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1500677. eCollection
2015.

Does the mismatch negativity operate on a consciously accessible memory trace?

Dykstra AR(1), Gutschalk A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

The extent to which the contents of short-term memory are consciously accessible 
is a fundamental question of cognitive science. In audition, short-term memory is
often studied via the mismatch negativity (MMN), a change-related component of
the auditory evoked response that is elicited by violations of otherwise regular 
stimulus sequences. The prevailing functional view of the MMN is that it operates
on preattentive and even preconscious stimulus representations. We directly
examined the preconscious notion of the MMN using informational masking and
magnetoencephalography. Spectrally isolated and otherwise suprathreshold auditory
oddball sequences were occasionally random rendered inaudible by embedding them
in random multitone masker "clouds." Despite identical stimulation/task contexts 
and a clear representation of all stimuli in auditory cortex, MMN was only
observed when the preceding regularity (that is, the standard stream) was
consciously perceived. The results call into question the preconscious
interpretation of MMN and raise the possibility that it might index partial
awareness in the absence of overt behavior.

PMCID: PMC4681331
PMID: 26702432  [PubMed]


51. Health Promot Int. 2015 Dec 20. pii: dav111. [Epub ahead of print]

Assessing the quality of mental health promotion and prevention in Croatia: the
case of Istria.

Mihic J(1), Novak M(2), Hosman C(3), Domitrovich C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Education and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Zagreb,
Zagreb, Croatia josipa.mihic@erf.hr. (2)Faculty of Education and Rehabilitation
Sciences, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. (3)Emeritus Professor of Mental 
Health Promotion and Prevention at Maastricht University & Radboud University
Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. (4)Prevention Research Centre, Penn State
University, Penn State, USA.

While the availability of mental health promotion and prevention programs
worldwide is growing, there is divergence in their level of effectiveness that
has led to increasing interest in the development of 'effect management'
strategies. Mental health promotion and prevention science and practice has a
relatively young history in Croatia, but major investments towards its
development have been made over the last decade. This paper reports on a research
project that took place within the Istrian Region. The long-term goal of the
initiative is to establish quality assurance indicators for mental health
promotion and prevention interventions. The current study involved adapting the
Dutch Preffi 2.0 instrument for use in Croatia. The content of the Preffi
reflects the literature regarding research-based effect predictors. An instrument
allows users to assess whether programs have been designed and implemented in
ways that maximize their ability to be effective. The Preffi scores can be used
for improving a program and the quality with which it is implemented. The first
aim of the study is to determine if independent researchers can use the Preffi
reliably as a quality assessment instrument. The second aim is to use the Preffi 
to describe the quality of one cohort of mental health promotion and prevention
programs. The study represents the first steps toward developing a strategy for
quality assurance that strengthens community capacity for effective service
delivery and that could inform other countries whose mental health promotion and 
prevention efforts are in early stages of development.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26692389  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


52. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 18;5:18630. doi: 10.1038/srep18630.

De novo assembly and characterization of root transcriptome in two distinct
morphotypes of vetiver, Chrysopogon zizaniodes (L.) Roberty.

Chakrabarty D(1), Chauhan PS(1), Chauhan AS(1), Indoliya Y(1), Lavania UC(2),
Nautiyal CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute, Rana Pratap Marg, Lucknow 226 001,
India. (2)Department of Botany, Lucknow University, Lucknow 226 007, India.

Vetiver, a perennial C4 grass, has long been known for its multifarious uses in
perfumery, medicine and environmental protection. Two distinct vetiver
morphotypes have been identified in India, i.e., A. North Indian type
characterized by thick and smooth fast growing roots that produce superior
quality of laevorotatory oil; and B. South Indian type with more number of thin
and hairy roots that produce inferior quality of dextrorotatory oil. The two
morphotypes were targeted for transcriptome analysis to understand the
contribution of genetic background on oil quality and root morphology. Sample A
showed enhanced activity of flavonoid and terpenoid biosynthesis related genes,
i.e. ERF, MYB, bHLH, bZIP and WRKY. Interestingly, expression analysis revealed
that the genes involved in sesquiterpene biosynthesis pathway were up regulated
in Sample A. Moreover, some of the genes involved in mevalonate pathway of
sesquiterpene biosynthesis were unique to Sample A. Our results also demonstrated
several transcripts involved in root development and hormonal regulation being up
regulated in Sample A. To validate gene expression results of RNA-seq data, 20
transcripts were validated by qRT-PCR experiment. The present study provided an
important start point for further discovery of genes related to root oil quality 
in different ecotypes of vetiver.

PMCID: PMC4683516
PMID: 26679063  [PubMed - in process]


53. Plant Cell. 2015 Dec;27(12):3410-24. doi: 10.1105/tpc.15.00461. Epub 2015 Dec 15.

The NIN Transcription Factor Coordinates Diverse Nodulation Programs in Different
Tissues of the Medicago truncatula Root.

Vernié T(1), Kim J(1), Frances L(2), Ding Y(1), Sun J(1), Guan D(1), Niebel A(2),
Gifford ML(3), de Carvalho-Niebel F(2), Oldroyd GE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, John Innes Centre, Norwich NR4
7UH, United Kingdom. (2)Laboratoire des Interactions Plantes Microorganismes,
CNRS-INRA 2594/441, F-31320 Castanet Tolosan, France. (3)School of Life Sciences,
University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Cell
and Developmental Biology, John Innes Centre, Norwich NR4 7UH, United Kingdom
giles.oldroyd@jic.ac.uk.

Biological nitrogen fixation in legumes occurs in nodules that are initiated in
the root cortex following Nod factor recognition at the root surface, and this
requires coordination of diverse developmental programs in these different
tissues. We show that while early Nod factor signaling associated with calcium
oscillations is limited to the root surface, the resultant activation of Nodule
Inception (NIN) in the root epidermis is sufficient to promote cytokinin
signaling and nodule organogenesis in the inner root cortex. NIN or a product of 
its action must be associated with the transmission of a signal between the root 
surface and the cortical cells where nodule organogenesis is initiated. NIN
appears to have distinct functions in the root epidermis and the root cortex. In 
the epidermis, NIN restricts the extent of Early Nodulin 11 (ENOD11) expression
and does so through competitive inhibition of ERF Required for Nodulation (ERN1).
In contrast, NIN is sufficient to promote the expression of the cytokinin
receptor Cytokinin Response 1 (CRE1), which is restricted to the root cortex. Our
work in Medicago truncatula highlights the complexity of NIN action and places
NIN as a central player in the coordination of the symbiotic developmental
programs occurring in differing tissues of the root that combined are necessary
for a nitrogen-fixing symbiosis.

© 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4707452
PMID: 26672071  [PubMed - in process]


54. Plant Cell. 2016 Jan;28(1):160-80. doi: 10.1105/tpc.15.00866. Epub 2015 Dec 14.

Redundant ERF-VII Transcription Factors Bind to an Evolutionarily Conserved
cis-Motif to Regulate Hypoxia-Responsive Gene Expression in Arabidopsis.

Gasch P(1), Fundinger M(1), Müller JT(1), Lee T(2), Bailey-Serres J(2), Mustroph 
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Physiology, University Bayreuth, 95440 Bayreuth, Germany. (2)Center for 
Plant Cell Biology and Botany and Plant Sciences Department, University of
California, Riverside, California 92521. (3)Plant Physiology, University
Bayreuth, 95440 Bayreuth, Germany angelika.mustroph@uni-bayreuth.de.

The response of Arabidopsis thaliana to low-oxygen stress (hypoxia), such as
during shoot submergence or root waterlogging, includes increasing the levels of 
~50 hypoxia-responsive gene transcripts, many of which encode enzymes associated 
with anaerobic metabolism. Upregulation of over half of these mRNAs involves
stabilization of five group VII ethylene response factor (ERF-VII) transcription 
factors, which are routinely degraded via the N-end rule pathway of proteolysis
in an oxygen- and nitric oxide-dependent manner. Despite their importance,
neither the quantitative contribution of individual ERF-VIIs nor the
cis-regulatory elements they govern are well understood. Here, using single- and 
double-null mutants, the constitutively synthesized ERF-VIIs RELATED TO
APETALA2.2 (RAP2.2) and RAP2.12 are shown to act redundantly as principle
activators of hypoxia-responsive genes; constitutively expressed RAP2.3
contributes to this redundancy, whereas the hypoxia-induced HYPOXIA RESPONSIVE
ERF1 (HRE1) and HRE2 play minor roles. An evolutionarily conserved 12-bp
cis-regulatory motif that binds to and is sufficient for activation by RAP2.2 and
RAP2.12 is identified through a comparative phylogenetic motif search, promoter
dissection, yeast one-hybrid assays, and chromatin immunopurification. This
motif, designated the hypoxia-responsive promoter element, is enriched in
promoters of hypoxia-responsive genes in multiple species.

© 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4746684 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26668304  [PubMed - in process]


55. J Exp Bot. 2016 Feb;67(4):1003-14. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv512. Epub 2015 Dec 11.

Gene expression regulation in roots under drought.

Janiak A(1), Kwasniewski M(2), Szarejko I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Silesia, Jagiellonska 28, 40-032
Katowice, Poland agnieszka.janiak@us.edu.pl. (2)Department of Genetics,
University of Silesia, Jagiellonska 28, 40-032 Katowice, Poland.

Stress signalling and regulatory networks controlling expression of target genes 
are the basis of plant response to drought. Roots are the first organs exposed to
water deficiency in the soil and are the place of drought sensing. Signalling
cascades transfer chemical signals toward the shoot and initiate molecular
responses that lead to the biochemical and morphological changes that allow
plants to be protected against water loss and to tolerate stress conditions.
Here, we present an overview of signalling network and gene expression regulation
pathways that are actively induced in roots under drought stress. In particular, 
the role of several transcription factor (TF) families, including DREB, AP2/ERF, 
NAC, bZIP, MYC, CAMTA, Alfin-like and Q-type ZFP, in the regulation of root
response to drought are highlighted. The information provided includes available 
data on mutual interactions between these TFs together with their regulation by
plant hormones and other signalling molecules. The most significant downstream
target genes and molecular processes that are controlled by the regulatory
factors are given. These data are also coupled with information about the
influence of the described regulatory networks on root traits and root
development which may translate to enhanced drought tolerance. This is the first 
literature survey demonstrating the gene expression regulatory machinery that is 
induced by drought stress, presented from the perspective of roots.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26663562  [PubMed - in process]


56. J Exp Bot. 2016 Mar;67(5):1231-41. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv518. Epub 2015 Dec 9.

Ethylene response factors in Arabidopsis immunity.

Huang PY, Catinot J, Zimmerli L.

Pathogen attack leads to transcriptional changes and metabolic modifications
allowing the establishment of appropriate plant defences. Transcription factors
(TFs) are key players in plant innate immunity. Notably, ethylene response factor
(ERF) TFs are integrators of hormonal pathways and are directly responsible for
the transcriptional regulation of several jasmonate (JA)/ethylene (ET)-responsive
defence genes. Transcriptional activation or repression by ERFs is achieved
through the binding to JA/ET-responsive gene promoters. In this review, we
describe the regulation and mode of action at a molecular level of ERFs involved 
in Arabidopsis thaliana immunity. In particular, we focus on defence activators
such as ERF1, ORA59, ERF6, and the recently described ERF96.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26663391  [PubMed - in process]


57. Plant J. 2016 Jan;85(1):134-47. doi: 10.1111/tpj.13097.

The cytokinin response factors modulate root and shoot growth and promote leaf
senescence in Arabidopsis.

Raines T(1), Shanks C(1), Cheng CY(1), McPherson D(1), Argueso CT(1), Kim HJ(2), 
Franco-Zorrilla JM(3), López-Vidriero I(3), Solano R(3), Vanková R(4), Schaller
GE(2), Kieber JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599,
USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, 03755,
USA. (3)Unidad de Genómica and Departamento de Genética Molecular de Plantas,
Centro Nacional de Biotecnología-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas,
Campus Universidad Autónoma, 28049, Madrid, Spain. (4)Laboratory of Hormonal
Regulations in Plants, Institute of Experimental Botany AS CR, Rozvojová 263, 165
02, Prague, Czech Republic.

The cytokinin response factors (CRFs) are a group of related AP2/ERF
transcription factors that are transcriptionally induced by cytokinin. Here we
explore the role of the CRFs in Arabidopsis thaliana growth and development by
analyzing lines with decreased and increased CRF function. While single crf
mutations have no appreciable phenotypes, disruption of multiple CRFs results in 
larger rosettes, delayed leaf senescence, a smaller root apical meristem (RAM),
reduced primary and lateral root growth, and, in etiolated seedlings, shorter
hypocotyls. In contrast, overexpression of CRFs generally results in the opposite
phenotypes. The crf1,2,5,6 quadruple mutant is embryo lethal, indicating that CRF
function is essential for embryo development. Disruption of the CRFs results in
partially insensitivity to cytokinin in a root elongation assay and affects the
basal expression of a significant number of cytokinin-regulated genes, including 
the type-A ARRs, although it does not impair the cytokinin induction of the
type-A ARRs. Genes encoding homeobox transcription factors are mis-expressed in
the crf1,3,5,6 mutant, including STIMPY/WOX9 that is required for root and shoot 
apical meristem maintenance roots and which has previously been linked to
cytokinin. These results indicate that the CRF transcription factors play
important roles in multiple aspects of plant growth and development, in part
through a complex interaction with cytokinin signaling.

© 2015 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26662515  [PubMed - in process]


58. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Nov 26;6:1064. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.01064. eCollection
2015.

The Small Ethylene Response Factor ERF96 is Involved in the Regulation of the
Abscisic Acid Response in Arabidopsis.

Wang X(1), Liu S(2), Tian H(2), Wang S(2), Chen JG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of Ministry of Education and Institute
of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University , Changchun, China ;
Biosciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory , Oak Ridge, TN, USA. (2)Key 
Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of Ministry of Education and Institute of
Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University , Changchun, China.
(3)Biosciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory , Oak Ridge, TN, USA.

Ethylene regulates many aspects of plant growth and development including seed
germination, leaf senescence, and fruit ripening, and of plant responses to
environmental stimuli including both biotic and abiotic stresses. Ethylene
response factors (ERFs) are plant-specific transcription factors and are a
subfamily of the AP2 (APETALA2)/ERF transcription factor family. The function of 
many members in this large gene family remains largely unknown. ERF96, a member
of the Group IX ERF family transcription factors, has recently been shown to be a
transcriptional activator that is involved in plant defense response in
Arabidopsis. Here we provide evidence that ERF96 is a positive regulator of
abscisic acid (ABA) responses. Bioinformatics analysis indicated that there are a
total four small ERFs in Arabidopsis including ERF95, ERF96, ERF97, and ERF98,
and that ERF96 forms a cluster with ERF95 and ERF97. By using quantitative
RT-PCR, we found that ERF96 is expressed in all tissues and organs examined
except roots, with relatively high expression in flowers and seeds. Results from 
the protoplast transfection assay indicated that the EDLL motif-containing
C-terminal domain is responsible for ERF96's transcriptional activity. Although
loss-of-function mutant of ERF96 was morphologically similar to wild type plants,
transgenic plants overexpressing ERF96 had smaller rosette size and were delayed 
in flowering time. In ABA sensitivity assays, we found that ERF96 overexpression 
plants were hypersensitive to ABA in terms of ABA inhibition of seed germination,
early seedling development and root elongation. Consistent with these
observations, elevated transcript levels of some ABA-responsive genes including
RD29A, ABI5, ABF3, ABF4, P5CS, and COR15A were observed in the transgenic plants 
in the presence of ABA. However, in the absence of ABA treatment, the transcript 
levels of these ABA-responsive genes remained largely unchanged. Our experiments 
also showed that water loss in ERF96 overexpression plants was slower than that
in Col wild type plants. Stomatal closure assays indicated that ERF96
overexpression plants had reduced stomatal aperture in the presence of ABA. Taken
together, our results suggest that ERF96 positively regulates ABA responses in
Arabidopsis.

PMCID: PMC4659910
PMID: 26635862  [PubMed]


59. Ter Arkh. 2015;87(9):44-51.

[Clinical effectiveness of pioglitazone in the combination treatment of patients 
with asthma concurrent with coronary heart disease].

[Article in Russian]

Byelan OV, Borzykh OA, Mamontova TV, Kaidashev IP.

AIM: To investigate the clinical effectiveness of pioglitazone in the combination
treatment of patients with asthma concurrent with coronary heart disease (CHD).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Fifty patients aged 40-75 years with asthma concurrent with
CHD were examined. External respiratory function (ERF), electrocardiograms, blood
pressure (BP), and anthropometric measurements were assessed in all the patients.
Blood and urine laboratory values and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein
(hs-CRP) concentrations were estimated; endothelial function was determined
measuring endothelium-dependent and endothelium-independent vasodilation (EDVD
and EIVD). The patients were randomized into a comparison group receiving only
standard therapy and a study group taking pioglitazone as part of combination
therapy for 3 months.
RESULTS: At the randomization stage prior to pioglitazone combination therapy,
the patient groups did not statistically significantly differ in basic clinical
and anamnestic data. Three-month standard therapy resulted in stabilization of
ERF and endothelial function. During the treatment, there were increases in the
frequency of asthma symptoms and the duration of angina attacks, however, there
was a decline in hs-CRP levels (p<0.001). Incorporation of pioglitazone into the 
standard treatment regimen of patients with asthma concurrent with CHD improved
clinical disease control, decreased the degree of bronchial obstruction and the
frequency of angina pain and asthma attacks using nitroglycerin and salbutamol,
lowered systolic and diastolic blood pressure, improved EDVD (increases in the
maximum linear velocity of blood flow after a test for reactive hyperemia (RH),
index of reactivity (IR), and A% brachial artery (BA) diameter) and EIVD
(increases in IR and A% BA diameter), and reduced systemic inflammation from
hs-CRP values (p<0.001) and hypercholesterolemia from total cholesterol levels
(p<0.02).
CONCLUSION: The incorporation of pioglitazone in the combination therapy of
patients with asthma concurrent with CHD improves the clinical course of the
diseases and increases their control, reduces systemic inflammation, and improves
endothelial functional activity.

PMID: 26591552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Pan Afr Med J. 2015 Aug 27;21:309. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2015.21.309.6498.
eCollection 2015.

Exclusive breastfeeding and HIV/AIDS: a crossectional survey of mothers attending
prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV clinics in southwestern
Nigeria.

Aishat U(1), David D(2), Olufunmilayo F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nigeria Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Programme, Abuja, Nigeria ;
Department of Community Medicine, LAUTECH Teaching Hospital, Osogbo, Osun State, 
Nigeria. (2)Nigeria Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Programme, Abuja, 
Nigeria ; Department of Epidemiology and Medical statistics, University of
Ibadan, Oyo State, Nigeria.

INTRODUCTION: Prevention of Mother-To-Child-Transmission (PMTCT) of Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) guideline recommends replacement feeding where it is
acceptable, feasible, affordable, sustainable and safe. Where this is
un-achievable, exclusive breastfeeding (EBF) is recommended during the first six 
months of life.
METHODS: A hospital-based cross-sectional study was conducted among 600
HIV-positive using a two-stage sampling technique. Data on socio-demographics,
infant feeding choice and factors influencing these choices were collected using 
semi-structured questionnaires.
RESULTS: Majority of the mothers (86.0%) were married and aged 31.0 ± 5.7 years. 
Slightly above half (53.0%) had =2 children and more than two-third had disclosed
their HIV status to their spouses. About two-third (61.0%) were traders with
75.0% earning monthly income =N5,000.00k. Half of the mothers had =4 antenatal
care visits and 85.0% had infant feeding counselling. Infant feeding choices
among the mothers were EBF (61.0%), ERF (26.0%) and MF (13.0%). The choice of EBF
was influenced by spouse influence (84.0%), family influence (81.0%) and fear of 
stigmatisation (53.0%). Predictors of EBF were; monthly income (AOR = 2.6, C.I.
=1.4-4.5), infant feeding counselling (AOR = 2.7, C.I. = 1.6-6.9) and fear of
stigmatisation (AOR = 7. 2, C.I. = 2.1-23.6).
CONCLUSION: HIV positive mothers are faced with multiple challenges as they
strive to practice exclusive breastfeeding. More extensive and comprehensive
approach of infant feeding counseling with emphasis on behavioural change
programmes in the context of HIV/AIDS within communities is advocated.

PMCID: PMC4633749
PMID: 26587157  [PubMed - in process]


61. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Nov 3;6:952. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00952. eCollection
2015.

Gene-to-metabolite network for biosynthesis of lignans in MeJA-elicited Isatis
indigotica hairy root cultures.

Chen R(1), Li Q(2), Tan H(1), Chen J(2), Xiao Y(2), Ma R(3), Gao S(2), Zerbe
P(4), Chen W(2), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Botany, School of Pharmacy, Second Military
Medical University Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Pharmacy, Shanghai
Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University Shanghai, China.
(3)School of Traditional Chinese Materia Medica, Shenyang Pharmaceutical
University Shenyang, China. (4)Department of Plant Biology, University of
California, Davis Davis, CA, USA.

Root and leaf tissue of Isatis indigotica shows notable anti-viral efficacy, and 
are widely used as "Banlangen" and "Daqingye" in traditional Chinese medicine.
The plants' pharmacological activity is attributed to phenylpropanoids,
especially a group of lignan metabolites. However, the biosynthesis of lignans in
I. indigotica remains opaque. This study describes the discovery and analysis of 
biosynthetic genes and AP2/ERF-type transcription factors involved in lignan
biosynthesis in I. indigotica. MeJA treatment revealed differential expression of
three genes involved in phenylpropanoid backbone biosynthesis (IiPAL, IiC4H,
Ii4CL), five genes involved in lignan biosynthesis (IiCAD, IiC3H, IiCCR, IiDIR,
and IiPLR), and 112 putative AP2/ERF transcription factors. In addition, four
intermediates of lariciresinol biosynthesis were found to be induced. Based on
these results, a canonical correlation analysis using Pearson's correlation
coefficient was performed to construct gene-to-metabolite networks and identify
putative key genes and rate-limiting reactions in lignan biosynthesis.
Over-expression of IiC3H, identified as a key pathway gene, was used for
metabolic engineering of I. indigotica hairy roots, and resulted in an increase
in lariciresinol production. These findings illustrate the utility of canonical
correlation analysis for the discovery and metabolic engineering of key metabolic
genes in plants.

PMCID: PMC4630570
PMID: 26579184  [PubMed]


62. Plant Sci. 2016 Jan;242:224-39. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2015.09.018. Epub 2015
Sep 28.

Identification of candidate network hubs involved in metabolic adjustments of
rice under drought stress by integrating transcriptome data and genome-scale
metabolic network.

Mohanty B(1), Kitazumi A(2), Cheung CY(1), Lakshmanan M(3), de los Reyes BG(2),
Jang IC(4), Lee DY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of
Singapore, 4 Engineering Drive 4, 117585 Singapore. (2)School of Biology and
Ecology, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469 USA. (3)Bioprocessing Technology
Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 20 Biopolis Way,
#06-01, Centros, 138668 Singapore. (4)Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory, 1
Research Link, National University of Singapore, 117604 Singapore; Department of 
Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore,14 Science Drive 4, 117543 
Singapore. (5)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National
University of Singapore, 4 Engineering Drive 4, 117585 Singapore; Bioprocessing
Technology Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 20
Biopolis Way, #06-01, Centros, 138668 Singapore. Electronic address:
cheld@nus.edu.sg.

In this study, we have integrated a rice genome-scale metabolic network and the
transcriptome of a drought-tolerant rice line, DK151, to identify the major
transcriptional regulators involved in metabolic adjustments necessary for
adaptation to drought. This was achieved by examining the differential
expressions of transcription factors and metabolic genes in leaf, root and young 
panicle of rice plants subjected to drought stress during tillering, booting and 
panicle elongation stages. Critical transcription factors such as AP2/ERF, bZIP, 
MYB and NAC that control the important nodes in the gene regulatory pathway were 
identified through correlative analysis of the patterns of spatio-temporal
expression and cis-element enrichment. We showed that many of the candidate
transcription factors involved in metabolic adjustments were previously linked to
phenotypic variation for drought tolerance. This approach represents the first
attempt to integrate models of transcriptional regulation and metabolic pathways 
for the identification of candidate regulatory genes for targeted selection in
rice breeding.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26566840  [PubMed - in process]


63. Gene. 2016 Jan 15;576(1 Pt 2):358-65. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.10.048. Epub 2015 
Oct 23.

Field application of safe chemical elicitors induced the expression of some
resistance genes against grey mold and cottony rot diseases during snap bean pods
storage.

El-Garhy HA(1), Rashid IA(2), Abou-Ali RM(3), Moustafa MM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Genetic Engineering Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Benha
University, Moshtohor 13736, Qalyubia, Egypt. Electronic address:
hoda.algarhy@fagr.bu.edu.eg. (2)Post-harvest Diseases Department, Plant Pathology
Research Institute, Agricultural Research Center (ARC), Giza, Egypt. (3)Nucleic
Acid and Protein Structure Department, Agricultural Genetic Engineering Research 
Institute (AGERI), Agricultural Research Center (ARC), Giza, Egypt. (4)Genetics
and Genetic Engineering Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Benha University,
Moshtohor 13736, Qalyubia, Egypt.

Phaseolus vulgaris is subjected to serious post-harvest diseases such as grey
mold and cottony rot diseases caused by Botrytis cinerea and Pythium
aphanidermatum, respectively. In current study, potassium silicate (KSi),
potassium thiosulfate (KTS) and potassium sulfate (KS) suppressed moderately the 
growth of B. cinerea and P. aphanidermatum in vitro. The applied treatments
significantly suppressed grey mold and cottony rot of Xera and Valentino snap
beans varieties' pods stored at 7±1°C and 90-95% RH for 20days. Ethylene
responsive factor (ERF), polygalacturonase inhibitor protein (PGIP), phosphatase 
associated to defense (PA) and pathogenesis-related protein (PR1) defense genes
were over-expressed in leaves tissue of both bean varieties responding positively
to potassium salts field application. The expression of these genes was
influenced by plant genotype and environment as it varied by snap bean varieties.
Accumulation of ERF, GIP, PA and PR1 genes transcript under KTS at 4000ppm
treatment were the highest in Xera tissues (3.5-, 4.8-, 4- and 4.8-fold,
respectively). In conclusion, pre-harvest potassium salt in vivo application
could be used as effective safe alternatives to fungicides against grey mold and 
cottony rot diseases of snap beans during storage for up to 20days at 7±1°C.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26526133  [PubMed - in process]


64. Plant Cell Rep. 2016 Feb;35(2):303-16. doi: 10.1007/s00299-015-1885-7. Epub 2015 
Oct 30.

A novel cis-acting element in the GmERF3 promoter contributes to inducible gene
expression in soybean and tobacco after wounding.

Hernandez-Garcia CM(1,)(2), Finer JJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture and Crop Science, OARDC/The Ohio State University, 
1680 Madison Ave., Wooster, OH, 44691, USA. (2)Epicrop Technologies, Inc., 5701 N
58th St, Suite 1, Lincoln, NE, 68507, USA. (3)Department of Horticulture and Crop
Science, OARDC/The Ohio State University, 1680 Madison Ave., Wooster, OH, 44691, 
USA. finer.1@osu.edu.

KEY MESSAGE: Using in silico and functional analyses, we cloned and validated the
expression profile of an inducible soybean promoter (GmERF3) along with its novel
wound-induced and delayed expression (WIDE) element. Promoters and their
contributing promoter elements are the main regulators of gene expression at the 
transcriptional level. Although the Ethylene Response Factor (ERF) gene family is
one of the most well-studied stress-responsive gene families in plants, their
promoter regions have received little attention. In this study, we investigated
the expression patterns driven by the soybean (Glycine max) GmERF3 promoter and
its cis-acting elements in soybean and tobacco. Transcriptomic data revealed that
the native GmERF3 gene was differentially expressed in organs and tissues of
plants. In transgenic soybeans containing a 1.3 kb GmERF3 promoter fused to the
green fluorescent protein (gfp) gene, organ- and tissue-specificity was observed 
in untreated plants while mechanical wounding led to induction of GFP expression.
Further in silico and in planta analyses of the GmERF3 promoter sequence in
soybean revealed different cis-acting elements, including a novel cis-acting
element, which contributed to increased expression, 1-2 days after mechanical
wounding. We have named this DNA motif the wound-induced and delayed expression
element (GGATTCAAGTTTAACC). A synthetic promoter containing a tetrameric repeat
of this element showed high but late wound-induced GFP expression in leaves of
transgenic tobacco. Our study expands the toolbox of inducible promoters and
promoter elements for potential use in basic and applied research.

PMID: 26518427  [PubMed - in process]


65. Plant Mol Biol. 2016 Jan;90(1-2):49-62. doi: 10.1007/s11103-015-0393-z. Epub 2015
Oct 19.

Identification of a regulatory element responsible for salt induction of rice
OsRAV2 through ex situ and in situ promoter analysis.

Duan YB(1,)(2), Li J(1), Qin RY(1), Xu RF(1), Li H(1), Yang YC(1), Ma H(1), Li
L(1), Wei PC(3), Yang JB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Rice Genetic Breeding of Anhui Province, Rice Research
Institute, Anhui Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hefei, 230031, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Resource Plant Biology of Anhui Province, College of Life Sciences,
Huaibei Normal University, Huaibei, 235000, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Rice
Genetic Breeding of Anhui Province, Rice Research Institute, Anhui Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Hefei, 230031, China. weipengcheng@gmail.com. (4)Key
Laboratory of Rice Genetic Breeding of Anhui Province, Rice Research Institute,
Anhui Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hefei, 230031, China. yjianbo@263.net.

Salt is a major environmental stress factor that can affect rice growth and
yields. Recent studies suggested that members of the AP2/ERF domain-containing
RAV (related to ABI3/VP1) TF family are involved in abiotic stress adaptation.
However, the transcriptional response of rice RAV genes (OsRAVs) to salt has not 
yet been fully characterized. In this study, the expression patterns of all five 
OsRAVs were examined under salt stress. Only one gene, OsRAV2, was stably induced
by high-salinity treatment. Further expression profile analyses indicated that
OsRAV2 is transcriptionally regulated by salt, but not KCl, osmotic stress, cold 
or ABA (abscisic acid) treatment. To elucidate the regulatory mechanism of the
stress response at the transcriptional level, we isolated and characterized the
promoter region of OsRAV2 (P OsRAV2 ). Transgenic analysis indicated that P
OsRAV2 is induced by salt stress but not osmotic stress or ABA treatment. Serial 
5' deletions and site-specific mutations in P OsRAV2 revealed that a GT-1 element
located at position -664 relative to the putative translation start site is
essential for the salt induction of P OsRAV2 . The regulatory function of the
GT-1 element in the salt induction of OsRAV2 was verified in situ in plants with 
targeted mutations generated using the CRISPR/Cas9 (clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats/CRISPR-associated protein 9) system. Taken 
together, our results indicate that the GT-1 element directly controls the salt
response of OsRAV2. This study provides a better understanding of the putative
functions of OsRAVs and the molecular regulatory mechanisms of plant genes under 
salt stress.

PMID: 26482477  [PubMed - in process]


66. J Plant Physiol. 2015 Sep 15;189:11-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2015.08.009. Epub
2015 Oct 9.

Role of AINTEGUMENTA-like gene NtANTL in the regulation of tobacco organ growth.

Kuluev B(1), Avalbaev A(2), Nurgaleeva E(3), Knyazev A(4), Nikonorov Y(4),
Chemeris A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Centre, Russian Academy
of Sciences, pr. Oktyabrya 71, Ufa 450054, Russia; Bashkir State University, Z.
Validi str. 32, 450074 Ufa, Russia. Electronic address: kuluev@bk.ru.
(2)Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Centre, Russian Academy
of Sciences, pr. Oktyabrya 71, Ufa 450054, Russia. Electronic address:
avalbaev@yahoo.com. (3)Bashkir State University, Z. Validi str. 32, 450074 Ufa,
Russia. (4)Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Centre, Russian
Academy of Sciences, pr. Oktyabrya 71, Ufa 450054, Russia.

The Nicotiana tabacum AINTEGUMENTA-like gene (NtANTL), encoding one of AP2/ERF
transcription factors, is a putative ortholog of the AtANT gene from Arabidopsis 
thaliana. In wild-type tobacco plants, the NtANTL gene was expressed in the
actively dividing young flowers, shoot apices, and calluses, while the level of
its mRNA increased considerably after treatment with exogenous
6-benzylaminopurine, indoleacetic acid and 24-epibrassinolide. We found a
positive correlation among the expression levels of NtANTL, cyclin NtCYCD3;1 and 
cyclin-dependent kinase NtCDKB1-1 genes, suggesting possible molecular links
between AINTEGUMENTA and cell cycle regulators in tobacco plants. However, no
correlation was observed between NtANTL, NtCYCD3;1 and NtCDKB1-1 expression
levels in response to NaCl and ABA. These observations indicate that the
transcription factor NtANTL was not involved in the regulation of the cellular
response to salinity nor did it affect the expression of NtCYCD3;1 and NtCDKB1-1 
when tobacco plants were exposed to salt stress and ABA. In addition, we
generated transgenic tobacco plants with both up-regulated and down-regulated
expression of the NtANTL gene. Constitutive expression of the NtANTL gene
contributed to an increase in the size of leaves and corolla of transgenic
plants. Transgenic plants with reduced expression of the NtANTL gene had smaller 
leaves, flowers and stems, but showed a compensatory increase in the cell size of
leaves and flowers. The results show the significance of the NtANTL gene for the 
control of organ growth by both cell division and expansion in tobacco plants.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26479044  [PubMed - in process]


67. Plant Cell Environ. 2015 Oct 18. doi: 10.1111/pce.12660. [Epub ahead of print]

Exogenous isoprene modulates gene expression in unstressed Arabidopsis thaliana
plants.

Harvey CM(1), Sharkey TD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University,
603 Wilson Rd., East Lansing, MI, 48824.

Isoprene is a well-studied volatile hemiterpene that protects plants from abiotic
stress through mechanisms that are not fully understood. The antioxidant and
membrane stabilizing potential of isoprene are the two most commonly invoked
mechanisms. However, isoprene also affects phenylpropanoid metabolism, suggesting
an additional role as a signaling molecule. In this study, microarray based gene 
expression profiling reveals transcriptional reprogramming of Arabidopsis
thaliana plants fumigated for 24 hrs with a physiologically relevant
concentration of isoprene. Functional enrichment analysis of fumigated plants
revealed enhanced heat- and light-stress-responsive processes in response to
isoprene. Isoprene induced a network enriched in ERF and WRKY transcription
factors, which may play a role in stress tolerance. The isoprene-induced
upregulation of phenylpropanoid biosynthetic genes was specifically confirmed
using quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. These results
support a role for isoprene as a signaling molecule, in addition to its possible 
roles as an antioxidant and membrane thermoprotectant.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26477606  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


68. J Neurosci. 2015 Oct 14;35(41):13927-42. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0477-15.2015.

Near-Critical Dynamics in Stimulus-Evoked Activity of the Human Brain and Its
Relation to Spontaneous Resting-State Activity.

Arviv O(1), Goldstein A(2), Shriki O(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Leslie and Susan Gonda (Goldschmied) Multidisciplinary Brain Research
Center and Oshrit.Arviv@biu.ac.il. (2)The Leslie and Susan Gonda (Goldschmied)
Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center and Department of Psychology, Bar-Ilan
University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, Israel, and. (3)Department of Brain and Cognitive 
Sciences, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva 8410501, Israel.

In recent years, numerous studies have found that the brain at resting state
displays many features characteristic of a critical state. Here we examine
whether stimulus-evoked activity can also be regarded as critical. Additionally, 
we investigate the relation between resting-state activity and stimulus-evoked
activity from the perspective of criticality. We found that cortical activity
measured by magnetoencephalography (MEG) is near critical and organizes as
neuronal avalanches at both resting-state and stimulus-evoked activities.
Moreover, a significantly high intrasubject similarity between avalanche size and
duration distributions at both cognitive states was found, suggesting that the
distributions capture specific features of the individual brain dynamics. When
comparing different subjects, a higher intersubject consistency was found for
stimulus-evoked activity than for resting state. This was expressed by the
distance between avalanche size and duration distributions of different
participants and was supported by the spatial spreading of the avalanches
involved. During the course of stimulus-evoked activity, time locked to the
stimulus onset, we demonstrate fluctuations in the gain of the neuronal system
and thus short timescale deviations from the critical state. Nonetheless, the
overall near-critical state in stimulus-evoked activity is retained over longer
timescales, in close proximity and with a high correlation to spontaneous (not
time-locked) resting-state activity. Spatially, the observed fluctuations in gain
manifest through anticorrelative activations of brain sites involved, suggesting 
a switch between task-negative (default mode) and task-positive networks and
assigning the changes in excitation-inhibition balance to nodes within these
networks. Overall, this study offers a novel outlook on evoked activity through
the framework of criticality.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: The organization of
stimulus-evoked activity and ongoing cortical activity is a topic of high
importance. The article addresses several general questions. What is the
spatiotemporal organization of stimulus-evoked cortical activity in healthy human
subjects? Are there deviations from excitation-inhibition balance during
stimulus-evoked activity? What is the relationship between stimulus-evoked
activity and ongoing resting-state activity? Using magnetoencephalography (MEG), 
we demonstrate that stimulus-evoked activity in humans follows a critical
branching process that produces neuronal avalanches. Additionally, we investigate
the spatiotemporal relationship between resting-state activity and
stimulus-evoked activity from the perspective of critical dynamics. These
analyses reveal new aspects of this complex relationship and offer novel insights
into the interplay between excitation and inhibition that were not observed
previously using conventional approaches.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3513927-16$15.00/0.

PMID: 26468194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 9;10(10):e0139595. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139595.
eCollection 2015.

Comparative Transcriptome Analysis of the Less-Dormant Taiwanese Pear and the
Dormant Japanese Pear during Winter Season.

Takemura Y(1), Kuroki K(1), Shida Y(1), Araki S(1), Takeuchi Y(1), Tanaka K(2),
Ishige T(2), Yajima S(3), Tamura F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Tottori University, Koyama, Tottori, 680-8553, Japan. 
(2)NODA Genome Research Center, Tokyo University of Agriculture, Setagaya-ku,
Tokyo, 156-8502, Japan. (3)NODA Genome Research Center, Tokyo University of
Agriculture, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 156-8502, Japan; Department of Bioscience, Tokyo
University of Agriculture, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 156-8502, Japan.

The flower bud transcriptome in the less dormant Taiwanese pear 'Hengshanli' and 
high-chilling requiring Japanese pear strain TH3 subjected to the same chilling
exposure time were analyzed during winter using next-generation sequencing. In
buds sampled on January 10th and on February 7th in 2014, 6,978 and 7,096 genes, 
respectively, were significantly differentially expressed in the TH3 and
'Hengshanli' libraries. A comparative GO analysis revealed that
oxidation-reduction process (biological process) and ATP binding (molecular
function), were overrepresented during the ecodormancy period (EP) when compared 
to the endodormancy deepest period (DP), indicating that ATP synthesis was
activated during the transition between these dormancy stages. Among the 11
differently expressed genes (DEGs) annotated as probable dehydrins or LEA
protein-related genes, 9 DEGs showed higher transcript levels in the DP than in
the EP. In order to focus on transcription factors induced by low temperature or 
drought, 7 differently expressed genes (DEGs) annotated as probable ICE1 or DREB 
proteins were analyzed by real-time PCR. Expression levels of 3 genes were higher
in TH3 than in 'Hengshanli' on all sampling days. Their expression increased
during the endodormancy deepest period (DP) and then decreased before
endodormancy breaking in TH3 buds. Taken together, these results suggest that
these genes annotated as ICE1, DREB and ERF are involved in endodormancy
maintenance and in the transition from endodormancy to ecodormancy.

PMCID: PMC4599857
PMID: 26451604  [PubMed - in process]


70. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Sep 4;6:686. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00686. eCollection
2015.

Arabidopsis AtERF15 positively regulates immunity against Pseudomonas syringae
pv. tomato DC3000 and Botrytis cinerea.

Zhang H(1), Huang L(1), Dai Y(1), Liu S(1), Hong Y(1), Tian L(1), Huang L(1), Cao
Z(1), Li D(1), Song F(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory for Rice Biology, Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang
University Hangzhou, China.

Upon pathogen infection, activation of immune response requires effective
transcriptional reprogramming that regulates inducible expression of a large set 
of defense genes. A number of ethylene-responsive factor transcription factors
have been shown to play critical roles in regulating immune responses in plants. 
In the present study, we explored the functions of Arabidopsis AtERF15 in immune 
responses against Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (Pst) DC3000, a
(hemi)biotrophic bacterial pathogen, and Botrytis cinerea, a necrotrophic fungal 
pathogen. Expression of AtERF15 was induced by infection of Pst DC3000 and B.
cinerea and by treatments with salicylic acid (SA) and methyl jasmonate.
Biochemical assays demonstrated that AtERF15 is a nucleus-localized transcription
activator. The AtERF15-overexpressing (AtERF15-OE) plants displayed enhanced
resistance while the AtERF15-RNAi plants exhibited decreased resistance against
Pst DC3000 and B. cinerea. Meanwhile, Pst DC3000- or B. cinerea-induced
expression of defense genes was upregulated in AtERF15-OE plants but
downregulated in AtERF15-RNAi plants, as compared to the expression in wild type 
plants. In response to infection with B. cinerea, the AtERF15-OE plants
accumulated less reactive oxygen species (ROS) while the AtERF15-RNAi plants
accumulated more ROS. The flg22- and chitin-induced oxidative burst was abolished
and expression levels of the pattern-triggered immunity-responsive genes AtFRK1
and AtWRKY53 were suppressed in AtER15-RNAi plants upon treatment with flg22 or
chitin. Furthermore, SA-induced defense response was also partially impaired in
the AtERF15-RNAi plants. These data demonstrate that AtERF15 is a positive
regulator of multiple layers of the immune responses in Arabidopsis.

PMCID: PMC4559647
PMID: 26388886  [PubMed]


71. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Aug 28;6:640. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00640. eCollection
2015.

Ethylene responsive factors in the orchestration of stress responses in
monocotyledonous plants.

Dey S(1), Corina Vlot A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Department of Environmental Sciences, Institute of
Biochemical Plant Pathology , Neuherberg, Germany.

The APETALA2/Ethylene-Responsive Factor (AP2/ERF) superfamily of transcription
factors (TFs) regulates physiological, developmental and stress responses. Most
of the AP2/ERF TFs belong to the ERF family in both dicotyledonous and
monocotyledonous plants. ERFs are implicated in the responses to both biotic and 
abiotic stress and occasionally impart multiple stress tolerance. Studies have
revealed that ERF gene function is conserved in dicots and monocots. Moreover,
successful stress tolerance phenotypes are observed on expression in heterologous
systems, making ERFs promising candidates for engineering stress tolerance in
plants. In this review, we summarize the role of ERFs in general stress
tolerance, including responses to biotic and abiotic stress factors, and endeavor
to understand the cascade of ERF regulation resulting in successful
signal-to-response translation in monocotyledonous plants.

PMCID: PMC4552142
PMID: 26379679  [PubMed]


72. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 14;10(9):e0137602. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137602.
eCollection 2015.

Gene Co-Expression Analysis Inferring the Crosstalk of Ethylene and Gibberellin
in Modulating the Transcriptional Acclimation of Cassava Root Growth in Different
Seasons.

Saithong T(1), Saerue S(2), Kalapanulak S(1), Sojikul P(3), Narangajavana J(3),
Bhumiratana S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Program, School of Bioresources and
Technology, King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Thakham,
Bangkhunthian, Bangkok, Thailand; Systems Biology and Bioinformatics Research
Group, Pilot Plant Development and Training Institute, King Mongkut's University 
of Technology Thonburi, Thakham, Bangkhunthian, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Program, School of Bioresources and
Technology, King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Thakham,
Bangkhunthian, Bangkok, Thailand. (3)Center for Cassava Molecular Biotechnology, 
Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Thungphayathai, Ratchathewi, Bangkok,
Thailand; Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University,
Thungphayathai, Ratchathewi, Bangkok, Thailand. (4)Systems Biology and
Bioinformatics Research Group, Pilot Plant Development and Training Institute,
King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Thakham, Bangkhunthian,
Bangkok, Thailand; Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering,
King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Bangkok, Thungkhru, Bangmod,
Bangkok, Thailand.

Cassava is a crop of hope for the 21st century. Great advantages of cassava over 
other crops are not only the capacity of carbohydrates, but it is also an easily 
grown crop with fast development. As a plant which is highly tolerant to a poor
environment, cassava has been believed to own an effective acclimation process,
an intelligent mechanism behind its survival and sustainability in a wide range
of climates. Herein, we aimed to investigate the transcriptional regulation
underlying the adaptive development of a cassava root to different seasonal
cultivation climates. Gene co-expression analysis suggests that AP2-EREBP
transcription factor (ERF1) orthologue (D142) played a pivotal role in regulating
the cellular response to exposing to wet and dry seasons. The ERF shows crosstalk
with gibberellin, via ent-Kaurene synthase (D106), in the transcriptional
regulatory network that was proposed to modulate the downstream regulatory system
through a distinct signaling mechanism. While sulfur assimilation is likely to be
a signaling regulation for dry crop growth response, calmodulin-binding protein
is responsible for regulation in the wet crop. With our initiative study, we hope
that our findings will pave the way towards sustainability of cassava production 
under various kinds of stress considering the future global climate change.

PMCID: PMC4569563
PMID: 26366737  [PubMed - in process]


73. J Integr Plant Biol. 2015 Sep 10. doi: 10.1111/jipb.12427. [Epub ahead of print]

A gain-of-function mutation in Msl10 triggers cell death and wound-induced
hyperaccumulation of JA in Arabidopsis.

Zou Y(1), Chintamanani S(2), He P(3), Fukushige H(4), Yu L(5), Shao M(1), Zhu
L(5), Hildebrand DF(4), Tang X(6), Zhou JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai
201210, China. (2)Syngenta Biotechnology, Inc. Slater, IA 50244, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Institute for Plant Genomics and
Biotechnology, Texas A&M University, TX 77840, USA. (4)Department of Agronomy,
Agricultural Sciences Center-Noth, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
40546-0091, USA. (5)State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(6)School of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China.

Jasmonates (JAs) are rapidly induced after wounding and act as key regulators for
wound induced signaling pathway. However, what perceives the wound signal and how
that triggers JA biosynthesis remains poorly understood. To identify components
involved in Arabidopsis wound and JA signaling pathway, we screened for mutants
with abnormal expression of a luciferase reporter which is under the control of a
wound-responsive promoter of an ethylene response factor (ERF) transcription
factor gene, RAP2.6 (Related to APetala 2.6). The rea1 (RAP2.6 expresser in shoot
apex) mutant constitutively expressed the RAP2.6-LUC reporter gene in young
leaves. Along with the typical JA phenotypes including shorter petioles, loss of 
apical dominance, accumulation of anthocyanin pigments and constitutive
expression of JA response gene, rea1 plants also displayed cell death and
accumulated high levels of JA in response to wounding. The phenotype of rea1
mutant is caused by a gain-of-function mutation in the C-terminus of a
mechanosensitive ion channel MscS-like 10 (MSL10). MSL10 is localized in the
plasma membrane and is expressed predominantly in root tip, shoot apex and
vascular tissues. These results suggest that MSL10 is involved in the
wound-triggered early signal transduction pathway and possibly in regulating the 
positive feedback synthesis of JA.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26356550  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


74. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Aug 28;14(3):10206-23. doi: 10.4238/2015.August.28.4.

Cloning and stress response analysis of the PeDREB2A and PeDREB1A genes in moso
bamboo (Phyllostachys edulis).

Wu HL(1), Li L(1), Cheng ZC(1), Ge W(1), Gao J(2), Li XP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing, China. (2)Beijing, China gaojian@icbr.ac.cn.

Moso bamboo is a large woody bamboo with the highest ecological, economic, and
cultural value among all bamboos in Asia. However, environmental stress
influences its growth and development and limits its geographic distribution.
Therefore, improving its resistance to environmental stress is extremely
important. Dehydration responsive element binding (DREB) transcription factors
perform an important role in the regulation of stress-related genes, enhancing
the resistance of plants to abiotic stress. In the current study, two novel DREB 
genes, PeDREB2A and PeDREB1A (Gene ID No. PH01000046G1730 and PH01000668G0350),
were isolated from moso bamboo and the sequences were identified and
characterized (coding sequence lengths were 795 and 825 bp, respectively). The
PeDREB2A and PeDREB1A proteins were estimated to have typical AP2/ERF domains,
molecular weights of 28.96 and 28.84 kDa, and isoelectric points of 9.47 and
5.34, respectively. RT-PCR analysis revealed that PeDREB2A and PeDREB1A were
tissue-specific genes, expressed in leaves, young stems, and roots, with similar 
expression levels in leaves and young stems. qRT-PCR analysis of leaves
demonstrated that PeDREB2A transcription levels rapidly accumulate following
exposure to drought and salt stress, peaking at 12 and 0.5 h, respectively, but
only low expression levels were observed under cold stress. PeDREB1A exhibited a 
strong response to cold stress, reaching a peak in expression 3 h after exposure,
but demonstrated only a slight response to drought and salt stress. In roots,
PeDREB2A was down-regulated, and PeDREB1A was initially upregulated but then
declined, under stress conditions. Two plant expression vectors, pCAMBIA2300-
CaMV35S-PeDREB2A and pCAMBIA2300-CaMV35S-PeDREB1A were also successfully
constructed.

PMID: 26345957  [PubMed - in process]


75. Plant Signal Behav. 2015;10(10):e1065366. doi: 10.1080/15592324.2015.1065366.
Epub 2015 Sep 4.

TdERF1, an ethylene response factor associated with dehydration responses in
durum wheat (Triticum turgidum L. subsp. durum).

Makhloufi E(1,)(2,)(3), Yousfi FE(1,)(2,)(3), Pirrello J(1,)(2), Bernadac
A(1,)(2), Ghorbel A(3), Bouzayen M(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a University of Toulouse, INPT; Laboratoire de Génomique et Biotechnologie des
Fruits ; Castanet-Tolosan , France. (2)b INRA; UMR990 Génomique et Biotechnologie
des Fruits ; Castanet-Tolosan , France. (3)c Center of Biotechnology of Borj
Cedria (CBBC); Lab. Plant Molecular Physiology; Borj Cedria Science and
Technology Park ; Hammam-Lif , Tunisia.

Water deficit and increasing salinization reduce productivity of wheat, the
leading crop for human diet. While the complete genome sequence of this crop has 
not been deciphered, a BAC library screening allowed the isolation of TdERF1, the
first ethylene response factor gene from durum wheat. This gene is putatively
involved in mediating salt stress tolerance and its characterization provides
clues toward understanding the mechanisms underlying the adaptation/tolerance of 
durum wheat to suboptimal growth conditions. TdERF1 expression is differentially 
induced by high salt treatment in 2 durum wheat varieties, the salt-tolerant
Grecale (GR) and the salt-sensitive Om Rabiaa (OR). To further extend these
findings, we show here that the expression of this ERF is correlated with
physiological parameters, such as the accumulation of osmo-regulators and
membrane integrity, that discriminate between the 2 contrasted wheat genotypes.
The data confirm that GR and OR are 2 contrasted wheat genotypes with regard to
salt-stress and show that TdERF1 is also induced by water stress with an
expression pattern clearly discriminating between the 2 genotypes. These findings
suggest that TdERF1 might be involved in responses to salt and water stress
providing a potential genetic marker discriminating between tolerant and
sensitive wheat varieties.

PMID: 26338450  [PubMed - in process]


76. BMC Genomics. 2015 Sep 2;16:658. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1856-y.

Large scale transcriptome analysis reveals interplay between development of
forest trees and a beneficial mycorrhiza helper bacterium.

Kurth F(1), Feldhahn L(2), Bönn M(3,)(4), Herrmann S(5,)(6), Buscot F(7,)(8),
Tarkka MT(9,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)UFZ - Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Soil Ecology,
Theodor-Lieser-Str. 4, 06120, Halle/Saale, Germany. florence.kurth@ufz.de. (2)UFZ
- Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Soil Ecology,
Theodor-Lieser-Str. 4, 06120, Halle/Saale, Germany. lasse.feldhahn@ufz.de. (3)UFZ
- Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Soil Ecology,
Theodor-Lieser-Str. 4, 06120, Halle/Saale, Germany. markus.boenn@ufz.de.
(4)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle - Jena -
Leipzig, Deutscher Platz 5, 04103, Leipzig, Germany. markus.boenn@ufz.de. (5)UFZ 
- Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Community Ecology,
Theodor-Lieser-Str. 4, 06120, Halle/Saale, Germany. sylvie.herrmann@ufz.de.
(6)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle - Jena -
Leipzig, Deutscher Platz 5, 04103, Leipzig, Germany. sylvie.herrmann@ufz.de.
(7)UFZ - Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Soil Ecology,
Theodor-Lieser-Str. 4, 06120, Halle/Saale, Germany. francois.buscot@ufz.de.
(8)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle - Jena -
Leipzig, Deutscher Platz 5, 04103, Leipzig, Germany. francois.buscot@ufz.de.
(9)UFZ - Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Soil Ecology,
Theodor-Lieser-Str. 4, 06120, Halle/Saale, Germany. mika.tarkka@ufz.de.
(10)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) Halle - Jena -
Leipzig, Deutscher Platz 5, 04103, Leipzig, Germany. mika.tarkka@ufz.de.

BACKGROUND: Pedunculate oak, Quercus robur is an abundant forest tree species
that hosts a large and diverse community of beneficial ectomycorrhizal fungi
(EMFs), whereby ectomycorrhiza (EM) formation is stimulated by mycorrhiza helper 
bacteria such as Streptomyces sp. AcH 505. Oaks typically grow rhythmically, with
alternating root flushes (RFs) and shoot flushes (SFs). We explored the poorly
understood mechanisms by which oaks integrate signals induced by their beneficial
microbes and endogenous rhythmic growth at the level of gene expression. To this 
end, we compared transcript profiles of oak microcuttings at RF and SF during
interactions with AcH 505 alone and in combination with the basidiomycetous EMF
Piloderma croceum.
RESULTS: The local root and distal leaf responses to the microorganisms differed 
substantially. More genes involved in the recognition of bacteria and fungi,
defence and cell wall remodelling related transcription factors (TFs) were
differentially expressed in the roots than in the leaves of oaks. In addition,
interaction with AcH 505 and P. croceum affected the expression of a higher
number of genes during SF than during RF, including AcH 505 elicited defence
response, which was attenuated by co-inoculation with P. croceum in the roots
during SF. Genes encoding leucine-rich receptor-like kinases (LRR-RLKs) and
proteins (LRR-RLPs), LRR containing defence response regulators, TFs from bZIP,
ERF and WRKY families, xyloglucan cell wall transglycolases/hydrolases and
exordium proteins were differentially expressed in both roots and leaves of
plants treated with AcH 505. Only few genes, including specific RLKs and TFs,
were induced in both AcH 505 and co-inoculation treatments.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with AcH 505 induces and maintains the expression levels of
signalling genes encoding candidate receptor protein kinases and TFs and leads to
differential expression of cell wall modification related genes in pedunculate
oak microcuttings. Local gene expression response to AcH 505 alone and in
combination with P. croceum are more pronounced when roots are in resting stages,
possibly due to the fact that non growing roots re-direct their activity towards 
plant defence rather than growth.

PMCID: PMC4557895
PMID: 26328611  [PubMed - in process]


77. Plant Mol Biol. 2015 Sep;89(1-2):173-86. doi: 10.1007/s11103-015-0361-7. Epub
2015 Aug 30.

PsAP2 an AP2/ERF family transcription factor from Papaver somniferum enhances
abiotic and biotic stress tolerance in transgenic tobacco.

Mishra S(1), Phukan UJ(1), Tripathi V(2), Singh DK(1), Luqman S(1), Shukla RK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Division, Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants
(CSIR-CIMAP), P.O. CIMAP, Near Kukrail Picnic Spot, Lucknow, 226015, India.
(2)Botany Division, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Sector 10, Jankipuram, 
Lucknow, 226031, India. (3)Biotechnology Division, Central Institute of Medicinal
and Aromatic Plants (CSIR-CIMAP), P.O. CIMAP, Near Kukrail Picnic Spot, Lucknow, 
226015, India. rk.shukla@cimap.res.in.

The AP2/ERFs are one of the most important family of transcription factors which 
regulate multiple responses like stress, metabolism and development in plants. We
isolated PsAP2 a novel AP2/ERF from Papaver somniferum which was highly
upregulated in response to wounding followed by ethylene, methyl jasmonate and
ABA treatment. PsAP2 showed specific binding with both DRE and GCC box elements
and it was able to transactivate the reporter genes in yeast. PsAP2
overexpressing transgenic tobacco plants exhibited enhanced tolerance towards
both abiotic and biotic stresses . Real time transcript expression analysis
showed constitutive upregulation of tobacco Alternative oxidase1a and
Myo-inositol-1-phosphate synthase in PsAP2 overexpressing tobacco plants.
Further, PsAP2 showed interaction with NtAOX1a promoter in vitro, it also
specifically activated the NtAOX1a promoter in yeast and tobacco BY2 cells. The
silencing of PsAP2 using VIGS lead to significant reduction in the AOX1 level in 
P. somniferum. Taken together PsAP2 can directly bind and transcriptionally
activate NtAOX1a and its overexpression in tobacco imparted increased tolerance
towards both abiotic and biotic stress.

PMID: 26319514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Plant Signal Behav. 2016 Feb;11(2):e1073873. doi: 10.1080/15592324.2015.1073873.

EARLY BUD-BREAK1 (EBB1) defines a conserved mechanism for control of bud-break in
woody perennials.

Busov V(1,)(2), Carneros E(3), Yakovlev I(3).

Author information: 
(1)a School of Forest Resources and Environmental Science; Michigan Technological
University ; Houghton , Michigan USA. (2)c Biotechnology Research Center,
Michigan Technological University , 1400 Townsend Drive, Houghton , MI 49931 ,
USA. (3)b Norwegian Forest and Landscape Institute ; Ås , Norway.

Bud-break is an environmentally and economically important trait in trees, shrubs
and vines from temperate latitudes. Poor synchronization of bud-break timing with
local climates can lead to frost injuries, susceptibility to pests and pathogens 
and poor crop yields in fruit trees and vines. The rapid climate changes outpace 
the adaptive capacities of plants to respond through natural selection. This is
particularly true for trees which have long generation cycle and thus the
adaptive changes are significantly delayed. Therefore, to devise appropriate
breeding and conservation strategies, it is imperative to understand the
molecular underpinnings that govern dormancy mechanisms. We have recently
identified and characterized the poplar EARLY BUD-BREAK 1 (EBB1) gene. EBB1 is a 
positive regulator of bud-break and encodes a transcription factor from the
AP2/ERF family. Here, using comparative and functional genomics approaches we
show that EBB1 function in regulation of bud-break is likely conserved across
wide range of woody perennial species with importance to forestry and
agriculture.

PMID: 26317150  [PubMed - in process]


79. Plant Cell. 2015 Sep;27(9):2469-83. doi: 10.1105/tpc.15.00227. Epub 2015 Aug 25.

The Interaction between Rice ERF3 and WOX11 Promotes Crown Root Development by
Regulating Gene Expression Involved in Cytokinin Signaling.

Zhao Y(1), Cheng S(2), Song Y(2), Huang Y(2), Zhou S(2), Liu X(2), Zhou DX(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural
University, 430070 Wuhan, China zhaoyu@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (2)National Key
Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070 
Wuhan, China. (3)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong
Agricultural University, 430070 Wuhan, China Institute of Plant Sciences
Paris-Saclay (IPS2), Université Paris-Sud 11, 91405 Orsay, France.

Crown roots are the main components of the fibrous root system in rice (Oryza
sativa). WOX11, a WUSCHEL-related homeobox gene specifically expressed in the
emerging crown root meristem, is a key regulator in crown root development.
However, the nature of WOX11 function in crown root development has remained
elusive. Here, we identified a rice AP2/ERF protein, ERF3, which interacts with
WOX11 and was expressed in crown root initials and during crown root growth.
Functional analysis revealed that ERF3 was essential for crown root development
and acts in auxin- and cytokinin-responsive gene expression. Downregulation of
ERF3 in wox11 mutants produced a more severe root phenotype. Also, increased
expression of ERF3 could partially complement wox11, indicating that the two
genes functioned cooperatively to regulate crown root development. ERF3 and WOX11
shared a common target, the cytokinin-responsive gene RR2. The expression of ERF3
and WOX11 only partially overlapped, underlining a spatio-temporal control of RR2
expression and crown root development. Furthermore, ERF3-regulated RR2 expression
was involved in crown root initiation, while the ERF3/WOX11 interaction likely
repressed RR2 during crown root elongation. These results define a mechanism
regulating gene expression involved in cytokinin signaling during different
stages of crown root development in rice.

© 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26307379  [PubMed - in process]


80. Plant J. 2015 Oct;84(2):296-308. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12994.

The maize transcription factor EREB58 mediates the jasmonate-induced production
of sesquiterpene volatiles.

Li S(1,)(2), Wang H(1), Li F(3), Chen Z(1), Li X(1), Zhu L(1), Wang G(3), Yu
J(2), Huang D(1), Lang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing, 100081, China. (2)College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural
University, Beijing, 100193, China. (3)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant 
Diseases and Insect Pests, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100193, China.

Over the past two decades, Zea mays (maize) has been established as a model
system for the study of indirect plant defense against herbivores. When attacked 
by lepidopteran larvae, maize leaves emit a complex blend of volatiles, mainly
composed of sesquiterpenes, to attract the natural enemies of the herbivores.
This is associated with a swift transcriptional induction of terpene synthases
such as TPS10; however, the molecular components controlling the complex
transcriptional reprogramming in this process are still obscure. Here, by
exploiting the finding that the maize TPS10 promoter retained its full
responsiveness to herbivory in Arabidopsis, we identified the region from -300 to
-200 of the TPS10 promoter as both necessary and sufficient for its herbivore
inducibility through 5' deletion mapping. A high-throughput screening of an
Arabidopsis transcription factor library using this promoter region as the bait
identified seven AP2/ERF family transcription factors. Among their close homologs
in maize, EREB58 was the only gene responsive to herbivory, with a spatiotemporal
expression pattern highly similar to that of TPS10. Meanwhile, EREB58 was also
responsive to Jasmonate. In vivo and in vitro assays indicated that EREB58
promotes TPS10 expression by directly binding to the GCC-box within the region
from -300 to -200 of the TPS10 promoter. Transgenic maize plants overexpressing
EREB58 constitutively over-accumulate TPS10 transcript, and also (E)-ß-farnesene 
and (E)-a-bergamotene, two major sesquiterpenes produced by TPS10. In contrast,
jasmonate induction of TPS10 and its volatiles was abolished in EREB58-RNAi
transgenic lines. In sum, these results demonstrate that EREB58 is a positive
regulator of sesquiterpene production by directly promoting TPS10 expression.

© 2015 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26303437  [PubMed - in process]


81. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 19;10(8):e0134837. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134837.
eCollection 2015.

Assembly and Analysis of Differential Transcriptome Responses of Hevea
brasiliensis on Interaction with Microcyclus ulei.

Hurtado Páez UA(1), García Romero IA(1), Restrepo Restrepo S(2), Aristizábal
Gutiérrez FA(1), Montoya Castaño D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Caracterización Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia; Grupo de Bioprocesos y
Bioprospección, Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional de Colombia,
Bogotá, Colombia. (2)Laboratorio de Micología y Fitopatología, Universidad de los
Andes, Bogotá, Colombia. (3)Grupo de Bioprocesos y Bioprospección, Instituto de
Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogotá, Colombia.

Natural rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) is a tropical tree used commercially for the 
production of latex, from which 40,000 products are generated. The fungus
Microcyclus ulei infects this tree, causing South American leaf blight (SALB)
disease. This disease causes developmental delays and significant crop losses,
thereby decreasing the production of latex. Currently several groups are working 
on obtaining clones of rubber tree with durable resistance to SALB through the
use of extensive molecular biology techniques. In this study, we used a secondary
clone that was resistant to M. ulei isolate GCL012. This clone, FX 3864 was
obtained by crossing between clones PB 86 and B 38 (H. brasiliensis x H.
brasiliensis). RNA-Seq high-throughput sequencing technology was used to analyze 
the differential expression of the FX 3864 clone transcriptome at 0 and 48 h post
infection (hpi) with the M. ulei isolate GCL012. A total of 158,134,220 reads
were assembled using the de novo assembly strategy to generate 90,775 contigs
with an N50 of 1672. Using a reference-based assembly, 76,278 contigs were
generated with an N50 of 1324. We identified 86 differentially expressed genes
associated with the defense response of FX 3864 to GCL012. Seven putative genes
members of the AP2/ERF ethylene (ET)-dependent superfamily were found to be
down-regulated. An increase in salicylic acid (SA) was associated with the
up-regulation of three genes involved in cell wall synthesis and remodeling, as
well as in the down-regulation of the putative gene CPR5. The defense response of
FX 3864 against the GCL012 isolate was associated with the antagonistic SA, ET
and jasmonic acid (JA) pathways. These responses are characteristic of plant
resistance to biotrophic pathogens.

PMCID: PMC4564276
PMID: 26287380  [PubMed - in process]


82. Med Biol Eng Comput. 2016 Apr;54(4):675-89. doi: 10.1007/s11517-015-1358-8. Epub 
2015 Aug 18.

Sound transmission in porcine thorax through airway insonification.

Peng Y(1), Dai Z(2), Mansy HA(3,)(4), Henry BM(2), Sandler RH(3,)(4), Balk RA(5),
Royston TJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 842 W. Taylor St, 2039 ERF, Chicago, IL, 60607, USA. ypeng6@uic.edu.
(2)Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 842 W. Taylor St, 2039 ERF, Chicago, IL, 60607, USA. (3)University of
Central Florida, Orlando, FL, 32816, USA. (4)Nemours Children's Hospital,
Orlando, FL, 32827, USA. (5)Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 60612,
USA.

Many pulmonary injuries and pathologies may lead to structural and functional
changes in the lungs resulting in measurable sound transmission changes on the
chest surface. Additionally, noninvasive imaging of externally driven mechanical 
wave motion in the chest (e.g., using magnetic resonance elastography) can
provide information about lung structural property changes and, hence, may be of 
diagnostic value. In the present study, a comprehensive computational simulation 
(in silico) model was developed to simulate sound wave propagation in the
airways, lung, and chest wall under normal and pneumothorax conditions.
Experiments were carried out to validate the model. Here, sound waves with
frequency content from 50 to 700 Hz were introduced into airways of five porcine 
subjects via an endotracheal tube, and transmitted waves were measured by
scanning laser Doppler vibrometry at the chest wall surface. The computational
model predictions of decreased sound transmission with pneumothorax were
consistent with experimental measurements. The in silico model can also be used
to visualize wave propagation inside and on the chest wall surface for other
pulmonary pathologies, which may help in developing and interpreting diagnostic
procedures that utilize sound and vibration.

PMCID: PMC4758916 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26280512  [PubMed - in process]


83. PLoS Genet. 2015 Aug 14;11(8):e1005464. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005464.
eCollection 2015.

SHOEBOX Modulates Root Meristem Size in Rice through Dose-Dependent Effects of
Gibberellins on Cell Elongation and Proliferation.

Li J(1), Zhao Y(1), Chu H(2), Wang L(1), Fu Y(1), Liu P(3), Upadhyaya N(4), Chen 
C(1), Mou T(1), Feng Y(3), Kumar P(2), Xu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, China. (2)Department of Biological Sciences and NUS Centre for
BioImaging Sciences, National University of Singapore, Singapore. (3)Key
Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Biology and Medicine (Ministry of
Education), Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. (4)Plant
Industry, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Canberra,
Australia.

Little is known about how the size of meristem cells is regulated and whether it 
participates in the control of meristem size in plants. Here, we report our
findings on shoebox (shb), a mild gibberellin (GA) deficient rice mutant that has
a short root meristem size. Quantitative analysis of cortical cell length and
number indicates that shb has shorter, rather than fewer, cells in the root
meristem until around the fifth day after sowing, from which the number of
cortical cells is also reduced. These defects can be either corrected by
exogenous application of bioactive GA or induced in wild-type roots by a
dose-dependent inhibitory effect of paclobutrazol on GA biosynthesis, suggesting 
that GA deficiency is the primary cause of shb mutant phenotypes. SHB encodes an 
AP2/ERF transcription factor that directly activates transcription of the GA
biosynthesis gene KS1. Thus, root meristem size in rice is modulated by
SHB-mediated GA biosynthesis that regulates the elongation and proliferation of
meristem cells in a developmental stage-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC4537253
PMID: 26275148  [PubMed - in process]


84. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2015 Jul 20;3:101. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2015.00101.
eCollection 2015.

Identification and Molecular Characterization of the Switchgrass AP2/ERF
Transcription Factor Superfamily, and Overexpression of PvERF001 for Improvement 
of Biomass Characteristics for Biofuel.

Wuddineh WA(1), Mazarei M(1), Turner GB(2), Sykes RW(2), Decker SR(2), Davis
MF(2), Stewart CN Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Tennessee , Knoxville, TN , USA ; 
Bioenergy Science Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory , Oak Ridge, TN , USA.
(2)Bioenergy Science Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory , Oak Ridge, TN , USA 
; National Renewable Energy Laboratory , Golden, CO , USA.

The APETALA2/ethylene response factor (AP2/ERF) superfamily of transcription
factors (TFs) plays essential roles in the regulation of various growth and
developmental programs including stress responses. Members of these TFs in other 
plant species have been implicated to play a role in the regulation of cell wall 
biosynthesis. Here, we identified a total of 207 AP2/ERF TF genes in the
switchgrass genome and grouped into four gene families comprised of 25 AP2-, 121 
ERF-, 55 DREB (dehydration responsive element binding)-, and 5 RAV (related to
API3/VP) genes, as well as a singleton gene not fitting any of the above
families. The ERF and DREB subfamilies comprised seven and four distinct groups, 
respectively. Analysis of exon/intron structures of switchgrass AP2/ERF genes
showed high diversity in the distribution of introns in AP2 genes versus a single
or no intron in most genes in the ERF and RAV families. The majority of the
subfamilies or groups within it were characterized by the presence of one or more
specific conserved protein motifs. In silico functional analysis revealed that
many genes in these families might be associated with the regulation of responses
to environmental stimuli via transcriptional regulation of the response genes.
Moreover, these genes had diverse endogenous expression patterns in switchgrass
during seed germination, vegetative growth, flower development, and seed
formation. Interestingly, several members of the ERF and DREB families were found
to be highly expressed in plant tissues where active lignification occurs. These 
results provide vital resources to select candidate genes to potentially impart
tolerance to environmental stress as well as reduced recalcitrance.
Overexpression of one of the ERF genes (PvERF001) in switchgrass was associated
with increased biomass yield and sugar release efficiency in transgenic lines,
exemplifying the potential of these TFs in the development of lignocellulosic
feedstocks with improved biomass characteristics for biofuels.

PMCID: PMC4507462
PMID: 26258121  [PubMed]


85. Funct Integr Genomics. 2015 Nov;15(6):741-52. doi: 10.1007/s10142-015-0457-9.
Epub 2015 Aug 2.

Transcriptome-based discovery of AP2/ERF transcription factors related to
temperature stress in tea plant (Camellia sinensis).

Wu ZJ(1), Li XH(1), Liu ZW(1), Li H(1), Wang YX(1), Zhuang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tea Science Research Institute, College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural 
University, Nanjing, 210095, China. (2)Tea Science Research Institute, College of
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China.
zhuangjing@njau.edu.cn.

Tea plant (Camellia sinensis) is an important natural resource for the global
supply of non-alcoholic beverage production. The extension of tea plant
cultivation is challenged by biotic and abiotic stresses. Transcription factors
(TFs) of the APETALA 2 (AP2)/ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) family are involved
in growth and anti-stresses through multifaceted transcriptional regulation in
plants. This study comprehensively analyzed AP2/ERF family TFs from C. sinensis
on the basis of the transcriptome sequencing data of four tea plant cultivars,
namely, 'Yunnanshilixiang', 'Chawansanhao', 'Ruchengmaoyecha', and 'Anjibaicha'. 
A total of 89 putative AP2/ERF transcription factors with full-length AP2 domain 
were identified from C. sinensis and classified into five subfamilies, namely,
AP2, dehydration-responsive-element-binding (DREB), ERF, related to ABI3/VP
(RAV), and Soloist. All identified CsAP2/ERF genes presented relatively stable
expression levels in the four tea plant cultivars. Many groups also showed
cultivar specificity. Five CsAP2/ERF genes from each AP2/ERF subfamily (DREB,
ERF, AP2, and RAV) were related to temperature stresses; these results indicated 
that AP2/ERF TFs may play important roles in abnormal temperature stress response
in C. sinensis.

PMID: 26233577  [PubMed - in process]


86. BMC Plant Biol. 2015 Jul 28;15:185. doi: 10.1186/s12870-015-0573-7.

The Phytoene synthase gene family of apple (Malus x domestica) and its role in
controlling fruit carotenoid content.

Ampomah-Dwamena C(1), Driedonks N(2,)(3), Lewis D(4), Shumskaya M(5), Chen X(6), 
Wurtzel ET(7,)(8), Espley RV(9), Allan AC(10).

Author information: 
(1)The New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food Research Limited, Private Bag
92169, Auckland, 1142, New Zealand. charles.dwamena@plantandfood.co.nz. (2)The
New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food Research Limited, Private Bag 92169,
Auckland, 1142, New Zealand. n.driedonks@science.ru.nl. (3)Institute for Wetland 
and Water Research, Radboud University, Postbus 9010, 6500 GL, Nijmegen,
Netherlands. n.driedonks@science.ru.nl. (4)The New Zealand Institute for Plant & 
Food Research Limited, Private Bag 11600, Palmerston North, 4442, New Zealand.
david.lewis@plantandfood.co.nz. (5)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehman
College, The City University of New York, 250 Bedford Park Blvd. West, Bronx, New
York, NY, 10468, USA. mashum@gmail.com. (6)The New Zealand Institute for Plant & 
Food Research Limited, Private Bag 92169, Auckland, 1142, New Zealand.
xiuyin.chen@plantandfood.co.nz. (7)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehman
College, The City University of New York, 250 Bedford Park Blvd. West, Bronx, New
York, NY, 10468, USA. eleanore.wurtzel@lehman.cuny.edu. (8)The Graduate School
and University Center-CUNY, 365 Fifth Ave, New York, NY, 10016-4309, USA.
eleanore.wurtzel@lehman.cuny.edu. (9)The New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food
Research Limited, Private Bag 92169, Auckland, 1142, New Zealand.
richard.espley@plantandfood.co.nz. (10)The New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food
Research Limited, Private Bag 92169, Auckland, 1142, New Zealand.
andrew.allan@plantandfood.co.nz.

BACKGROUND: Carotenoid compounds play essential roles in plants such as
protecting the photosynthetic apparatus and in hormone signalling. Coloured
carotenoids provide yellow, orange and red colour to plant tissues, as well as
offering nutritional benefit to humans and animals. The enzyme phytoene synthase 
(PSY) catalyses the first committed step of the carotenoid biosynthetic pathway
and has been associated with control of pathway flux. We characterised four PSY
genes found in the apple genome to further understand their involvement in fruit 
carotenoid accumulation.
RESULTS: The apple PSY gene family, containing six members, was predicted to have
three functional members, PSY1, PSY2, and PSY4, based on translation of the
predicted gene sequences and/or corresponding cDNAs. However, only PSY1 and PSY2 
showed activity in a complementation assay. Protein localisation experiments
revealed differential localization of the PSY proteins in chloroplasts; PSY1 and 
PSY2 localized to the thylakoid membranes, while PSY4 localized to plastoglobuli.
Transcript levels in 'Granny Smith' and 'Royal Gala' apple cultivars showed PSY2 
was most highly expressed in fruit and other vegetative tissues. We tested the
transient activation of the apple PSY1 and PSY2 promoters and identified
potential and differential regulation by AP2/ERF transcription factors, which
suggested that the PSY genes are controlled by different transcriptional
mechanisms.
CONCLUSION: The first committed carotenoid pathway step in apple is controlled by
MdPSY1 and MdPSY2, while MdPSY4 play little or no role in this respect. This has 
implications for apple breeding programmes where carotenoid enhancement is a
target and would allow co-segregation with phenotypes to be tested during the
development of new cultivars.

PMCID: PMC4517366
PMID: 26215656  [PubMed - in process]


87. Plant Signal Behav. 2015;10(10):e1062957. doi: 10.1080/15592324.2015.1062957.
Epub 2015 Jul 25.

Novel players in the AP2-miR172 regulatory network for common bean nodulation.

Íñiguez LP(1), Nova-Franco B(1), Hernández G(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México ;
Cuernavaca , Mexico.

The intricate regulatory network for floral organogenesis in plants that includes
AP2/ERF, SPL and AGL transcription factors, miR172 and miR156 along with other
components is well documented, though its complexity and size keep increasing.
The miR172/AP2 node was recently proposed as essential regulator in the
legume-rhizobia nitrogen-fixing symbiosis. Research from our group contributed to
demonstrate the control of common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) nodulation by
miR172c/AP2-1, however no other components of such regulatory network have been
reported. Here we propose AGLs as new protagonists in the regulation of common
bean nodulation and discuss the relevance of future deeper analysis of the
complex AP2 regulatory network for nodule organogenesis in legumes.

PMID: 26211831  [PubMed - in process]


88. Plant Cell Physiol. 2015 Oct;56(10):1909-17. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcv111. Epub 2015
Jul 23.

Apple MdACS6 Regulates Ethylene Biosynthesis During Fruit Development Involving
Ethylene-Responsive Factor.

Li T(1), Tan D(1), Liu Z(2), Jiang Z(3), Wei Y(3), Zhang L(3), Li X(3), Yuan
H(3), Wang A(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, 110866
China These authors contributed equally to this work. (2)Division of Apple
Breeding, Institute of Pomology, Liaoning Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Xiongyue, 115009 China. (3)College of Horticulture, Shenyang Agricultural
University, Shenyang, 110866 China. (4)College of Horticulture, Shenyang
Agricultural University, Shenyang, 110866 China adwang333@163.com.

Ethylene biosynthesis in plants involves different
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid synthase (ACS) genes. The regulation of
each ACS gene during fruit development is unclear. Here, we characterized another
apple (Malus×domestica) ACS gene, MdACS6. The transcript of MdACS6 was observed
not only in fruits but also in other tissues. During fruit development, MdACS6
was initiated at a much earlier stage, whereas MdACS3a and MdACS1 began to be
expressed at 35 d before harvest and immediateley after harvest, respectively.
Moreover, the enzyme activity of MdACS6 was significantly lower than that of
MdACS3a and MdACS1, accounting for the low ethylene biosynthesis in young fruits.
Overexpression of MdACS6 (MdACS6-OE) by transient assay in apple showed enhanced 
ethylene production, and MdACS3a was induced in MdACS6-OE fruits but not in
control fruits. In MdACS6 apple fruits silenced by the virus-induced gene
silencing (VIGS) system (MdACS6-AN), neither ethylene production nor MdACS3a
transcript was detectable. In order to explore the mechanism through which
MdACS3a was induced in MdACS6-OE fruits, we investigated the expression of apple 
ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) genes. The results showed that the expression of
MdERF2 was induced in MdACS6-OE fruits and inhibited in MdACS6-AN fruits. Yeast
one-hybrid assay showed that MdERF2 protein could bind to the promoter of
MdACS3a. Moreover, down-regulation of MdERF2 in apple flesh callus led to a
decrease of MdACS3a expression, demonstrating the regulation of MdERF2 on
MdACS3a. The mechanism through which MdACS6 regulates the action of MdACS3a was
discussed.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese
Society of Plant Physiologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26209510  [PubMed - in process]


89. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2015 Oct 19:1-17. [Epub ahead of print]

Structural modeling and molecular simulation analysis of HvAP2/EREBP from barley.

Pandey B(1), Sharma P(1), Tyagi C(2), Goyal S(3), Grover A(3), Sharma I(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Plant Biotechnology Laboratory , ICAR-Indian Institute of Wheat and Barley ,
Karnal 132001 , Haryana , India. (2)b Agricultural Knowledge Management Unit ,
Indian Agricultural Research Institute , New Delhi 110032 , India. (3)c School of
Biotechnology , Jawaharlal Nehru University , New Delhi 110067 , India.

AP2/ERF transcription factors play a critical role in plant development and
stress adaptation. This study reports the three-dimensional ab initio-based model
of AP2/EREBP protein of barley and its interaction with DNA. Full-length coding
sequence of HvAP2/EREBP gene isolated from two Indian barley cultivars, RD 2503
and RD 31, was used to model the protein. Of five protein models obtained, the
one with lowest C-score was chosen for further analysis. The N- and C-terminal
regions of HvAP2 protein were found to be highly disordered. The dynamic
properties of AP2/EREBP and its interaction with DNA were investigated by
molecular dynamics simulation. Analysis of trajectories from simulation yielded
the equilibrated conformation between 2-10ns for protein and 7-15ns for
protein-DNA complex. We established relationship between DNA having GCC box and
DNA-binding domain of HvAP2/EREBP was established by modeling 11-base-pair-long
nucleotide sequence and HvAP2/EREBP protein using ab initio method. Analysis of
protein-DNA interaction showed that a ß-sheet motif constituting amino acid
residues THR105, ARG100, ARG93, and ARG83 seems to play important role in
stabilizing the complex as they form strong hydrogen bond interactions with the
DNA motif. Taken together, this study provides first-hand comprehensive
information detailing structural conformation and interactions of HvAP2/EREBP
proteins in barley. The study intensifies the role of computational approaches
for preliminary examination of unknown proteins in the absence of experimental
information. It also provides molecular insight into protein-DNA binding for
understanding and enhancing abiotic stress resistance for improving the water use
efficiency in crop plants.

PMID: 26198402  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


90. Crit Rev Biotechnol. 2015 Jul 16:1-11. [Epub ahead of print]

Waterlogging and submergence stress: affects and acclimation.

Phukan UJ(1), Mishra S, Shukla RK.

Author information: 
(1)a Biotechnology Division (CSIR-CIMAP) , Central Institute of Medicinal and
Aromatic Plants (CSIR-CIMAP) , Lucknow , Uttar Pradesh , India.

Submergence, whether partial or complete, imparts some serious consequences on
plants grown in flood prone ecosystems. Some plants can endure these conditions
by embracing various survival strategies, including morphological adaptations and
physiological adjustments. This review summarizes recent progress made in
understanding of the stress and the acclimation responses of plants under
waterlogged or submerged conditions. Waterlogging and submergence are often
associated with hypoxia development, which may trigger various morphological
traits and cellular acclimation responses. Ethylene, abscisic acid, gibberellic
acid and other hormones play a crucial role in the survival process which is
controlled genetically. Effects at the cellular level, including ATP management, 
starch metabolism, elemental toxicity, role of transporters and redox status have
been explained. Transcriptional and hormonal interplay during this stress may
provide some key aspects in understanding waterlogging and submergence tolerance.
The level and degree of tolerance may vary depending on species or climatic
variations which need to be studied for a proper understanding of waterlogging
stress at the global level. The exploration of regulatory pathways and interplay 
in model organisms such as Arabidopsis and rice would provide valuable resources 
for improvement of economically and agriculturally important plants in
waterlogging affected areas.

PMID: 26177332  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


91. Pneumonol Alergol Pol. 2015;83(4):303-6. doi: 10.5603/PiAP.2015.0050.

Self-expandable metallic stents in oesophago-respiratory fistulas treatment in
neoplasms - case reports and literature review.

Marczynski W(1), Pajak M, Komandowska T, Nikiel I.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterological Ward of District Specialist Hospital Latawiec in Swidnica,
Poland. witek.mar@wp.pl.

Self-expandable metallic stents (SEMS) insertion to the oesophagus is the method 
of choice in palliative treatment of malignant oesophago-respiratory fistulas
(ERF). ERF evolve as a result of 0.2-5% of advanced oesopghageal or lung cancer. 
They also appear after radiotherapy. EFR are serious and lethal complications.
SEMS insertion is an effective, safe, technically simple and minimally invasive
solution. Potential complications of SEMS include thoracic pain, bleeding,
perforation, stent migration, tumour overgrowth or ingrowth and food bolus
impaction. The article presents three cases of patients with advanced lung cancer
with EFR subjected to SEMS insertion procedure in our centre.

PMID: 26166792  [PubMed - in process]


92. Genetics. 2015 Sep;201(1):155-65. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.176628. Epub 2015 Jul
7.

The Genetic Basis of Composite Spike Form in Barley and 'Miracle-Wheat'.

Poursarebani N(1), Seidensticker T(1), Koppolu R(1), Trautewig C(1), Gawronski
P(1), Bini F(1), Govind G(1), Rutten T(1), Sakuma S(2), Tagiri A(2), Wolde GM(1),
Youssef HM(3), Battal A(4), Ciannamea S(5), Fusca T(5), Nussbaumer T(6), Pozzi
C(5), Börner A(1), Lundqvist U(7), Komatsuda T(2), Salvi S(8), Tuberosa R(8),
Uauy C(9), Sreenivasulu N(1), Rossini L(10), Schnurbusch T(11).

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research, OT Gatersleben,
D-06466 Stadt Seeland, Germany. (2)National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences,
Plant Genome Research Unit, Tsukuba 305 8602, Japan. (3)Leibniz Institute of
Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research, OT Gatersleben, D-06466 Stadt Seeland,
Germany Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University, 12613 Giza, Egypt. (4)John
Innes Centre, Department of Crop Genetics, Colney, Norwich, NR4 7UH, United
Kingdom Biological Sciences, Middle East Technical University, Cankaya, 06800,
Ankara, Turkey. (5)Parco Tecnologico Padano, 26900 Lodi, Italy. (6)Plant Genome
and Systems Biology, Helmholtz Center Munich, D-85764, Neuherberg, Germany.
(7)Nordic Genetic Resource Center, SE-230 53 Alnarp, Sweden. (8)Dipartimento di
Scienze Agrarie, University of Bologna, 40127 Bologna, Italy. (9)John Innes
Centre, Department of Crop Genetics, Colney, Norwich, NR4 7UH, United Kingdom.
(10)Parco Tecnologico Padano, 26900 Lodi, Italy Università degli Studi di Milano,
DiSAA, I-20133 Milan, Italy. (11)Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop
Plant Research, OT Gatersleben, D-06466 Stadt Seeland, Germany
thor@ipk-gatersleben.de.

Inflorescences of the tribe Triticeae, which includes wheat (Triticum sp. L.) and
barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) are characterized by sessile spikelets directly borne
on the main axis, thus forming a branchless spike. 'Compositum-Barley' and
tetraploid 'Miracle-Wheat' (T. turgidum convar. compositum (L.f.) Filat.) display
noncanonical spike-branching in which spikelets are replaced by lateral
branch-like structures resembling small-sized secondary spikes. As a result of
this branch formation 'Miracle-Wheat' produces significantly more grains per
spike, leading to higher spike yield. In this study, we first isolated the gene
underlying spike-branching in 'Compositum-Barley,' i.e., compositum 2 (com2).
Moreover, we found that COM2 is orthologous to the branched head(t) (bh(t)) locus
regulating spike branching in tetraploid 'Miracle-Wheat.' Both genes possess
orthologs with similar functions in maize BRANCHED SILKLESS 1 (BD1) and rice
FRIZZY PANICLE/BRANCHED FLORETLESS 1 (FZP/BFL1) encoding AP2/ERF transcription
factors. Sequence analysis of the bh(t) locus in a collection of mutant and
wild-type tetraploid wheat accessions revealed that a single amino acid
substitution in the DNA-binding domain gave rise to the domestication of
'Miracle-Wheat.' mRNA in situ hybridization, microarray experiments, and
independent qRT-PCR validation analyses revealed that the branch repression
pathway in barley is governed through the spike architecture gene Six-rowed spike
4 regulating COM2 expression, while HvIDS1 (barley ortholog of maize
INDETERMINATE SPIKELET 1) is a putative downstream target of COM2. These findings
presented here provide new insights into the genetic basis of spike architecture 
in Triticeae, and have disclosed new targets for genetic manipulations aiming at 
boosting wheat's yield potential.

Copyright © 2015 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4566260
PMID: 26156223  [PubMed - in process]


93. Comput Math Methods Med. 2015;2015:560108. doi: 10.1155/2015/560108. Epub 2015
Jun 4.

Revisiting Warfarin Dosing Using Machine Learning Techniques.

Sharabiani A(1), Bress A(2), Douzali E(1), Darabi H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Room 4209, SEL West Building, 950 South Halsted Street, Chicago, IL
60607, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacotherapy, University of Utah, 30 South 2000
East, Room 4929, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA. (3)Department of Mechanical and
Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Room 2055, ERF
Building, 842 W Taylor Street, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

Determining the appropriate dosage of warfarin is an important yet challenging
task. Several prediction models have been proposed to estimate a therapeutic dose
for patients. The models are either clinical models which contain clinical and
demographic variables or pharmacogenetic models which additionally contain the
genetic variables. In this paper, a new methodology for warfarin dosing is
proposed. The patients are initially classified into two classes. The first class
contains patients who require doses of >30<U+2009>mg/wk and the second class contains
patients who require doses of =30<U+2009>mg/wk. This phase is performed using relevance 
vector machines. In the second phase, the optimal dose for each patient is
predicted by two clinical regression models that are customized for each class of
patients. The prediction accuracy of the model was 11.6 in terms of root mean
squared error (RMSE) and 8.4 in terms of mean absolute error (MAE). This was 15% 
and 5% lower than IWPC and Gage models (which are the most widely used models in 
practice), respectively, in terms of RMSE. In addition, the proposed model was
compared with fixed-dose approach of 35<U+2009>mg/wk, and the model proposed by
Sharabiani et al. and its outperformance were proved in terms of both MAE and
RMSE.

PMCID: PMC4471424
PMID: 26146514  [PubMed - in process]


94. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 2;10(7):e0131391. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131391.
eCollection 2015.

Comparative Transcriptome Analysis of Shoots and Roots of TNG67 and TCN1 Rice
Seedlings under Cold Stress and Following Subsequent Recovery: Insights into
Metabolic Pathways, Phytohormones, and Transcription Factors.

Yang YW(1), Chen HC(1), Jen WF(1), Liu LY(1), Chang MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agronomy, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Section 4, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Cold stress affects rice growth, quality and yield. The investigation of
genome-wide gene expression is important for understanding cold stress tolerance 
in rice. We performed comparative transcriptome analysis of the shoots and roots 
of 2 rice seedlings (TNG67, cold-tolerant; and TCN1, cold-sensitive) in response 
to low temperatures and restoration of normal temperatures following cold
exposure. TNG67 tolerated cold stress via rapid alterations in gene expression
and the re-establishment of homeostasis, whereas the opposite was observed in
TCN1, especially after subsequent recovery. Gene ontology and pathway analyses
revealed that cold stress substantially regulated the expression of genes
involved in protein metabolism, modification, translation, stress responses, and 
cell death. TNG67 takes advantage of energy-saving and recycling resources to
more efficiently synthesize metabolites compared with TCN1 during adjustment to
cold stress. During recovery, expression of OsRR4 type-A response regulators was 
upregulated in TNG67 shoots, whereas that of genes involved in oxidative stress, 
chemical stimuli and carbohydrate metabolic processes was downregulated in TCN1. 
Expression of genes related to protein metabolism, modification, folding and
defense responses was upregulated in TNG67 but not in TCN1 roots. In addition,
abscisic acid (ABA)-, polyamine-, auxin- and jasmonic acid (JA)-related genes
were preferentially regulated in TNG67 shoots and roots and were closely
associated with cold stress tolerance. The TFs AP2/ERF were predominantly
expressed in the shoots and roots of both TNG67 and TCN1. The TNG67-preferred TFs
which express in shoot or root, such as OsIAA23, SNAC2, OsWRKY1v2, 24, 53, 71,
HMGB, OsbHLH and OsMyb, may be good candidates for cold stress tolerance-related 
genes in rice. Our findings highlight important alterations in the expression of 
cold-tolerant genes, metabolic pathways, and hormone-related and TF-encoding
genes in TNG67 rice during cold stress and recovery. The cross-talk of hormones
may play an essential role in the ability of rice plants to cope with cold
stress.

PMCID: PMC4489882
PMID: 26133169  [PubMed - in process]


95. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Jun 11;6:442. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00442. eCollection
2015.

Development and regulation of pedicel abscission in tomato.

Ito Y(1), Nakano T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Food Biotechnology Division, National Food Research Institute, National
Agriculture and Food Research Organization , Tsukuba, Japan.

To shed unfertilized flowers or ripe fruits, many plant species develop a pedicel
abscission zone (AZ), a specialized tissue that develops between the organ and
the main body of the plant. Regulation of pedicel abscission is an important
agricultural concern because pre-harvest abscission can reduce yields of fruit or
grain crops, such as apples, rice, wheat, etc. Tomato has been studied as a model
system for abscission, as tomato plants develop a distinct AZ at the midpoint of 
the pedicel and several tomato mutants, such as jointless, have pedicels that
lack an AZ. This mini-review focuses on recent advances in research on the
mechanisms regulating tomato pedicel abscission. Molecular genetic studies
revealed that three MADS-box transcription factors interactively play a central
role in pedicel AZ development. Transcriptome analyses identified activities
involved in abscission and also found novel transcription factors that may
regulate AZ activities. Another study identified transcription factors mediating 
abscission pathways from induction signals to activation of cell wall hydrolysis.
These recent findings in tomato will enable significant advances in understanding
the regulation of abscission in other key agronomic species.

PMCID: PMC4462994
PMID: 26124769  [PubMed]


96. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jun 30;16:484. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1575-4.

Tobacco drought stress responses reveal new targets for Solanaceae crop
improvement.

Rabara RC(1), Tripathi P(2), Reese RN(3), Rushton DL(4), Alexander D(5), Timko
MP(6), Shen QJ(7), Rushton PJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Texas A&M AgriLife Research and Extension Center, Dallas, Texas, 75252, USA.
roel.rabara@tamu.edu. (2)Molecular and Computational Biology Section, Dana &
David Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and Sciences, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. tprateek@dornsife.usc.edu. (3)Department of
Biology and Microbiology, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD, 57007,
USA. Neil.Reese@sdstate.edu. (4)Department of Biological Sciences, University of 
North Texas, Denton, TX, 76203, USA. dlrushton82@gmail.com. (5)Metabolon, Inc.,
617 Davis Drive, Durham, NC, 277133, USA. DAlexander@metabolon.com. (6)Department
of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, 22904, USA.
mpt9g@virginia.edu. (7)School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 
89154, USA. jeffery.shen@unlv.edu. (8)Texas A&M AgriLife Research and Extension
Center, Dallas, Texas, 75252, USA. paul.rushton@tamu.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Solanaceae are an economically important family of plants that
include tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.), tomato, and potato. Drought is a major
cause of crop losses.
RESULTS: We have identified major changes in physiology, metabolites, mRNA
levels, and promoter activities during the tobacco response to drought. We have
classified these as potential components of core responses that may be common to 
many plant species or responses that may be family/species-specific features of
the drought stress response in tobacco or the Solanaceae. In tobacco the largest 
increase in any metabolite was a striking 70-fold increase in
4-hydroxy-2-oxoglutaric acid (KHG) in roots that appears to be tobacco/Solanaceae
specific. KHG is poorly characterized in plants but is broken down to pyruvate
and glyoxylate after the E. coli SOS response to facilitate the resumption of
respiration. A similar process in tobacco would represent a mechanism to restart 
respiration upon water availability after drought. At the mRNA level,
transcription factor gene induction by drought also showed both core and
species/family specific responses. Many Group IX Subgroup 3 AP2/ERF transcription
factors in tobacco appear to play roles in nicotine biosynthesis as a response to
herbivory, whereas their counterparts in legume species appear to play roles in
drought responses. We observed apparent Solanaceae-specific drought induction of 
several Group IId WRKY genes. One of these, NtWRKY69, showed ABA-independent
drought stress-inducible promoter activity that moved into the leaf through the
vascular tissue and then eventually into the surrounding leaf cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose components of a core metabolic response to drought stress
in plants and also show that some major responses to drought stress at the
metabolome and transcriptome levels are family specific. We therefore propose
that the observed family-specific changes in metabolism are regulated, at least
in part, by family-specific changes in transcription factor activity. We also
present a list of potential targets for the improvement of Solanaceae drought
responses.

PMCID: PMC4485875
PMID: 26123791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Plant Physiol. 2015 Sep;169(1):32-41. doi: 10.1104/pp.15.00677. Epub 2015 Jun 23.

Ethylene Response Factors: A Key Regulatory Hub in Hormone and Stress Signaling.

Müller M(1), Munné-Bosch S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona,
08028 Barcelona, Spain. (2)Department of Plant Biology, Faculty of Biology,
University of Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain smunne@ub.edu.

Ethylene is essential for many developmental processes and a key mediator of
biotic and abiotic stress responses in plants. The ethylene signaling and
response pathway includes Ethylene Response Factors (ERFs), which belong to the
transcription factor family APETALA2/ERF. It is well known that ERFs regulate
molecular response to pathogen attack by binding to sequences containing AGCCGCC 
motifs (the GCC box), a cis-acting element. However, recent studies suggest that 
several ERFs also bind to dehydration-responsive elements and act as a key
regulatory hub in plant responses to abiotic stresses. Here, we review some of
the recent advances in our understanding of the ethylene signaling and response
pathway, with emphasis on ERFs and their role in hormone cross talk and redox
signaling under abiotic stresses. We conclude that ERFs act as a key regulatory
hub, integrating ethylene, abscisic acid, jasmonate, and redox signaling in the
plant response to a number of abiotic stresses.

© 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4577411 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26103991  [PubMed - in process]


98. Plant Signal Behav. 2015;10(7):e1028705. doi: 10.1080/15592324.2015.1028705.

The interactome of soybean GmWRKY53 using yeast 2-hybrid library screening to
saturation.

Tripathi P(1), Rabara RC, Choudhary MK, Miller MA, Huang YS, Shen QJ, Blachon S, 
Rushton PJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Molecular and Computational Biology Section; University of Southern
California ; Los Angeles , CA USA.

Soybean GmWRKY53 functions in both biotic and abiotic stress signaling. Using
GmWRKY53 as a bait yeast 2-hybrid library screening to saturation isolated
multiple independent fragments for many interacting proteins, enabling
delineation of minimal interacting domains and computation of a confidence score.
Multiple independent clones coding for the LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL clock protein
GmLCL2 (MYB114) were isolated and the binding site for GmWRKY53 was mapped to 90 
amino acids separate from the MYB domain. This suggests a direct input from the
clock on GmWRKY53 activity. The GmWRKY53-interacting proteins also included 3
water stress-inducible AP2/ERF transcription factors. One of these
(Glyma03g26310) is one of the most strongly water stress induced genes in soybean
roots, suggesting that GmWRKY53/ERF complexes regulate water stress responses.

PMCID: PMC4623026
PMID: 26102586  [PubMed - in process]


99. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Nov;167A(11):2544-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37218. Epub 2015 
Jun 22.

Heterozygous mutations in ERF cause syndromic craniosynostosis with multiple
suture involvement.

Chaudhry A(1), Sabatini P(2), Han L(2), Ray PN(2), Forrest C(3), Bowdin S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Paediatrics, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Genome Diagnostics,
Paediatric Laboratory Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (3)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Centre for
Craniofacial Careand Research, The Hospital for Sick Children.

Craniosynostosis is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous condition.
Knowledge of the specific genetic diagnosis in patients presenting with this
condition is important for surgical and medical management. The most common
single gene causes of syndromic craniosynostosis are mutations in FGFR1, FGFR2,
FGFR3, TWIST1, and EFNB1. Recently, a new single gene cause of craniosynostosis
was published, together with phenotype data that highlight the clinical
importance of making this specific molecular diagnosis. Phenotypic features of
"ERF-related craniosynostosis" include sagittal or multiple-suture synostosis,
Chiari malformation, and language delay. In order to determine the contribution
of ERF mutations to genetically undiagnosed patients with craniosynostosis, we
sequenced the coding regions of ERF in 40 patients with multi-suture or sagittal 
suture synostosis. We identified heterozygous ERF mutations in two individuals
(5%). One mutation positive individual had pansynostosis, while the second had
bilateral coronal and metopic synostosis. Both presented in infancy or childhood 
(age 3 months, and 6 years 9 months, respectively). One had CNS abnormalities
including Chiari I malformation. Dysmorphic features included hypertelorism,
proptosis, depressed nasal bridge, and retrognathia, in keeping with previously
reported cases. The individuals did not require repeated cranial surgeries.
ERF-related craniosynostosis should be suspected in patients presenting with
multiple suture or sagittal synostosis.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26097063  [PubMed - in process]


100. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2015 Sep 18;77:303-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2015.06.012. Epub
2015 Jun 16.

In vitro solubility, dissolution and permeability studies combined with
semi-mechanistic modeling to investigate the intestinal absorption of
desvenlafaxine from an immediate- and extended release formulation.

Franek F(1), Jarlfors A(2), Larsen F(3), Holm P(4), Steffansen B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Universitetsparken 2, Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 2, Copenhagen, Denmark;
Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University, Biomedical Centre, P.O. Box 580,
SE-751 23 Uppsala, Sweden. (3)Clinical Pharmacology, H. Lundbeck A/S, Ottiliavej 
9, DK-2500 Valby, Denmark. (4)Biologics and Pharmaceutical Science, H. Lundbeck
A/S, Ottiliavej 9, DK-2500 Valby, Denmark.

Desvenlafaxine is a biopharmaceutics classification system (BCS) class 1 (high
solubility, high permeability) and biopharmaceutical drug disposition
classification system (BDDCS) class 3, (high solubility, poor metabolism;
implying low permeability) compound. Thus the rate-limiting step for
desvenlafaxine absorption (i.e. intestinal dissolution or permeation) is not
fully clarified. The aim of this study was to investigate whether dissolution
and/or intestinal permeability rate-limit desvenlafaxine absorption from an
immediate-release formulation (IRF) and Pristiq(®), an extended release
formulation (ERF). Semi-mechanistic models of desvenlafaxine were built (using
SimCyp(®)) by combining in vitro data on dissolution and permeation (mechanistic 
part of model) with clinical data (obtained from literature) on distribution and 
clearance (non-mechanistic part of model). The model predictions of
desvenlafaxine pharmacokinetics after IRF and ERF administration were compared
with published clinical data from 14 trials. Desvenlafaxine in vivo dissolution
from the IRF and ERF was predicted from in vitro solubility studies and
biorelevant dissolution studies (using the USP3 dissolution apparatus),
respectively. Desvenlafaxine apparent permeability (Papp) at varying apical pH
was investigated using the Caco-2 cell line and extrapolated to effective
intestinal permeability (Peff) in human duodenum, jejunum, ileum and colon.
Desvenlafaxine pKa-values and octanol-water partition coefficients (Do:w) were
determined experimentally. Due to predicted rapid dissolution after IRF
administration, desvenlafaxine was predicted to be available for permeation in
the duodenum. Desvenlafaxine Do:w and Papp increased approximately 13-fold when
increasing apical pH from 5.5 to 7.4. Desvenlafaxine Peff thus increased with pH 
down the small intestine. Consequently, desvenlafaxine absorption from an IRF
appears rate-limited by low Peff in the upper small intestine, which "delays" the
predicted time to the maximal plasma concentration (tmax), consistent with
clinical data. Conversely, desvenlafaxine absorption from the ERF appears
rate-limited by dissolution due to the formulation, which tends to negate the
influence of pH-dependent permeability on absorption. We suggest that
desvenlafaxine Peff is mainly driven by transcellular diffusion of the unionized 
form. In the case of desvenlafaxine, poor metabolism does not imply low
intestinal permeability, as indicated by the BDDCS, merely low duodenal/jejunal
permeability.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26091569  [PubMed - in process]


101. Tijdschr Psychiatr. 2015;57(6):441-5.

[The type of agent auto-intoxication and the degree of suicidal intent].

[Article in Dutch]

Veraart JK, Coric D, van der Erf M, Braam AW.

BACKGROUND: The type of the agent used for auto-intoxication may increase or
decrease the degree of suicidal intent.
AIM: To find out whether the type of agent used for auto-intoxication is linked
to the degree of suicidal intent at the moment when a patient is given a
psychiatric assessment in a general hospital.
METHOD: We studied the files of 211 patients who had been assessed following
auto-intoxication. The files provided us with information about the type of agent
used, the suicidal intent of the patient at the time and about other recent,
relevant risk factors.
RESULTS: At the time of the assessment, benzodiazepines were the only
auto-intoxication agents used which seemed to predict suicidal intent.
CONCLUSION: Although the results need to be verified in further studies, it can
be concluded that auto-intoxication induced only by benzodiazepines can be seen
as a serious expression of an individual's wish to die.

PMID: 26073838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Plant Physiol. 2015 Aug;168(4):1666-83. doi: 10.1104/pp.15.00433. Epub 2015 Jun
10.

FOREVER YOUNG FLOWER Negatively Regulates Ethylene Response DNA-Binding Factors
by Activating an Ethylene-Responsive Factor to Control Arabidopsis Floral Organ
Senescence and Abscission.

Chen WH(1), Li PF(1), Chen MK(1), Lee YI(1), Yang CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology (W.-H.C., P.-F.L., M.-K.C., C.-H.Y.)
andAgricultural Biotechnology Center (C.-H.Y.), National Chung Hsing University, 
Taichung, Taiwan 40227, Republic of China; andBiology Department, National Museum
of Natural Science, Taichung, Taiwan 40227, Republic of China (Y.-I.L.).
(2)Institute of Biotechnology (W.-H.C., P.-F.L., M.-K.C., C.-H.Y.)
andAgricultural Biotechnology Center (C.-H.Y.), National Chung Hsing University, 
Taichung, Taiwan 40227, Republic of China; andBiology Department, National Museum
of Natural Science, Taichung, Taiwan 40227, Republic of China (Y.-I.L.)
chyang@dragon.nchu.edu.tw.

In this study of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), we investigated the
relationship between FOREVER YOUNG FLOWER (FYF) and Ethylene Response DNA-binding
Factors (EDFs) and functionally analyzed a key FYF target, an Ethylene-Responsive
Factor (ERF), that controls flower senescence/abscission. Ectopic expression of
EDF1/2/3/4 caused promotion of flower senescence/abscission and the activation of
the senescence-associated genes. The presence of a repressor domain in EDFs and
the enhancement of the promotion of senescence/abscission in EDF1/2/3/4+SRDX
(converting EDFs to strong repressors by fusion with the ERF-associated
amphiphilic repression motif repression domain SRDX) transgenic plants suggested 
that EDFs act as repressors. The significant reduction of ß-glucuronidase (GUS)
expression by 35S:FYF in EDF1/2/3/4:GUS plants indicates that EDF1/2/3/4
functions downstream of FYF in regulating flower senescence/abscission. In this
study, we also characterized an ERF gene, FOREVER YOUNG FLOWER UP-REGULATING
FACTOR1 (FUF1), which is up-regulated by FYF during flower development. Ectopic
expression of FUF1 caused similar delayed flower senescence/abscission as seen in
35S:FYF plants. This phenotype was correlated with deficient abscission zone
formation, ethylene insensitivity, and down-regulation of EDF1/2/3/4 and
abscission-associated genes in 35S:FUF1 flowers. In contrast, significant
promotion of flower senescence/abscission and up-regulation of EDF1/2/3/4 were
observed in 35S:FUF1+SRDX transgenic dominant-negative plants, in which FUF1 is
converted to a potent repressor by fusion to an SRDX-suppressing motif. Thus,
FUF1 acts as an activator in suppressing EDF1/2/3/4 function and
senescence/abscission of the flowers. Our results reveal that FYF regulates
flower senescence/abscission by negatively regulating EDF1/2/3/4, which is the
downstream gene in the ethylene response, by activating FUF1 in Arabidopsis.

© 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4528748 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26063506  [PubMed - in process]


103. Plant Cell Environ. 2015 Dec;38(12):2721-34. doi: 10.1111/pce.12583. Epub 2015
Jul 3.

ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 96 positively regulates Arabidopsis resistance to
necrotrophic pathogens by direct binding to GCC elements of jasmonate - and
ethylene-responsive defence genes.

Catinot J(1), Huang JB(1), Huang PY(1), Tseng MY(1), Chen YL(1,)(2), Gu
SY(3,)(4), Lo WS(3), Wang LC(5), Chen YR(2), Zimmerli L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Institute of Plant Biology, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center,
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology,
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Life Sciences, National Central
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (5)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology
Center, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan.

The ERF (ethylene responsive factor) family is composed of transcription factors 
(TFs) that are critical for appropriate Arabidopsis thaliana responses to biotic 
and abiotic stresses. Here we identified and characterized a member of the ERF TF
group IX, namely ERF96, that when overexpressed enhances Arabidopsis resistance
to necrotrophic pathogens such as the fungus Botrytis cinerea and the bacterium
Pectobacterium carotovorum. ERF96 is jasmonate (JA) and ethylene (ET) responsive 
and ERF96 transcripts accumulation was abolished in JA-insensitive coi1-16 and in
ET-insensitive ein2-1 mutants. Protoplast transactivation and electrophoresis
mobility shift analyses revealed that ERF96 is an activator of transcription that
binds to GCC elements. In addition, ERF96 mainly localized to the nucleus.
Microarray analysis coupled to chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR of Arabidopsis
overexpressing ERF96 revealed that ERF96 enhances the expression of the JA/ET
defence genes PDF1.2a, PR-3 and PR-4 as well as the TF ORA59 by direct binding to
GCC elements present in their promoters. While ERF96-RNAi plants demonstrated
wild-type resistance to necrotrophic pathogens, basal PDF1.2 expression levels
were reduced in ERF96-silenced plants. This work revealed ERF96 as a key player
of the ERF network that positively regulates the Arabidopsis resistance response 
to necrotrophic pathogens.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26038230  [PubMed - in process]


104. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 2;10(6):e0127831. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127831.
eCollection 2015.

Overexpression of an AP2/ERF Type Transcription Factor OsEREBP1 Confers Biotic
and Abiotic Stress Tolerance in Rice.

Jisha V(1), Dampanaboina L(1), Vadassery J(2), Mithöfer A(2), Kappara S(1),
Ramanan R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India. (2)Max Planck
Institute for Chemical Ecology, Department Bioorganic Chemistry, Jena, Germany.

AP2/ERF-type transcription factors regulate important functions of plant growth
and development as well as responses to environmental stimuli. A rice AP2/ERF
transcription factor, OsEREBP1 is a downstream component of a signal transduction
pathway in a specific interaction between rice (Oryza sativa) and its bacterial
pathogen, Xoo (Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae). Constitutive expression of
OsEREBP1 in rice driven by maize ubiquitin promoter did not affect normal plant
growth. Microarray analysis revealed that over expression of OsEREBP1 caused
increased expression of lipid metabolism related genes such as lipase and
chloroplastic lipoxygenase as well as several genes related to jasmonate and
abscisic acid biosynthesis. PR genes, transcription regulators and Aldhs (alcohol
dehydrogenases) implicated in abiotic stress and submergence tolerance were also 
upregulated in transgenic plants. Transgenic plants showed increase in endogenous
levels of a-linolenate, several jasmonate derivatives and abscisic acid but not
salicylic acid. Soluble modified GFP (SmGFP)-tagged OsEREBP1 was localized to
plastid nucleoids. Comparative analysis of non-transgenic and OsEREBP1
overexpressing genotypes revealed that OsEREBP1 attenuates disease caused by Xoo 
and confers drought and submergence tolerance in transgenic rice. Our results
suggest that constitutive expression of OsEREBP1 activates the jasmonate and
abscisic acid signalling pathways thereby priming the rice plants for enhanced
survival under abiotic or biotic stress conditions. OsEREBP1 is thus, a good
candidate gene for engineering plants for multiple stress tolerance.

PMCID: PMC4452794
PMID: 26035591  [PubMed - in process]


105. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 May 28;16(6):12131-46. doi: 10.3390/ijms160612131.

Functional Analysis of the Maize C-Repeat/DRE Motif-Binding Transcription Factor 
CBF3 Promoter in Response to Abiotic Stress.

Liu J(1), Wang F(2), Yu G(3), Zhang X(4), Jia C(5), Qin J(6), Pan H(7).

Author information: 
(1)College of Plant Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, China.
jlliu@jlu.edu.cn. (2)College of Plant Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun
130062, China. wft1001@163.com. (3)College of Plant Sciences, Jilin University,
Changchun 130062, China. chrisyu_gang@126.com. (4)College of Plant Sciences,
Jilin University, Changchun 130062, China. zhangxianghui@jlu.edu.cn. (5)College
of Plant Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, China. jiacg@jlu.edu.cn.
(6)College of Plant Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, China.
qinjc@jlu.edu.cn. (7)College of Plant Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun
130062, China. panhongyu@jlu.edu.cn.

The ZmCBF3 gene is a member of AP2/ERF transcription factor family, which is a
large family of plant-specific transcription factors that share a well-conserved 
DNA-binding domain. To understand the regulatory mechanism of ZmCBF3 gene
expression, we isolated and characterized the ZmCBF3 promoter (PZmCBF3). Three
deletion fragments of PZmCBF3 were generated, C1-C3, from the translation start
codon at position -1079, -638, and -234, and fused to the GUS reporter gene. Each
deletion construct was analyzed by Agrobacterium-mediated stable transformation
and expression in Arabidopsis thaliana. GUS expression assays indicated that the 
PZmCBF3 exhibited root-specific expression activity. A 234-bp fragment upstream
of the ZmCBF3 gene conferred a high level of GUS activity in Arabidopsis. Some
cis-acting elements involved in the down-regulation of gene expression were
detected in the promoter, encompassing positions -1079 to -234. PZmCBF3 was
activated by cold stress. The MYCCONSENSUSAT elements (CANNTG) were responsible
for the ability of PZmCBF3 to respond to cold stress. The results of the present 
study suggest that PZmCBF3 might play a role in cold tolerance in maize.

PMCID: PMC4490434
PMID: 26030672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Plant Sci. 2015 Jul;236:37-43. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2015.03.008. Epub 2015 Mar
21.

Constitutively expressed ERF-VII transcription factors redundantly activate the
core anaerobic response in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Bui LT(1), Giuntoli B(2), Kosmacz M(3), Parlanti S(4), Licausi F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Plantlab, Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Via
Mariscoglio 34, 56124, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: t.bui@sssup.it.
(2)Plantlab, Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Via
Mariscoglio 34, 56124, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: b.giuntoli@sssup.it.
(3)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Am Muehlenberg 1, 14476
Golm, Germany. Electronic address: kosmacz@mpimp-golm.mpg.de. (4)Plantlab,
Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Via Mariscoglio 34,
56124, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: s.parlanti@sssup.it. (5)Plantlab,
Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Via Mariscoglio 34,
56124, Pisa, Italy. Electronic address: f.licausi@sssup.it.

Plant adaptation to hypoxic conditions is mediated by the transcriptional
activation of genes involved in the metabolic reprogramming of plant cells to
cope with reduced oxygen availability. Recent studies indicated that members of
the group VII of the Ethylene Responsive Transcription Factor (ERFs) family act
as positive regulators of this molecular response. In the current study, the five
ERF-VII transcription factors of Arabidopsis thaliana were compared to infer a
hierarchy in their role with respect to the anaerobic response. When the activity
of each transcription factor was tested on a set of hypoxia-responsive promoters,
RAP2.2, RAP2.3 and RAP2.12 appeared to be the most powerful activators. RAP2.12
was further dissected in transactivation assays in Arabidopsis protoplasts to
identify responsible regions for transcriptional activation. An ultimate
C-terminal motif was identified as sufficient to drive gene transcription.
Finally, using realtime RT-PCR in single and double mutants for the corresponding
genes, we confirmed that RAP2.2 and RAP2.12 exert major control upon the
anaerobic response.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26025519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. BMC Genomics. 2015 May 28;16:416. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1633-y.

De novo transcriptome characterization and gene expression profiling of the
desiccation tolerant moss Bryum argenteum following rehydration.

Gao B(1,)(2), Zhang D(3), Li X(4), Yang H(5), Zhang Y(6), Wood AJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biogeography and Bioresource in Arid Land, Xinjiang
Institute of Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi, 830011, 
China. gaobei11@mails.ucas.ac.cn. (2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, 100049, China. gaobei11@mails.ucas.ac.cn. (3)Key Laboratory of
Biogeography and Bioresource in Arid Land, Xinjiang Institute of Ecology and
Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi, 830011, China.
zhangdy@ms.xjb.ac.cn. (4)Key Laboratory of Biogeography and Bioresource in Arid
Land, Xinjiang Institute of Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Urumqi, 830011, China. xiaoshuangliok@sina.com. (5)Key Laboratory of Biogeography
and Bioresource in Arid Land, Xinjiang Institute of Ecology and Geography,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi, 830011, China. yanghonglan@ms.xjb.ac.cn.
(6)Key Laboratory of Biogeography and Bioresource in Arid Land, Xinjiang
Institute of Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi, 830011, 
China. zhangym@ms.xjb.ac.cn. (7)Department of Plant Biology, Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, Carbondale, IL, 62901-6509, USA. wood@plant.siu.edu.

BACKGROUND: The desiccation-tolerant moss Bryum argenteum is an important
component of the Biological Soil Crusts (BSCs) found in the Gurbantunggut desert.
Desiccation tolerance is defined as the ability to revive from the air dried
state. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms related to desiccation tolerance, we
employed RNA-Seq and digital gene expression (DGE) technologies to study the
genome-wide expression profiles of the dehydration and rehydration processes in
this important desert plant.
RESULTS: We applied a two-step approach to investigate the gene expression
profile upon rehydration in the moss Bryum argenteum using Illumina HiSeq2000
sequencing platform. First, a total of 57,247 transcript assembly contigs (TACs) 
were obtained from 54.79 million reads by de novo assembly, with an average
length of 863 bp and N50 of 1,372 bp. Among the reconstructed TACs, 36,916
(64.5%) revealed similarity with existing protein sequences in the public
databases. 23,509 and 21,607 TACs were assigned GO and KEGG annotation
information, respectively. Second, samples were taken from 3 hydration stages:
desiccated (Dry), rehydrated 2 h (R2) and rehydrated 24 h (R24), and DEG
libraries were constructed for Differentially Expressed Genes (DEGs) discovery.
4,081 and 6,709 DEGs were identified in R2 and R24, compared with Dry,
respectively. Compared to the desiccated sample, up-regulated genes after two
hours of hydration are primarily related to stress responses. GO function
enrichment network, EKGG metabolic pathway and MapMan analysis supports the idea 
of the rapid recovery of photosynthesis after 24 h of rehydration. We identified 
770 transcription factors (TFs) which were classified into 50 TF families. 142 TF
transcripts were up-regulated upon rehydration including 23 members of the ERF
family.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we constructed a pioneering, high-quality reference
transcriptome in B. argenteum and generated three DGE libraries to elucidate the 
changes of gene expression upon rehydration. Expression profiles consistent with 
the rapid recovery of photosynthesis (at R2) and the re-establishment of a
positive carbon balance following rehydration (at R24) were observed. Our study
will extend our knowledge of bryophyte transcriptomes and provide further insight
into the molecular mechanisms related to rehydration and desiccation-tolerance.

PMCID: PMC4445806
PMID: 26016800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS One. 2015 May 26;10(5):e0128041. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128041.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptome Profiling of the Potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) Plant under Drought 
Stress and Water-Stimulus Conditions.

Gong L(1), Zhang H(2), Gan X(1), Zhang L(1), Chen Y(1), Nie F(1), Shi L(1), Li
M(1), Guo Z(3), Zhang G(3), Song Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ningxia Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, Agricultural Bio-Technology
Center, Ningxia Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Science, Yinchuan, Ningxia
Hui Nationality Autonomous Region, China. (2)National Key Laboratory of Plant
Molecular Genetics, Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. (3)Guyuan sub-centers of National Potato
Improvement Center, Ningxia Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Science, Guyuan, 
Ningxia Hui Nationality Autonomous Region, China.

Drought stress can seriously affect tuberization, yield and quality of potato
plant. However, the precise molecular mechanisms governing potato stolon's
response to drought stress and water supply are not very well understood. In this
work, a potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) variant, Ningshu 4, was subjected to severe
drought stress treatment (DT) and re-watering treatment (RWT) at tuber bulking
stage. Strand-specific cDNA libraries of stolon materials were constructed for
paired-end transcriptome sequencing analyses and differentially expressed gene
(DEG) examination. In comparison to untreated-control (CT) plants, 3189 and 1797 
DEGs were identified in DT and RWT plants and 4154 solely expressed DEGs were
screened out from these two comparison groups. Interestingly, 263 genes showed
opposite expression patterns in DT and RWT plants. Among them, genes homologous
to Protein Phosphatase 2C (PP2C), Aspartic protease in guard cell 1 (ASPG1),
auxin-responsive protein, Arabidopsis pseudo response regualtor 2 (APRR2), GA
stimulated transcripts in Arabidopsis 6 (GASA6), Calmodulin-like protein 19
(CML19), abscisic acid 8'-hydroxylases and calcium-transporting ATPase, et al.
were related with drought-stress and water stimulus response. Sixteen DEGs
involved in starch synthesis, accumulation and tuber formation exhibited
significantly different expression upon re-watering. In addition, 1630, 1527 and 
1596 transcription factor encoding genes were detected in CT, DT and RWT. DEGs of
ERF, bHLH, MYB, NAC, WRKY, C2H2, bZIP and HD-ZIP families accounted for 50% in
three comparison groups, respectively. Furthermore, characteristics of 565 gene
ontology (GO) and 108 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways (KEGG)
were analyzed with the 4154 DEGs. All these results suggest that the drought- and
water-stimulus response could be implemented by the regulated expression of
metabolic pathway DEGs, and these genes were involved in the endogenous hormone
biosynthesis and signal transduction pathways. Our data provide more direct
information for future study on the interaction between key genes involved in
various metabolic pathways under drought stress in potato.

PMCID: PMC4444143
PMID: 26010543  [PubMed - in process]


109. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2015 Sep;17(5):962-72. doi: 10.1111/plb.12349. Epub 2015 Jun
22.

Involvement of NtERF3 in the cell death signalling pathway mediated by SIPK/WIPK 
and WRKY1 in tobacco plants.

Ogata T(1), Okada H(1), Kawaide H(2), Takahashi H(3), Seo S(4), Mitsuhara I(4),
Matsushita Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gene Research Center, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Fuchu,
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Institute of Agriculture, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, Fuchu, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Life Science, Graduate School
of Agricultural Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. (4)Plant-Microbe
Interactions Research Unit, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

We previously reported that one of the ethylene response factors (ERFs), NtERF3, 
and other members of the subgroup VIII-a ERFs of the AP2/ERF family exhibit cell 
death-inducing ability in tobacco leaves. In this study, we focused on the
involvement of NtERF3 in a cell death signalling pathway in tobacco plants,
particularly downstream of NtSIPK/NtWIPK and NtWRKY1, which are mitogen-activated
protein kinases and a phosphorylation substrate of NtSIPK, respectively. An
ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif-deficient NtERF3b mutant
(NtERF3b<U+0394>EAR) that lacked cell death-inducing ability suppressed the induction of
cell death caused by NtERF3a. The transient co-expression of NtERF3b<U+0394>EAR
suppressed the hypersensitive reaction (HR)-like cell death induced by NtSIPK and
NtWRKY1. The induction of cell death by NtSIPK and NtWRKY1 was also inhibited in 
transgenic plants expressing NtERF3b<U+0394>EAR. Analysis of gene expression, ethylene
production and cell death symptoms in salicylic acid-deficient tobacco plants
suggested the existence of some feedback regulation in the HR cell death
signalling pathway mediated by SIPK/WIPK and WRKY1. Overall, these results
suggest that NtERF3 functions downstream of NtSIPK/NtWIPK and NtWRKY1 in a cell
death signalling pathway, with some feedback regulation.

© 2015 German Botanical Society and The Royal Botanical Society of the
Netherlands.

PMID: 25996234  [PubMed - in process]


110. Plant Physiol. 2015 Sep;169(1):166-79. doi: 10.1104/pp.15.00335. Epub 2015 May
20.

The ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTORs ERF6 and ERF11 Antagonistically Regulate
Mannitol-Induced Growth Inhibition in Arabidopsis.

Dubois M(1), Van den Broeck L(1), Claeys H(1), Van Vlierberghe K(1), Matsui M(1),
Inzé D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 9052
Ghent, Belgium (M.D., L.V.d.B., H.C., K.V.V., D.I.);Department of Plant Systems
Biology, Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie, 9052 Ghent, Belgium (M.D.,
L.V.d.B., H.C., K.V.V., D.I.); andRIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, 
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan (M.M.). (2)Department of Plant Biotechnology and
Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium (M.D., L.V.d.B., H.C.,
K.V.V., D.I.);Department of Plant Systems Biology, Vlaams Instituut voor
Biotechnologie, 9052 Ghent, Belgium (M.D., L.V.d.B., H.C., K.V.V., D.I.);
andRIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan (M.M.)
diinz@psb.vib-ugent.be.

Leaf growth is a tightly regulated and complex process, which responds in a
dynamic manner to changing environmental conditions, but the mechanisms that
reduce growth under adverse conditions are rather poorly understood. We
previously identified a growth inhibitory pathway regulating leaf growth upon
exposure to a low concentration of mannitol and characterized the ETHYLENE
RESPONSE FACTOR (ERF)/APETALA2 transcription factor ERF6 as a central activator
of both leaf growth inhibition and induction of stress tolerance genes. Here, we 
describe the role of the transcriptional repressor ERF11 in relation to the
ERF6-mediated stress response in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Using
inducible overexpression lines, we show that ERF6 induces the expression of
ERF11. ERF11 in turn molecularly counteracts the action of ERF6 and represses at 
least some of the ERF6-induced genes by directly competing for the target gene
promoters. As a phenotypical consequence of the ERF6-ERF11 antagonism, the
extreme dwarfism caused by ERF6 overexpression is suppressed by overexpression of
ERF11. Together, our data demonstrate that dynamic mechanisms exist to fine-tune 
the stress response and that ERF11 counteracts ERF6 to maintain a balance between
plant growth and stress defense.

© 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4577380
PMID: 25995327  [PubMed - in process]


111. PLoS One. 2015 May 18;10(5):e0126657. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126657.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-Wide Analysis of the AP2/ERF Transcription Factors Family and the
Expression Patterns of DREB Genes in Moso Bamboo (Phyllostachys edulis).

Wu H(1), Lv H(2), Li L(1), Liu J(1), Mu S(1), Li X(1), Gao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Center for Bamboo and Rattan, Key Laboratory of Bamboo and
Rattan Science and Technology, State Forestry Administration, Beijing, People's
Republic of China. (2)Hunan Forest Botanical Garden, Changsha, Hunan Province,
People's Republic of China.

The AP2/ERF transcription factor family, one of the largest families unique to
plants, performs a significant role in terms of regulation of growth and
development, and responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. Moso bamboo
(Phyllostachys edulis) is a fast-growing non-timber forest species with the
highest ecological, economic and social values of all bamboos in Asia. The draft 
genome of moso bamboo and the available genomes of other plants provide great
opportunities to research global information on the AP2/ERF family in moso
bamboo. In total, 116 AP2/ERF transcription factors were identified in moso
bamboo. The phylogeny analyses indicated that the 116 AP2/ERF genes could be
divided into three subfamilies: AP2, RAV and ERF; and the ERF subfamily genes
were divided into 11 groups. The gene structures, exons/introns and conserved
motifs of the PeAP2/ERF genes were analyzed. Analysis of the evolutionary
patterns and divergence showed the PeAP2/ERF genes underwent a large-scale event 
around 15 million years ago (MYA) and the division time of AP2/ERF family genes
between rice and moso bamboo was 15-23 MYA. We surveyed the putative promoter
regions of the PeDREBs and showed that largely stress-related cis-elements
existed in these genes. Further analysis of expression patterns of PeDREBs
revealed that the most were strongly induced by drought, low-temperature and/or
high salinity stresses in roots and, in contrast, most PeDREB genes had negative 
functions in leaves under the same respective stresses. In this study there were 
two main interesting points: there were fewer members of the PeDREB subfamily in 
moso bamboo than in other plants and there were differences in DREB gene
expression profiles between leaves and roots triggered in response to abiotic
stress. The information produced from this study may be valuable in overcoming
challenges in cultivating moso bamboo.

PMCID: PMC4436012
PMID: 25985202  [PubMed - in process]


112. Mol Genet Genomics. 2015 Dec;290(6):2049-61. doi: 10.1007/s00438-015-1061-3. Epub
2015 May 14.

Genome-wide analysis of AP2/ERF transcription factors in carrot (Daucus carota
L.) reveals evolution and expression profiles under abiotic stress.

Li MY(1), Xu ZS(1), Huang Y(1), Tian C(1), Wang F(1), Xiong AS(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, College of
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China. (2)State
Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, College of
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China.
xiongaisheng@njau.edu.cn.

AP2/ERF is a large transcription factor family that regulates plant physiological
processes, such as plant development and stress response. Carrot (Daucus carota
L.) is an important economical crop with a genome size of 480 Mb; the draft
genome sequencing of this crop has been completed by our group. However, little
is known about the AP2/ERF factors in carrot. In this study, a total of 267
putative AP2/ERF factors were identified from the whole-genome sequence of
carrot. These AP2/ERF proteins were phylogenetically clustered into five
subfamilies based on their similarity to the amino acid sequences from
Arabidopsis. The distribution and comparative genome analysis of the AP2/ERF
factors among plants showed the AP2/ERF factors had expansion during the
evolutionary process, and the AP2 domain was highly conserved during evolution.
The number of AP2/ERF factors in land plants expanded during their evolution. A
total of 60 orthologous and 145 coorthologous AP2/ERF gene pairs between carrot
and Arabidopsis were identified, and the interaction network of orthologous genes
was constructed. The expression patterns of eight AP2/ERF family genes from each 
subfamily (DREB, ERF, AP2, and RAV) were related to abiotic stresses. Yeast
one-hybrid and ß-galactosidase activity assays confirmed the DRE and GCC
box-binding activities of DREB subfamily genes. This study is the first to
identify and characterize the AP2/ERF transcription factors in carrot using
whole-genome analysis, and the findings may serve as references for future
functional research on the transcription factors in carrot.

PMID: 25971861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2015 May;176(2):582-97. doi: 10.1007/s12010-015-1597-z. 
Epub 2015 May 3.

A New AP2/ERF Transcription Factor from the Oil Plant Jatropha curcas Confers
Salt and Drought Tolerance to Transgenic Tobacco.

Wang X(1), Han H, Yan J, Chen F, Wei W.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and
Eco-Environment, Ministry of Education, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Jatropha curcas L. is a drought and salt-tolerant oil plant widely used for
various purposes and has considerable potential as a diesel/kerosene substitute
or extender. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlie that the response to
various biotic and abiotic stresses of this plant could be important to crop
improvement efforts. Here, a new AP2/ERF-type transcription factor gene, named
JcERF2, was isolated from the leaves of J. curcas. Sequence analysis showed that 
the JcERF2 gene contains a 759-bp open reading frame encoding a polypeptide of
252 amino acids. The predicted JcERF2 protein contained a conserved DNA-binding
domain (the AP2/ERF domain) with 58 amino acids. The JcERF2 protein is highly
homologous with other ERFs. JcERF2 was localized in the nucleus by analysis with 
a JcERF2-green fluorescent protein (GFP) fusion protein. Quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction (qPCR) analysis showed that JcERF2 was induced by drought, salt,
abscisic acid, and ethylene. Overexpression of JcERF2 in transgenic tobacco
plants enhanced the expression of biotic and abiotic stress-related genes,
increased the accumulation of free proline and soluble carbohydrates, and
conferred tolerance to drought and salt stresses compared to the wild type (WT). 
Taken together, the JcERF2 gene is a novel AP2/ERF transcription factor involved 
in plant response to environmental factors, which can be used as a potential
candidate gene for genetic engineering of crops.

PMID: 25935218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. BMC Plant Biol. 2015 Apr 19;15:108. doi: 10.1186/s12870-015-0489-2.

Transcriptional regulation of the paper mulberry under cold stress as revealed by
a comprehensive analysis of transcription factors.

Peng X(1), Wu Q(2,)(3), Teng L(4), Tang F(5), Pi Z(6), Shen S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, 100093, People's Republic of China. pengxianjun@ibcas.ac.cn.
(2)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, 100093, People's Republic of China. qqwu@ibcas.ac.cn.
(3)University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of
China. qqwu@ibcas.ac.cn. (4)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of
Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, People's Republic of
China. tenglinhong@126.com. (5)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of
Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, People's Republic of
China. tangfeng76@163.com. (6)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of
Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, People's Republic of
China. pizhi@ibcas.ac.cn. (7)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of
Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100093, People's Republic of
China. shshen@ibcas.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Several studies have focused on cold tolerance in multiple regulated 
levels. However, a genome-scale molecular analysis of the regulated network under
the control of transcription factors (TFs) is still lacking, especially for
trees. To comprehensively identify the TFs that regulate cold stress response in 
the paper mulberry and understand their regulatory interactions, transcriptomic
data was used to assess changes in gene expression induced by exposure to cold.
RESULTS: Results indicated that 794 TFs, belonging to 47 families and comprising 
more than 59% of the total TFs of this plant, were involved in the cold stress
response. They were clustered into three groups, namely early, intermediate and
late responsive groups which contained 95, 550 and 149 TFs, respectively. Among
of these differentially expressed TFs, one bHLH, two ERFs and three CAMTAs were
considered to be the key TFs functioning in the primary signal transduction.
After that, at the intermediate stage of cold stress, there were mainly two
biological processes that were regulated by TFs, namely cold stress resistance
(including 5 bHLH, 14 ERFs, one HSF, 4 MYBs, 3 NACs, 11 WRKYs and so on) and
growth and development of lateral organ or apical meristem (including ARR-B, B3, 
5 bHLHs, 2 C2H2, 4 CO-like, 2 ERF, 3 HD-ZIP, 3 YABBYs, G2-like, GATA, GRAS and
TCP). In late responsive group, 3 ARR-B, C3H, 6 CO-like, 2 G2-like, 2 HSFs, 2
NACs and TCP. Most of them presented the up-regulated expression at 12 or
24 hours after cold stress implied their important roles for the new growth
homeostasis under cold stress.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified the key TFs that function in the regulatory
cascades mediating the activation of downstream genes during cold tress tolerance
in the paper mulberry. Based on the analysis, we found that the AP2/ERF, bHLH,
MYB, NAC and WRKY families might play the central and significant roles during
cold stress response in the paper mulberry just as in other species. Meanwhile,
many other TF families previously reported as involving in regulation of growth
and development, including ARF, DBB, G2-like, GRF, GRAS, LBD, WOX and YAABY
exhibited their important potential function in growth regulation under cold
stress.

PMCID: PMC4432934
PMID: 25928853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 29;10(4):e0124382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124382.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptomic Analysis of Drought Stress Responses in Ammopiptanthus mongolicus 
Leaves Using the RNA-Seq Technique.

Gao F(1), Wang J(2), Wei S(1), Li Z(1), Wang N(1), Li H(1), Feng J(1), Li H(3),
Zhou Y(1), Zhang F(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life and Environmental Sciences, Minzu University of China, Beijing
100081, China. (2)College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, Beijing
100048, China. (3)The National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic
Improvement (NFCRI), Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Beijing 100081, China.

Ammopiptanthus mongolicus (Maxim. Ex Kom.) Cheng f., a relic tree of the Tertiary
period, plays a critical role in maintaining desert ecosystems in the Mid-Asia
region. Genome-scale gene expression profiling studies will provide deep insight 
into the molecular mechanism underlying the drought tolerance of A. mongolicus.
In the present study, we investigated the transcriptional changes induced by
drought treatment in A. mongolicus leaves by establishing a comprehensive
transcriptome database and then performing a Digital Gene Expression (DGE)
analysis using Solexa sequencing technology. A comprehensive transcriptome
database was obtained by assembling the Illumina unigenes with expressed sequence
tags (EST) available publicly, and other high throughput sequencing data. To
analyze the dynamic and complicated gene regulation network during
PEG6000-induced drought treatment in leaves of A. mongolicus, a time-course gene 
expression analysis was performed using tag-based DGE technology, which
identified 437, 1,247 and 802 differentially expressed transcripts in 1, 24 and
72 h drought stress libraries, respectively. GO and KEGG analyses revealed
hormone signal transduction and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis were enriched during
drought treatment. A batch of drought-regulated transcription factor transcripts 
were identified, including the subsets of HD-ZIP, bZIP, WRKY, AP2/ERF and bHLH
family members, which may play roles in drought response in A. mongolicus. The
sequence collection assembled in the present study represents one of the most
comprehensive transcriptome databases for A. mongolicus currently. The
differentially expressed transcripts identified in our study provide a good start
for identifying the key genes in stress response and performing functional
analysis to reveal their roles in stress adaptation in planta.

PMCID: PMC4414462
PMID: 25923822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 23;10(4):e0123618. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123618.
eCollection 2015.

Ethylene Response Factors Are Controlled by Multiple Harvesting Stresses in Hevea
brasiliensis.

Putranto RA(1), Duan C(2), Kuswanhadi(3), Chaidamsari T(4), Rio M(5), Piyatrakul 
P(6), Herlinawati E(3), Pirrello J(5), Dessailly F(5), Leclercq J(5), Bonnot
F(7), Tang C(8), Hu S(9), Montoro P(5).

Author information: 
(1)CIRAD, UMR DAP, Montpellier, France; IBRIEC, Bogor, Indonesia. (2)CIRAD, UMR
DAP, Montpellier, France; RRI, CATAS, Danzhou, Hainan, China. (3)IRRI, Sembawa,
Palembang, Indonesia. (4)IBRIEC, Bogor, Indonesia. (5)CIRAD, UMR DAP,
Montpellier, France. (6)CIRAD, UMR DAP, Montpellier, France; Rubber Research
Institute, Chatuchak, Bangkok, Thailand. (7)CIRAD, UMR BGPI, Montpellier, France.
(8)RRI, CATAS, Danzhou, Hainan, China. (9)BIG-CAS, Beijing, China.

Tolerance of recurrent mechanical wounding and exogenous ethylene is a feature of
the rubber tree. Latex harvesting involves tapping of the tree bark and ethephon 
is applied to increase latex flow. Ethylene is an essential element in
controlling latex production. The ethylene signalling pathway leads to the
activation of Ethylene Response Factor (ERF) transcription factors. This family
has been identified in Hevea brasiliensis. This study set out to understand the
regulation of ERF genes during latex harvesting in relation to abiotic stress and
hormonal treatments. Analyses of the relative transcript abundance were carried
out for 35 HbERF genes in latex, in bark from mature trees and in leaves from
juvenile plants under multiple abiotic stresses. Twenty-one HbERF genes were
regulated by harvesting stress in laticifers, revealing an overrepresentation of 
genes in group IX. Transcripts of three HbERF-IX genes from HbERF-IXc4,
HbERF-IXc5 and HbERF-IXc6 were dramatically accumulated by combining wounding,
methyl jasmonate and ethylene treatments. When an ethylene inhibitor was used,
the transcript accumulation for these three genes was halted, showing
ethylene-dependent induction. Subcellular localization and transactivation
experiments confirmed that several members of HbERF-IX are activator-type
transcription factors. This study suggested that latex harvesting induces
mechanisms developed for the response to abiotic stress. These mechanisms
probably depend on various hormonal signalling pathways. Several members of
HbERF-IX could be essential integrators of complex hormonal signalling pathways
in Hevea.

PMCID: PMC4408094
PMID: 25906196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2014 Dec;39(24):4732-9.

[Transcriptome-based bioinformatics analysis of Arnebia euchroma ERF
transcription factor family].

[Article in Chinese]

Xie T, Wang S, Huang L, Wang X, Kang LP, Guo LP.

Twenty-seven ERF transcription factor family genes were isolated from Arnebia
euchroma, with an average size of 1,010 bp, each gene encoded a 212 amino acids
on average. The gene structure and expression of physicochemical properties,
subcellular localization, signal peptides, senior structural domains and
conservative forecasting, and analysis of A. euchroma were studied comparing with
ERF gene gi261363612 of Lithospermum erythrorhizon, and phylogenetic analysis of 
A. euchroma ERF family was carried out. The results showed the existence of three
conserved domains in this family, the senior structure based on random coil and
it clustered into CBF/DREB and ERF subfamilies.

PMID: 25898569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Genet Genomics. 2015 Aug;290(4):1367-77. doi: 10.1007/s00438-015-1005-y. Epub
2015 Feb 10.

Transcriptome exploration for further understanding of the tropane alkaloids
biosynthesis in Anisodus acutangulus.

Cui L(1), Huang F, Zhang D, Lin Y, Liao P, Zong J, Kai G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Biotechnology, College of Life and Environment Sciences,
Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai, 200234, People's Republic of China.

Tropane alkaloids (TAs) such as anisodamine, anisodine, hyoscyamine and
scopolamine are extensively used in clinical practice as anticholinergic agents. 
Anisodus acutangulus produces TAs in root tissue, and although several genes
involved in scopolamine biosynthesis have been cloned, yet the biosynthetic
pathway of TAs remains poorly understood. To further understand TAs biosynthesis 
mechanism, transcriptome analysis with deep RNA sequencing in A. acutangulus
roots was performed in this study; 48 unigenes related to tropane, piperidine and
pyridine alkaloid biosynthesis, 145 linked to the distribution of arginine to TAs
biosynthesis, and 86 categorized to terpenoid backbone biosynthesis have been
identified in pathway enrichment analyses with eukaryotic orthologous groups
(KOG) and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. Additionally, 82 unigenes
annotated as cytochrome P450 family members seemed to be involved in secondary
metabolism. Genes encoding littorine mutase/monooxygenase (CYP80F1), diamine
oxidase (DAO), alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aromatic amino acid
aminotransferase (ArAT) may also play roles in TAs biosynthetic pathways.
Furthermore, over 1,000 unigenes were identified as potential transcription
factors of WRKY, AP2/ERF, MYB and bHLH families, which would be helpful to
understand transcriptional regulation of secondary metabolite biosynthesis. These
data enable novel insights into A. acutangulus transcriptome, updating the
knowledge of TAs biosynthetic mechanism at molecular level.

PMID: 25876163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 13;10(4):e0121844. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121844.
eCollection 2015.

Testing Nelder-Mead based repulsion algorithms for multiple roots of nonlinear
systems via a two-level factorial design of experiments.

Ramadas GC(1), Rocha AM(2), Fernandes EM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, School of Engineering, Polytechnic of Porto,
4200-072 Porto, Portugal. (2)ALGORITMI Research Centre, University of Minho,
Campus de Gualtar 4710-057 Braga, Portugal.

This paper addresses the challenging task of computing multiple roots of a system
of nonlinear equations. A repulsion algorithm that invokes the Nelder-Mead (N-M) 
local search method and uses a penalty-type merit function based on the error
function, known as 'erf', is presented. In the N-M algorithm context, different
strategies are proposed to enhance the quality of the solutions and improve the
overall efficiency. The main goal of this paper is to use a two-level factorial
design of experiments to analyze the statistical significance of the observed
differences in selected performance criteria produced when testing different
strategies in the N-M based repulsion algorithm. The main goal of this paper is
to use a two-level factorial design of experiments to analyze the statistical
significance of the observed differences in selected performance criteria
produced when testing different strategies in the N-M based repulsion algorithm.

PMCID: PMC4395165
PMID: 25875591  [PubMed - in process]


120. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Mar 25;6:170. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00170. eCollection
2015.

How salicylic acid takes transcriptional control over jasmonic acid signaling.

Caarls L(1), Pieterse CM(1), Van Wees SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Plant-Microbe Interactions, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht
University Utrecht, Netherlands.

Transcriptional regulation is a central process in plant immunity. The induction 
or repression of defense genes is orchestrated by signaling networks that are
directed by plant hormones of which salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA)
are the major players. Extensive cross-communication between the hormone
signaling pathways allows for fine tuning of transcriptional programs,
determining resistance to invaders and trade-offs with plant development. Here,
we give an overview of how SA can control transcriptional reprogramming of
JA-induced genes in Arabidopsis thaliana. SA can influence activity and/or
localization of transcriptional regulators by post-translational modifications of
transcription factors and co-regulators. SA-induced redox changes, mediated by
thioredoxins and glutaredoxins, modify transcriptional regulators that are
involved in suppression of JA-dependent genes, such as NPR1 and TGA transcription
factors, which affects their localization or DNA binding activity. Furthermore,
SA can mediate sequestering of JA-responsive transcription factors away from
their target genes by stalling them in the cytosol or in complexes with repressor
proteins in the nucleus. SA also affects JA-induced transcription by inducing
degradation of transcription factors with an activating role in JA signaling, as 
was shown for the ERF transcription factor ORA59. Additionally, SA can induce
negative regulators, among which WRKY transcription factors, that can directly or
indirectly inhibit JA-responsive gene expression. Finally, at the DNA level,
modification of histones by SA-dependent factors can result in repression of
JA-responsive genes. These diverse and complex regulatory mechanisms affect
important signaling hubs in the integration of hormone signaling networks. Some
pathogens have evolved effectors that highjack hormone crosstalk mechanisms for
their own good, which are described in this review as well.

PMCID: PMC4373269
PMID: 25859250  [PubMed]


121. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 7;10(4):e0121041. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121041.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-wide analysis of the AP2/ERF family in Eucalyptus grandis: an intriguing
over-representation of stress-responsive DREB1/CBF genes.

Cao PB(1), Azar S(1), SanClemente H(1), Mounet F(1), Dunand C(1), Marque G(1),
Marque C(1), Teulières C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, UPS, UMR 5546, LRSV, 24 Chemin de Borde Rouge,
Auzeville, BP 42617 31326, Castanet-Tolosan, France; CNRS, UMR 5546, LRSV, 24
Chemin de Borde Rouge, Auzeville, BP 42617 31326, Castanet-Tolosan, France.

BACKGROUND: The AP2/ERF family includes a large number of developmentally and
physiologically important transcription factors sharing an AP2 DNA-binding
domain. Among them DREB1/CBF and DREB2 factors are known as master regulators
respectively of cold and heat/osmotic stress responses.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACHES: The manual annotation of AP2/ERF family from Eucalyptus 
grandis, Malus, Populus and Vitis genomes allowed a complete phylogenetic study
for comparing the structure of this family in woody species and the model
Arabidopsis thaliana. Expression profiles of the whole groups of EgrDREB1 and
EgrDREB2 were investigated through RNAseq database survey and RT-qPCR analyses.
RESULTS: The structure and the size of the AP2/ERF family show a global
conservation for the plant species under comparison. In addition to an expansion 
of the ERF subfamily, the tree genomes mainly differ with respect to the group
representation within the subfamilies. With regard to the E. grandis DREB
subfamily, an obvious feature is the presence of 17 DREB1/CBF genes, the maximum 
reported to date for dicotyledons. In contrast, only six DREB2 have been
identified, which is similar to the other plants species under study, except for 
Malus. All the DREB1/CBF and DREB2 genes from E. grandis are expressed in at
least one condition and all are heat-responsive. Regulation by cold and drought
depends on the genes but is not specific of one group; DREB1/CBF group is more
cold-inducible than DREB2 which is mainly drought responsive.
CONCLUSION: These features suggest that the dramatic expansion of the DREB1/CBF
group might be related to the adaptation of this evergreen tree to climate
changes when it expanded in Australia.

PMCID: PMC4388522
PMID: 25849589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Plant Signal Behav. 2015;10(3):e1003755. doi: 10.1080/15592324.2014.1003755.

The E3 ubiquitin ligase HOS1 is involved in ethylene regulation of leaf expansion
in Arabidopsis.

Lee K(1), Seo PJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Bioactive Material Sciences and Research Center of Bioactive
Materials ; Chonbuk National University , Jeonju , Korea.

Ethylene regulates a variety of physiological processes, such as flowering,
senescence, abscission, and fruit ripening. In particular, leaf expansion is also
controlled by ethylene in Arabidopsis. Exogenous treatment with ethylene inhibits
leaf expansion, and consistently, ethylene insensitive mutants show increased
leaf area. Here, we report that the RING finger-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase
HIGH EXPRESSION OF OSMOTICALLY RESPONSIVE GENES 1 (HOS1) regulates leaf expansion
in an ethylene signaling pathway. The HOS1-deficient mutant showed reduced leaf
area and was insensitive to ethylene perception inhibitor, silver thiosulfate
(STS). Accordingly, genes encoding ethylene signaling components were
significantly up-regulated in hos1-3. This study demonstrates that the HOS1
protein is involved in ethylene signal transduction for the proper regulation of 
leaf expansion possibly under environmentally stressful conditions.

PMCID: PMC4622604
PMID: 25848954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Plant J. 2015 Jun;82(5):772-84. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12848. Epub 2015 May 14.

The low oxygen, oxidative and osmotic stress responses synergistically act
through the ethylene response factor VII genes RAP2.12, RAP2.2 and RAP2.3.

Papdi C(1,)(2), Pérez-Salamó I(1,)(2), Joseph MP(1), Giuntoli B(3), Bögre L(2),
Koncz C(1,)(4), Szabados L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biological Research Centre, Institute of Plant Biology, Temesvári krt. 62.,
H-6726, Szeged, Hungary. (2)Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham Hill,
Surrey, TW20 0EX, UK. (3)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, 
56127, Pisa, Italy. (4)Max-Planck-Institut für Züchtungsforschung, Carl von Linne
weg 10., 50829, Cologne, Germany.

The ethylene response factor VII (ERF-VII) transcription factor RELATED TO
APETALA2.12 (RAP2.12) was previously identified as an activator of the ALCOHOL
DEHYDROGENASE1 promoter::luciferase (ADH1-LUC) reporter gene. Here we show that
overexpression of RAP2.12 and its homologues RAP2.2 and RAP2.3 sustains
ABA-mediated activation of ADH1 and activates hypoxia marker genes under both
anoxic and normoxic conditions. Inducible expression of all three RAP2s conferred
tolerance to anoxia, oxidative and osmotic stresses, and enhanced the sensitivity
to abscisic acid (ABA). Consistently, the rap2.12-2 rap2.3-1 double mutant showed
hypersensitivity to both submergence and osmotic stress. These findings suggest
that the three ERF-VII-type transcription factors play roles in tolerance to
multiple stresses that sequentially occur during and after submergence in
Arabidopsis. Oxygen-dependent degradation of RAP2.12 was previously shown to be
mediated by the N-end rule pathway. During submergence the RAP2.12, RAP2.2 and
RAP2.3 are stabilized and accumulates in the nucleus affecting the transcription 
of stress response genes. We conclude that the stabilized RAP2 transcription
factors can prolong the ABA-mediated activation of a subset of osmotic responsive
genes (e.g. ADH1). We also show that RAP2.12 protein level is affected by the
REALLY INTERESTING GENE (RING) domain containing SEVEN IN ABSENTIA of Arabidopsis
thaliana 2 (SINAT2). Silencing of SINAT1/2 genes leads to enhanced RAP2.12
abundance independently of the presence or absence of its N-terminal degron.
Taken together, our results suggest that RAP2.12 and its homologues RAP2.2 and
RAP2.3 act redundantly in multiple stress responses. Alternative protein
degradation pathways may provide inputs to the RAP2 transcription factors for the
distinct stresses.

© 2015 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25847219  [PubMed - in process]


124. FEBS Open Bio. 2015 Feb 24;5:132-7. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2015.02.002. eCollection
2015.

Genome-wide analysis of the AP2/ERF gene family in Salix arbutifolia.

Rao G(1), Sui J(2), Zeng Y(3), He C(3), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Tree Genetics and Breeding, Research Institute of
Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry, Beijing 100091, China ; Collaborative
Innovation Center of Sustainable Forestry in Southern China, Nanjing Forestry
University, Nanjing 210037, China ; Key Laboratory of Tree Breeding and
Cultivation, State Forestry Administration, Research Institute of Forestry,
Chinese Academy of Forestry, Beijing 100091, China. (2)Collaborative Innovation
Center of Sustainable Forestry in Southern China, Nanjing Forestry University,
Nanjing 210037, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Tree Genetics and Breeding,
Research Institute of Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry, Beijing 100091,
China.

AP2/ERF genes encode transcriptional regulators with a variety of functions in
plant growth and development and in response to biotic and abiotic stresses. To
date, there are no detailed classification and expression profiles for AP2/ERF
genes in Salix. In this study, a comprehensive computational analysis identified 
173 AP2/ERF superfamily genes in willow (Salix arbutifolia), by using in silico
cloning methods with the use of the AP2/ERF conserved domain amino acid sequence 
of Arabidopsis thaliana as a probe. Based on the results of phylogenetic analyses
and the number of AP2/ERF domains, the AP2/ERF genes were classified into four
groups: AP2, RAV, ERF and Soloist. The expression profile was analyzed using
transcriptome data from different tissues. A comparative analysis of AP2/ERF
superfamily genes among Salix, Populus and Arabidopsis was performed. The Salix
DREB, AP2 and RAV groups had a similar number to those in Arabidopsis, and the
size of the ERF subfamily in Salix was about 1.4-fold that of Arabidopsis. The
Salix DREB subfamily was smaller compared to Populus, while the other families
were similar in size to those in Populus. These results will be useful for future
functional analyses of the ERF family genes.

PMCID: PMC4354408
PMID: 25830086  [PubMed]


125. RNA Biol. 2015;12(3):354-67. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1017231.

Translation attenuation via 3' terminal codon usage in bovine csn1s2 is
responsible for the difference in as2- and ß-casein profile in milk.

Kim JJ(1), Yu J, Bag J, Bakovic M, Cant JP.

Author information: 
(1)a Animal and Poultry Science; University of Guelph ; Guelph , Ontario ,
Canada.

The rate of secretion of as2-casein into bovine milk is approximately 25% of that
of ß-casein, yet mammary expression of their respective mRNA transcripts (csn1s2 
and csn2) is not different. Our objective was to identify molecular mechanisms
that explain the difference in translation efficiency between csn1s2 and csn2.
Cell-free translational efficiency of csn2 was 5 times that of csn1s2.
Transcripts of csn1s2 distributed into heavier polysomes than csn2 transcripts,
indicating an attenuation of elongation and/or termination. Stimulatory and
inhibitory effects of the 5' and 3' UTRs on translational efficiency were
different with luciferase and casein sequences in the coding regions.
Substituting the 5' and 3' UTRs from csn2 into csn1s2 did not improve csn1s2
translation, implicating the coding region itself in the translation difference. 
Deletion of a 28-codon fragment from the 3' terminus of the csn1s2 coding region,
which displays codons with low correlations to cell fitness, increased
translation to a par with csn2. We conclude that the usage of the last 28 codons 
of csn1s2 is the main regulatory element that attenuates its expression and is
responsible for the differential translational expression of csn1s2 and csn2.

PMCID: PMC4615300
PMID: 25826667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Am J Vet Res. 2015 Apr;76(4):367-72. doi: 10.2460/ajvr.76.4.367.

Pharmacokinetics of an oral extended-release formulation of doxycycline hyclate
containing acrylic acid and polymethacrylate in dogs.

Ruiz SM(1), Olvera LG, Chacón Sdel C, Estrada DV.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiología y Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina Veterinaria y 
Zootecnia, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Delegación Coyoacán, Ciudad
de México C.P. 04510, México.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the pharmacokinetics of doxycycline hyclate administered 
orally in the form of experimental formulations with different proportions of
acrylic acid-polymethacrylate-based matrices.
ANIMALS: 30 healthy adult dogs.
PROCEDURES: In a crossover study, dogs were randomly assigned (in groups of 10)
to receive a single oral dose (20 mg/kg) of doxycycline hyclate without
excipients (control) or extended-release formulations (ERFs) containing
doxycycline, acrylic acid polymer, and polymethacrylate in the following
proportions: 1:0.5:0.0075 (ERF1) or 1:1:0.015 (ERF2). Serum concentrations of
doxycycline were determined for pharmacokinetic analysis before and at several
intervals after each treatment.
RESULTS: Following oral administration to the study dogs, each ERF resulted in
therapeutic serum doxycycline concentrations for 48 hours, whereas the control
treatment resulted in therapeutic serum doxycycline concentrations for only 24
hours. All pharmacokinetic parameters for ERF1 and ERF2 were significantly
different; however, findings for ERF1 did not differ significantly from those for
the control treatment.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Results indicated that both ERFs containing
doxycycline, acrylic acid polymer, and polymethacrylate had an adequate
pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationship for a time-dependent drug and a
longer release time than doxycycline alone following oral administration in dogs.
Given the minimum effective serum doxycycline concentration of 0.26 µg/mL, a dose
interval of 48 hours can be achieved for each tested ERF. This minimum inhibitory
concentration has the potential to be effective against several susceptible
bacteria involved in important infections in dogs. Treatment of dogs with either 
ERF may have several benefits over treatment with doxycycline alone.

PMID: 25815578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. C R Biol. 2015 Apr;338(4):219-26. doi: 10.1016/j.crvi.2015.01.006. Epub 2015 Mar 
23.

Isolation and characterization of StERF transcription factor genes from potato
(Solanum tuberosum L.).

Wang Z(1), Zhang N(2), Zhou X(3), Fan Q(1), Si H(1), Wang D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Gansu Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic and Germplasm Enhancement, Gansu
Provincial Key Laboratory of Aridland Crop Science, Gansu Agricultural
University, Lanzhou 730070, People's Republic of China; College of Life Science
and Technology, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070, People's Republic 
of China. (2)College of Life Science and Technology, Gansu Agricultural
University, Lanzhou 730070, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
ningzh@gsau.edu.cn. (3)College of Life Science and Technology, Gansu Agricultural
University, Lanzhou 730070, People's Republic of China. (4)Gansu Key Laboratory
of Crop Genetic and Germplasm Enhancement, Gansu Provincial Key Laboratory of
Aridland Crop Science, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou 730070, People's
Republic of China. Electronic address: wangd@gsau.edu.cn.

Ethylene response factor (ERF) is a major subfamily of the AP2/ERF family and
plays significant roles in the regulation of abiotic- and biotic-stress
responses. ERF proteins can interact with the GCC-box cis-element and then
initiate a transcriptional cascade activating downstream ethylene response and
enhancing plant stress tolerance. In this research, we cloned five StERF genes
from potato (Solanum tuberosum L.). The expressional analysis of StERF genes
revealed that they showed tissue- or organ-specific expression patterns and the
expression levels in leaf, stem, root, flower, and tuber were different. The
assays of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and the
reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) showed that the expression of five StERF genes
was regulated by ethephon, methyl jasmonate (MeJA), salt and drought stress. The 
result from the yeast one-hybrid experiment showed that five StERFs had
trans-activation activity and could specifically bind to the GCC-box
cis-elements. The StERFs responded to abiotic factors and hormones suggested that
they possibly had diverse roles in stress and hormone regulation of potato.

Copyright © 2015 Académie des sciences. Published by Elsevier SAS. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 25814424  [PubMed - in process]


128. J Plant Res. 2015 May;128(3):389-97. doi: 10.1007/s10265-015-0714-y. Epub 2015
Mar 26.

WIND1-based acquisition of regeneration competency in Arabidopsis and rapeseed.

Iwase A(1), Mita K, Nonaka S, Ikeuchi M, Koizuka C, Ohnuma M, Ezura H, Imamura J,
Sugimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan,
akira.iwase@riken.jp.

Callus formation and de novo organogenesis often occur in the wounded tissues of 
plants. Although this regenerative capacity of plant cells has been utilized for 
many years, molecular basis for the wound-induced acquisition of regeneration
competency is yet to be elucidated. Here we find that wounding treatment is
essential for shoot regeneration from roots in the conventional tissue culture of
Arabidopsis thaliana. Furthermore, we show that an AP2/ERF transcription factor
WOUND INDUCED DEDIFFERENTIATION1 (WIND1) plays a pivotal role for the acquisition
of regeneration competency in the culture system. Ectopic expression of WIND1 can
bypass both wounding and auxin pre-treatment and increase de novo shoot
regeneration from root explants cultured on shoot-regeneration promoting media.
In Brassica napus, activation of Arabidopsis WIND1 also greatly enhances de novo 
shoot regeneration, further corroborating the role of WIND1 in conferring
cellular regenerative capacity. Our data also show that sequential activation of 
WIND1 and an embryonic regulator LEAFY COTYLEDON2 enhances generation of
embryonic callus, suggesting that combining WIND1 with other transcription
factors promote efficient and organ-specific regeneration. Our findings in the
model plant and crop plant point to a possible way to efficiently induce callus
formation and regeneration by utilizing transcription factors as a molecular
switch.

PMID: 25810222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 19;5:9264. doi: 10.1038/srep09264.

A combinatorial approach of comprehensive QTL-based comparative genome mapping
and transcript profiling identified a seed weight-regulating candidate gene in
chickpea.

Bajaj D(1), Upadhyaya HD(2), Khan Y(1), Das S(1), Badoni S(1), Shree T(1), Kumar 
V(3), Tripathi S(4), Gowda CL(2), Singh S(2), Sharma S(2), Tyagi AK(1),
Chattopdhyay D(1), Parida SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New 
Delhi 110067, India. (2)International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid 
Tropics (ICRISAT), Patancheru 502324, Telangana, India. (3)National Research
Centre on Plant Biotechnology (NRCPB), New Delhi 110012, India. (4)Division of
Genetics, Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New Delhi 110012, India.

High experimental validation/genotyping success rate (94-96%) and intra-specific 
polymorphic potential (82-96%) of 1536 SNP and 472 SSR markers showing in silico 
polymorphism between desi ICC 4958 and kabuli ICC 12968 chickpea was obtained in 
a 190 mapping population (ICC 4958 × ICC 12968) and 92 diverse desi and kabuli
genotypes. A high-density 2001 marker-based intra-specific genetic linkage map
comprising of eight LGs constructed is comparatively much saturated (mean
map-density: 0.94 cM) in contrast to existing intra-specific genetic maps in
chickpea. Fifteen robust QTLs (PVE: 8.8-25.8% with LOD: 7.0-13.8) associated with
pod and seed number/plant (PN and SN) and 100 seed weight (SW) were identified
and mapped on 10 major genomic regions of eight LGs. One of 126.8 kb major
genomic region harbouring a strong SW-associated robust QTL (Caq'SW1.1:
169.1-171.3 cM) has been delineated by integrating high-resolution QTL mapping
with comprehensive marker-based comparative genome mapping and differential
expression profiling. This identified one potential regulatory SNP (G/A) in the
cis-acting element of candidate ERF (ethylene responsive factor) TF
(transcription factor) gene governing seed weight in chickpea. The functionally
relevant molecular tags identified have potential to be utilized for
marker-assisted genetic improvement of chickpea.

PMCID: PMC4365403
PMID: 25786576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Exp Bot. 2015 May;66(9):2635-47. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erv078. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

Overexpression of GmERF5, a new member of the soybean EAR motif-containing ERF
transcription factor, enhances resistance to Phytophthora sojae in soybean.

Dong L(1), Cheng Y(1), Wu J(2), Cheng Q(1), Li W(1), Fan S(1), Jiang L(1), Xu
Z(3), Kong F(4), Zhang D(3), Xu P(5), Zhang S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Soybean Research Institute, Key Laboratory of Soybean Biology of Chinese
Education Ministry, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, Heilongjiang
150030, PR China. (2)Soybean Research Institute, Heilongjiang Academy of
Agricultural Sciences; Collaborative Innovation Center of Grain Production
Capacity Improvement in Heilongjiang Province, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150086, PR
China. (3)Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210014, PR
China. (4)Northeast Institute of Geography and Agroecology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081, PR China. (5)Soybean Research Institute,
Key Laboratory of Soybean Biology of Chinese Education Ministry, Northeast
Agricultural University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150030, PR China
zhangshuzhen@neau.edu.cn xupengfei@neau.edu.cn.

Phytophthora root and stem rot of soybean [Glycine max (L.) Merr.], caused by
Phytophthora sojae Kaufmann and Gerdemann, is a destructive disease throughout
the soybean planting regions in the world. Here, we report insights into the
function and underlying mechanisms of a novel ethylene response factor (ERF) in
soybean, namely GmERF5, in host responses to P. sojae. GmERF5-overexpressing
transgenic soybean exhibited significantly enhanced resistance to P. sojae and
positively regulated the expression of the PR10, PR1-1, and PR10-1 genes.
Sequence analysis suggested that GmERF5 contains an AP2/ERF domain of 58 aa and a
conserved ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif in its C-terminal
region. Following stress treatments, GmERF5 was significantly induced by P.
sojae, ethylene (ET), abscisic acid (ABA), and salicylic acid (SA). The activity 
of the GmERF5 promoter (GmERF5P) was upregulated in tobacco leaves with ET, ABA, 
Phytophthora nicotianae, salt, and drought treatments, suggesting that GmERF5
could be involved not only in the induced defence response but also in the
ABA-mediated pathway of salt and drought tolerance. GmERF5 could bind to the
GCC-box element and act as a repressor of gene transcription. It was targeted to 
the nucleus when transiently expressed in Arabidopsis protoplasts. GmERF5
interacted with a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor (GmbHLH) and
eukaryotic translation initiation factor (GmEIF) both in yeast cells and in
planta. To the best of our knowledge, GmERF5 is the first soybean EAR
motif-containing ERF transcription factor demonstrated to be involved in the
response to pathogen infection.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25779701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Plant Biotechnol J. 2015 Dec;13(9):1325-34. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12351. Epub 2015 Mar
16.

EjAP2-1, an AP2/ERF gene, is a novel regulator of fruit lignification induced by 
chilling injury, via interaction with EjMYB transcription factors.

Zeng JK(1), Li X(1), Xu Q(1), Chen JY(2), Yin XR(1), Ferguson IB(1,)(3), Chen
KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fruit Quality Biology/The State Agriculture Ministry Laboratory 
of Horticultural Plant Growth, Development and Quality Improvement, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. (2)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and
Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources/Guangdong Key Laboratory for
Postharvest Science, College of Horticultural Science, South China Agricultural
University, Guangzhou, China. (3)New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food Research 
Limited, Auckland, New Zealand.

Lignin biosynthesis is regulated by many transcription factors, such as those of 
the MYB and NAC families. However, the roles of AP2/ERF transcription factors in 
lignin biosynthesis have been rarely investigated. Eighteen EjAP2/ERF genes were 
isolated from loquat fruit (Eriobotrya japonica), which undergoes postharvest
lignification during low temperature storage. Among these, expression of EjAP2-1,
a transcriptional repressor, was negatively correlated with fruit lignification. 
The dual-luciferase assay indicated that EjAP2-1 could trans-repress activities
of promoters of lignin biosynthesis genes from both Arabidopsis and loquat.
However, EjAP2-1 did not interact with the target promoters (Ej4CL1). Yeast
two-hybrid (Y2H) and bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) assays
indicated protein-protein interactions between EjAP2-1 and lignin
biosynthesis-related EjMYB1 and EjMYB2. Furthermore, repression effects on the
Ej4CL1 promoter were observed with the combination of EjAP2-1 and EjMYB1 or
EjMYB2, while EjAP2-1 with the EAR motif mutated (mEjAP2-1) lost such repression,
although mEjAP2-1 still interacted with EjMYB protein. Based on these results, it
is proposed that EjAP2-1 is an indirect transcriptional repressor on lignin
biosynthesis, and the repression effects were manifested by EAR motifs and were
conducted via protein-protein interaction with EjMYBs.

© 2015 Society for Experimental Biology, Association of Applied Biologists and
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25778106  [PubMed - in process]


132. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Mar 12;16(3):5714-40. doi: 10.3390/ijms16035714.

Genome-wide identification and analysis of drought-responsive genes and microRNAs
in tobacco.

Yin F(1,)(2), Qin C(3,)(4), Gao J(5), Liu M(6), Luo X(4), Zhang W(7), Liu H(8),
Liao X(9), Shen Y(10), Mao L(11), Zhang Z(12), Lin H(8), Lübberstedt T(13), Pan
G(14).

Author information: 
(1)School of Agricultural Sciences, Xichang College, Xichang 615000, China.
yinfuqiang04@sina.com. (2)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural
University/Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in
Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China.
yinfuqiang04@sina.com. (3)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural
University/Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in
Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China.
luoxirong1982@gmail.com. (4)Zunyi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Zunyi 563102,
China. luoxirong1982@gmail.com. (5)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan
Agricultural University/Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of
Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China.
gaojian8888@gmail.com. (6)School of Agricultural Sciences, Xichang College,
Xichang 615000, China. lming311608@sina.com. (7)School of Agricultural Sciences, 
Xichang College, Xichang 615000, China. zhangwy@gmail.com. (8)Maize Research
Institute of Sichuan Agricultural University/Key Laboratory of Biology and
Genetic Improvement of Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture,
Chengdu 611130, China. lhj20305@gmail.com. (9)Beijing Genomics
Institute-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China. liaoxinhui@bgitechsolutions.com.
(10)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural University/Key Laboratory of
Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of
Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China. shenyaou@gmail.com. (11)Beijing Genomics
Institute-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China. maolikai@bgitechsolutions.com.
(12)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural University/Key Laboratory of
Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of
Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China. zzmmaize@gmail.com. (13)Department of
Agronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA. thomasl@iastate.edu.
(14)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural University/Key Laboratory of
Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of
Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China. pangt@sicau.edu.cn.

Drought stress response is a complex trait regulated at transcriptional and
post-transcriptional levels in tobacco. Since the 1990s, many studies have shown 
that miRNAs act in many ways to regulate target expression in plant growth,
development and stress response. The recent draft genome sequence of Nicotiana
benthamiana has provided a framework for Digital Gene Expression (DGE) and small 
RNA sequencing to understand patterns of transcription in the context of plant
response to environmental stress. We sequenced and analyzed three Digital Gene
Expression (DGE) libraries from roots of normal and drought-stressed tobacco
plants, and four small RNA populations from roots, stems and leaves of control or
drought-treated tobacco plants, respectively. We identified 276 candidate drought
responsive genes (DRGs) with sequence similarities to 64 known DRGs from other
model plant crops, 82 were transcription factors (TFs) including WRKY, NAC, ERF
and bZIP families. Of these tobacco DRGs, 54 differentially expressed DRGs
included 21 TFs, which belonged to 4 TF families such as NAC (6), MYB (4), ERF
(10), and bZIP (1). Additionally, we confirmed expression of 39 known miRNA
families (122 members) and five conserved miRNA families, which showed
differential regulation under drought stress. Targets of miRNAs were further
surveyed based on a recently published study, of which ten targets were DRGs. An 
integrated gene regulatory network is proposed for the molecular mechanisms of
tobacco root response to drought stress using differentially expressed DRGs, the 
changed expression profiles of miRNAs and their target transcripts. This network 
analysis serves as a reference for future studies on tobacco response stresses
such as drought, cold and heavy metals.

PMCID: PMC4394501
PMID: 25775154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Plant Cell. 2015 Mar;27(3):839-56. doi: 10.1105/tpc.114.134809. Epub 2015 Mar 13.

Phosphorylation of trihelix transcriptional repressor ASR3 by MAP KINASE4
negatively regulates Arabidopsis immunity.

Li B(1), Jiang S(2), Yu X(2), Cheng C(3), Chen S(4), Cheng Y(2), Yuan JS(2),
Jiang D(5), He P(3), Shan L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Institute for Plant Genomics
and Biotechnology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843 Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Plant Pathology of Hubei Province, College of Plant Science and
Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Institute for Plant Genomics
and Biotechnology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Institute for Plant Genomics and
Biotechnology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843. (4)Department 
of Biology, Genetics Institute, Plant Molecular and Cellular Biology Program,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610. (5)Provincial Key Laboratory
of Plant Pathology of Hubei Province, College of Plant Science and Technology,
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, P.R. China. (6)Department 
of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Institute for Plant Genomics and
Biotechnology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843 lshan@tamu.edu.

Comment in
    Plant Cell. 2015 Mar;27(3):481.

Proper control of immune-related gene expression is crucial for the host to
launch an effective defense response. Perception of microbe-associated molecular 
patterns (MAMPs) induces rapid and profound transcriptional reprogramming via
unclear mechanisms. Here, we show that ASR3 (ARABIDOPSIS SH4-RELATED3) functions 
as a transcriptional repressor and plays a negative role in regulating
pattern-triggered immunity (PTI) in Arabidopsis thaliana. ASR3 belongs to a
plant-specific trihelix transcription factor family for which functional studies 
are lacking. MAMP treatments induce rapid phosphorylation of ASR3 at threonine
189 via MPK4, a mitogen-activated protein kinase that negatively regulates PTI
responses downstream of multiple MAMP receptors. ASR3 possesses transcriptional
repressor activity via its ERF-associated amphiphilic repression motifs and
negatively regulates a large subset of flg22-induced genes. Phosphorylation of
ASR3 by MPK4 enhances its DNA binding activity to suppress gene expression.
Importantly, the asr3 mutant shows enhanced disease resistance to virulent
bacterial pathogen infection, whereas transgenic plants overexpressing the
wild-type or phospho-mimetic form of ASR3 exhibit compromised PTI responses. Our 
studies reveal a function of the trihelix transcription factors in plant innate
immunity and provide evidence that ASR3 functions as a transcriptional repressor 
regulated by MAMP-activated MPK4 to fine-tune plant immune gene expression.

© 2015 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4558661
PMID: 25770109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Plant Signal Behav. 2014;9(8):e29463. doi: 10.4161/psb.29463.

DEWAX-mediated transcriptional repression of cuticular wax biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Suh MC(1), Go YS.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Bioenergy Science and Technology; Chonnam National University;
Gwangju, Korea.

The aerial parts of plants are covered with a cuticular wax layer, which is the
first barrier between a plant and its environment. Although cuticular wax
deposition increases more in the light than in the dark, little is known about
the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of cuticular wax biosynthesis.
Recently DEWAX (Decrease Wax Biosynthesis) encoding an AP2/ERF transcription
factor was found to be preferentially expressed in the epidermis and induced by
darkness. Wax analysis of the dewax knockout mutant, wild type, and DEWAX
overexpression lines (OX) indicates that DEWAX is a negative regulator of
cuticular wax biosynthesis. DEWAX represses the expression of wax biosynthetic
genes CER1, LACS2, ACLA2, and ECR via direct interaction with their promoters.
Cuticular wax biosynthesis is negatively regulated twice a day by the expression 
of DEWAX; throughout the night and another for stomata closing. Taken together,
it is evident that DEWAX-mediated negative regulation of the wax biosynthetic
genes plays role in determining the total wax loads produced in Arabidopsis
during daily dark and light cycles. In addition, significantly higher levels of
DEWAX transcripts in leaves than stems suggest that DEWAX-mediated
transcriptional repression might be involved in the organ-specific regulation of 
total wax amounts on plant surfaces.

PMCID: PMC4203645
PMID: 25763625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Plant J. 2015 Apr;82(2):193-207. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12796. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

Regulation of the Arabidopsis CBF regulon by a complex low-temperature regulatory
network.

Park S(1), Lee CM, Doherty CJ, Gilmour SJ, Kim Y, Thomashow MF.

Author information: 
(1)MSU-DOE Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
MI, 48824, USA.

Comment in
    Trends Plant Sci. 2015 Aug;20(8):466-8.

Exposure of Arabidopsis thaliana plants to low non-freezing temperatures results 
in an increase in freezing tolerance that involves action of the C-repeat binding
factor (CBF) regulatory pathway. CBF1, CBF2 and CBF3, which are rapidly induced
in response to low temperature, encode closely related AP2/ERF DNA-binding
proteins that recognize the C-repeat (CRT)/dehydration-responsive element (DRE)
DNA regulatory element present in the promoters of CBF-regulated genes. The CBF
transcription factors alter the expression of more than 100 genes, known as the
CBF regulon, which contribute to an increase in freezing tolerance. In this
study, we investigated the extent to which cold induction of the CBF regulon is
regulated by transcription factors other than CBF1, CBF2 and CBF3, and whether
freezing tolerance is dependent on a functional CBF-CRT/DRE regulatory module. To
address these issues we generated transgenic lines that constitutively
overexpressed a truncated version of CBF2 that had dominant negative effects on
the function of the CBF-CRT/DRE regulatory module, and 11 transcription factors
encoded by genes that were rapidly cold-induced in parallel with the 'first-wave'
CBF genes, and determined the effects that overexpressing these proteins had on
global gene expression and freezing tolerance. Our results indicate that cold
regulation of the CBF regulon involves extensive co-regulation by other
first-wave transcription factors; that the low-temperature regulatory network
beyond the CBF pathway is complex and highly interconnected; and that the
increase in freezing tolerance that occurs with cold acclimation is only
partially dependent on the CBF-CRT/DRE regulatory module.

© 2015 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25736223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Trends Plant Sci. 2015 Apr;20(4):219-29. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2015.02.001. Epub
2015 Feb 24.

Diverse roles of jasmonates and ethylene in abiotic stress tolerance.

Kazan K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO),
Agriculture Flagship, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia; The Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation (QAAFI),
The University of Queensland, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia. Electronic address: kemal.kazan@csiro.au.

Jasmonates (JAs) and ethylene (ET), often acting cooperatively, play essential
roles in regulating plant defense against pests and pathogens. Recent research
reviewed here has revealed mechanistic new insights into the mode of action of
these hormones in plant abiotic stress tolerance. During cold stress, JAs and ET 
differentially regulate the C-repeat binding factor (CBF) pathway. Major JA and
ET signaling hubs such as JAZ proteins, CTR1, MYC2, components of the mediator
complex, EIN2, EIN3, and several members of the AP2/ERF transcription factor gene
family all have complex regulatory roles during abiotic stress adaptation. Better
understanding the roles of these phytohormones in plant abiotic stress tolerance 
will contribute to the development of crop plants tolerant to a wide range of
stressful environments.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25731753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Plant Cell Rep. 2015 Jun;34(6):1005-23. doi: 10.1007/s00299-015-1761-5. Epub 2015
Feb 21.

Analyzing serial cDNA libraries revealed reactive oxygen species and gibberellins
signaling pathways in the salt response of Upland cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.).

Shi G(1), Guo X, Guo J, Liu L, Hua J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Crop Heterosis and Utilization of Ministry of Education, College of
Agronomy and Biotechnology, Beijing Key Lab of Crop Genetic Improvement, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, China, shi-850411@163.com.

KEY MESSAGE: By comparing series full-length cDNA libraries stressed and control,
the dynamic process of salt stress response in Upland cotton was studied, and
reactive oxygen species and gibberellins signaling pathways were proposed. The
Upland cotton is the most important fiber plant with highly salt tolerance.
However, the molecular mechanism underlying salt tolerance in domesticated cotton
was unclear. Here, seven full-length cDNA libraries were constructed for seedling
roots of Upland cotton 'Zhong G 5' at 0, 3, 12 and 48 h after the treatment of
control or 150 mM NaCl stress. About 3300 colonies in each library were selected 
robotically for 5'-end pyrosequencing, resulting in 20,358 expressed sequence
tags (ESTs) totally. And 8516 uniESTs were then assembled, including 2914 contigs
and 5602 singletons, and explored for Gene Ontology (GO) function. GO comparison 
between serial stress libraries and control reflected the growth regulation,
stimulus response, signal transduction and biology regulation processes were
conducted dynamically in response to salt stress. MYB, MYB-related, WRKY, bHLH,
GRAS and ERF families of transcription factors were significantly enriched in the
early response. 65 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), mainly associated with 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging, gibberellins (GAs) metabolism, signal
transduction, transcription regulation, stress response and transmembrane
transport, were identified and confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR.
Overexpression of selected DEGs increased tolerance against salt stress in
transgenic yeast. Results in this study supported that a ROS-GAs interacting
signaling pathway of salt stress response was activated in Upland cotton. Our
results provided valuable gene resources for further investigation of the
molecular mechanism of salinity tolerance.

PMID: 25700980  [PubMed - in process]


138. Nephron. 2015;129 Suppl 1:87-98. doi: 10.1159/000370274. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

UK Renal Registry 17th Annual Report: Chapter 4 Demography of the UK Paediatric
Renal Replacement Therapy Population in 2013.

Pruthi R(1), Hamilton AJ, O'Brien C, Casula A, Braddon F, Inward C, Lewis M,
Maxwell H, Stojanovic J, Tse Y, Sinha MD.

Author information: 
(1)UK Renal Registry, Bristol, UK.

AIMS: To describe the demographics of the paediatric renal replacement therapy
(RRT) population under the age of 18 years in the UK and to analyse changes in
demography over time.
METHODS: Data were collected electronically from all 13 paediatric renal centres 
within the UK. A series of cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses were
performed to describe the demographics of paediatric RRT patients.
RESULTS: A total of 891 children and young people under 18 with established renal
failure (ERF) were receiving treatment at paediatric nephrology centres in 2013. 
At the census date, 80.2% had a functioning transplant, 11.7%were receiving
haemodialysis (HD) and 8.1% were receiving peritoneal dialysis (PD). In patients 
aged ,16 years the prevalence of ERF was 58.2 per million age related
population(pmarp) and the incidence 9.3 pmarp. A third of the prevalent patients 
had one or more reported comorbidities.At transfer to adult services, 85.2% of
patients had a functioning renal transplant. Pre-emptive transplantation was seen
to occur in a third of children starting RRT under16 years, with lower rates seen
in girls and ethnic minorities.Living donation as starting modality has continued
to improve with an increase from 8.8% in 19992003 to 18.4% in 20092013.
Survival in childhood amongst children starting RRT was the lowest in those aged 
less than two years.
CONCLUSIONS: We report continued improvement in data quality and electronic
submission of data returns. The data provided in this report show relatively
stable trends of incidence and prevalence in children with established renal
failure.

PMID: 25695808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Protoplasma. 2015 Nov;252(6):1461-73. doi: 10.1007/s00709-015-0775-8. Epub 2015
Feb 17.

Isolation and molecular characterization of a novel WIN1/SHN1 ethylene-responsive
transcription factor TdSHN1 from durum wheat (Triticum turgidum. L. subsp.
durum).

Djemal R(1), Khoudi H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Protection and Improvement, Center of Biotechnology of
Sfax, University of Sfax, B.P' 1177, Route Sidi Mansour Km 6, 3018, Sfax,
Tunisia. (2)Laboratory of Plant Protection and Improvement, Center of
Biotechnology of Sfax, University of Sfax, B.P' 1177, Route Sidi Mansour Km 6,
3018, Sfax, Tunisia. hkhoudi@hotmail.com.

Over the last decade, APETALA2/Ethylene Responsive Factor (AP2/ERF) proteins have
become the subject of intensive research activity due to their involvement in a
variety of biological processes. This research led to the identification of
AP2/ERF genes in many species; however, little is known about these genes in
durum wheat, one of the most important cereal crops in the world. In this study, 
a new member of the AP2/ERF transcription factor family, designated TdSHN1, was
isolated from durum wheat using thermal asymetric interlaced PCR (TAIL-PCR)
method. Protein sequence analysis showed that TdSHN1 contained an AP2/ERF domain 
of 63 amino acids and a putative nuclear localization signal (NLS). Phylogenetic 
analysis showed that TdSHN1 belongs to a group Va protein in the ERF subfamily
which contains the Arabidopsis ERF proteins (SHN1, SHN2, and SHN3). Expression of
TdSHN1 was strongly induced by salt, drought, abscisic acid (ABA), and cold. In
planta, TdSHN1 protein was able to activate the transcription of GUS reporter
gene driven by the GCC box and DRE element sequences. In addition, TdSHN1 was
targeted to the nucleus when transiently expressed in tobacco epidermal cells. In
transgenic yeast, overexpression of TdSHN1 increased tolerance to multiple
abiotic stresses. Taken together, the results showed that TdSHN1 encodes an
abiotic stress-inducible, transcription factor which confers abiotic stress
tolerance in yeast. TdSHN1 is therefore a promising candidate for improvement of 
biotic and abiotic stress tolerance in wheat as well as other crops.

PMID: 25687296  [PubMed - in process]


140. Plant Cell Physiol. 2015 May;56(5):992-1005. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcv025. Epub 2015
Feb 13.

The Potato ERF Transcription Factor StERF3 Negatively Regulates Resistance to
Phytophthora infestans and Salt Tolerance in Potato.

Tian Z(1), He Q(2), Wang H(2), Liu Y(3), Zhang Y(4), Shao F(5), Xie C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology (HAU), Ministry of Education,
National Center for Vegetable Improvement (Central China), Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan, Hubei, 430070, China tianzhd@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (2)Key
Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology (HAU), Ministry of Education, National 
Center for Vegetable Improvement (Central China), Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, Hubei, 430070, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant
Biology (HAU), Ministry of Education, National Center for Vegetable Improvement
(Central China), Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, 430070, China
Present address: Science and Technology School of Shiyan City, Danjiangkou,
Shiyan City, Hubei Province, 442701, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Horticultural
Plant Biology (HAU), Ministry of Education, National Center for Vegetable
Improvement (Central China), Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei,
430070, China Present address: Shanghai ChemPartner Co., LTD., Shanghai, 201203, 
China. (5)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology (HAU), Ministry of
Education, National Center for Vegetable Improvement (Central China), Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, 430070, China Present address:
Agricultural Bureau of the Laiwu City, Shandong Province, 271100, China.

Ethylene response factors (ERFs) are unique to the plant kingdom and play crucial
roles in plant response to various biotic and abiotic stresses. We show here that
a potato StERF3, which contains an ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR)
motif in its C-terminal region, negatively regulates resistance to Phytophthora
infestans and salt tolerance in potato. The StERF3 promoter responds to induction
by salicylic acid, ABA ethylene and NaCl, as well as P. infestans, the causal
agent of potato late blight disease. StERF3 could bind to the GCC box element of 
the HIS3 promoter and activate transcription of HIS3 in yeast cells. Importantly,
silencing of StERF3 in potato produced an enhanced foliage resistance to P.
infestans and elevated plant tolerance to NaCl stress accompanied by the
activation of defense-related genes (PR1, NPR1 and WRKY1). In contrast,
StERF3-overexpressing plants showed reduced expression of these defense-related
genes and enhanced susceptibility to P. infestans, suggesting that StERF3
functions as a negative regulator of downstream defense- and/or stress-related
genes in potato. StERF3 is localized to the nucleus. Interestingly, yeast
two-hybrid assay and a bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) test
clarified that StERF3 could interact with other proteins in the cytoplasm which
may lead to its re-localization between the nucleus and cytoplasm, revealing a
novel means of StERF3 regulation. Taken together, these data provide new insights
into the mechanism underlying how StERF3 negatively regulates late blight
resistance and abiotic tolerance in potato and may have a potential use in
engineering late blight resistance in potato.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese
Society of Plant Physiologists. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25681825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cytometry A. 2015 Mar;87(3):254-61. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.22634. Epub 2015 Feb 5.

Quantification of cells with specific phenotypes II: determination of CD4
expression level on reconstituted lyophilized human PBMC labelled with anti-CD4
FITC antibody.

Wang L(1), Stebbings R, Gaigalas AK, Sutherland J, Kammel M, John M, Roemer B,
Kuhne M, Schneider RJ, Braun M, Engel A, Dikshit D, Abbasi F, Marti GE, Sassi M, 
Revel L, Kim SK, Baradez M, Lekishvili T, Marshall D, Whitby L, Jing W, Ost V,
Vonsky M, Neukammer J.

Author information: 
(1)Biosystems and Biomaterials Division, NIST (National Institute of Standards
and Technology), Gaithersburg, Maryland, 20899.

This report focuses on the characterization of CD4 expression level in terms of
equivalent number of reference fluorophores (ERF). Twelve different flow
cytometer platforms across sixteen laboratories were utilized in this study. As a
first step the participants were asked to calibrate the fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC) channel of each flow cytometer using commercially available
calibration standard consisting of five populations of microspheres. Each
population had an assigned value of equivalent fluorescein fluorophores (EFF
denotes a special case of the generic term ERF with FITC as the reference
fluorophore). The EFF values were assigned at the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST). A surface-labelled lyophilized cell preparation was
provided by the National Institute of Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC),
using human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) pre-labeled with a FITC
conjugated anti-CD4 monoclonal antibody. Three PBMC sample vials, provided to
each participant, were used for the CD4 expression analysis. The PBMC are
purported to have a fixed number of surface CD4 receptors. On the basis of the
microsphere calibration, the EFF value of the PBMC samples was measured to
characterize the population average CD4 expression level of the PBMC
preparations. Both the results of data analysis performed by each participant and
the results of centralized analysis of all participants' raw data are reported.
Centralized analysis gave a mean EFF value of 22,300 and an uncertainty of 750,
corresponding to 3.3% (level of confidence 68%) of the mean EFF value. The next
step will entail the measurement of the ERF values of the lyophilized PBMC
stained with labels for other fluorescence channels. The ultimate goal is to show
that lyophilized PBMC is a suitable biological reference cell material for
multicolor flow cytometry and that it can be used to present multicolor flow
cytometry measurements in terms of ABC (antibodies bound per cell) units.

© 2015 International Society for Advancement of Cytometry.

PMID: 25655377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 6;458(2):287-93. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.01.101. Epub 2015 Jan 31.

The development dynamics of the maize root transcriptome responsive to heavy
metal Pb pollution.

Gao J(1), Zhang Y(1), Lu C(1), Peng H(2), Luo M(3), Li G(4), Shen Y(1), Ding
H(1), Zhang Z(1), Pan G(5), Lin H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in Southwest
Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural
University, Wenjiang, Sichuan, 611130, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Biology and
Genetic Improvement of Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Maize 
Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural University, Wenjiang, Sichuan, 611130,
China; Sichuan Tourism University, Chengdu, 610000, Sichuan, China. (3)Drug
Discovery Research Center of Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou, Sichuan 646000,
China. (4)Guangdong Academy of Agriculture Sciences, Gongzhou, 510640, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in Southwest
Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural
University, Wenjiang, Sichuan, 611130, China. Electronic address:
pangt1956@aliyun.com. (6)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of
Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Maize Research Institute of
Sichuan Agricultural University, Wenjiang, Sichuan, 611130, China. Electronic
address: linhj521@gmail.com.

Lead (Pb), as a heavy metal element, has become the most important metal
pollutant of the environment. With allocating a relatively higher proportion of
its biomass in roots, maize could be a potential important model to study the
phytoremediation of Pb-contaminated soil. Here we analyzed the maize root
transcriptome of inbred lines 9782 under heavy metal lead (Pb) pollution, which
was identified as a non-hyperaccumulator for Pb in roots. In the present study,
more than 98 millions reads were mapped to define gene structure and detect
polymorphism, thereby to qualify transcript abundance along roots development
under Pb treatment. A total of 17,707, 17,440, 16,998 and 16,586 genes were
identified in maize roots at four developmental stages (0, 12 h, 24 h and 48 h)
respectively and 2,825, 2,626, 2161 and 2260 stage-specifically expressed genes
were also identified respectively. In addition, based on our RNA-Seq data,
transcriptomic changes during maize root development responsive to Pb were
investigated. A total of 384 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (log2Ratio =
1, FDR = 0.001) were identified, of which, 36 genes with significant alteration
in expression were detected in four developmental stages; 12 DEGs were randomly
selected and successful validated by qRT-PCR. Additionally, many transcription
factor families might act as the important regulators at different developmental 
stages, such as bZIP, ERF and GARP et al. These results will expand our
understanding of the complex molecular and cellular events in maize root
development and provide a foundation for future study on root development in
maize under heavy metal pollution and other cereal crops.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25645016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Integr Plant Biol. 2015 Oct;57(10):838-47. doi: 10.1111/jipb.12335. Epub 2015
Mar 31.

ThERF1 regulates its target genes via binding to a novel cis-acting element in
response to salt stress.

Wang L(1,)(2), Wang C(2), Qin L(1), Liu W(2), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biogeography and Bioresource in Arid Land, Xinjiang
Institute of Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi, 830011, 
China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Tree Genetics and Breeding (Northeast Forestry 
University), Harbin, 150040, China.

Ethylene responsive factors (ERFs) are plant-specific transcription factors that 
are involved in a variety of biological processes. We previously demonstrated
that an ERF gene from Tamarix hispida, ThERF1, encodes a protein binding to
GCC-box and DRE motifs and negatively modulates abiotic stress tolerance. In the 
present study, microarray analysis was performed to study the genes regulated by 
ThERF1 on a genomic scale. There were 154 and 307 genes (respectively
representing 134 and 260 unique genes) significantly up- and downregulated by
ThERF1 under salt stress conditions, respectively. A novel motif, named TTG, was 
identified to be recognized by ThERF1, which commonly presents in the promoters
of ThERF1-targeted genes. The TTG motif is also bound by other ERFs of a
different subfamily from T. hispida and Arabidopsis, indicating that it is
commonly recognized by ERF proteins. The binding affinities of ERFs to the TTG
motif are significantly induced by salt stress. The TTG motif is more enriched
than the GCC-box and DRE motifs in the promoters of ThERF1-targeted genes. Taken 
together, these studies suggested that the TTG motif plays an important role in
the gene expression regulated by ERFs in response to salt stress.

© 2015 Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 25641039  [PubMed - in process]


144. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Jan 19;16(1):2052-65. doi: 10.3390/ijms16012052.

Isolation and characterization of six AP2/ERF transcription factor genes in
Chrysanthemum nankingense.

Gao C(1), Li P(2), Song A(3), Wang H(4), Wang Y(5), Ren L(6), Qi X(7), Chen F(8),
Jiang J(9), Chen S(10).

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095,
China. 2011104110@njau.edu.cn. (2)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, China. 2011204026@njau.edu.cn. (3)College of
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.
aiping_song@aliyun.com. (4)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, China. hb@njau.edu.cn. (5)College of Horticulture,
Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China. 2011104112@njau.edu.cn.
(6)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095,
China. 2012204032@njau.edu.cn. (7)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, China. 2012204028@njau.edu.cn. (8)College of
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.
chenfd@njau.edu.cn. (9)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing 210095, China. jiangjiafu@njau.edu.cn. (10)College of Horticulture,
Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China. chensm@njau.edu.cn.

The AP2/ERF family of plant transcription factors (TFs) regulate a variety of
developmental and physiological processes. Here, we report the isolation of six
AP2/ERF TF family genes from Chrysanthemum nankingense. On the basis of sequence 
similarity, one of these belonged to the Ethylene Responsive Factor (ERF)
subfamily and the other five to the Dehydration Responsive Element Binding
protein (DREB) subfamily. A transient expression experiment showed that all six
AP2/ERF proteins localized to the nucleus. A yeast-one hybrid assay demonstrated 
that CnDREB1-1, 1-2 and 1-3 all function as transactivators, while CnERF1,
CnDREB3-1 and 3-2 have no transcriptional activation ability. The transcription
response of the six TFs in response to wounding, salinity and low temperature
stress and treatment with abscisic acid (ABA), salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic
acid (JA) showed that CnERF1 was up-regulated by wounding and low temperature
stress but suppressed by salinity stress. The transcription of CnDREB1-1, 1-2 and
1-3 was down-regulated by ABA and JA to varying degrees. CnDREB3-1 and 3-2 was
moderately increased or decreased by wounding and SA treatment, suppressed by
salinity stress and JA treatment, and enhanced by low temperature stress and ABA 
treatment.

PMCID: PMC4307348
PMID: 25607731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Annu Rev Plant Biol. 2015;66:345-67. doi: 10.1146/annurev-arplant-043014-114813. 
Epub 2015 Jan 12.

Oxygen sensing and signaling.

van Dongen JT(1), Licausi F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology I, Aachen Biology and Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen
University, 52074 Aachen, Germany; email: dongen@bio1.rwth-aachen.de.

Oxygen is an indispensable substrate for many biochemical reactions in plants,
including energy metabolism (respiration). Despite its importance, plants lack an
active transport mechanism to distribute oxygen to all cells. Therefore, steep
oxygen gradients occur within most plant tissues, which can be exacerbated by
environmental perturbations that further reduce oxygen availability. Plants
possess various responses to cope with spatial and temporal variations in oxygen 
availability, many of which involve metabolic adaptations to deal with energy
crises induced by low oxygen. Responses are induced gradually when oxygen
concentrations decrease and are rapidly reversed upon reoxygenation. A direct
effect of the oxygen level can be observed in the stability, and thus activity,
of various transcription factors that control the expression of hypoxia-induced
genes. Additional signaling pathways are activated by the impact of oxygen
deficiency on mitochondrial and chloroplast functioning. Here, we describe the
molecular components of the oxygen-sensing pathway.

PMID: 25580837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Cancer Prev. 2014 Dec;19(4):288-300. doi: 10.15430/JCP.2014.19.4.288.

Eugenol-rich Fraction of Syzygium aromaticum (Clove) Reverses Biochemical and
Histopathological Changes in Liver Cirrhosis and Inhibits Hepatic Cell
Proliferation.

Ali S(1), Prasad R(1), Mahmood A(1), Routray I(1), Shinkafi TS(1), Sahin K(2),
Kucuk O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, 
New Delhi, India. (2)Department of Animal Nutrition, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Firat University, Elazig, Turkey. (3)Winship Cancer Institute, Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

BACKGROUND: Dried flower bud of Syzygium aromaticum (clove) is rich in eugenol,
an antioxidant and antiinflammatory compound that can protect liver against
injury. Clove, besides eugenol, also contains other pharmacologically active
phytochemicals such as ß-sitosterol and ascorbic acid. This study reports the
effect of eugenol-rich fraction (ERF) of clove on liver cirrhosis induced by
thioacetamide.
METHODS: Cirrhosis of the liver, which predisposes to hepatocellular carcinoma,
was induced by administering thioacetamide (0.03%) in drinking water for 16
weeks. Cirrhotic animals were divided into two groups; the treated group was
administered ERF for 9 weeks, one week after discontinuation of thioacetamide,
while the other group received normal saline for a similar duration of time.
RESULTS: The treatment with ERF, as determined by histopathology and through a
battery of biochemical markers of hepatic injury, oxidative stress and drug
metabolizing enzymes, significantly ameliorated the signs of liver cirrhosis. It 
lowered the elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase, <U+03B3>-glutamyl transferase and
other biochemical changes in liver cirrhosis. Histopathology of the liver
corroborated the effect of ERF with biochemical findings. ERF treatment further
inhibited cell proliferation, as demonstrated by reduced [(3)H]-thymidine uptake.
CONCLUSIONS: Data provide evidence supporting the protective action of ERF on
liver cirrhosis. The study assumes significance because cirrhosis predisposes the
liver to cancer, which is characterized by abnormal cell proliferation. ERF in
this study is reported to inhibit hepatic cell proliferation and at the same time
decrease oxidative stress, which might be the mechanism of protection against
liver cirrhosis.

PMCID: PMC4285960
PMID: 25574464  [PubMed]


147. PLoS Genet. 2015 Jan 8;11(1):e1004835. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004835.
eCollection 2015.

Insight in genome-wide association of metabolite quantitative traits by exome
sequence analyses.

Demirkan A(1), Henneman P(2), Verhoeven A(3), Dharuri H(2), Amin N(4), van
Klinken JB(2), Karssen LC(4), de Vries B(2), Meissner A(3), Göraler S(3), van den
Maagdenberg AM(5), Deelder AM(3), C 't Hoen PA(2), van Duijn CM(4), van Dijk
KW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands; Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands. (2)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands. (3)Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands. (4)Department of
Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (5)Department
of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands;
Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands. (6)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands; Department of Endocrinology, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.

Metabolite quantitative traits carry great promise for epidemiological studies,
and their genetic background has been addressed using Genome-Wide Association
Studies (GWAS). Thus far, the role of less common variants has not been
exhaustively studied. Here, we set out a GWAS for metabolite quantitative traits 
in serum, followed by exome sequence analysis to zoom in on putative causal
variants in the associated genes. 1H Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (1H-NMR)
spectroscopy experiments yielded successful quantification of 42 unique
metabolites in 2,482 individuals from The Erasmus Rucphen Family (ERF) study.
Heritability of metabolites were estimated by SOLAR. GWAS was performed by linear
mixed models, using HapMap imputations. Based on physical vicinity and pathway
analyses, candidate genes were screened for coding region variation using exome
sequence data. Heritability estimates for metabolites ranged between 10% and 52%.
GWAS replicated three known loci in the metabolome wide significance: CPS1 with
glycine (P-value <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.27×10-32), PRODH with proline (P-value <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.11×10-19),
SLC16A9 with carnitine level (P-value <U+200A>=<U+200A>4.81×10-14) and uncovered a novel
association between DMGDH and dimethyl-glycine (P-value <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.65×10-19) level. In 
addition, we found three novel, suggestively significant loci: TNP1 with pyruvate
(P-value <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.26×10-8), KCNJ16 with 3-hydroxybutyrate (P-value <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.65×10-8) and 
2p12 locus with valine (P-value <U+200A>=<U+200A>3.49×10-8). Exome sequence analysis identified
potentially causal coding and regulatory variants located in the genes CPS1,
KCNJ2 and PRODH, and revealed allelic heterogeneity for CPS1 and PRODH. Combined 
GWAS and exome analyses of metabolites detected by high-resolution 1H-NMR is a
robust approach to uncover metabolite quantitative trait loci (mQTL), and the
likely causative variants in these loci. It is anticipated that insight in the
genetics of intermediate phenotypes will provide additional insight into the
genetics of complex traits.

PMCID: PMC4287344
PMID: 25569235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2014 Nov;79(11):1226-36. doi: 10.1134/S0006297914110108.

Overexpression of the Jatropha curcas JcERF1 gene coding an AP2/ERF-type
transcription factor increases tolerance to salt in transgenic tobacco.

Yang H(1), Yu C, Yan J, Wang X, Chen F, Zhao Y, Wei W.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdum, 610064, P. R. China.
wwscu.ed@gmail.com.

The JcERF1 gene, which is related to the ERF family (ethylene responsive factor
coding genes), was isolated and characterized from the oil tree Jatropha curcas. 
The JcERF1 protein contains conserved an AP2/EREBP DNA-binding domain of 58 amino
acid residues. The JcERF1 gene could be induced by abscisic acid, high salinity, 
hormones, and osmotic stress, suggesting that JcERF1 is regulated by certain
components of the stress-signaling pathway. The full-length and C-terminus of
JcERF1 driven by the GAL4 promoter functioned effectively as a transactivator in 
yeast, while its N-terminus was completely inactive. Transient expression
analysis using a JcERF1-mGFP fusion gene in onion epidermal cells revealed that
the JcERF1 protein is targeted to the nucleus. Transgenic tobacco plants carrying
CaMV35S::JcERF1 fragments were shown to be much more salt tolerant compared to
wild-type plants. Our results indicate that JcERF1 is a new member of the ERF
transcription factors family that may play an important role in tolerance to
environmental stress.

PMID: 25540008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Planta. 2015 Apr;241(4):967-85. doi: 10.1007/s00425-014-2225-9. Epub 2014 Dec 23.

ERF022 impacts the induction of somatic embryogenesis in Arabidopsis through the 
ethylene-related pathway.

Nowak K(1), Wójcikowska B, Gaj MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Silesia, Jagiellonska 28, 40-032,
Katowice, Poland.

MAIN CONCLUSION: The ERF022 gene was found to affect embryogenic transition in
somatic cells in Arabidopsis via the ethylene-related pathway. The study provides
evidence that ERF022 - LEC2 interaction is involved in the auxin-ethylene
crosstalk that operates in somatic embryogenesis induction. The ERF022 gene of
the ERF family was previously identified among the transcription factor genes
that were differentially expressed in an embryogenic culture of Arabidopsis. A
strong inhibition of the gene was found to be associated with the induction of
somatic embryogenesis (SE) and an erf022 mutant was indicated to display a
substantially impaired capacity for SE. Therefore, the molecular function of
ERF022 in the induction of SE was studied in the present work. A phenotype of an 
erf022 mutant was indicated as being related to an increased content of ethylene.
The results further suggest that the ERF022 controls the genes that are involved 
in both the biosynthesis (ACS7) and signalling (ERF1, ETR1) of ethylene and
indicate that the ERF022 is a new regulatory element in ethylene-related
responses that negatively control the ethylene content and perception. It is
proposed that the negative impact of ethylene on the induction of SE may result
from a modulation of the auxin-related genes that control the embryogenic
transition in somatic cells. Among them, the LEC2, which is a key regulator of
the induction of SE through the stimulation of auxin synthesis, was possibly
related to ERF022. The results of the study provide new hormone-related clues to 
define the genetic network that governs SE. A putative model of the regulatory
pathway is proposed that is involved in the induction of SE in which the
auxin-ethylene interactions are controlled by ERF022 and LEC2 and their targets.

PMCID: PMC4361773
PMID: 25534944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Dec 17;15(12):23537-54. doi: 10.3390/ijms151223537.

The dynamics of DNA methylation in maize roots under Pb stress.

Ding H(1), Gao J(2), Qin C(3), Ma H(4), Huang H(5), Song P(6), Luo X(7), Lin
H(8), Shen Y(9), Pan G(10), Zhang Z(11).

Author information: 
(1)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural University/Key Laboratory of 
Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of
Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China. dinghp@sicau.edu.cn. (2)Maize Research
Institute of Sichuan Agricultural University/Key Laboratory of Biology and
Genetic Improvement of Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture,
Chengdu 611130, China. gaojian8888@gmail.com. (3)Zunyi Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Zunyi 563102, China. cheng.qin.sicau@gmail.com. (4)Maize Research
Institute of Sichuan Agricultural University/Key Laboratory of Biology and
Genetic Improvement of Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture,
Chengdu 611130, China. ma_hai_xia@126.com. (5)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan
Agricultural University/Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of
Maize in Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China.
hhhhsunny@sina.com. (6)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural
University/Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in
Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China.
zhlfan391@163.com. (7)Zunyi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Zunyi 563102,
China. luoxirong1982@163.com. (8)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural
University/Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in
Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China.
linhj521@gmail.com. (9)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural
University/Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in
Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China.
shenyaou@gmail.com. (10)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural
University/Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in
Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China.
pangt@sicau.edu.cn. (11)Maize Research Institute of Sichuan Agricultural
University/Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Maize in
Southwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Chengdu 611130, China.
zzmmaize@gmail.com.

Plants adapt to adverse conditions through a series of physiological, cellular,
and molecular processes, culminating in stress tolerance. However, little is
known about the associated regulatory mechanisms at the epigenetic level in maize
under lead (Pb) stress. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to compare DNA
methylation profiles during the dynamic development of maize roots following Pb
treatment to identify candidate genes involved in the response to Pb stress.
Methylated DNA immunoprecipitation-sequencing (MeDIP-seq) was used to investigate
the genome-wide DNA methylation patterns in maize roots under normal condition
(A1) and 3 mM Pb(NO3)2 stress for 12 h (K2), 24 h (K3) and 48 h (K4). The results
showed that the average methylation density was the highest in CpG islands
(CGIs), followed by the intergenic regions. Within the gene body, the methylation
density of the introns was higher than those of the UTRs and exons. In total,
3857 methylated genes were found in 4 tested samples, including 1805
differentially methylated genes for K2 versus A1, 1508 for K3 versus A1, and 1660
for K4 versus A1. Further analysis showed that 140 genes exhibited altered DNA
methylation in all three comparisons, including some well-known stress-responsive
transcription factors and proteins, such as MYB, AP2/ERF, bZIP,
serine-threonine/tyrosine-proteins, pentatricopeptide repeat proteins, RING zinc 
finger proteins, F-box proteins, leucine-rich repeat proteins and
tetratricopeptide repeat proteins. This study revealed the genome-scale DNA
methylation patterns of maize roots in response to Pb exposure and identified
candidate genes that potentially regulate root dynamic development under Pb
stress at the methylation level.

PMCID: PMC4284779
PMID: 25526567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. BMC Plant Biol. 2014 Dec 19;14:370. doi: 10.1186/s12870-014-0370-8.

Transcriptomic analysis of the late stages of grapevine (Vitis vinifera cv.
Cabernet Sauvignon) berry ripening reveals significant induction of ethylene
signaling and flavor pathways in the skin.

Cramer GR(1), Ghan R(2), Schlauch KA(3), Tillett RL(4), Heymann H(5), Ferrarini
A(6), Delledonne M(7), Zenoni S(8), Fasoli M(9), Pezzotti M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557, USA. cramer@unr.edu. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, NV, 89557, USA. rghan@unr.edu. (3)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, NV, 89557,
USA. schlauch@unr.edu. (4)Center for Bioinformatics, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557, USA. rltillett@unr.edu. (5)Department of Viticulture and Enology,
University of California, Davis, CA, 95616, USA. heymannh@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 15,
I-37134, Verona, Italy. alberto.ferrarini@univr.it. (7)Department of
Biotechnology, University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 15, I-37134, Verona, Italy.
massimo.delledonne@univr.it. (8)Department of Biotechnology, University of
Verona, Strada Le Grazie 15, I-37134, Verona, Italy. sara.zenoni@univr.it.
(9)Department of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 15,
I-37134, Verona, Italy. marianna.fasoli@univr.it. (10)Department of
Biotechnology, University of Verona, Strada Le Grazie 15, I-37134, Verona, Italy.
mario.pezzotti@univr.it.

BACKGROUND: Grapevine berry, a nonclimacteric fruit, has three developmental
stages; the last one is when berry color and sugar increase. Flavors derived from
terpenoid and fatty acid metabolism develop at the very end of this ripening
stage. The transcriptomic response of pulp and skin of Cabernet Sauvignon berries
in the late stages of ripening between 22 and 37 °Brix was assessed using
whole-genome micorarrays.
RESULTS: The transcript abundance of approximately 18,000 genes changed with
°Brix and tissue type. There were a large number of changes in many gene ontology
(GO) categories involving metabolism, signaling and abiotic stress. GO categories
reflecting tissue differences were overrepresented in photosynthesis, isoprenoid 
metabolism and pigment biosynthesis. Detailed analysis of the interaction of the 
skin and pulp with °Brix revealed that there were statistically significantly
higher abundances of transcripts changing with °Brix in the skin that were
involved in ethylene signaling, isoprenoid and fatty acid metabolism. Many
transcripts were peaking around known optimal fruit stages for flavor production.
The transcript abundance of approximately two-thirds of the AP2/ERF superfamily
of transcription factors changed during these developmental stages. The
transcript abundance of a unique clade of ERF6-type transcription factors had the
largest changes in the skin and clustered with genes involved in ethylene,
senescence, and fruit flavor production including ACC oxidase, terpene synthases,
and lipoxygenases. The transcript abundance of important transcription factors
involved in fruit ripening was also higher in the skin.
CONCLUSIONS: A detailed analysis of the transcriptome dynamics during late stages
of ripening of grapevine berries revealed that these berries went through massive
transcriptional changes in gene ontology categories involving chemical signaling 
and metabolism in both the pulp and skin, particularly in the skin. Changes in
the transcript abundance of genes involved in the ethylene signaling pathway of
this nonclimacteric fruit were statistically significant in the late stages of
ripening when the production of transcripts for important flavor and aroma
compounds were at their highest. Ethylene transcription factors known to play a
role in leaf senescence also appear to play a role in fruit senescence. Ethylene 
may play a bigger role than previously thought in this non-climacteric fruit.

PMCID: PMC4312598
PMID: 25524329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Front Plant Sci. 2014 Dec 2;5:658. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00658. eCollection
2014.

Elucidation of the molecular responses to waterlogging in Jatropha roots by
transcriptome profiling.

Juntawong P(1), Sirikhachornkit A(1), Pimjan R(1), Sonthirod C(2), Sangsrakru
D(2), Yoocha T(2), Tangphatsornruang S(2), Srinives P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Special Research Unit in Microalgal Molecular Genetics and Functional
Genomics, Department of Genetics, Faculty of Science, Kasetsart University
Bangkok, Thailand. (2)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
Pathumthani, Thailand. (3)Department of Agronomy, Faculty of Agriculture at
Kamphaeng Saen, Kasetsart University Nakhon Pathom, Thailand.

Jatropha (Jatropha curcas) is a promising oil-seed crop for biodiesel production.
However, the species is highly sensitive to waterlogging, which can result in
stunted growth and yield loss. To date, the molecular mechanisms underlying the
responses to waterlogging in Jatropha remain elusive. Here, the transcriptome
adjustment of Jatropha roots to waterlogging was examined by high-throughput
RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq). The results indicated that 24 h of waterlogging caused 
significant changes in mRNA abundance of 1968 genes. Comprehensive gene ontology 
and functional enrichment analysis of root transcriptome revealed that
waterlogging promoted responses to hypoxia and anaerobic respiration. On the
other hand, the stress inhibited carbohydrate synthesis, cell wall biogenesis,
and growth. The results also highlighted the roles of ethylene, nitrate, and
nitric oxide in waterlogging acclimation. In addition, transcriptome profiling
identified 85 waterlogging-induced transcription factors including members of
AP2/ERF, MYB, and WRKY families implying that reprogramming of gene expression is
a vital mechanism for waterlogging acclimation. Comparative analysis of
differentially regulated transcripts in response to waterlogging among
Arabidopsis, gray poplar, Jatropha, and rice further revealed not only conserved 
but species-specific regulation. Our findings unraveled the molecular responses
to waterlogging in Jatropha and provided new perspectives for developing a
waterlogging tolerant cultivar in the future.

PMCID: PMC4251292
PMID: 25520726  [PubMed]


153. Front Plant Sci. 2014 Nov 28;5:652. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00652. eCollection
2014.

Genome wide transcriptome analysis reveals ABA mediated response in Arabidopsis
during gold (AuCl(-) 4) treatment.

Shukla D(1), Krishnamurthy S(1), Sahi SV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Western Kentucky University Bowling Green, KY, USA.

The unique physico-chemical properties of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) find
manifold applications in diagnostics, medicine and catalysis. Chemical synthesis 
produces reactive AuNPs and generates hazardous by-products. Alternatively,
plants can be utilized to produce AuNPs in an eco-friendly manner. To better
control the biosynthesis of AuNPs, we need to first understand the detailed
molecular response induced by AuCl(-) 4 In this study, we carried out global
transcriptome analysis in root tissue of Arabidopsis grown for 12- h in presence 
of gold solution (HAuCl4) using the novel unbiased Affymetrix exon array.
Transcriptomics analysis revealed differential regulation of a total of 704 genes
and 4900 exons. Of these, 492 and 212 genes were up- and downregulated,
respectively. The validation of the expressed key genes, such as
glutathione-S-transferases, auxin responsive genes, cytochrome P450 82C2, methyl 
transferases, transducin (G protein beta subunit), ERF transcription factor, ABC,
and MATE transporters, was carried out through quantitative RT-PCR. These key
genes demonstrated specific induction under AuCl4(-) treatment relative to other 
heavy metals, suggesting a unique plant-gold interaction. GO enrichment analysis 
reveals the upregulation of processes like oxidative stress, glutathione binding,
metal binding, transport, and plant hormonal responses. Changes predicted in
biochemical pathways indicated major modulation in glutathione mediated
detoxification, flavones and derivatives, and plant hormone biosynthesis. Motif
search analysis identified a highly significant enriched motif, ACGT, which is an
abscisic acid responsive core element (ABRE), suggesting the possibility of ABA- 
mediated signaling. Identification of abscisic acid response element (ABRE)
points to the operation of a predominant signaling mechanism in response to
AuCl(-) 4 exposure. Overall, this study presents a useful picture of plant-gold
interaction with an identification of candidate genes involved in nanogold
synthesis.

PMCID: PMC4246665
PMID: 25506348  [PubMed]


154. Front Plant Sci. 2014 Nov 25;5:650. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00650. eCollection
2014.

The roles of ethylene and transcription factors in the regulation of onset of
leaf senescence.

Koyama T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bioorganic Research Institute - Suntory Foundation for Life Sciences Osaka,
Japan.

Leaf senescence is the last stage of leaf development and is accompanied by cell 
death. In contrast to senescence in individual organisms that leads to death,
leaf senescence is associated with dynamic processes that include the
translocation of nutrients from old leaves to newly developing or storage tissues
within the same plant. The onset of leaf senescence is largely regulated by age
and internal and external stimuli, which include the plant hormone ethylene.
Earlier studies have documented the important role of ethylene in the regulation 
of leaf senescence. The production of ethylene coincides with the onset of leaf
senescence, whereas the application of ethylene to plants induces precocious leaf
senescence. Recently, many studies have described the components of ethylene
signaling and biosynthetic pathways that are involved in modulating the onset of 
leaf senescence. Particularly, transcription factors (TFs) integrate ethylene
signals with those from environmental and developmental factors to accelerate or 
delay leaf senescence. This review aims to discuss the regulatory cascade
involving ethylene and TFs in the regulation of onset of leaf senescence.

PMCID: PMC4243489
PMID: 25505475  [PubMed]


155. J Exp Bot. 2015 Feb;66(2):559-70. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru472. Epub 2014 Dec 11.

The ethylene response factor Pti5 contributes to potato aphid resistance in
tomato independent of ethylene signalling.

Wu C(1), Avila CA(2), Goggin FL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA.
(2)Department of Entomology, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA 
Department of Horticultural Sciences, Texas A&M AgriLife Research, Weslaco, TX
78596, USA. (3)Department of Entomology, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR
72701, USA fgoggin@uark.edu.

Ethylene response factors (ERFs) comprise a large family of transcription factors
that regulate numerous biological processes including growth, development, and
response to environmental stresses. Here, we report that Pti5, an ERF in tomato
[Solanum lycopersicum (Linnaeus)] was transcriptionally upregulated in response
to the potato aphid Macrosiphum euphorbiae (Thomas), and contributed to plant
defences that limited the population growth of this phloem-feeding insect.
Virus-induced gene silencing of Pti5 enhanced aphid population growth on tomato, 
both on an aphid-susceptible cultivar and on a near-isogenic genotype that
carried the Mi-1.2 resistance (R) gene. These results indicate that Pti5
contributes to basal resistance in susceptible plants and also can synergize with
other R gene-mediated defences to limit aphid survival and reproduction. Although
Pti5 contains the ERF motif, induction of this gene by aphids was independent of 
ethylene, since the ACC deaminase (ACD) transgene, which inhibits ethylene
synthesis, did not diminish the responsiveness of Pti5 to aphid infestation.
Furthermore, experiments with inhibitors of ethylene synthesis revealed that Pti5
and ethylene have distinctly different roles in plant responses to aphids.
Whereas Pti5 contributed to antibiotic plant defences that limited aphid survival
and reproduction on both resistant (Mi-1.2+) and susceptible (Mi-1.2-) genotypes,
ethylene signalling promoted aphid infestation on susceptible plants but
contributed to antixenotic defences that deterred the early stages of aphid host 
selection on resistant plants. These findings suggest that the antixenotic
defences that inhibit aphid settling and the antibiotic defences that depress
fecundity and promote mortality are regulated through different signalling
pathways.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4286409
PMID: 25504643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. BMC Plant Biol. 2014 Dec 10;14:342. doi: 10.1186/s12870-014-0342-z.

Identification of potential transcriptional regulators of actinorhizal symbioses 
in Casuarina glauca and Alnus glutinosa.

Diédhiou I, Tromas A, Cissoko M, Gray K, Parizot B, Crabos A, Alloisio N,
Fournier P, Carro L, Svistoonoff S, Gherbi H, Hocher V, Diouf D, Laplaze L,
Champion A.

BACKGROUND: Trees belonging to the Casuarinaceae and Betulaceae families play an 
important ecological role and are useful tools in forestry for degraded land
rehabilitation and reforestation. These functions are linked to their capacity to
establish symbiotic relationships with a nitrogen-fixing soil bacterium of the
genus Frankia. However, the molecular mechanisms controlling the establishment of
these symbioses are poorly understood. The aim of this work was to identify
potential transcription factors involved in the establishment and functioning of 
actinorhizal symbioses.
RESULTS: We identified 202 putative transcription factors by in silico analysis
in 40 families in Casuarina glauca (Casuarinaceae) and 195 in 35 families in
Alnus glutinosa (Betulaceae) EST databases. Based on published transcriptome
datasets and quantitative PCR analysis, we found that 39% and 26% of these
transcription factors were regulated during C. glauca and A. glutinosa-Frankia
interactions, respectively. Phylogenetic studies confirmed the presence of common
key transcription factors such as NSP, NF-YA and ERN-related proteins involved in
nodule formation in legumes, which confirm the existence of a common symbiosis
signaling pathway in nitrogen-fixing root nodule symbioses. We also identified an
actinorhizal-specific transcription factor belonging to the zinc finger C1-2i
subfamily we named CgZF1 in C. glauca and AgZF1 in A. glutinosa.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified putative nodulation-associated transcription factors
with particular emphasis on members of the GRAS, NF-YA, ERF and C2H2 families.
Interestingly, comparison of the non-legume and legume TF with signaling elements
from actinorhizal species revealed a new subgroup of nodule-specific C2H2 TF that
could be specifically involved in actinorhizal symbioses. In silico
identification, transcript analysis, and phylogeny reconstruction of
transcription factor families paves the way for the study of specific molecular
regulation of symbiosis in response to Frankia infection.

PMCID: PMC4264327
PMID: 25492470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Biotechnol. 2015 Apr;57(4):348-58. doi: 10.1007/s12033-014-9828-z.

Genome-wide analysis and expression profiling of the ERF transcription factor
family in potato (Solanum tuberosum L.).

Charfeddine M(1), Saïdi MN, Charfeddine S, Hammami A, Gargouri Bouzid R.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Enzymes et Bioconversion, Ecole Nationale d'Ingénieurs de Sfax, Route 
Soukra Km 4, BP 1173, 3038, Sfax, Tunisia, charfeddine.mariam@yahoo.fr.

The ERF transcription factors belong to the AP2/ERF superfamily, one of the
largest transcription factor families in plants. They play important roles in
plant development processes, as well as in the response to biotic, abiotic, and
hormone signaling. In the present study, 155 putative ERF transcription factor
genes were identified from the potato (Solanum tuberosum) genome database, and
compared with those from Arabidopsis thaliana. The StERF proteins are divided
into ten phylogenetic groups. Expression analyses of five StERFs were carried out
by semi-quantitative RT-PCR and compared with published RNA-seq data. These
latter analyses were used to distinguish tissue-specific, biotic, and abiotic
stress genes as well as hormone-responsive StERF genes. The results are of
interest to better understand the role of the AP2/ERF genes in response to
diverse types of stress in potatoes. A comprehensive analysis of the
physiological functions and biological roles of the ERF family genes in S.
tuberosum is required to understand crop stress tolerance mechanisms.

PMID: 25491236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Prion. 2014;8(3):247-60. doi: 10.4161/pri.29851. Epub 2014 Nov 1.

Modulation of efficiency of translation termination in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Nizhnikov AA(1), Antonets KS, Inge-Vechtomov SG, Derkatch IL.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Genetics and Biotechnology ; St. Petersburg State University ;
St. Petersburg , Russia.

Nonsense suppression is a readthrough of premature termination codons. It
typically occurs either due to the recognition of stop codons by tRNAs with
mutant anticodons, or due to a decrease in the fidelity of translation
termination. In the latter case, suppressors usually promote the readthrough of
different types of nonsense codons and are thus called omnipotent nonsense
suppressors. Omnipotent nonsense suppressors were identified in yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae in 1960s, and most of subsequent studies were performed 
in this model organism. Initially, omnipotent suppressors were localized by
genetic analysis to different protein- and RNA-encoding genes, mostly the
components of translational machinery. Later, nonsense suppression was found to
be caused not only by genomic mutations, but also by epigenetic elements, prions.
Prions are self-perpetuating protein conformations usually manifested by
infectious protein aggregates. Modulation of translational accuracy by prions
reflects changes in the activity of their structural proteins involved in
different aspects of protein synthesis. Overall, nonsense suppression can be seen
as a "phenotypic mirror" of events affecting the accuracy of the translational
machine. However, the range of proteins participating in the modulation of
translation termination fidelity is not fully elucidated. Recently, the list has 
been expanded significantly by findings that revealed a number of weak genetic
and epigenetic nonsense suppressors, the effect of which can be detected only in 
specific genetic backgrounds. This review summarizes the data on the nonsense
suppressors decreasing the fidelity of translation termination in S. cerevisiae, 
and discusses the functional significance of the modulation of translational
accuracy.

PMCID: PMC4601251
PMID: 25486049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Plant Signal Behav. 2014;9(10):976479. doi: 10.4161/15592324.2014.976479.

The acclimation response to high light is initiated within seconds as indicated
by upregulation of AP2/ERF transcription factor network in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Moore M(1), Vogel M, Dietz K.

Author information: 
(1)a Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants ; Bielefeld University ; Bielefeld ,
Germany.

High light acclimation implicates mechanisms on various molecular levels and time
scales. The recently identified small transcription factor network of APETALA
2/ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR (AP2/ERF) transcription factors is triggered upon
transfer of Arabidopsis to high light and depends on metabolite export and
mitogen activated protein kinase activation. An experimental design was developed
consisting of a low light to high light and back to low light illumination. This 
allowed the determination of the time point of no return post high light transfer
which activates transcription of the AP2/ERF network. Within 10 seconds of high
light treatment transcript levels of ERF6, ERF104, ERF105 and RRTF were triggered
to increase from low to high levels within the next 10 minutes witnessing an
ultrafast retrograde pathway with a very early time point of no return. This
response differed profoundly from other high light-responsive transcripts such as
stromal ascorbate peroxidase (sAPX) which accumulated in a dose-dependent manner 
or COR47.

PMCID: PMC4622746
PMID: 25482793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. BMC Plant Biol. 2014 Dec 3;14:339. doi: 10.1186/s12870-014-0339-7.

Trihelix transcription factor GT-4 mediates salt tolerance via interaction with
TEM2 in Arabidopsis.

Wang XH, Li QT, Chen HW, Zhang WK, Ma B, Chen SY, Zhang JS.

BACKGROUND: Trihelix transcription factor family is plant-specific and plays
important roles in developmental processes. However, their function in abiotic
stress response is largely unclear.
RESULTS: We studied one member GT-4 from Arabidopsis in relation to salt stress
response. GT-4 expression is induced by salt stress and GT-4 protein is localized
in nucleus and cytoplasm. GT-4 acts as a transcriptional activator and its
C-terminal end is the activation domain. The protein can bind to the cis-elements
GT-3 box, GT-3b box and MRE4. GT-4 confers enhanced salt tolerance in Arabidopsis
likely through direct binding to the promoter and activation of Cor15A, in
addition to possible regulation of other relevant genes. The gt-4 mutant shows
salt sensitivity. TEM2, a member of AP2/ERF family was identified to interact
with GT-4 in yeast two-hybrid, BiFC and Co-IP assays. Loss-of-function of TEM2
exerts no significant difference on salt tolerance or Cor15A expression in
Arabidopsis. However, double mutant gt-4/tem2 shows greater sensitivity to salt
stress and lower transcript level of Cor15A than gt-4 single mutant. GT-4 plus
TEM2 can synergistically increase the promoter activity of Cor15A.
CONCLUSIONS: GT-4 interacts with TEM2 and then co-regulates the salt responsive
gene Cor15A to improve salt stress tolerance.

PMCID: PMC4267404
PMID: 25465615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Neuroimage. 2015 Jan 15;105:507-24. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.016. Epub
2014 Nov 14.

Localization of electrophysiological responses to semantic and syntactic
anomalies in language comprehension with MEG.

Kielar A(1), Panamsky L(1), Links KA(1), Meltzer JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Rotman Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Psychology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Rotman Research Institute,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Psychology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: jmeltzer@research.baycrest.org.

Syntactically and semantically anomalous words encountered during sentence
comprehension are known to elicit dissociable electrophysiological responses,
which are thought to reflect distinct aspects of language processing. However,
the sources of these responses have not been well characterized. We used
beamforming analysis of magnetoencephalography (MEG) data to map generators of
electrophysiological responses to linguistic anomalies. Anomalous words occurred 
in the context of a sentence acceptability judgement task conducted in both
visual and auditory modalities. Time-frequency analysis revealed that both kinds 
of violations elicited event-related synchronization (ERS) in the delta-theta
frequency range (1-5 Hz), and desynchronization (ERD) in the alpha-beta range
(8-30 Hz). In addition, these responses were differentially modulated by
violation type and presentation modality. 1-5 Hz responses were consistently
localized within medial prefrontal cortex and did not vary significantly across
violation types, but were stronger for visual presentation. In contrast, 8-30 Hz 
ERD occurred in different regions for different violation types. For semantic
violations the distribution was predominantly in the bilateral occipital cortex
and left temporal and inferior frontal regions, and these effects did not differ 
for visual and auditory presentation. In contrast, syntactic responses were
strongly affected by presentation modality. Under visual presentation, syntactic 
violations elicited bilateral 8-30 Hz ERD extending into dorsal parietal and
frontal regions, whereas effects were much weaker and mostly statistically
insignificant in the auditory modality. These results suggest that delta-theta
ERS reflects generalized increases in working memory demands related to
linguistic anomaly detection, while alpha-beta ERD reflects specific activation
of cortical regions involved in distinct aspects of linguistic processing, such
as semantic vs. phonological short-term memory. Beamforming analysis of
time-domain average signals (ERFs) revealed an N400m effect for semantic
anomalies in both modalities, localized to left superior temporal and posterior
frontal regions, and a later P600-like effect for syntactic anomalies in both
modalities, widespread over bilateral frontal, posterior temporal, and parietal
regions. These results indicate that time-domain averaged responses and induced
oscillatory responses have distinct properties, including localization and
modality dependence, and likely reflect dissociable and complementary aspects of 
neural activity related to language comprehension and additional task-related
processes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Plant Cell Environ. 2015 Jun;38(6):1094-103. doi: 10.1111/pce.12493. Epub 2015
Jan 23.

The stability and nuclear localization of the transcription factor RAP2.12 are
dynamically regulated by oxygen concentration.

Kosmacz M(1), Parlanti S, Schwarzländer M, Kragler F, Licausi F, Van Dongen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Golm, 14476, Germany.

Plants often experience low oxygen conditions as the consequence of reduced
oxygen availability in their environment or due to a high activity of respiratory
metabolism. Recently, an oxygen sensing pathway was described in Arabidopsis
thaliana which involves the migration of an ERF transcription factor (RAP2.12)
from the plasma membrane to the nucleus upon hypoxia. Moreover, RAP2.12 protein
level is controlled through an oxygen-dependent branch of the N-end rule pathway 
for proteasomal degradation. Inside the nucleus, RAP2.12 induces the expression
of genes involved in the adaptation to reduced oxygen availability. In the
present study, we describe the oxygen concentration and time-resolved
characterization of RAP2.12 activity. A reduction of the oxygen availability to
half the concentration in normal air is sufficient to trigger RAP2.12
relocalization into the nucleus, while nuclear accumulation correlates with the
first induction of the molecular response to hypoxia. Nuclear presence of RAP2.12
may not only depend on relocalization of existing protein, but involves de novo
synthesis of the transcription factor as well. After re-oxygenation of the
tissue, degradation of RAP2.12 in the nucleus was observed within 3<U+2009>h,
concomitant with reduction in hypoxia responsive gene transcripts to normoxic
levels.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25438831  [PubMed - in process]


163. J Biosci. 2014 Dec;39(5):887-97.

Isolation and molecular characterization of an ethylene response factor NtERF1-1 
in Nicotiana tabacum cv. Xanthi.

Gao JS(1), Hu L, Xie P, Meng Y, Cai YP, Lin Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Anhui Agricultural University, 230036 Hefei, Anhui,
China.

Apetala2/Ethylene Response Factors (AP2/ERF) play important roles in regulating
gene expression under abiotic and biotic stress in the plant kingdom. Here, we
isolated a member of the AP2/ERF transcription factors, NtERF1-1, from Nicotiana 
tabcum cv. Xanthi NN carrying the N gene, which is resistant to Tobacco mosaic
virus (TMV). NtERF1-1 encoded a putative protein of 229 amino acids with a
predicted molecular mass of 24.58 kDa. Nucleotide sequence analysis showed that
NtERF1-1 contained a conserved DNA-binding domain at the N-terminal. Comparison
of amino acid sequences revealed that NtERF1-1 possessed high similarities to
ERFs from diverse plants. Semi-quantitative and real-time quantitative RT-PCR
analyses indicated that NtERF1-1 was up-regulated following TMV infection. In
addition, we speculated that NtERF1-1 might participate in the signal
transduction pathway of defence response inducted by the interaction between the 
N gene and TMV.

PMID: 25431417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 19;9(11):e113092. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113092.
eCollection 2014.

Genome-wide investigation and expression profiling of AP2/ERF transcription
factor superfamily in foxtail millet (Setaria italica L.).

Lata C(1), Mishra AK(2), Muthamilarasan M(2), Bonthala VS(2), Khan Y(2), Prasad
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre on Plant Biotechnology, New Delhi, India;
CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)National Institute of Plant Genome Research, New Delhi, India.

The APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding factor (AP2/ERF) family is one
of the largest transcription factor (TF) families in plants that includes four
major sub-families, namely AP2, DREB (dehydration responsive element binding),
ERF (ethylene responsive factors) and RAV (Related to ABI3/VP). AP2/ERFs are
known to play significant roles in various plant processes including growth and
development and biotic and abiotic stress responses. Considering this, a
comprehensive genome-wide study was conducted in foxtail millet (Setaria italica 
L.). A total of 171 AP2/ERF genes were identified by systematic sequence analysis
and were physically mapped onto nine chromosomes. Phylogenetic analysis grouped
AP2/ERF genes into six classes (I to VI). Duplication analysis revealed that 12
(~7%) SiAP2/ERF genes were tandem repeated and 22 (~13%) were segmentally
duplicated. Comparative physical mapping between foxtail millet AP2/ERF genes and
its orthologs of sorghum (18 genes), maize (14 genes), rice (9 genes) and
Brachypodium (6 genes) showed the evolutionary insights of AP2/ERF gene family
and also the decrease in orthology with increase in phylogenetic distance. The
evolutionary significance in terms of gene-duplication and divergence was
analyzed by estimating synonymous and non-synonymous substitution rates.
Expression profiling of candidate AP2/ERF genes against drought, salt and
phytohormones revealed insights into their precise and/or overlapping expression 
patterns which could be responsible for their functional divergence in foxtail
millet. The study showed that the genes SiAP2/ERF-069, SiAP2/ERF-103 and
SiAP2/ERF-120 may be considered as potential candidate genes for further
functional validation as well for utilization in crop improvement programs for
stress resistance since these genes were up-regulated under drought and salinity 
stresses in ABA dependent manner. Altogether the present study provides new
insights into evolution, divergence and systematic functional analysis of AP2/ERF
gene family at genome level in foxtail millet which may be utilized for improving
stress adaptation and tolerance in millets, cereals and bioenergy grasses.

PMCID: PMC4237383
PMID: 25409524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Front Plant Sci. 2014 Sep 26;5:494. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00494. eCollection
2014.

Transcriptomic analysis reveals ethylene as stimulator and auxin as regulator of 
adventitious root formation in petunia cuttings.

Druege U(1), Franken P(1), Lischewski S(2), Ahkami AH(3), Zerche S(1), Hause
B(2), Hajirezaei MR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Propagation, Leibniz Institute of Vegetable and Ornamental
Crops (IGZ) Großbeeren/Erfurt, Germany. (2)Department of Cell and Metabolic
Biology, Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Halle, Germany. (3)Institute of 
Biological Chemistry, Washington State University Pullman, WA, USA. (4)Department
of Molecular Plant Nutrition, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant 
Research Gatersleben, Germany.

Adventitious root (AR) formation in the stem base (SB) of cuttings is the basis
for propagation of many plant species and petunia is used as model to study this 
developmental process. Following AR formation from 2 to 192 hours post-excision
(hpe) of cuttings, transcriptome analysis by microarray revealed a change of the 
character of the rooting zone from SB to root identity. The greatest shift in the
number of differentially expressed genes was observed between 24 and 72 hpe, when
the categories storage, mineral nutrient acquisition, anti-oxidative and
secondary metabolism, and biotic stimuli showed a notable high number of induced 
genes. Analyses of phytohormone-related genes disclosed multifaceted changes of
the auxin transport system, auxin conjugation and the auxin signal perception
machinery indicating a reduction in auxin sensitivity and phase-specific
responses of particular auxin-regulated genes. Genes involved in ethylene
biosynthesis and action showed a more uniform pattern as a high number of
respective genes were generally induced during the whole process of AR formation.
The important role of ethylene for stimulating AR formation was demonstrated by
the application of inhibitors of ethylene biosynthesis and perception as well as 
of the precursor aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid, all changing the number and
length of AR. A model is proposed showing the putative role of polar auxin
transport and resulting auxin accumulation in initiation of subsequent changes in
auxin homeostasis and signal perception with a particular role of Aux/IAA
expression. These changes might in turn guide the entrance into the different
phases of AR formation. Ethylene biosynthesis, which is stimulated by wounding
and does probably also respond to other stresses and auxin, acts as important
stimulator of AR formation probably via the expression of ethylene responsive
transcription factor genes, whereas the timing of different phases seems to be
controlled by auxin.

PMCID: PMC4212214
PMID: 25400641  [PubMed]


166. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2015 May;17(3):618-24. doi: 10.1111/plb.12288. Epub 2014 Dec
8.

Cloning and characterisation of JAZ gene family in Hevea brasiliensis.

Hong H(1), Xiao H, Yuan H, Zhai J, Huang X.

Author information: 
(1)Hainan Key Laboratory for Sustainable Utilization of Tropical Bioresources,
College of Agriculture, Hainan University, Haikou, China.

Mechanical wounding or treatment with exogenous jasmonates (JA) induces
differentiation of the laticifer in Hevea brasiliensis. JA is a key signal for
latex biosynthesis and wounding response in the rubber tree. Identification of
JAZ (jasmonate ZIM-domain) family of proteins that repress JA responses has
facilitated rapid progress in understanding how this lipid-derived hormone
controls gene expression and related physiological processes in plants. In this
work, the full-length cDNAs of six JAZ genes were cloned from H. brasiliensis
(termed HbJAZ). These HbJAZ have different lengths and sequence diversity, but
all of them contain Jas and ZIM domains, and two of them contain an
ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif in the N-terminal. Real-time
RT-PCR analyses revealed that HbJAZ have different expression patterns and tissue
specificity. Four HbJAZ were up-regulated, one was down-regulated, while two were
less effected by rubber tapping treatment, suggesting that they might play
distinct roles in the wounding response. A yeast two-hybrid assay revealed that
HbJAZ proteins interact with each other to form homologous or heterogeneous dimer
complexes, indicating that the HbJAZ proteins may expand their function through
diverse JAZ-JAZ interactions. This work lays a foundation for identification of
the JA signalling pathway and molecular mechanisms of latex biosynthesis in
rubber trees.

© 2014 German Botanical Society and The Royal Botanical Society of the
Netherlands.

PMID: 25399518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Protoplasma. 2015 May;252(3):813-24. doi: 10.1007/s00709-014-0718-9. Epub 2014
Oct 26.

Gene transcript profiles of the TIA biosynthetic pathway in response to ethylene 
and copper reveal their interactive role in modulating TIA biosynthesis in
Catharanthus roseus.

Pan YJ(1), Liu J, Guo XR, Zu YG, Tang ZH.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Plant Ecology, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin,
150040, China.

Research on transcriptional regulation of terpenoid indole alkaloid (TIA)
biosynthesis of the medicinal plant, Catharanthus roseus, has largely been
focused on gene function and not clustering analysis of multiple genes at the
transcript level. Here, more than ten key genes encoding key enzyme of alkaloid
synthesis in TIA biosynthetic pathways were chosen to investigate the integrative
responses to exogenous elicitor ethylene and copper (Cu) at both transcriptional 
and metabolic levels. The ethylene-induced gene transcripts in leaves and roots, 
respectively, were subjected to principal component analysis (PCA) and the
results showed the overall expression of TIA pathway genes indicated as the Q
value followed a standard normal distribution after ethylene treatments. Peak
gene expression was at 15-30 µM of ethephon, and the pre-mature leaf had a higher
Q value than the immature or mature leaf and root. Treatment with elicitor Cu
found that Cu up-regulated overall TIA gene expression more in roots than in
leaves. The combined effects of Cu and ethephon on TIA gene expression were
stronger than their separate effects. It has been documented that TIA gene
expression is tightly regulated by the transcriptional factor (TF) ethylene
responsive factor (ERF) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade. The 
loading plot combination with correlation analysis for the genes of C. roseus
showed that expression of the MPK gene correlated with strictosidine synthase
(STR) and strictosidine b-D-glucosidase(SGD). In addition, ERF expression
correlated with expression of secologanin synthase (SLS) and tryptophan
decarboxylase (TDC), specifically in roots, whereas MPK and myelocytomatosis
oncogene (MYC) correlated with STR and SGD genes. In conclusion, the ERF
regulates the upstream pathway genes in response to heavy metal Cu mainly in C.
roseus roots, while the MPK mainly participates in regulating the STR gene in
response to ethylene in pre-mature leaf. Interestingly, the change in TIA
accumulation does not correlate with expression of the associated genes. Our
previous research found significant accumulation of vinblastine in response to
high concentration of ethylene and Cu suggesting the involvement of
posttranscriptional and posttranslational mechanisms in a spatial and temporal
manner. In this study, meta-analysis reveals ERF and MPK form a positive feedback
loop connecting two pathways actively involved in response of TIA pathway genes
to ethylene and copper in C. roseus.

PMID: 25344654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Plant Cell Rep. 2015 Feb;34(2):223-31. doi: 10.1007/s00299-014-1701-9. Epub 2014 
Oct 25.

Arabidopsis AtERF71/HRE2 functions as transcriptional activator via cis-acting
GCC box or DRE/CRT element and is involved in root development through regulation
of root cell expansion.

Lee SY(1), Hwang EY, Seok HY, Tarte VN, Jeong MS, Jang SB, Moon YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan, 609-735,
Korea.

KEY MESSAGE: AtERF71/HRE2 binds to GCC box or DRE/CRT as transcription activator 
and plays an important role in root development via root cell expansion
regulation. AtERF71/HRE2 transcription factor, a member of the AP2/ERF family,
plays a key role in the stress response. GCC box and DRE/CRT, both essential
cis-acting elements, have been shown to be recognized by AP2/ERF family
transcription factors. However, it remains unclear whether or not AtERF71/HRE2
directly interacts with GCC box and/or DRE/CRT. Here, we showed that AtERF71/HRE2
binds to GCC box and DRE/CRT by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA).
Binding of AtERF71/HRE2 to GCC box and DRE/CRT was also detected by fluorescence 
measurement and surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy (BIAcore) experiments.
Folding properties of AtERF71/HRE2 proteins were characterized by CD
spectroscopy, and AtERF71/HRE2 showed thermal stability as evidenced by two
endothermic peaks (T d) at 53 and 65 °C. In addition, AtERF71/HRE2 showed
transcriptional activation activity via GCC box and DRE/CRT in Arabidopsis
protoplasts. Interestingly, AtERF71/HRE2 OXs showed increased primary root length
due to elevated root cell expansion. Our data indicate that AtERF71/HRE2 binds to
both GCC box and DRE/CRT, transactivates expression of genes downstream via GCC
box or DRE/CRT, and plays an important role in root development through
regulation of root cell expansion.

PMID: 25344007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Plant Physiol. 2014 Dec;166(4):2133-51. doi: 10.1104/pp.114.249276. Epub 2014 Oct
20.

Bacteria-triggered systemic immunity in barley is associated with WRKY and
ETHYLENE RESPONSIVE FACTORs but not with salicylic acid.

Dey S(1), Wenig M(1), Langen G(1), Sharma S(1), Kugler KG(1), Knappe C(1), Hause 
B(1), Bichlmeier M(1), Babaeizad V(1), Imani J(1), Janzik I(1), Stempfl T(1),
Hückelhoven R(1), Kogel KH(1), Mayer KF(1), Vlot AC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Department of Environmental Sciences, Institute of
Biochemical Plant Pathology (S.D., M.W., C.K., M.B., A.C.V.) and Research Unit
Plant Genome and Systems Biology (S.S., K.G.K., K.F.X.M.), 85764 Neuherberg,
Germany;Justus Liebig University, Research Centre for BioSystems, Land Use, and
Nutrition, 35392 Giessen, Germany (G.L., V.B., J.I., K.-H.K.);Leibniz Institute
of Plant Biochemistry, Department of Cell and Metabolic Biology, 06120
Halle/Saale, Germany (B.H.);Plant Sciences, Institute for Biosciences and
Geosciences, Forschungszentrum Jülich, 52425 Juelich, Germany (I.J.);University
of Regensburg, Center of Excellence for Fluorescent Bioanalytics, 93053
Regensburg, Germany (T.S.); andTechnische Universität München, Department of
Phytopathology, 85350 Freising, Germany (R.H.). (2)Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen,
Department of Environmental Sciences, Institute of Biochemical Plant Pathology
(S.D., M.W., C.K., M.B., A.C.V.) and Research Unit Plant Genome and Systems
Biology (S.S., K.G.K., K.F.X.M.), 85764 Neuherberg, Germany;Justus Liebig
University, Research Centre for BioSystems, Land Use, and Nutrition, 35392
Giessen, Germany (G.L., V.B., J.I., K.-H.K.);Leibniz Institute of Plant
Biochemistry, Department of Cell and Metabolic Biology, 06120 Halle/Saale,
Germany (B.H.);Plant Sciences, Institute for Biosciences and Geosciences,
Forschungszentrum Jülich, 52425 Juelich, Germany (I.J.);University of Regensburg,
Center of Excellence for Fluorescent Bioanalytics, 93053 Regensburg, Germany
(T.S.); andTechnische Universität München, Department of Phytopathology, 85350
Freising, Germany (R.H.) corina.vlot@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

Leaf-to-leaf systemic immune signaling known as systemic acquired resistance is
poorly understood in monocotyledonous plants. Here, we characterize systemic
immunity in barley (Hordeum vulgare) triggered after primary leaf infection with 
either Pseudomonas syringae pathovar japonica (Psj) or Xanthomonas translucens
pathovar cerealis (Xtc). Both pathogens induced resistance in systemic,
uninfected leaves against a subsequent challenge infection with Xtc. In contrast 
to systemic acquired resistance in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), systemic
immunity in barley was not associated with NONEXPRESSOR OF PATHOGENESIS-RELATED
GENES1 or the local or systemic accumulation of salicylic acid. Instead, we
documented a moderate local but not systemic induction of abscisic acid after
infection of leaves with Psj. In contrast to salicylic acid or its functional
analog benzothiadiazole, local applications of the jasmonic acid methyl ester or 
abscisic acid triggered systemic immunity to Xtc. RNA sequencing analysis of
local and systemic transcript accumulation revealed unique gene expression
changes in response to both Psj and Xtc and a clear separation of local from
systemic responses. The systemic response appeared relatively modest, and
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction associated systemic 
immunity with the local and systemic induction of two WRKY and two ETHYLENE
RESPONSIVE FACTOR (ERF)-like transcription factors. Systemic immunity against Xtc
was further associated with transcriptional changes after a secondary/systemic
Xtc challenge infection; these changes were dependent on the primary treatment.
Taken together, bacteria-induced systemic immunity in barley may be mediated in
part by WRKY and ERF-like transcription factors, possibly facilitating
transcriptional reprogramming to potentiate immunity.

© 2014 American Society of Plant Biologists. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4256861
PMID: 25332505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 20;9(10):e109290. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109290.
eCollection 2014.

The challenges of genome-wide interaction studies: lessons to learn from the
analysis of HDL blood levels.

van Leeuwen EM(1), Smouter FA(1), Kam-Thong T(2), Karbalai N(2), Smith AV(3),
Harris TB(4), Launer LJ(4), Sitlani CM(5), Li G(5), Brody JA(5), Bis JC(5), White
CC(6), Jaiswal A(7), Oostra BA(8), Hofman A(9), Rivadeneira F(10), Uitterlinden
AG(10), Boerwinkle E(11), Ballantyne CM(12), Gudnason V(3), Psaty BM(13), Cupples
LA(14), Järvelin MR(15), Ripatti S(16), Isaacs A(1), Müller-Myhsok B(17), Karssen
LC(1), van Duijn CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Max Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Munich,
Germany. (3)Icelandic Heart Association, Kopavogur, Iceland and University of
Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. (4)Laboratory of Epidemiology, Demography, and
Biometry, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America. (5)Cardiovascular Health Research Unit and
Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States of
America. (6)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (7)Institute for
Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands. (9)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam,
the Netherlands. (10)Departments of Epidemiology and Internal Medicine, Erasmus
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (11)University of Texas Health
Science Center School of Public Health, Human Genetics Center, Houston, TX,
United States of America. (12)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, United States of America. (13)Departments of Epidemiology, Medicine 
and Health Services, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States of
America and Group Health Research Institute, Group Health, Seattle, WA, United
States of America. (14)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Framingham Heart 
Study, Framingham, Massachusetts, United States of America. (15)Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, MRC Health Protection Agency (HPA) Centre for
Environment and Health, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London,
United Kingdom; National Institute for Health and Welfare, Oulu, Finland;
Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Institute of Health Sciences, 
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; Unit of Primary Care, Oulu University
Hospital, Oulu, Finland. (16)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM),
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Hjelt Institute, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland. (17)Max Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany;
Munich Cluster für Systems Neurology (Synergy), Munich, Germany; Institute of
Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed 74 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL)
blood levels. This study is, to our knowledge, the first genome-wide interaction 
study (GWIS) to identify SNP×SNP interactions associated with HDL levels. We
performed a GWIS in the Rotterdam Study (RS) cohort I (RS-I) using the GLIDE tool
which leverages the massively parallel computing power of Graphics Processing
Units (GPUs) to perform linear regression on all genome-wide pairs of SNPs. By
performing a meta-analysis together with Rotterdam Study cohorts II and III
(RS-II and RS-III), we were able to filter 181 interaction terms with a p-value<1
· 10-8 that replicated in the two independent cohorts. We were not able to
replicate any of these interaction term in the AGES, ARIC, CHS, ERF, FHS and
NFBC-66 cohorts (Ntotal<U+200A>=<U+200A>30,011) when adjusting for multiple testing. Our GWIS
resulted in the consistent finding of a possible interaction between rs774801 in 
ARMC8 (ENSG00000114098) and rs12442098 in SPATA8 (ENSG00000185594) being
associated with HDL levels. However, p-values do not reach the preset Bonferroni 
correction of the p-values. Our study suggest that even for highly genetically
determined traits such as HDL the sample sizes needed to detect SNP×SNP
interactions are large and the 2-step filtering approaches do not yield a
solution. Here we present our analysis plan and our reservations concerning GWIS.

PMCID: PMC4203717
PMID: 25329471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Plant Cell. 2014 Oct;26(10):3984-98. doi: 10.1105/tpc.114.129296. Epub 2014 Oct
17.

The Arabidopsis ethylene/jasmonic acid-NRT signaling module coordinates nitrate
reallocation and the trade-off between growth and environmental adaptation.

Zhang GB(1), Yi HY(1), Gong JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics and National Center for
Plant Gene Research (Shanghai), Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of China. (2)National Key Laboratory of Plant 
Molecular Genetics and National Center for Plant Gene Research (Shanghai),
Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of
China jmgong@sibs.ac.cn.

Stresses decouple nitrate assimilation and photosynthesis through
stress-initiated nitrate allocation to roots (SINAR), which is mediated by the
nitrate transporters NRT1.8 and NRT1.5 and functions to promote stress tolerance.
However, how SINAR communicates with the environment remains unknown. Here, we
present biochemical and genetic evidence demonstrating that in Arabidopsis
thaliana, ethylene (ET) and jasmonic acid (JA) affect the crosstalk between SINAR
and the environment. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that ethylene response factors (ERFs),
including OCTADECANOID-RESPONSIVE ARABIDOPSIS AP2/ERF59, bind to the GCC boxes in
the NRT1.8 promoter region, while ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3) binds to the EIN3 
binding site motifs in the NRT1.5 promoter. Genetic assays showed that cadmium
and sodium stresses initiated ET/JA signaling, which converged at EIN3/EIN3-Like1
(EIL1) to modulate ERF expression and hence to upregulate NRT1.8. By contrast, ET
and JA signaling mediated the downregulation of NRT1.5 via EIN3/EIL1 and other,
unknown component(s). SINAR enhanced stress tolerance and decreased plant growth 
under nonstressed conditions through the ET/JA-NRT1.5/NRT1.8 signaling module.
Interestingly, when nitrate reductase was impaired, SINAR failed to affect either
stress tolerance or plant growth. These data suggest that SINAR responds to
environmental conditions through the ET/JA-NRT signaling module, which further
modulates stress tolerance and plant growth in a nitrate reductase-dependent
manner.

© 2014 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4247569
PMID: 25326291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1223:321-34. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1695-5_26.

Pepper, sweet (Capsicum annuum).

Heidmann I(1), Boutilier K.

Author information: 
(1)Enza Zaden Research and Development B.V., P.O. Box 7, 1600 AA, Enkhuizen, The 
Netherlands.

Capsicum (pepper) species are economically important crops that are recalcitrant 
to genetic transformation by Agrobacterium (Agrobacterium tumefaciens). A number 
of protocols for pepper transformation have been described but are not routinely 
applicable. The main bottleneck in pepper transformation is the low frequency of 
cells that are both susceptible for Agrobacterium infection and have the ability 
to regenerate. Here, we describe a protocol for the efficient regeneration of
transgenic sweet pepper (C. annuum) through inducible activation of the BABY BOOM
(BBM) AP2/ERF transcription factor. Using this approach, we can routinely achieve
a transformation efficiency of at least 0.6 %. The main improvements in this
protocol are the reproducibility in transforming different genotypes and the
ability to produce fertile shoots. An added advantage of this protocol is that
BBM activity can be induced subsequently in stable transgenic lines, providing a 
novel regeneration system for clonal propagation through somatic embryogenesis.

PMID: 25300852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Sep 26;13(3):7839-51. doi: 10.4238/2014.September.26.22.

Genome-wide identification and phylogenetic analysis of the AP2/ERF gene
superfamily in sweet orange (Citrus sinensis).

Ito TM(1), Polido PB(1), Rampim MC(1), Kaschuk G(1), Souza SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular, Universidade Paranaense, Umuarama, PR,
Brasil. (2)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular, Universidade Paranaense, Umuarama, 
PR, Brasil silviahulse@unipar.br.

Sweet orange (Citrus sinensis) plays an important role in the economy of more
than 140 countries, but it is grown in areas with intermittent stressful soil and
climatic conditions. The stress tolerance could be addressed by manipulating the 
ethylene response factor (ERF) transcription factors because they orchestrate
plant responses to environmental stress. We performed an in silico study on the
ERFs in the expressed sequence tag database of C. sinensis to identify potential 
genes that regulate plant responses to stress. We identified 108 putative genes
encoding protein sequences of the AP2/ERF superfamily distributed within 10
groups of amino acid sequences. Ninety-one genes were assembled from the ERF
family containing only one AP2/ERF domain, 13 genes were assembled from the AP2
family containing two AP2/ERF domains, and four other genes were assembled from
the RAV family containing one AP2/ERF domain and a B3 domain. Some conserved
domains of the ERF family genes were disrupted into a few segments by introns.
This irregular distribution of genes in the AP2/ERF superfamily in different
plant species could be a result of genomic losses or duplication events in a
common ancestor. The in silico gene expression revealed that 67% of AP2/ERF genes
are expressed in tissues with usual plant development, and 14% were expressed in 
stressed tissues. Because the AP2/ERF superfamily is expressed in an orchestrated
way, it is possible that the manipulation of only one gene may result in changes 
in the whole plant function, which could result in more tolerant crops.

PMID: 25299098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. BMC Genomics. 2014 Oct 4;15:854. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-854.

Transcriptome analysis of Gossypium hirsutum flower buds infested by cotton boll 
weevil (Anthonomus grandis) larvae.

Artico S, Ribeiro-Alves M, Oliveira-Neto OB, de Macedo LL, Silveira S,
Grossi-de-Sa MF, Martinelli AP, Alves-Ferreira M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro - UFRJ Av,
Prof, Rodolpho Paulo Rocco, s/n - Prédio do CCS Instituto de Biologia, 2° andar -
sala 93, 219410-970 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. alvesfer@uol.com.br.

BACKGROUND: Cotton is a major fibre crop grown worldwide that suffers extensive
damage from chewing insects, including the cotton boll weevil larvae (Anthonomus 
grandis). Transcriptome analysis was performed to understand the molecular
interactions between Gossypium hirsutum L. and cotton boll weevil larvae. The
Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform was used to sequence the transcriptome of cotton
flower buds infested with boll weevil larvae.
RESULTS: The analysis generated a total of 327,489,418 sequence reads that were
aligned to the G. hirsutum reference transcriptome. The total number of expressed
genes was over 21,697 per sample with an average length of 1,063 bp. The DEGseq
analysis identified 443 differentially expressed genes (DEG) in cotton flower
buds infected with boll weevil larvae. Among them, 402 (90.7%) were up-regulated,
41 (9.3%) were down-regulated and 432 (97.5%) were identified as orthologues of
A. thaliana genes using Blastx. Mapman analysis of DEG indicated that many genes 
were involved in the biotic stress response spanning a range of functions, from a
gene encoding a receptor-like kinase to genes involved in triggering defensive
responses such as MAPK, transcription factors (WRKY and ERF) and signalling by
ethylene (ET) and jasmonic acid (JA) hormones. Furthermore, the spatial
expression pattern of 32 of the genes responsive to boll weevil larvae feeding
was determined by "in situ" qPCR analysis from RNA isolated from two flower
structures, the stamen and the carpel, by laser microdissection (LMD).
CONCLUSION: A large number of cotton transcripts were significantly altered upon 
infestation by larvae. Among the changes in gene expression, we highlighted the
transcription of receptors/sensors that recognise chitin or insect oral
secretions; the altered regulation of transcripts encoding enzymes related to
kinase cascades, transcription factors, Ca2+ influxes, and reactive oxygen
species; and the modulation of transcripts encoding enzymes from phytohormone
signalling pathways. These data will aid in the selection of target genes to
genetically engineer cotton to control the cotton boll weevil.

PMCID: PMC4234063
PMID: 25280771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Funct Integr Genomics. 2015 Jan;15(1):27-46. doi: 10.1007/s10142-014-0399-7. Epub
2014 Oct 2.

The CarERF genes in chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.) and the identification of
CarERF116 as abiotic stress responsive transcription factor.

Deokar AA(1), Kondawar V, Kohli D, Aslam M, Jain PK, Karuppayil SM, Varshney RK, 
Srinivasan R.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Centre on Plant Biotechnology, IARI, Pusa Campus, New Delhi,
110012, India, aadeokar@gmail.com.

The AP2/ERF family is one of the largest transcription factor gene families that 
are involved in various plant processes, especially in response to biotic and
abiotic stresses. Complete genome sequences of one of the world's most important 
pulse crops chickpea (Cicer arietinum L.), has provided an important opportunity 
to identify and characterize genome-wide ERF genes. In this study, we identified 
120 putative ERF genes from chickpea. The genomic organization of the chickpea
ERF genes suggested that the gene family might have been expanded through the
segmental duplications. The 120 member ERF family was classified into eleven
distinct groups (I-X and VI-L). Transcriptional factor CarERF116, which is
differentially expressed between drought tolerant and susceptible chickpea
cultivar under terminal drought stress has been identified and functionally
characterized. The CarERF116 encodes a putative protein of 241 amino acids and
classified into group IX of ERF family. An in vitro CarERF116 protein-DNA binding
assay demonstrated that CarERF116 protein specifically interacts with GCC box. We
demonstrate that CarERF116 is capable of transactivation activity of and show
that the functional transcriptional domain lies at the C-terminal region of the
CarERF116. In transgenic Arabidopsis plants overexpressing CarERF116, significant
up-regulation of several stress related genes were observed. These plants also
exhibit resistance to osmotic stress and reduced sensitivity to ABA during seed
germination. Based on these findings, we conclude that CarERF116 is an abiotic
stress responsive gene, which plays an important role in stress tolerance. In
addition, the present study leads to genome-wide identification and evolutionary 
analyses of chickpea ERF gene family, which will facilitate further research on
this important group of genes and provides valuable resources for comparative
genomics among the grain legumes.

PMID: 25274312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 30;9(9):e108977. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108977.
eCollection 2014.

De novo transcriptome sequence assembly and identification of AP2/ERF
transcription factor related to abiotic stress in parsley (Petroselinum crispum).

Li MY(1), Tan HW(1), Wang F(1), Jiang Q(1), Xu ZS(1), Tian C(1), Xiong AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, College of
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.

Parsley is an important biennial Apiaceae species that is widely cultivated as
herb, spice, and vegetable. Previous studies on parsley principally focused on
its physiological and biochemical properties, including phenolic compound and
volatile oil contents. However, little is known about the molecular and genetic
properties of parsley. In this study, 23,686,707 high-quality reads were obtained
and assembled into 81,852 transcripts and 50,161 unigenes for the first time.
Functional annotation showed that 30,516 unigenes had sequence similarity to
known genes. In addition, 3,244 putative simple sequence repeats were detected in
curly parsley. Finally, 1,569 of the identified unigenes belonged to 58
transcription factor families. Various abiotic stresses have a strong detrimental
effect on the yield and quality of parsley. AP2/ERF transcription factors have
important functions in plant development, hormonal regulation, and abiotic
response. A total of 88 putative AP2/ERF factors were identified from the
transcriptome sequence of parsley. Seven AP2/ERF transcription factors were
selected in this study to analyze the expression profiles of parsley under
different abiotic stresses. Our data provide a potentially valuable resource that
can be used for intensive parsley research.

PMCID: PMC4182582
PMID: 25268141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Plant Cell Rep. 2015 Jan;34(1):71-81. doi: 10.1007/s00299-014-1688-2. Epub 2014
Sep 25.

AtERF15 is a positive regulator of ABA response.

Lee SB(1), Lee SJ, Kim SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Kumho Life Science Laboratory,
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Chonnam National University, Gwangju,
500-757, South Korea.

KEY MESSAGE: The Arabidopsis AP2/ERF family transcription factor AtERF15 is
nuclear-localized and positively regulates ABA and stress responses. Abscisic
acid (ABA) is a major plant hormone that controls the expression of hundreds
genes involved in various aspects of plant growth and development, such as seed
development, germination, seedling growth and abiotic stress response. Several
cis-elements mediating the ABA-regulated gene expression have been reported, and 
one of the regulatory elements is Coupling Element 1 (CE1). We previously
isolated a group of AP2/ERF family proteins that bind CE1, but their functions
are mostly unknown. In this study, we demonstrate that one of the CE1 binding
factors (CEBFs), AtERF15, is involved in ABA response. To investigate the AtERF15
function, we generated its overexpression (OX) lines by expressing the AtERF15
coding region under the control of CaMV 35S promoter and analyzed their
phenotypes. We found that the AtERF15 OX lines were hypersensitive to ABA at the 
germination stage. The ABA hypersensitivity was also observed in our root
elongation assay of seedlings. Furthermore, the transgenic lines were
hypersensitive to high salinity and high osmolarity at the seedling establishment
stage, and the transgenic seedlings were drought-tolerant. We also determined the
tissue-specific expression pattern and the subcellular localization of AtERF15.
Our results indicate that it is highly expressed in roots and embryos and
nuclear-localized. Collectively, our data suggest that AtERF15 is a positive
regulator of ABA response.

PMID: 25253450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2014 Jun;39(12):2251-7.

[In silico cloning and bioinformatics analysis of an AP2/EFR family gene from
Arnebia euchroma].

[Article in Chinese]

Xie T, Wang S, Zhou LY, Tang JF, Guo LP.

A cDNA sequence of Arnebia euchroma AP2/ERF named AeAP2/ERF was cloned by in
silico cloning in this study, using ACX71873 sequence from Lithospermum
erythrorhizon as the probe sequence. Some characters of the AP2/ERF gene and
encoded protein sequences were predicted and analyzed by the bioinformatics
methods, including general physical and chemical properties, hydrophobieity,
signal peptide, secondary structure, localization sites in cells. Results showed 
that the 876 bp long gene included a 1 077 bp ORF and encoding 205 amino acid.
The AeAP2/ERF protein had no signal peptide, it was a hydrophilic proteins
located in nucleus. The function of the AP2/ERF protein was mainly involved with 
metabolism controlling and signal transduction.

PMID: 25244754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. FEBS Lett. 2014 Nov 3;588(21):3912-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.002. Epub
2014 Sep 19.

ERECTA family genes regulate development of cotyledons during embryogenesis.

Chen MK(1), Shpak ED(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA. Electronic 
address: eshpak@utk.edu.

Receptor-like kinases are important regulators of plant growth. Often a single
receptor is involved in regulation of multiple developmental processes in a
variety of tissues. ERECTA family (ERf) receptors have previously been linked
with stomata development, above-ground organ elongation, shoot apical meristem
function, flower differentiation and biotic/abiotic stresses. Here we explore the
role of these genes during embryogenesis. ERfs are expressed in the developing
embryo, where their expression is progressively limited to the upper half of the 
embryo. During embryogenesis ERfs redundantly stimulate the growth of cotyledons 
by promoting cell proliferation and inhibiting premature stomata differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25240196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 18;9(9):e107110. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107110.
eCollection 2014.

Genome-wide meta-analysis of myopia and hyperopia provides evidence for
replication of 11 loci.

Simpson CL(1), Wojciechowski R(2), Oexle K(3), Murgia F(4), Portas L(4), Li X(5),
Verhoeven VJ(6), Vitart V(7), Schache M(8), Hosseini SM(9), Hysi PG(10), Raffel
LJ(11), Cotch MF(12), Chew E(12), Klein BE(13), Klein R(13), Wong TY(14), van
Duijn CM(15), Mitchell P(16), Saw SM(17), Fossarello M(18), Wang JJ(19);
DCCT/EDIC Research Group, Polaek O(20), Campbell H(21), Rudan I(21), Oostra
BA(22), Uitterlinden AG(23), Hofman A(24), Rivadeneira F(23), Amin N(15), Karssen
LC(15), Vingerling JR(6), Döring A(25), Bettecken T(26), Bencic G(27), Gieger
C(28), Wichmann HE(25), Wilson JF(21), Venturini C(10), Fleck B(29), Cumberland
PM(30), Rahi JS(31), Hammond CJ(10), Hayward C(7), Wright AF(7), Paterson AD(9), 
Baird PN(8), Klaver CC(6), Rotter JI(5), Pirastu M(4), Meitinger T(32),
Bailey-Wilson JE(1), Stambolian D(33).

Collaborators: Genuth S, Nathan DM, Zinman B, Crofford O, Crandall J, Reid M,
Brown-Friday J, Engel S, Sheindlin J, Martinez H, Shamoon H, Engel H, Phillips M,
Gubitosi-Klug R, Mayer L, Pendegast S, Zegarra H, Miller D, Singerman L,
Smith-Brewer S, Novak M, Quin J, Dahms W, Genuth S, Palmert M, Brillon D, Lackaye
ME, Kiss S, Chan R, Reppucci V, Lee T, Heinemann M, Whitehouse F, Kruger D, Jones
J, McLellan M, Carey JD, Angus E, Thomas A, Galprin A, Bergenstal R, Johnson M,
Spencer M, Morgan K, Etzwiler D, Kendall D, Aiello LP, Golden E, Jacobson A,
Beaser R, Ganda O, Hamdy O, Wolpert H, Sharuk G, Arrigg P, Schlossman D,
Rosenzwieg J, Rand L, Nathan DM, Larkin M, Ong M, Godine J, Cagliero E, Lou P,
Folino K, Fritz S, Crowell S, Hansen K, Gauthier-Kelly C, Service J, Luttrell L, 
Caulder S, Lopes-Virella M, Colwell J, Soule J, Fernandes J, Hermayer K, Kwon S, 
Brabham M, Blevins A, Parker J, Lee D, Patel N, Pittman C, Lindsey P, Bracey M,
Lee K, Nutaitis M, Farr A, Elsing S, Thompson T, Selby J, Lyons T, Yacoub-Wasef
S, Szpiech M, Wood D, Mayfield R, Molitch M, Schaefer B, Jampol L, Lyon A, Gill
M, Strugula Z, Kaminski L, Mirza R, Simjanoski E, Ryan D, Kolterman O, Lorenzi G,
Sivitz W, Bayless M, Counts D, Johnsonbaugh S, Hebdon M, Salemi P, Liss R, Donner
T, Gordon J, Hemady R, Kowarski A, Ostrowski D, Steidl S, Jones B, Herman WH,
Martin CL, Pop-Busui R, Sarma A, Albers J, Feldman E, Kim K, Elner S, Comer G,
Gardner T, Hackel R, Prusak R, Goings L, Smith A, Gothrup J, Titus P, Lee J,
Brandle M, Prosser L, Greene DA, Stevens MJ, Vine A, Bantle J, Wimmergren N,
Cochrane A, Olsen T, Steuer E, Rath P, Rogness B, Hainsworth D, Goldstein D, Hitt
S, Giangiacomo J, Schade DS, Canady JL, Chapin JE, Ketai C LH, Braunstein S,
Bourne PA, Schwartz S, Brucker A, Maschak-Carey BJ, Baker L, Orchard T, Silvers
N, Ryan C, Songer T, Doft B, Olson S, Bergren RL, Lobes L, Rath P, Becker D,
Rubinstein D, Conrad PW, Yalamanchi S, Drash A, Morrison A, Bernal ML,
Vaccaro-Kish J, Malone J, Pavan PR, Grove N, Iyer MN, Burrows AF, Tanaka EA,
Gstalder R, Dagogo-Jack S, Wigley C, Ricks H, Kitabchi A, Murphy M, Moser S,
Meyer D, Iannacone A, Chaum E, Yoser S, Bryer-Ash M, Schussler S, Lambeth H,
Raskin P, Strowig S, Zinman B, Barnie A, Devenyi R, Mandelcorn M, Brent M, Rogers
S, Gordon A, Palmer J, Catton S, Brunzell J, Wessells H, de Boer I, Hokanson J,
Purnell J, Ginsberg J, Kinyoun J, Deeb S, Weiss M, Meekins G, Distad J, Van
Ottingham L, Dupre J, Harth J, Nicolle D, Driscoll M, Mahon J, Canny C, May M,
Lipps J, Agarwal A, Adkins T, Survant L, Pate R, Munn G, Lorenz R, Feman S, White
N, Levandoski L, Boniuk I, Grand G, Thomas M, Joseph D, Blinder K, Shah G,
Boniuk, Burgess, Santiago J, Tamborlane W, Gatcomb P, Stoessel K, Taylor K,
Goldstein J, Novella S, Mojibian H, Cornfeld D, Gubitosi-Klug R, Quin J, Gaston
P, Palmert M, Trail R, Dahms W, Lachin J, Cleary P, Backlund J, Sun W, Braffett
B, Klumpp K, Chan K, Diminick L, Rosenberg D, Petty B, Determan A, Kenny D,
Rutledge B, Younes N, Williams, Dews L, Hawkins M, Cowie C, Fradkin J, Siebert C,
Eastman R, Danis R, Gangaputra S, Neill S, Davis M, Hubbard L, Wabers H, Burger
M, Dingledine J, Gama V, Sussman R, Steffes M, Bucksa J, Nowicki M, Chavers B,
O'Leary D, Polak J, Harrington A, Funk L, Crow R, Gloeb B, Thomas S, O'Donnell C,
Soliman E, Zhang ZM, Prineas R, Campbell C, Ryan C, Sandstrom D, Williams T,
Geckle M, Cupelli E, Thoma F, Burzuk B, Woodfill T, Low P, Sommer C, Nickander K,
Budoff M, Detrano R, Wong N, Fox M, Kim L, Oudiz R, Lima J, Bluemke D, Turkbey E,
van der Geest R, Liu C, Malayeri A, Jain A, Miao C, Chahal H, Jarboe R, Weir G,
Espeland M, Klein B, Manolio T, Rand L, Singer D, Stern M, Boulton AE, Clark C,
D'Agostino R, Lopes-Virella M, Garvey WT, Lyons TJ, Jenkins A, Klein R, Virella
G, Jaffa A, Carter R, Lackland D, Brabham M, McGee D, Zheng D, Mayfield R,
Paterson A, Boright A, Bull S, Sun L, Scherer S, Zinman B, Maynard J, Natarajan
R, Miao F, Zhang L, Chen Z, Nathan DM.

Refractive error (RE) is a complex, multifactorial disorder characterized by a
mismatch between the optical power of the eye and its axial length that causes
object images to be focused off the retina. The two major subtypes of RE are
myopia (nearsightedness) and hyperopia (farsightedness), which represent opposite
ends of the distribution of the quantitative measure of spherical refraction. We 
performed a fixed effects meta-analysis of genome-wide association results of
myopia and hyperopia from 9 studies of European-derived populations: AREDS, KORA,
FES, OGP-Talana, MESA, RSI, RSII, RSIII and ERF. One genome-wide significant
region was observed for myopia, corresponding to a previously identified myopia
locus on 8q12 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.25×10(-8)), which has been reported by Kiefer et al. as
significantly associated with myopia age at onset and Verhoeven et al. as
significantly associated to mean spherical-equivalent (MSE) refractive error. We 
observed two genome-wide significant associations with hyperopia. These regions
overlapped with loci on 15q14 (minimum p value<U+200A>=<U+200A>9.11×10(-11)) and 8q12 (minimum 
p value 1.82×10(-11)) previously reported for MSE and myopia age at onset. We
also used an intermarker linkage- disequilibrium-based method for calculating the
effective number of tests in targeted regional replication analyses. We analyzed 
myopia (which represents the closest phenotype in our data to the one used by
Kiefer et al.) and showed replication of 10 additional loci associated with
myopia previously reported by Kiefer et al. This is the first replication of
these loci using myopia as the trait under analysis. "Replication-level"
association was also seen between hyperopia and 12 of Kiefer et al.'s published
loci. For the loci that show evidence of association to both myopia and
hyperopia, the estimated effect of the risk alleles were in opposite directions
for the two traits. This suggests that these loci are important contributors to
variation of refractive error across the distribution.

PMCID: PMC4169415
PMID: 25233373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Funct Integr Genomics. 2014 Dec;14(4):767-77. doi: 10.1007/s10142-014-0403-2.
Epub 2014 Sep 18.

Identification of the mulberry genes involved in ethylene biosynthesis and
signaling pathways and the expression of MaERF-B2-1 and MaERF-B2-2 in the
response to flooding stress.

Shang J(1), Song P, Ma B, Qi X, Zeng Q, Xiang Z, He N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University, Beibei,
Chongqing, 400715, China.

The phytohormone ethylene is essential to plant growth and development. It plays 
crucial roles in responses to biotic and abiotic stress. The mulberry tree is an 
important crop plant in countries in which people rear silkworms for silk
production. The availability of the mulberry genome has made it possible to
identify mulberry genes involved in ethylene biosynthesis and signal pathways. A 
total of 145 mulberry genes were identified by both homology-based and hidden
Markov model (HMM) search, including 29 genes associated with ethylene
biosynthesis and 116 genes in the AP2/ERF family. Studies on gene structure have 
provided a genetic basis for understanding the functions of these genes. The
differences in gene expression were also observed in different tissues. The
expression of two mulberry genes in the AP2/ERF family, MaERF-B2-1 and
MaERF-B2-2, was found to be associated with the response to flooding stress.

PMCID: PMC4233114
PMID: 25231943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Jun;23(6):837-43. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.183. Epub 2014 Sep
17.

The dystrophin gene and cognitive function in the general population.

Vojinovic D(1), Adams HH(2), van der Lee SJ(3), Ibrahim-Verbaas CA(3), Brouwer
R(4), van den Hout MC(4), Oole E(4), van Rooij J(5), Uitterlinden A(6), Hofman
A(3), van IJcken WF(4), Aartsma-Rus A(7), van Ommen GB(8), Ikram MA(9), van Duijn
CM(10), Amin N(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands [2] Clinic for Neurology and Psychiatry for Children and Youth,
School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. (2)1] Department of
Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands [2]
Department of Radiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Center for Biomics, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (6)1] Department of
Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands [2]
Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands [3] Netherlands Consortium on Health Aging and National Genomics 
Initiative, Leiden, The Netherlands. (7)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (8)1] Department of Human
Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands [2] Center of
Medical Systems Biology, Leiden, The Netherlands. (9)1] Department of
Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands [2]
Department of Radiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands [3] Department of Neurology, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (10)1] Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands [2] Netherlands Consortium on Health
Aging and National Genomics Initiative, Leiden, The Netherlands [3] Center of
Medical Systems Biology, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The aim of our study is to investigate whether single-nucleotide dystrophin gene 
(DMD) variants associate with variability in cognitive functions in healthy
populations. The study included 1240 participants from the Erasmus Rucphen family
(ERF) study and 1464 individuals from the Rotterdam Study (RS). The participants 
whose exomes were sequenced and who were assessed for various cognitive traits
were included in the analysis. To determine the association between DMD variants 
and cognitive ability, linear (mixed) modeling with adjustment for age, sex and
education was used. Moreover, Sequence Kernel Association Test (SKAT) was used to
test the overall association of the rare genetic variants present in the DMD with
cognitive traits. Although no DMD variant surpassed the prespecified significance
threshold (P<1 × 10(-4)), rs147546024:A>G showed strong association (ß = 1.786,
P-value = 2.56 × 10(-4)) with block-design test in the ERF study, while another
variant rs1800273:G>A showed suggestive association (ß = -0.465, P-value = 0.002)
with Mini-Mental State Examination test in the RS. Both variants are highly
conserved, although rs147546024:A>G is an intronic variant, whereas rs1800273:G>A
is a missense variant in the DMD which has a predicted damaging effect on the
protein. Further gene-based analysis of DMD revealed suggestive association
(P-values = 0.087 and 0.074) with general cognitive ability in both cohorts. In
conclusion, both single variant and gene-based analyses suggest the existence of 
variants in the DMD which may affect cognitive functioning in the general
populations.

PMCID: PMC4795046 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25227141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. PLoS Biol. 2014 Sep 16;12(9):e1001950. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001950.
eCollection 2014.

A trihelix DNA binding protein counterbalances hypoxia-responsive transcriptional
activation in Arabidopsis.

Giuntoli B(1), Lee SC(2), Licausi F(1), Kosmacz M(3), Oosumi T(2), van Dongen
JT(4), Bailey-Serres J(2), Perata P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy. (2)Center
for Plant Cell Biology, University of California, Riverside, California, United
States of America. (3)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology,
Potsdam-Golm, Germany. (4)Institute of Biology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany.

Transcriptional activation in response to hypoxia in plants is orchestrated by
ethylene-responsive factor group VII (ERF-VII) transcription factors, which are
stable during hypoxia but destabilized during normoxia through their targeting to
the N-end rule pathway of selective proteolysis. Whereas the conditionally
expressed ERF-VII genes enable effective flooding survival strategies in rice,
the constitutive accumulation of N-end-rule-insensitive versions of the
Arabidopsis thaliana ERF-VII factor RAP2.12 is maladaptive. This suggests that
transcriptional activation under hypoxia that leads to anaerobic metabolism may
need to be fine-tuned. However, it is presently unknown whether a counterbalance 
of RAP2.12 exists. Genome-wide transcriptome analyses identified an
uncharacterized trihelix transcription factor gene, which we named HYPOXIA
RESPONSE ATTENUATOR1 (HRA1), as highly up-regulated by hypoxia. HRA1 counteracts 
the induction of core low oxygen-responsive genes and transcriptional activation 
of hypoxia-responsive promoters by RAP2.12. By yeast-two-hybrid assays and
chromatin immunoprecipitation we demonstrated that HRA1 interacts with the
RAP2.12 protein but with only a few genomic DNA regions from hypoxia-regulated
genes, indicating that HRA1 modulates RAP2.12 through protein-protein
interaction. Comparison of the low oxygen response of tissues characterized by
different levels of metabolic hypoxia (i.e., the shoot apical zone versus mature 
rosette leaves) revealed that the antagonistic interplay between RAP2.12 and HRA1
enables a flexible response to fluctuating hypoxia and is of importance to stress
survival. In Arabidopsis, an effective low oxygen-sensing response requires
RAP2.12 stabilization followed by HRA1 induction to modulate the extent of the
anaerobic response by negative feedback regulation of RAP2.12. This mechanism is 
crucial for plant survival under suboptimal oxygenation conditions. The discovery
of the feedback loop regulating the oxygen-sensing mechanism in plants opens new 
perspectives for breeding flood-resistant crops.

PMCID: PMC4165759
PMID: 25226037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:167681. doi: 10.1155/2014/167681. Epub 2014 Aug
6.

Ethylene response factor Sl-ERF.B.3 is responsive to abiotic stresses and
mediates salt and cold stress response regulation in tomato.

Klay I(1), Pirrello J(2), Riahi L(3), Bernadac A(2), Cherif A(3), Bouzayen M(2), 
Bouzid S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Morphogenèse et de Biotechnologie Végétale, Faculté des
Sciences de Tunis (FST), Campus Universitaire 2092 El Manar Tunis, Tunisia ;
Université Toulouse, INP ENSA Toulouse, 31326 Castanet-Tolosan, France ; INRA,
31326 Castanet-Tolosan, France. (2)Université Toulouse, INP ENSA Toulouse, 31326 
Castanet-Tolosan, France ; INRA, 31326 Castanet-Tolosan, France. (3)LR
Biotechnologie et Valorisation des Bio-Géo Ressources (LR11ES31), Institut
Supérieur de Biotechnologie, Université de La Manouba Biotech Pole de Sidi
Thabet, Sidi Thabet, 2020 Ariana, Tunisia. (4)Laboratoire de Morphogenèse et de
Biotechnologie Végétale, Faculté des Sciences de Tunis (FST), Campus
Universitaire 2092 El Manar Tunis, Tunisia.

Sl-ERF.B.3 (Solanum lycopersicum ethylene response factor B.3) gene encodes for a
tomato transcription factor of the ERF (ethylene responsive factor) family. Our
results of real-time RT-PCR showed that Sl-ERF.B.3 is an abiotic stress
responsive gene, which is induced by cold, heat, and flooding, but downregulated 
by salinity and drought. To get more insight into the role of Sl-ERF.B.3 in plant
response to separate salinity and cold, a comparative study between wild type and
two Sl-ERF.B.3 antisense transgenic tomato lines was achieved. Compared with wild
type, Sl-ERF.B.3 antisense transgenic plants exhibited a salt stress dependent
growth inhibition. This inhibition was significantly enhanced in shoots but
reduced in roots, leading to an increased root to shoot ratio. Furthermore, the
cold stress essay clearly revealed that introducing antisense Sl-ERF.B.3 in
transgenic tomato plants reduces their cell injury and enhances their tolerance
against 14 d of cold stress. All these results suggest that Sl-ERF.B.3 gene is
involved in plant response to abiotic stresses and may play a role in the layout 
of stress symptoms under cold stress and in growth regulation under salinity.

PMCID: PMC4142182
PMID: 25215313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Exp Bot. 2014 Dec;65(22):6359-71. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru352. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Isolation and molecular characterization of ERF1, an ethylene response factor
gene from durum wheat (Triticum turgidum L. subsp. durum), potentially involved
in salt-stress responses.

Makhloufi E(1), Yousfi FE(1), Marande W(2), Mila I(3), Hanana M(4), Bergès H(2), 
Mzid R(4), Bouzayen M(5).

Author information: 
(1)University of Toulouse, INPT, Laboratoire de Génomique et Biotechnologie des
Fruits, Avenue de l'Agrobiopole BP 32607, Castanet-Tolosan F-31326, France INRA, 
UMR990 Génomique et Biotechnologie des Fruits, Castanet-Tolosan, F-31326, France 
Center of Biotechnology of Borj Cedria (CBBC). Lab. Plant Molecular Physiology.
Borj Cedria Science and Technology Park - B.P.901, Hammam-lif 2050, Tunisia.
(2)Centre National de Ressources Génomiques Végétales, INRA-CNRGV, 24 Chemin de
Borde Rouge, CS 52627, 31326 Castanet-Tolosan, France. (3)University of Toulouse,
INPT, Laboratoire de Génomique et Biotechnologie des Fruits, Avenue de
l'Agrobiopole BP 32607, Castanet-Tolosan F-31326, France INRA, UMR990 Génomique
et Biotechnologie des Fruits, Castanet-Tolosan, F-31326, France. (4)Center of
Biotechnology of Borj Cedria (CBBC). Lab. Plant Molecular Physiology. Borj Cedria
Science and Technology Park - B.P.901, Hammam-lif 2050, Tunisia. (5)University of
Toulouse, INPT, Laboratoire de Génomique et Biotechnologie des Fruits, Avenue de 
l'Agrobiopole BP 32607, Castanet-Tolosan F-31326, France INRA, UMR990 Génomique
et Biotechnologie des Fruits, Castanet-Tolosan, F-31326, France
bouzayen@ensat.fr.

As food crop, wheat is of prime importance for human society. Nevertheless, our
understanding of the genetic and molecular mechanisms controlling wheat
productivity conditions has been, so far, hampered by the lack of sufficient
genomic resources. The present work describes the isolation and characterization 
of TdERF1, an ERF gene from durum wheat (Triticum turgidum L. subsp. durum). The 
structural features of TdERF1 supported the hypothesis that it is a novel member 
of the ERF family in durum wheat and, considering its close similarity to TaERF1 
of Triticum aestivum, it probably plays a similar role in mediating responses to 
environmental stresses. TdERF1 displayed an expression pattern that discriminated
between two durum wheat genotypes contrasted with regard to salt-stress
tolerance. The high number of cis-regulatory elements related to stress responses
present in the TdERF1 promoter and the ability of TdERF1 to regulate the
transcription of ethylene and drought-responsive promoters clearly indicated its 
potential role in mediating plant responses to a wide variety of environmental
constrains. TdERF1 was also regulated by abscisic acid, ethylene, auxin, and
salicylic acid, suggesting that it may be at the crossroads of multiple hormone
signalling pathways. Four TdERF1 allelic variants have been identified in durum
wheat genome, all shown to be transcriptionally active. Interestingly, the
expression of one allelic form is specific to the tolerant genotype, further
supporting the hypothesis that this gene is probably associated with the
susceptibility/tolerance mechanism to salt stress. In this regard, the TdERF1
gene may provide a discriminating marker between tolerant and sensitive wheat
varieties.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25205575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Front Plant Sci. 2014 Aug 19;5:407. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00407. eCollection
2014.

Roles for jasmonate- and ethylene-induced transcription factors in the ability of
Arabidopsis to respond differentially to damage caused by two insect herbivores.

Rehrig EM(1), Appel HM(2), Jones AD(3), Schultz JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Chemistry, Fitchburg State University Fitchburg, MA,
USA. (2)Plant Sciences, Bond Life Sciences Center, The University of Missouri
Columbia, MO, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University East Lansing, MI, USA.

Plant responses to insects and wounding involve substantial transcriptional
reprogramming that integrates hormonal, metabolic, and physiological events. The 
ability to respond differentially to various stresses, including wounding,
generally involves hormone signaling and trans-acting regulatory factors.
Evidence of the importance of transcription factors (TFs) in responses to insects
is also accumulating. However, the relationships among hormone signaling, TF
activity, and ability to respond specifically to different insects are uncertain.
We examined transcriptional and hormonal changes in Arabidopsis thaliana after
herbivory by larvae of two lepidopteran species, Spodoptera exigua (Hübner) and
Pieris rapae L. over a 24-h time course. Transcriptional responses to the two
insects differed and were frequently weaker or absent in response to the
specialist P. rapae. Using microarray analysis and qRT-PCR, we found 141 TFs,
including many AP2/ERFs (Ethylene Response Factors) and selected defense-related 
genes, to be differentially regulated in response to the two insect species or
wounding. Jasmonic Acid (JA), JA-isoleucine (JA-IL), and ethylene production by
Arabidopsis plants increased after attack by both insect species. However, the
amounts and timing of ethylene production differed between the two herbivory
treatments. Our results support the hypothesis that the different responses to
these two insects involve modifications of JA-signaling events and activation of 
different subsets of ERF TFs, resulting in different degrees of divergence from
responses to wounding alone.

PMCID: PMC4137388
PMID: 25191332  [PubMed]


187. Plant Cell Rep. 2014 Dec;33(12):2033-45. doi: 10.1007/s00299-014-1678-4. Epub
2014 Sep 3.

LchERF, a novel ethylene-responsive transcription factor from Lycium chinense,
confers salt tolerance in transgenic tobacco.

Wu D(1), Ji J, Wang G, Guan C, Jin C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin,
300072, People's Republic of China.

KEY MESSAGE: An ERF gene, LchERF , was cloned from L. chinense for the first
time. Overexpression of LchERF conferred salt stress tolerance in transgenic
tobacco lines during seed germination and vegetative growth. Ethylene-responsive 
transcription factors (ERFs) play important roles in tolerance to biotic and
abiotic stresses by regulating the expression of stress-responsive genes.
Although the ERF proteins involved in defense responses against biotic stresses
have been extensively documented, the mechanisms by which ERF subfamily genes
regulate plant responses to abiotic stresses are largely unknown. In this study, 
a novel ethylene-responsive transcription factor, named LchERF, was isolated from
Lycium chinense (a salinity-resistant plant). Analysis of the LchERF-deduced
protein sequence showed that it had a typical AP2/ERF domain and belonged to the 
B-3 subgroup of the ERF subfamily. The expression of LchERF was found to be
tissue specific in L. chinense under normal conditions. Upon treatment with NaCl,
polyethylene glycol (PEG) or ethephon (ET), transcript levels of LchERF rapidly
increased in L. chinense. Overexpression of LchERF conferred salt stress
tolerance in transgenic tobacco during seed germination and vegetative growth.
Compared with control lines, LchERF-overexpressing plants showed higher
chlorophyll and proline contents, and were associated with lower H2O2 content
under salt stress. Overall, our results demonstrate that LchERF might play an
important role in the regulation of plant responses to abiotic stresses and
mediate various physiological pathways that enhance salt stress tolerance in
plants.

PMID: 25182480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2014 Nov 15;434:152-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jcis.2014.07.036. 
Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Fast adsorption of Cd²<U+207A> and Pb²<U+207A> by EGTA dianhydride (EGTAD) modified ramie
fiber.

Sun Z(1), Liu Y(2), Huang Y(1), Tan X(1), Zeng G(1), Hu X(1), Yang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha
410082, PR China; Key Laboratory of Environmental Biology and Pollution Control
(Hunan University), Ministry of Education, Changsha 410082, PR China. (2)College 
of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, PR
China; Key Laboratory of Environmental Biology and Pollution Control (Hunan
University), Ministry of Education, Changsha 410082, PR China. Electronic
address: liuyunguo@hnu.edu.cn.

In this study, the removal of Cd(2+) and Pb(2+) from aqueous solutions was
investigated using a novel chelating material. The first part described the
synthesis of ethylene glycol-bis(2-aminoethylether)-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid
dianhydride (EGTAD), mercerization treatment of ramie fiber (MRF), and the MRF
was then reacted with EGTAD to prepare the new material (ERF). The obtained
material was characterized by weight gain, SEM, FTIR, and elemental analysis. The
results of FTIR and elemental analysis confirmed that ester bond, carboxyl and
amine groups were introduced onto ERF. The adsorption capacity of metals on ERF
was evaluated at different contact times, pH values, initial metal
concentrations, and temperatures in the second part. The adsorption equilibrium
was reached within 5 min for Cd(2+) and Pb(2+). Adsorption isotherm could be well
fitted by the Langmuir model, and the maximum adsorption capacities were 159.11
and 273.78 mg g(-1) for Cd(2+) and Pb(2+) at 298 K, respectively. Thermodynamic
analysis showed that the adsorption process was spontaneous and endothermic. The 
molar ratio of adsorbed cation to grafted EGTA is close to 1.8:1, which confirmed
that the adsorption was chemical process involving both surface chelation
reaction and ion exchange. In addition, the absorbent was successfully
regenerated using HCl and ultrasonic treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25181330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. BMC Genomics. 2014 Aug 23;15:707. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-707.

Genome resequencing and bioinformatic analysis of SNP containing candidate genes 
in the autoimmune vitiligo Smyth line chicken model.

Jang HM, Erf GF, Rowland KC, Kong BW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, Center of Excellence for Poultry Science,
University of Arkansas, POSC O-404, 1260 West Maple, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA.
bkong@uark.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Smyth line (SL) chicken is the only animal model for autoimmune
vitiligo that spontaneously displays all clinical and biological manifestations
of the human disorder. To understand the genetic components underlying the
susceptibility to develop SL vitiligo (SLV), whole genome resequencing analysis
was performed in SLV chickens compared with non-vitiliginous parental Brown line 
(BL) chickens, which maintain a very low incidence rate of vitiligo.
RESULTS: Illumina sequencing technology and reference based assembly on Red
Jungle Fowl genome sequences were used. Results of genome resequencing of pooled 
DNA of each 10 BL and SL chickens reached 5.1x and 7.0x coverage, respectively.
The total number of SNPs was 4.8 and 5.5 million in BL and SL genome,
respectively. Through a series of filtering processes, a total of ~1 million
unique SNPs were found in the SL alone. Eventually of the 156 reliable marker
SNPs, which can induce non-synonymous-, frameshift-, nonsense-, and no-start
mutations in amino acid sequences in proteins, 139 genes were chosen for further 
analysis. Of these, 14 randomly chosen SNPs were examined for SNP verification by
PCR and Sanger sequencing to detect SNP positions in 20 BL and 70 SL chickens.
The results of the analysis of the 14 SNPs clearly showed differential
frequencies of nucleotide bases in the SNP positions between BL and SL chickens. 
Bioinformatic analysis showed that the 156 most reliable marker SNPs included
genes involved in dermatological diseases/conditions such as ADAMTS13, ASPM,
ATP6V0A2, BRCA2, COL12A1, GRM5, LRP2, OBSCN, PLAU, RNF168, STAB2, and XIRP1.
Intermolecular gene network analysis revealed that candidate genes identified in 
SLV play a role in networks centered on protein kinases (MAPK, ERK1/2, PKC,
PRKDC), phosphatase (PPP1CA), ubiquitinylation (UBC) and amyloid production
(APP).
CONCLUSIONS: Various potential genetic markers showing amino acid changes and
potential roles in vitiligo development were identified in the SLV chicken
through genome resequencing. The genetic markers and bioinformatic
interpretations of amino acid mutations found in SLV chickens may provide insight
into the genetic component responsible for the onset and the progression of
autoimmune vitiligo and serve as valuable markers to develop diagnostic tools to 
detect vitiligo susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4152579
PMID: 25151476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Sep 12;452(1):91-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.052. Epub 2014 Aug 19.

Arabidopsis DREB2C modulates ABA biosynthesis during germination.

Je J(1), Chen H(1), Song C(1), Lim CO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Systems and Synthetic Agrobiotech Center and PMBBRC, Division of Applied Life 
Science, Graduate School of Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701,
Republic of Korea. (2)Systems and Synthetic Agrobiotech Center and PMBBRC,
Division of Applied Life Science, Graduate School of Gyeongsang National
University, Jinju 660-701, Republic of Korea; Research Institute of Natural
Science, Department of Biochemistry, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju
660-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: colim@gnu.ac.kr.

Plant dehydration-responsive element binding factors (DREBs) are transcriptional 
regulators of the APETELA2/Ethylene Responsive element-binding Factor (AP2/ERF)
family that control expression of abiotic stress-related genes. We show here that
under conditions of mild heat stress, constitutive overexpression seeds of
transgenic DREB2C overexpression Arabidopsis exhibit delayed germination and
increased abscisic acid (ABA) content compared to untransformed wild-type (WT).
Treatment with fluridone, an inhibitor of the ABA biosynthesis abrogated these
effects. Expression of an ABA biosynthesis-related gene, 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid
dioxygenase 9 (NCED9) was up-regulated in the DREB2C overexpression lines
compared to WT. DREB2C was able to trans-activate expression of NCED9 in
Arabidopsis leaf protoplasts in vitro. Direct and specific binding of DREB2C to a
complete DRE on the NCED9 promoter was observed in electrophoretic mobility shift
assays. Exogenous ABA treatment induced DREB2C expression in germinating seeds of
WT. Vegetative growth of transgenic DREB2C overexpression lines was more strongly
inhibited by exogenous ABA compared to WT. These results suggest that DREB2C is a
stress- and ABA-inducible gene that acts as a positive regulator of ABA
biosynthesis in germinating seeds through activating NCED9 expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25150152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Protoplasma. 2015 Mar;252(2):423-38. doi: 10.1007/s00709-014-0686-0. Epub 2014
Aug 23.

Physiological performance and differential expression profiling of genes
associated with drought tolerance in contrasting varieties of two Gossypium
species.

Singh R(1), Pandey N, Naskar J, Shirke PA.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Physiology Division, CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute,
Lucknow, 226001, India.

Cotton is mostly cultivated under rain-fed conditions in India, thus faces
frequent drought conditions during its life cycle. Drought being a major stress
factor responsible for yield penalty, there has always been a high priority to
generate knowledge on adaptation and tolerance of cotton. In the present study,
four cotton varieties, JKC-770 and KC-2 (Gossypium hirsutum), and JKC-717 and
RAHS-187(Gossypium herbaceum), were imposed to drought. Under drought condition, 
differential changes in physiological characters like net photosynthesis,
transpiration, stomatal conductance, chlorophyll fluorescence, relative water
content (RWC), and predawn water potential (<U+03C8> 0) showed a change. While proline, 
malondialdehyde (MDA), and glutathione-S-transferase (GST) content increased
along with a concomitant change in the expression of their associated genes.
Under moderate stress, tolerant varieties maintain lower <U+03C8> 0 probably due to
higher proline content as compared to sensitive varieties. Cyclic electron flow
(CEF) also plays an important role in tolerance under mild water stress in G.
hirsutum varieties. CEF not only activates at high light but also initiates at a 
very low light intensity. Expression analysis of genes reveals that
drought-tolerant varieties showed enhanced detoxifying mechanism by up-regulation
of asparagine synthase (AS), glutathione-S-transferase (GST), and methyl
glyoxalase (GlyI) genes under drought stress. Up-regulation of
<U+0394>(1)-pyrroline-5-carboxylase synthase (<U+0394>(1)P5CS) enhanced accumulation of
proline, an osmolyte, under drought in tolerant varieties. While the
drought-sensitive varieties showed up-regulation of ethylene responsive factor
(ERF) and down-regulation of WRKY70 responsible for senescence of the leaf which 
correlated well with the high rate of leaf fall in sensitive varieties under
water stress.

PMID: 25149149  [PubMed - in process]


192. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Nov;164A(11):2869-72. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36705. Epub 2014
Aug 13.

Severe craniosynostosis with Noonan syndrome phenotype associated with SHOC2
mutation: clinical evidence of crosslink between FGFR and RAS signaling pathways.

Takenouchi T(1), Sakamoto Y, Miwa T, Torii C, Kosaki R, Kishi K, Takahashi T,
Kosaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Dysregulation in the RAS signaling cascade results in a family of malformation
syndromes called RASopathies. Meanwhile, alterations in FGFR signaling cascade
are responsible for various syndromic forms of craniosynostosis. In general, the 
phenotypic spectra of RASopathies and craniosynostosis syndromes do not overlap. 
Recently, however, mutations in ERF, a downstream molecule of the RAS signaling
cascade, have been identified as a cause of complex craniosynostosis, suggesting 
that the RAS and FGFR signaling pathways can interact in the pathogenesis of
malformation syndromes. Here, we document a boy with short stature, developmental
delay, and severe craniosynostosis involving right coronal, bilateral lambdoid,
and sagittal sutures with a de novo mutation in exon1 of SHOC2 (c.4A>G
p.Ser2Gly). This observation further supports the existence of a crosslink
between the RAS signaling cascade and craniosynostosis. In retrospect, the
propositus had physical features suggestive of a dysregulated RAS signaling
cascade, such as fetal pleural effusion, fetal hydrops, and atrial tachycardia.
In addition to an abnormal cranial shape, which has been reported for this
specific mutation, craniosynostosis might be a novel associated phenotype. In
conclusion, the phenotypic combination of severe craniosynostosis and RASopathy
features observed in the propositus suggests an interaction between the RAS and
FGFR signaling cascades. Patients with craniosynostosis in combination with any
RASopathy feature may require mutation screening for molecules in the FGFR-RAS
signaling cascade.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25123707  [PubMed - in process]


193. OMICS. 2014 Oct;18(10):601-14. doi: 10.1089/omi.2013.0177. Epub 2014 Aug 13.

The potential of transcription factor-based genetic engineering in improving crop
tolerance to drought.

Rabara RC(1), Tripathi P, Rushton PJ.

Author information: 
(1)1 Texas A&M AgriLife Research and Extension Center , Dallas, Texas.

Drought is one of the major constraints in crop production and has an effect on a
global scale. In order to improve crop production, it is necessary to understand 
how plants respond to stress. A good understanding of regulatory mechanisms
involved in plant responses during drought will enable researchers to explore and
manipulate key regulatory points in order to enhance stress tolerance in crops.
Transcription factors (TFs) have played an important role in crop improvement
from the dawn of agriculture. TFs are therefore good candidates for genetic
engineering to improve crop tolerance to drought because of their role as master 
regulators of clusters of genes. Many families of TFs, such as CCAAT,
homeodomain, bHLH, NAC, AP2/ERF, bZIP, and WRKY have members that may have the
potential to be tools for improving crop tolerance to drought. In this review,
the roles of TFs as tools to improve drought tolerance in crops are discussed.
The review also focuses on current strategies in the use of TFs, with emphasis on
several major TF families in improving drought tolerance of major crops. Finally,
many promising transgenic lines that may have improved drought responses have
been poorly characterized and consequently their usefulness in the field is
uncertain. New advances in high-throughput phenotyping, both greenhouse and field
based, should facilitate improved phenomics of transgenic lines. Systems biology 
approaches should then define the underlying changes that result in higher yields
under water stress conditions. These new technologies should help show whether
manipulating TFs can have effects on yield under field conditions.

PMCID: PMC4175970
PMID: 25118806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. BMC Plant Biol. 2014 Aug 12;14:216. doi: 10.1186/s12870-014-0216-4.

The resemblance and disparity of gene expression in dormant and non-dormant seeds
and crown buds of leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula).

Chao WS(1), Dogramaci M, Anderson JV, Foley ME, Horvath DP.

Author information: 
(1)USDA-Agricultural Research Service, Biosciences Research Lab, Sunflower and
Plant Biology Research Unit, 1605 Albrecht Boulevard N, Fargo 58102, ND, USA.
wun.chao@ars.usda.gov.

BACKGROUND: Leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula L.) is a herbaceous perennial weed and 
dormancy in both buds and seeds is an important survival mechanism. Bud dormancy 
in leafy spurge exhibits three well-defined phases of para-, endo- and
ecodormancy; however, seed dormancy for leafy spurge is classified as
physiological dormancy that requires after-ripening and alternating temperature
for maximal germination. Overlaps in transcriptome profiles between different
phases of bud and seed dormancy have not been determined. Thus, we compared
various phases of dormancy between seeds and buds to identify common genes and
molecular processes, which should provide new insights about common regulators of
dormancy.
RESULTS: Cluster analysis of expression profiles for 201 selected genes indicated
bud and seed samples clustered separately. Direct comparisons between buds and
seeds are additionally complicated since seeds incubated at a constant
temperature of 20°C for 21 days (21d C) could be considered paradormant (Para)
because seeds may be inhibited by endosperm-generated signals, or ecodormant
(Eco) because seeds germinate after being subjected to alternating temperature of
20:30°C. Since direct comparisons in gene expression between buds and seeds were 
problematic, we instead examined commonalities in differentially-expressed genes 
associated with different phases of dormancy. Comparison between buds and seeds
('Para to Endo buds' and '21d C to 1d C seeds'), using endodormant buds (Endo)
and dormant seeds (1d C) as common baselines, identified transcripts associated
with cell cycle (HisH4), stress response/transcription factors (ICE2,
ERFB4/ABR1), ABA and auxin response (ABA1, ARF1, IAA7, TFL1),
carbohydrate/protein degradation (GAPDH_1), and transport (ABCB2). Comparison of 
transcript abundance for the 'Eco to Endo buds' and '21d C to 1d C seeds'
identified transcripts associated with ABA response (ATEM6), auxin response
(ARF1), and cell cycle (HisH4). These results indicate that the physiological
state of 21d C seeds is more analogous to paradormant buds than that of
ecodormant buds.
CONCLUSION: Combined results indicate that common molecular mechanisms associated
with dormancy transitions of buds and seeds involve processes associated with ABA
and auxin signaling and transport, cell cycle, and AP2/ERF transcription factors 
or their up-stream regulators.

PMCID: PMC4256794
PMID: 25112962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Brain Cogn. 2014 Oct;90:157-64. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2014.07.003. Epub 2014 Aug
8.

Neural mechanisms of savant calendar calculating in autism: an MEG-study of few
single cases.

Dubischar-Krivec AM(1), Bölte S(2), Braun C(3), Poustka F(4), Birbaumer N(5),
Neumann N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of
Tübingen, Silcherstr. 5, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. (2)Department of Women's and
Children's Health, Karolinska Institute, Center of Neurodevelopmental Disorders
(KIND), 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. (3)MEG-Center, University of Tübingen,
Otfried-Müller-Str. 47, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. (4)Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, J.W. Goethe University of Frankfurt,
Deutschordenstr. 50, 60528 Frankfurt/M., Germany. (5)Institute of Medical
Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of Tübingen, Silcherstr. 5,
72076 Tübingen, Germany; Ospedale San Camillo, Istituto Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS), Via Alberoni 70, 30126 Venezia, Italy.
(6)Institute of Medical Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology, University of
Tübingen, Silcherstr. 5, 72076 Tübingen, Germany; Center for Diagnostic Radiology
and Neuroradiology, Functional Imaging Unit, University of Greifswald,
Walther-Rathenau-Str. 46, 17475 Greifswald, Germany. Electronic address:
nicola.neumann@uni-greifswald.de.

This study contrasted the neurological correlates of calendar calculating (CC)
between those individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and typically
developing individuals. CC is the ability to correctly and quickly state the day 
of the week of a given date. Using magnetoencephalography (MEG), we presented 126
calendar tasks with dates of the present, past, and future. Event-related
magnetic fields (ERF) of 3000ms duration and brain activation patterns were
compared in three savant calendar calculators with ASD (ASDCC) and three
typically developing calendar calculators (TYPCC). ASDCC outperformed TYPCC in
correct responses, but not in answering speed. Comparing amplitudes of their
ERFs, there was a main effect of group between 1000 and 3000ms, but no further
effects of hemisphere or sensor location. We conducted CLARA source analysis
across the entire CC period in each individual. Both ASDCC and TYPCC exhibited
activation maxima in prefrontal areas including the insulae and the left superior
temporal gyrus. This is in accordance with verbal fact retrieval and working
memory as well as monitoring and coordination processes. In ASDCC, additional
activation sites at the right superior occipital gyrus, the right precuneus, and 
the right putamen point to visual-spatial strategies and are in line with the
preference of autistic individuals for engaging posterior regions relatively more
strongly in various reasoning and problem solving tasks.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25108822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. BMC Genomics. 2014 Aug 9;15:671. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-671.

Comparative transcriptome profiling of a desert evergreen shrub, Ammopiptanthus
mongolicus, in response to drought and cold stresses.

Wu Y, Wei W, Pang X, Wang X, Zhang H, Dong B, Xing Y, Li X(1), Wang M.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, No, 306
Zhaowuda Street, Hohhot 010018, China. xinguo.li@csiro.au.

BACKGROUND: The molecular mechanisms involved in plant tolerance to either
drought or cold have been extensively studied in many plant species. However, few
studies have focused on their comparisons especially using non-model plants with 
strong tolerance to both stresses. Ammopiptanthus mongolicus (Maxim. ex Kom.)
Cheng f. is the only evergreen broadleaf shrub grown in the central Asian desert 
and it has very strong cold and drought tolerance. To provide further insights
into plant tolerance, the transcriptome profiles of drought- and cold-treated A. 
mongolicus seedlings were analyzed using Illumina technology and differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) were compared.
RESULTS: A comprehensive transcriptome of A. mongolicus was sequenced using
pooled mRNA extracted from drought-, cold-stressed and unstressed seedlings as
well as leaves from naturally grown shrub. These sequences were assembled into
86058 unigenes, of which 51014 unigenes had an annotated function and 2440
encoded transcription factors (TFs). Transcriptome profiles were analyzed in A.
mongolicus seedlings after drought and cold treatments at three time points (2, 8
and 24 h). Between 3917 and 6102 unigenes were identified as DEGs at a single
time point in both stresses. Among these DEGs 2028 and 2026 DEGs were common
across the three time points of drought and cold treatments respectively, and 971
DEGs were co-regulated by both stresses. Functional enrichment analyses
identified many common or specific biological processes and gene sets in response
to drought and cold stresses. The most pronounced findings are that flavonoid
biosynthesis genes were enriched in the DEGs co-up-regulated by both stresses;
while membrane protein genes and genes related to chloroplast were abundant in
the DEGs specifically up-regulated by drought or cold, respectively. Furthermore,
the DREB, ERF, NAC and WRKY TFs were predominantly co-up-regulated by both
stresses.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides the most comprehensive transcriptome
resource and the first dynamic transcriptome profiles of A. mongolicus under
drought and cold stresses. This information will deepen our understanding of
plant tolerance to drought and cold. The up-regulated DEGs will be valuable for
further investigations of key genes and molecular mechanisms involved in the
adaptation of A. mongolicus to harsh environments.

PMCID: PMC4143566
PMID: 25108399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2014 Oct;174(4):1272-85. doi: 10.1007/s12010-014-1093-x.
Epub 2014 Aug 8.

In silico analysis of DREB transcription factor genes and proteins in grasses.

Filiz E(1), Tombuloglu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop and Animal Production, Cilimli Vocational School, Düzce
University, Çilimli, Düzce, 81750, Turkey, ertugrulfiliz@gmail.com.

Plants are exposed to various environmental stresses, including drought,
salinity, low temperature, etc. Dehydration responsive element binding (DREB)
genes, the members of AP2/ERF transcription factor family, regulate the
biological processes against cold and dehydration stresses. In this study, we
analyzed a total of 19 DREB transcription factor genes and proteins from 14 grass
species by using bioinformatic approaches, including their physiochemical
properties, conserved motif structures, homology models, and phylogenetic
relationships. The domain analysis showed that all grass species contained an AP2
domain whereas some residual substitutions and/or insertions were observed in the
AP2 domains of some grasses. The physiochemical analysis revealed that many DREB 
proteins (89.5 %) were of acidic character while the number of amino acids ranged
from 213 (Aegilops speltoides subsp. speltoides) to 394 (Triticum aestivum).
Based on the subcellular prediction, 16 of 19 DREB proteins were predicted to be 
localized in the nuclear region. According to the sequence analysis of grass
DREBs, the average value of pairwise distance was found to be 0.588, while
nucleotide diversity (p) was found to be 0.435. Thus, among all DREB proteins,
two most divergent ones (Oryza sativa and Avena sativa) were selected for 3D
structure and protein cavity comparison. In addition, 19 DREB proteins were
analyzed according to their phylogenetic relationships, and as a consequence, two
main groups were observed. In this study, our analyses could be a scientific base
to understand DREB genes and proteins to further wet lab studies in plants,
particularly in grass species.

PMID: 25104001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Exp Parasitol. 2014 Nov;145 Suppl:S34-8. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2014.07.006. Epub
2014 Jul 27.

Distribution of free-living amoebae in a treatment system of textile industrial
wastewater.

Ramirez E(1), Robles E(2), Martinez B(2), Ayala R(2), Sainz G(2), Martinez ME(2),
Gonzalez ME(2).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Conservation and Improvement Project, FES Iztacala, National
Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico. Electronic address: erf@unam.mx.
(2)Environmental Conservation and Improvement Project, FES Iztacala, National
Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico.

Free-living amoebae have been found in soil, air and a variety of aquatic
environments, but few studies have been conducted on industrial wastewater and
none on wastewater from the textile industry. The aim of this study was to
determine the presence and distribution of free-living amoebae in a biological
treatment system that treats textile industrial wastewater. Samples were taken
from input, aeration tank, sedimentation tank and output. Samples were
centrifuged at 1200g for 15min, the sediment was seeded on non-nutritive agar
with Enterobacter aerogenes (NNE) and the plates were incubated at 30 and 37°C.
Free-living amoebae were present in all stages of the treatment system. The
highest number of amoebic isolates was found in the aeration tank and no seasonal
distribution was observed during the year. A total of 14 amoeba genera were
isolated: Acanthamoeba, Echinamoeba, Korotnevella, Mayorella, Naegleria,
Platyamoeba, Saccamoeba, Stachyamoeba, Thecamoeba, Vahlkampfia, Vannella,
Vermamoeba, Vexillifera and Willaertia. The most frequently found amoebae were
Acanthamoeba and Vermamoeba which were found in all treatment system stages. The 
constant presence and diversity of free-living amoebae in the treatment system
were important findings due to the characteristics of the wastewater from the
textile plant in terms of the residue content from colorants, fixers, carriers,
surfactants, etc., used in fabric dyeing and finishing processes. The factors
that determined the presence and distribution of amoebae in the activated sludge 
system were their capacity to form cysts, which allowed them to resist adverse
conditions; food availability; an average temperature of 27-33°C; dissolved
oxygen in average concentrations above 2mg/L, and pH in a range of 5.9-7.1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25072828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. New Phytol. 2014 Nov;204(3):595-608. doi: 10.1111/nph.12918. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

The Xanthomonas campestris effector protein XopDXcc8004 triggers plant disease
tolerance by targeting DELLA proteins.

Tan L(1), Rong W, Luo H, Chen Y, He C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China; Hainan Key Laboratory of Sustainable
Utilization of Tropical Bioresources, Hainan University, Haikou, 570228, China;
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100039, China.

Plants protect themselves from the harmful effects of pathogens by resistance and
tolerance. Disease resistance, which eliminates pathogens, can be modulated by
bacterial type III effectors. Little is known about whether disease tolerance,
which sustains host fitness with a given pathogen burden, is regulated by
effectors. Here, we examined the effects of the Xanthomonas effector protein
XopDXcc8004 on plant disease defenses by constructing knockout and complemented
Xanthomonas strains, and performing inoculation studies in radish (Raphanus
sativus L. var. radiculus XiaoJinZhong) and Arabidopsis plants. XopDXcc8004
suppresses disease symptoms without changing bacterial titers in infected leaves.
In Arabidopsis, XopDXcc8004 delays the hormone gibberellin (GA)-mediated
degradation of RGA (repressor of ga1-3), one of five DELLA proteins that repress 
GA signaling and promote plant tolerance under biotic and abiotic stresses. The
ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif-containing region of
XopDXcc8004 interacts with the DELLA domain of RGA and might interfere with the
GA-induced binding of GID1, a GA receptor, to RGA. The EAR motif was found to be 
present in a number of plant transcriptional regulators. Thus, our data suggest
that bacterial pathogens might have evolved effectors, which probably mimic host 
components, to initiate disease tolerance and enhance their survival.

© 2014 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2014 New Phytologist Trust.

PMID: 25040905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2014 Nov;20(11):1729-36. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2014.06.036. Epub 2014 Jul 5.

Early failure of frontline rituximab-containing chemo-immunotherapy in diffuse
large B cell lymphoma does not predict futility of autologous hematopoietic cell 
transplantation.

Hamadani M(1), Hari PN(2), Zhang Y(3), Carreras J(2), Akpek G(4), Aljurf MD(5),
Ayala E(6), Bachanova V(7), Chen AI(8), Chen YB(9), Costa LJ(10), Fenske TS(11), 
Freytes CO(12), Ganguly S(13), Hertzberg MS(14), Holmberg LA(15), Inwards DJ(16),
Kamble RT(17), Kanfer EJ(18), Lazarus HM(19), Marks DI(20), Nishihori T(6),
Olsson R(21), Reddy NM(22), Rizzieri DA(23), Savani BN(22), Solh M(7), Vose
JM(24), Wirk B(25), Maloney DG(15), Smith SM(26), Montoto S(27), Saber W(2),
Alpdogan O, Cashen A, Dandoy C, Finke R, Gale R, Gibson J, Hsu JW, Janakiraman N,
Laughlin MJ, Lill M, Cairo MS, Munker R, Rowlings PA, Schouten HC, Shea TC, Stiff
PJ, Waller EK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant Research, Department of
Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Electronic address:
mhamadani@mcw.edu. (2)Center for International Blood and Marrow Transplant
Research, Department of Medicine, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin. (3)Division of Biostatistics, Institute for Health and Society,
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. (4)Section of Hematology
Oncology at Banner MD Anderson Cancer Center, Gilbert, Arizona. (5)Department of 
Oncology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital Center and Research, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. (6)Blood and Marrow Transplantation Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center
and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida. (7)Blood and Marrow Transplant Program,
University of Minnesota Medical Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (8)Blood and
Marrow Transplant Program, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Oregon. (9)Department of BMT, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts. (10)Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina. (11)Division of Hematology and
Oncology, Froedtert & Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(12)Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, South Texas Veterans Health Care System 
and University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas.
(13)BMT Program, Saint Luke's Blood & Marrow Transplant Program, Westwood,
Kansas. (14)Department of Haematology, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW,
Australia. (15)Department of Clinical Research, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, Seattle, Washington. (16)Department of Hematology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota. (17)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Baylor College of
Medicine and the Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Houston, Texas. (18)Department
of Hematology, Imperial College NHS Trust, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United
Kingdom. (19)Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, Seidman Cancer Center,
University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio. (20)Adult BMT Unit,
University Hospitals Britol NHS Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom. (21)Division of
Therapeutic Immunology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden; Centre for Clinical Research Sörmland, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. (22)Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee. (23)Division of Hematologic Malignancies
and Cellular Therapy, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina. (24)Department of 
Internal Medicine, The Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska. (25)BMT Program,
Stony Brook University Medical Center, Stony Brook, New York. (26)Section of
Hematology/Oncology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (27)Department
of Haemato-oncology, St. Bartholomew's Hospital, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, 
United Kingdom.

The poor prognosis for patients with diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) who
relapse within 1 year of initial diagnosis after first-line rituximab-based
chemo-immunotherapy has created controversy about the role of autologous
transplantation (HCT) in this setting. We compared autologous HCT outcomes for
chemosensitive DLBCL patients between 2000 and 2011 in 2 cohorts based on time to
relapse from diagnosis. The early rituximab failure (ERF) cohort consisted of
patients with primary refractory disease or those with first relapse within 1
year of initial diagnosis. The ERF cohort was compared with those relapsing >1
year after initial diagnosis (late rituximab failure [LRF] cohort). ERF and LRF
cohorts included 300 and 216 patients, respectively. Nonrelapse mortality (NRM), 
progression/relapse, progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival (OS)
of ERF versus LRF cohorts at 3 years were 9% (95% confidence interval [CI], 6% to
13%) versus 9% (95% CI, 5% to 13%), 47% (95% CI, 41% to 52%) versus 39% (95% CI, 
33% to 46%), 44% (95% CI, 38% to 50%) versus 52% (95% CI, 45% to 59%), and 50%
(95% CI, 44% to 56%) versus 67% (95% CI, 60% to 74%), respectively. On
multivariate analysis, ERF was not associated with higher NRM (relative risk
[RR], 1.31; P = .34). The ERF cohort had a higher risk of treatment failure
(progression/relapse or death) (RR, 2.08; P < .001) and overall mortality (RR,
3.75; P <.001) within the first 9 months after autologous HCT. Beyond this
period, PFS and OS were not significantly different between the ERF and LRF
cohorts. Autologous HCT provides durable disease control to a sizeable subset of 
DLBCL despite ERF (3-year PFS, 44%) and remains the standard-of-care in
chemosensitive DLBCL regardless of the timing of disease relapse.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4194275
PMID: 25008330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Med Biol Eng Comput. 2014 Aug;52(8):695-706. doi: 10.1007/s11517-014-1172-8. Epub
2014 Jul 8.

Sound transmission in the chest under surface excitation: an experimental and
computational study with diagnostic applications.

Peng Y(1), Dai Z, Mansy HA, Sandler RH, Balk RA, Royston TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 842 W. Taylor St, 2039 ERF, Chicago, IL, 60607, USA, ypeng6@uic.edu.

Chest physical examination often includes performing chest percussion, which
involves introducing sound stimulus to the chest wall and detecting an audible
change. This approach relies on observations that underlying acoustic
transmission, coupling, and resonance patterns can be altered by chest structure 
changes due to pathologies. More accurate detection and quantification of these
acoustic alterations may provide further useful diagnostic information. To
elucidate the physical processes involved, a realistic computer model of sound
transmission in the chest is helpful. In the present study, a computational model
was developed and validated by comparing its predictions with results from animal
and human experiments which involved applying acoustic excitation to the anterior
chest, while detecting skin vibrations at the posterior chest. To investigate the
effect of pathology on sound transmission, the computational model was used to
simulate the effects of pneumothorax on sounds introduced at the anterior chest
and detected at the posterior. Model predictions and experimental results showed 
similar trends. The model also predicted wave patterns inside the chest, which
may be used to assess results of elastography measurements. Future animal and
human tests may expand the predictive power of the model to include acoustic
behavior for a wider range of pulmonary conditions.

PMCID: PMC4160106
PMID: 25001497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 27;9(6):e99367. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099367. eCollection
2014.

Sequence and expression analyses of ethylene response factors highly expressed in
latex cells from Hevea brasiliensis.

Piyatrakul P(1), Yang M(2), Putranto RA(3), Pirrello J(4), Dessailly F(4), Hu
S(2), Summo M(4), Theeravatanasuk K(5), Leclercq J(4), Kuswanhadi(6), Montoro
P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unité mixte de recherche Amélioration Génétique et Adaptation des Plantes
méditerranéennes et tropicales, Centre International de Recherche Agronomique
pour le Développement, Montpellier, France; Department of Agriculture, Rubber
Research Institute, Bangkok, Thailand. (2)Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese 
Academy of Science, Beijing, China. (3)Unité mixte de recherche Amélioration
Génétique et Adaptation des Plantes méditerranéennes et tropicales, Centre
International de Recherche Agronomique pour le Développement, Montpellier,
France; Indonesian Biotechnology Research Institute for Estate Crops, Bogor,
Indonesia. (4)Unité mixte de recherche Amélioration Génétique et Adaptation des
Plantes méditerranéennes et tropicales, Centre International de Recherche
Agronomique pour le Développement, Montpellier, France. (5)Department of
Agriculture, Rubber Research Institute, Bangkok, Thailand. (6)Sembawa Research
Center, Indonesian Rubber Research Institute, Palembang, Indonesia.

The AP2/ERF superfamily encodes transcription factors that play a key role in
plant development and responses to abiotic and biotic stress. In Hevea
brasiliensis, ERF genes have been identified by RNA sequencing. This study set
out to validate the number of HbERF genes, and identify ERF genes involved in the
regulation of latex cell metabolism. A comprehensive Hevea transcriptome was
improved using additional RNA reads from reproductive tissues. Newly assembled
contigs were annotated in the Gene Ontology database and were assigned to 3 main 
categories. The AP2/ERF superfamily is the third most represented compared with
other transcription factor families. A comparison with genomic scaffolds led to
an estimation of 114 AP2/ERF genes and 1 soloist in Hevea brasiliensis. Based on 
a phylogenetic analysis, functions were predicted for 26 HbERF genes. A relative 
transcript abundance analysis was performed by real-time RT-PCR in various
tissues. Transcripts of ERFs from group I and VIII were very abundant in all
tissues while those of group VII were highly accumulated in latex cells. Seven of
the thirty-five ERF expression marker genes were highly expressed in latex.
Subcellular localization and transactivation analyses suggested that HbERF-VII
candidate genes encoded functional transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4074046
PMID: 24971876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Phytochemistry. 2015 May;113:41-9. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2014.05.017. Epub
2014 Jun 16.

Stress-induced expression of NICOTINE2-locus genes and their homologs encoding
Ethylene Response Factor transcription factors in tobacco.

Shoji T(1), Hashimoto T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, Takayama 8916-5, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, Japan. Electronic address:
t-shouji@bs.naist.jp. (2)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute
of Science and Technology, Takayama 8916-5, Ikoma, Nara 630-0101, Japan.

Plants have evolved diverse defense metabolites as adaptations to biotic and
abiotic stresses. The defense alkaloid nicotine is produced in Nicotiana tabacum 
(tobacco) and its biosynthesis is elicited by jasmonates in the roots. At least
seven jasmonate-responsive genes that encode transcription factors of the
Ethylene Response Factor (ERF) family are clustered at the nicotine-regulatory
locus NICOTINE2 (NIC2) in the tobacco genome. A subset of the NIC2-locus ERFs and
their homologs, including ERF189 and ERF199, have been shown to be most effective
in controlling nicotine biosynthetic pathway genes. Herein reported is that the
ERF genes of this group, other than ERF189 and ERF199, were strongly induced by
NaCl in tobacco hairy roots, although salt stress had no effect on expression of 
nicotine biosynthesis genes. Abscisic acid and osmotic stress also increased
expression of a subset of these NaCl-inducible ERF genes. Promoter expression
analysis in transgenic tobacco hairy roots confirmed that while methyl jasmonate 
(MJ) activated the promoters of ERF29, ERF210 and ERF199, salt stress
up-regulated the promoters of only ERF29 and ERF210, but not ERF199. The protein 
biosynthesis inhibitor cycloheximide induced expression of the ERFs, and
simultaneous addition of MJ and cycloheximide showed synergistic effects. These
results indicate that, after several gene duplication events, the NIC2-locus ERFs
and possibly their homologs appear to have diverged in their responses to
jasmonates and various environmental inputs, including salt stress, and may have 
evolved to regulate distinct metabolic processes and cellular responses.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24947337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Nat Commun. 2014 Jun 18;5:4140. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5140.

TOPLESS mediates brassinosteroid-induced transcriptional repression through
interaction with BZR1.

Oh E(1), Zhu JY(1), Ryu H(2), Hwang I(3), Wang ZY(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution for Science, 260 Panama
Street, Stanford, California 94305, USA [2]. (2)1] Department of Life Sciences,
POSTECH Biotech Center, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang
790-784, Korea [2] Microbial Plant Activation Lab, Agricultural Microbiology
Division, National Academy of Agricultural Science, RDA, Suwon 441-707, South
Korea. (3)Department of Life Sciences, POSTECH Biotech Center, Pohang University 
of Science and Technology, Pohang 790-784, Korea. (4)Department of Plant Biology,
Carnegie Institution for Science, 260 Panama Street, Stanford, California 94305, 
USA.

Brassinosteroid (BR) regulates plant development by activating the transcription 
factor brassinazole resistant 1 (BZR1), which activates and represses different
target genes to switch cellular programmes. The mechanisms that determine BZR1's 
transcriptional activities remain largely unknown. Here we show that BZR1
represses target genes by recruiting the Groucho/TUP1-like transcriptional
corepressor TOPLESS (TPL). Specific deletion or mutation of an evolutionarily
conserved ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif at the carboxy
terminus abolishes BZR1's abilities to regulate gene expression and cell
elongation, but these defects are rescued by TPL fusion to the EAR motif-mutated 
BZR1. The EAR motif in BZR1 mediates recruitment of TPL to BZR1-repressed
promoters. A triple tpl mutant (tpl;tpr1;tpr4) shows reduced BR sensitivity and
suppresses the gain-of-function bzr1-1D mutant phenotype. BR repression of gene
expression also requires histone deacetylases that interact with TPL. Our study
demonstrates key roles of the EAR motif and TPL in BR regulation of gene
expression and plant growth.

PMCID: PMC4232713
PMID: 24938363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Exp Bot. 2014 Sep;65(17):4795-806. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru235. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

Microarray analysis of laser-microdissected tissues indicates the biosynthesis of
suberin in the outer part of roots during formation of a barrier to radial oxygen
loss in rice (Oryza sativa).

Shiono K(1), Yamauchi T(2), Yamazaki S(3), Mohanty B(4), Malik AI(5), Nagamura
Y(6), Nishizawa NK(7), Tsutsumi N(3), Colmer TD(5), Nakazono M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Fukui Prefectural University, 4-1-1
Matsuoka-Kenjyojima, Eiheiji, Fukui 910-1195, Japan. shionok@fpu.ac.jp
nakazono@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp. (2)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences,
Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan. (3)Graduate School 
of Agriculture and Life Sciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo, Tokyo
113-8657, Japan. (4)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117585, Singapore. (5)School of Plant Biology 
and Institute of Agriculture, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling
Highway, Crawley, WA 6009, Australia. (6)National Institute of Agrobiological
Sciences, 2-1-2 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8602, Japan. (7)Graduate School
of Agriculture and Life Sciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo, Tokyo
113-8657, Japan. Research Institute for Bioresources and Biotechnology, Ishikawa 
Prefectural University, 1-308 Nonoichimachi, Ishikawa 921-8836, Japan.
(8)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho,
Chikusa, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan. shionok@fpu.ac.jp nakazono@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

Internal aeration is crucial for root growth in waterlogged soil. A barrier to
radial oxygen loss (ROL) can enhance long-distance oxygen transport via the
aerenchyma to the root tip; a higher oxygen concentration at the apex enables
root growth into anoxic soil. The ROL barrier is formed within the outer part of 
roots (OPR). Suberin and/or lignin deposited in cell walls are thought to
contribute to the barrier, but it is unclear which compound is the main
constituent. This study describes gene expression profiles during ROL barrier
formation in rice roots to determine the relative responses of suberin and/or
lignin biosyntheses for the barrier. OPR tissues were isolated by laser
microdissection and their transcripts were analysed by microarray. A total of 128
genes were significantly up- or downregulated in the OPR during the barrier
formation. Genes associated with suberin biosynthesis were strongly upregulated, 
whereas genes associated with lignin biosynthesis were not. By an ab initio
analysis of the promoters of the upregulated genes, the putative cis-elements
that could be associated with transcription factors, WRKY, AP2/ERF, NAC, bZIP,
MYB, CBT/DREB, and MADS, were elucidated. They were particularly associated with 
the expression of transcription factor genes containing WRKY, AP2, and MYB
domains. A semiquantitative reverse-transcription PCR analysis of genes
associated with suberin biosynthesis (WRKY, CYP, and GPAT) confirmed that they
were highly expressed during ROL barrier formation. Overall, these results
suggest that suberin is a major constituent of the ROL barrier in roots of rice.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24913626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Plant Signal Behav. 2014 Jun 6;9. pii: e29463. [Epub ahead of print]

DEWAX-mediated transcriptional repression of cuticular wax biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Suh MC(1), Go YS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioenergy Science and Technology; Chonnam National University;
Gwangju, Korea.

The aerial parts of plants are covered with a cuticular wax layer, which is the
first barrier between a plant and its environment. Although cuticular wax
deposition increases more in the light than in the dark, little is known about
the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of cuticular wax biosynthesis.
Recently DEWAX (Decrease Wax Biosynthesis) encoding an AP2/ERF transcription
factor was found to be preferentially expressed in the epidermis and induced by
darkness. Wax analysis of the dewax knockout mutant, wild type, and DEWAX
overexpression lines (OX) indicates that DEWAX is a negative regulator of
cuticular wax biosynthesis. DEWAX represses the expression of wax biosynthetic
genes CER1, LACS2, ACLA2, and ECR via direct interaction with their promoters.
Cuticular wax biosynthesis is negatively regulated twice a day by the expression 
of DEWAX; throughout the night and another for stomata closing. Taken together,
it is evident that DEWAX-mediated negative regulation of the wax biosynthetic
genes plays role in determining the total wax loads produced in Arabidopsis
during daily dark and light cycles. In addition, significantly higher levels of
DEWAX transcripts in leaves than stems suggest that DEWAX-mediated
transcriptional repression might be involved in the organ-specific regulation of 
total wax amounts on plant surfaces.

PMID: 24905919  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


207. Funct Integr Genomics. 2014 Sep;14(3):467-77. doi: 10.1007/s10142-014-0381-4.
Epub 2014 Jun 6.

Identification of ERF genes in peanuts and functional analysis of AhERF008 and
AhERF019 in abiotic stress response.

Wan L(1), Wu Y, Huang J, Dai X, Lei Y, Yan L, Jiang H, Zhang J, Varshney RK, Liao
B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Oil Crops, Ministry of
Agriculture, Oil Crops Research Institute of Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Wuhan, China, susun19846@163.com.

Ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) play an important role in regulating gene
expression in plant development and response to stresses. In peanuts (Arachis
hypogaea L.), which produce flowers aerially and pods underground, only a few ERF
genes have been identified so far. This study identifies 63 ERF unigenes from
247,313 peanut EST sequences available in the NCBI database. The phylogeny, gene 
structures, and putative conserved motifs in the peanut ERF proteins were
analysed. Comparative analysis revealed the absence of two subgroups (A1 and A3) 
of the ERF family in peanuts; only 10 subgroups were identified in peanuts
compared to 12 subgroups in Arabidopsis and soybeans. AP2/ERF domains were found 
to be conserved among peanuts, Arabidopsis, and soybeans. Outside the AP2/ERF
domain, many soybean-specific conserved motifs were also detected in peanuts. The
expression analysis of ERF family genes representing each clade revealed
differential expression patterns in response to biotic and abiotic stresses.
Overexpression of AhERF008 influenced the root gravity of Arabidopsis, whereas
overexpression of AhERF019 enhanced tolerance to drought, heat, and salt stresses
in Arabidopsis. The information generated in this study will be helpful to
further investigate the function of ERFs in plant development and stress
response.

PMID: 24902799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. AoB Plants. 2014 Jun 3;6. pii: plu026. doi: 10.1093/aobpla/plu026.

Metabolic and transcriptional regulatory mechanisms underlying the anoxic
adaptation of rice coleoptile.

Lakshmanan M(1), Mohanty B(1), Lim SH(2), Ha SH(3), Lee DY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of
Singapore, 4 Engineering Drive 4, Singapore 117585, Singapore. (2)Divison of
Metabolic Engineering, National Academy of Agricultural Science, Suwon 441707,
Republic of Korea. (3)Graduate School of Biotechnology and Crop Biotech
Institute, Kyung Hee University, Yongin 446701, Republic of Korea. (4)Department 
of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of Singapore, 4
Engineering Drive 4, Singapore 117585, Singapore Bioprocessing Technology
Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 20 Biopolis Way,
#06-01, Centros, Singapore 138668, Singapore cheld@nus.edu.sg.

The ability of rice to germinate under anoxia by extending the coleoptile is a
highly unusual characteristic and a key feature underpinning the ability of rice 
seeds to establish in such a stressful environment. The process has been a focal 
point for research for many years. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying
the anoxic growth of the coleoptile still remain largely unknown. To unravel the 
key regulatory mechanisms of rice germination under anoxic stress, we combined in
silico modelling with gene expression data analysis. Our initial modelling
analysis via random flux sampling revealed numerous changes in rice primary
metabolism in the absence of oxygen. In particular, several reactions associated 
with sucrose metabolism and fermentation showed a significant increase in flux
levels, whereas reaction fluxes across oxidative phosphorylation, the
tricarboxylic acid cycle and the pentose phosphate pathway were down-regulated.
The subsequent comparative analysis of the differences in calculated fluxes with 
previously published gene expression data under air and anoxia identified at
least 37 reactions from rice central metabolism that are transcriptionally
regulated. Additionally, cis-regulatory content analyses of these
transcriptionally controlled enzymes indicate a regulatory role for transcription
factors such as MYB, bZIP, ERF and ZnF in transcriptional control of genes that
are up-regulated during rice germination and coleoptile elongation under anoxia.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Annals of Botany Company.

PMCID: PMC4077593
PMID: 24894389  [PubMed]


209. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 3;15:422. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-422.

Genome-wide analysis of the distribution of AP2/ERF transcription factors reveals
duplication and CBFs genes elucidate their potential function in Brassica
oleracea.

Thamilarasan SK, Park JI, Jung HJ, Nou IS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture, Sunchon National University, 413 Jungangno,
Suncheon, Jeonnam 540-950, Republic of Korea. nis@sunchon.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Cabbage (Brassica oleracea) is one of the most important leaf
vegetables grown worldwide. The entire cabbage genome sequence and more than
fifty thousand proteins have been obtained to date. However a high degree of
sequence similarity and conserved genome structure remain between cabbage and
Arabidopsis; therefore, Arabidopsis is a viable reference species for comparative
genomics studies. Transcription factors (TFs) are important regulators involved
in plant development and physiological processes and the AP2/ERF protein family
contains transcriptional factors that play a crucial role in plant growth and
development, as well as response to biotic and abiotic stress conditions in
plants. However, no detailed expression profile of AP2/ERF-like genes is
available for B. oleracea.
RESULTS: In the present study, 226 AP2/ERF TFs were identified from B. oleracea
based on the available genome sequence. Based on sequence similarity, the AP2/ERF
superfamily was classified into five groups (DREB, ERF, AP2, RAV and Soloist) and
15 subgroups. The identification, classification, phylogenetic construction,
conserved motifs, chromosome distribution, functional annotation, expression
patterns and interaction network were then predicted and analyzed. AP2/ERF
transcription factor expression levels exhibited differences in response to
varying abiotic stresses based on expressed sequence tags (ESTs). BoCBF1a, 1b, 2,
3 and 4, which were highly conserved in Arabidopsis and B. rapa CBF/DREB genes
families were well characterized. Expression analysis enabled elucidation of the 
molecular and genetic level expression patterns of cold tolerance (CT) and
susceptible lines (CS) of cabbage and indicated that all BoCBF genes responded to
abiotic stresses.
CONCLUSIONS: Comprehensive analysis of the physiological functions and biological
roles of AP2/ERF superfamily genes and BoCBF family genes in B. oleracea is
required to fully elucidate AP2/ERF, which will provide rich resources and
opportunities to understand abiotic stress tolerance in crops.

PMCID: PMC4229850
PMID: 24888752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Kardiologiia. 2014;54(1):48-54.

[Efficacy and safety of bisoprololal in hypertensive patients with cardiovascular
disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Russian]

Statsenko ME, Derevianchenko MV, Chernikov MV, Lopushkova IuE.

Efficacy and safety of bisoprolol in hypertensive patients with cardiovascular
disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. A comparative study on the
efficacy and safety of bisoprolol and sustained release metoprolol succinate in
patients with arterial hypertension (AH), cardiovascular disease (CVD) and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) was conducted. High antihypertensive
efficacy and good tolerability of bisoprolol and metoprolol succinate sustained
release was shown in hypertensive patients with CVD and COPD. Bisoprolol versus
metoprolol succinate sustained release was more effective in reducing the number 
of PVCs in hypertensive patients with CVD and COPD. After 12 weeks of therapy of 
bisoprolol there was a trend to reduce the number of patients with concentric
left ventricular hypertrophy by 16.6 % (from 83.3% at baseline vs 66.7% after 12 
weeks of treatment, p < 0.1). Despite the fact that the identified changes in
respiratory function (ERF) in both groups did not reach certainty bisoprolol
versus metoprolol succinate sustained-release was a lesser extent influenced the 
performance of ERF and more - to reduce dyspnea to the evaluation scales Borg and
mMRC (delta% = -7.1 in fixed vs delta% = -3.8 in control groups and delta% = -5.6
vs delta% = 0 respectively) in patients with AH, CVD and COPD.

PMID: 24881311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Vision Res. 2014 Aug;101:41-50. doi: 10.1016/j.visres.2014.05.005. Epub 2014 May 
23.

Simultaneous recording of mouse retinal ganglion cells during epiretinal or
subretinal stimulation.

Sim SL(1), Szalewski RJ(1), Johnson LJ(2), Akah LE(1), Shoemaker LE(1), Thoreson 
WB(3), Margalit E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, USA. (2)Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, USA; Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience,
University of Nebraska, NE, USA. (4)VA Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System, 
NE, USA; Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. Electronic address: emargalit@unmc.edu.

We compared response patterns and electrical receptive fields (ERF) of retinal
ganglion cells (RGCs) during epiretinal and subretinal electrical stimulation of 
isolated mouse retina. Retinas were stimulated with an array of 3200
independently controllable electrodes. Four response patterns were observed: a
burst of activity immediately after stimulation (Type I cells, Vision Research
(2008), 48, 1562-1568), delayed bursts beginning >25ms after stimulation (Type
II), a combination of both (Type III), and inhibition of ongoing spike activity. 
Type I responses were produced more often by epiretinal than subretinal
stimulation whereas delayed and inhibitory responses were evoked more frequently 
by subretinal stimulation. Response latencies were significantly shorter with
epiretinal than subretinal stimulation. These data suggest that subretinal
stimulation is more effective at activating intraretinal circuits than epiretinal
stimulation. There was no significant difference in charge threshold between
subretinal and epiretinal configurations. ERFs were defined by the stimulating
array surface area that successfully stimulated spikes in an RGC. ERFs were
complex in shape, similar to receptive fields mapped with light. ERF areas were
significantly smaller with subretinal than epiretinal stimulation. This may
reflect the greater distance between stimulating electrodes and RGCs in the
subretinal configuration. ERFs for immediate and delayed responses mapped within 
the same Type III cells differed in shape and size, consistent with different
sites and mechanisms for generating these two response types.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4437194
PMID: 24863584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Front Plant Sci. 2014 Apr 22;5:151. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2014.00151. eCollection
2014.

Tolerance to drought and salt stress in plants: Unraveling the signaling
networks.

Golldack D(1), Li C(1), Mohan H(1), Probst N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants, Faculty of Biology,
Bielefeld University Bielefeld, Germany.

Tolerance of plants to abiotic stressors such as drought and salinity is
triggered by complex multicomponent signaling pathways to restore cellular
homeostasis and promote survival. Major plant transcription factor families such 
as bZIP, NAC, AP2/ERF, and MYB orchestrate regulatory networks underlying abiotic
stress tolerance. Sucrose non-fermenting 1-related protein kinase 2 and
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways contribute to initiation of stress
adaptive downstream responses and promote plant growth and development. As a
convergent point of multiple abiotic cues, cellular effects of environmental
stresses are not only imbalances of ionic and osmotic homeostasis but also
impaired photosynthesis, cellular energy depletion, and redox imbalances. Recent 
evidence of regulatory systems that link sensing and signaling of environmental
conditions and the intracellular redox status have shed light on interfaces of
stress and energy signaling. ROS (reactive oxygen species) cause severe cellular 
damage by peroxidation and de-esterification of membrane-lipids, however, current
models also define a pivotal signaling function of ROS in triggering tolerance
against stress. Recent research advances suggest and support a regulatory role of
ROS in the cross talks of stress triggered hormonal signaling such as the
abscisic acid pathway and endogenously induced redox and metabolite signals.
Here, we discuss and review the versatile molecular convergence in the abiotic
stress responsive signaling networks in the context of ROS and lipid-derived
signals and the specific role of stomatal signaling.

PMCID: PMC4001066
PMID: 24795738  [PubMed]


213. Plant Signal Behav. 2014 Apr 30;9. pii: e28983. [Epub ahead of print]

The Arabidopsis Myb transcription factor MTF1 is a unidirectional regulator of
susceptibility to Agrobacterium.

Sardesai N(1), Laluk K(2), Mengiste T(2), Gelvin S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences; Purdue University; West Lafayette, IN USA. 
(2)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology; Purdue University; West Lafayette,
IN USA.

We recently described the Arabidopsis Myb transcription factor MTF1 that
negatively regulates plant susceptibility to Agrobacterium-mediated
transformation. Roots of mtf1 mutant plants show increased susceptibility to
several Agrobacterium strains, and complementing the mutants with a MTF1 cDNA
decreases transformation susceptibility to wild-type levels. Here, we show that
overexpression of MTF1 in a wild-type Arabidopsis background does not result in
altered transformation susceptibility. However, MTF1 overexpressing plants show
increased root length and larger and darker leaves, indicating that MTF1 plays a 
role in plant growth and development. MTF1 decreases Arabidopsis root
susceptibility specifically to Agrobacterium but plant responses to the pathogens
Alternaria brassicicola or Pseudomonas syringae pv Tomato were not altered.
However, the homozygous MTF1 mutant mtf1-4 is resistant to Botrytis cinerea
strain BO5-10 and is regulated through the ethylene signaling pathway mediated by
upregulation of the AP2/ERF transcription factor ORA59.

PMCID: PMC4091474
PMID: 24785741  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


214. Ter Arkh. 2014;86(3):34-9.

[The features of risk factors, systemic inflammation, and endothelial dysfunction
in patients with asthma concurrent with coronary heart disease].

[Article in Russian]

Belan OV, Kaidashev IP, Borzykh OA.

AIM: To identify risk factors (RFs), to evaluate the impact of systemic
inflammation and endothelial dysfunction on the development of asthma concurrent 
with coronary heart disease (CHD), and to determine the degree of control of the 
disease.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The clinical trial included 50 asthmatics aged 40-75 years 
with CHD. All the patients underwent external respiratory function (ERF) test,
ECG, blood pressure and anthropometric measurements, and bicycle ergometry. Their
medical and allergy history data were collected and RFs and basic therapy were
assessed. Laboratory blood and urine values and endothelial function were
estimated determining the brachial artery diameter and the time-averaged maximal 
linear velocity (TAMX) of blood flow in endothelium-dependent and endothelium
independent vasodilation (VDV and VIDV).
RESULTS: The development of asthma in the presence of CHD was found to be
associated with RFs, such as female gender (66%), hereditary asthma (40%) and CHD
(76%), hypertension (86%), obesity (42%), smoking (7%), occupational exposures
(20%), and dyslipidemia. Laboratory tests in the asthmatic patients with CHD
revealed a positive C-reactive protein reaction (CRP) in 16 (32%) patients and
increased serum cholesterol levels. Reactive hyperemia and nitroglycerin tests in
the patients with asthma concurrent with CHD showed that the BA diameter was
significantly increased up to 4.27 +/- 0.3 and 4.54 +/- 0.03 mm, respectively, as
compared to the baseline values (p < 0.01). Most patients were observed to have
marked and frequent symptoms of the disease, frequent asthma exacerbations, and
impaired ERF and to need "rescue" bronchodilators.
CONCLUSION: RFs, such as female gender, family history, hypertension, obesity and
dyslipidemia play an important role in the development of asthma concurrent with 
CHD. Impaired TAMX, VDV, and VIDV, hypercholesterolemia and higher CRP levels
were detected. Basic therapy in the patients with asthma concurrent with CHD was 
not optimal or rather effective since disease control was not achieved in 70% of 
the patients.

PMID: 24779068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Funct Integr Genomics. 2014 Sep;14(3):453-66. doi: 10.1007/s10142-014-0372-5.
Epub 2014 Apr 29.

Genome-wide analysis of AP2/ERF family genes from Lotus corniculatus shows
LcERF054 enhances salt tolerance.

Sun ZM(1), Zhou ML, Xiao XG, Tang YX, Wu YM.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
(CAAS), Room 211, Zhongguancun South Street No. 12, Haidian District, 100081,
Beijing, China.

Lotus corniculatus is used in agriculture as a main forage plant. Members of the 
Apetala2/ethylene response factor (AP2/ERF) family play important roles in
regulating gene expression in response to many forms of stress, including drought
and salt. Here, starting from database of the L. corniculatus var. japonicus
genome, we identified 127 AP2/ERF genes by insilico cloning method. The
phylogeny, gene structures, and putative conserved motifs in L. corniculatus var.
japonicus ERF proteins were analyzed. Based on the number of AP2/ERF domains and 
the function of the genes, 127 AP2/ERF genes from L. corniculatus var. japonicus 
were classified into five subfamilies named the AP2, dehydration-responsive
element binding factor (DREB), ERF, RAV, and a soloist. Outside the AP2/ERF
domain, many L. corniculatus var. japonicus-specific conserved motifs were
detected. Expression profile analysis of AP2/ERF genes by quantitative real-time 
PCR revealed that 19 LcERF genes, including LcERF054 (KJ004728), were
significantly induced by salt stress. The results showed that the LcERF054 gene
encodes a nuclear transcription activator. Overexpression of LcERF054 in
Arabidopsis enhanced the tolerances to salt stress, showed higher germination
ratio of seeds, and had elevated levels of relative moisture contents, soluble
sugars, proline, and lower levels of malondialdehyde under stress conditions
compared to wild-type plants. The expression of hyperosmotic salinity response
genes COR15A, LEA4-5, P5CS1, and RD29A was found to be elevated in the
LcERF054-overexpressing Arabidopsis plants compared to wild type. These results
revealed that the LcERF genes play important roles in L. corniculatus cv Leo
under salt stress and that LcERFs are attractive engineering targets in applied
efforts to improve abiotic stress tolerances in L. corniculatus cv Leo or other
crops.

PMID: 24777608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Neurosci. 2014 Apr 23;34(17):5909-17. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3752-13.2014.

Source-reconstruction of event-related fields reveals hyperfunction and
hypofunction of cortical circuits in antipsychotic-naive, first-episode
schizophrenia patients during Mooney face processing.

Rivolta D(1), Castellanos NP, Stawowsky C, Helbling S, Wibral M, Grützner C,
Koethe D, Birkner K, Kranaster L, Enning F, Singer W, Leweke FM, Uhlhaas PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurophysiology, Max Planck Institute for Brain Research and
Ernst Strüngmann Institute (ESI) for Neuroscience in Cooperation with Max Planck 
Society, Frankfurt am Main 60528, Germany, School of Psychology, University of
East London, London E15 4LZ, United Kingdom, Laboratory of Cognitive and
Computational Neuroscience, Center for Biomedical Technology, Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid 28223, Spain, MEG Unit, Brain Imaging Centre,
Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main 60529, Germany, Institute
for Medical Psychology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main
60054, Germany, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of
Cologne, Cologne 50924, Germany, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy,
Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg
University, Mannheim 68159, Germany, Department of General Psychiatry, Medical
Faculty Heidelberg, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg 69115, Germany, Frankfurt
Institute for Advanced Studies, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am
Main 60438, Germany, and Institute of Neuroscience and Psychology, University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QB, United Kingdom.

Schizophrenia is characterized by dysfunctions in neural circuits that can be
investigated with electrophysiological methods, such as EEG and MEG. In the
present human study, we examined event-related fields (ERFs), in a sample of
medication-naive, first-episode schizophrenia (FE-ScZ) patients (n = 14) and
healthy control participants (n = 17) during perception of Mooney faces to
investigate the integrity of neuromagnetic responses and their
experience-dependent modification. ERF responses were analyzed for M100, M170,
and M250 components at the sensor and source levels. In addition, we analyzed
peak latency and adaptation effects due to stimulus repetition. FE-ScZ patients
were characterized by significantly impaired sensory processing, as indicated by 
a reduced discrimination index (A'). At the sensor level, M100 and M170 responses
in FE-ScZ were within the normal range, whereas the M250 response was impaired.
However, source localization revealed widespread elevated activity for M100 and
M170 in FE-ScZ and delayed peak latencies for the M100 and M250 responses. In
addition, M170 source activity in FE-ScZ was not modulated by stimulus
repetitions. The present findings suggest that neural circuits in FE-ScZ may be
characterized by a disturbed balance between excitation and inhibition that could
lead to a failure to gate information flow and abnormal spreading of activity,
which is compatible with dysfunctional glutamatergic neurotransmission.

PMID: 24760850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Int J Radiat Biol. 2014 Oct;90(10):853-8. doi: 10.3109/09553002.2014.916579. Epub
2014 Jun 25.

Improvement in quality of life in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma treated 
with non-invasive extracorporeal radiofrequency in combination with
chemoradiotherapy.

Zhao C(1), Chen J, Yu B, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, School of Medicine, Jinan
University , Guangzhou.

PURPOSE: To improve the quality of life (QOL) of patients with nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC) after chemoradiotherapy (CRT), it is necessary to find an
effective method to reduce the toxic side-effects of CRT.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Between June 2007 and June 2010, 83 previously untreated
patients with NPC were randomized to receive CRT either with or without
non-invasive extracorporeal radiofrequency (ERF). All the patients underwent
radiation, and weekly chemotherapy of paclitaxel 135-175 mg/m(2) and cisplatin
60-90 mg/m(2). In addition, the patients in the treatment group also underwent
non-invasive ERF on a radiofrequency machine at 13.56 MHz for 1 hour at 41-43°C. 
After the completion of treatment, evaluation was carried out to determine the
survival rate, disease-free survival time, and QOL. QOL was analyzed by using the
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life
Questionnaire-Core 30 (EORTC QLQ-C30) and the European Organization for Research 
and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire Head and Neck Cancer Module
(EORTC QLQ-H&N35) every 6 months during the three-year period.
RESULTS: After completion of the treatments, the 36-month survival rate was 0.730
in the treatment group and 0.535 in the reference group (p = 0.041); the average 
disease-free survival time was 48 months in the treatment group and only 37.5
months in the reference group (p = 0.048). In the post- treatment questionnaires,
several NPC-specific (pain, swallowing, speech, social eating, opening mouth, dry
mouth, sticky saliva) QOL domains were better preserved with CRT + ERF compared
to CRT at different time-points.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination treatment of ERF with CRT can prolong the survival
rate and disease-free survival time and improve the QOL for patients with NPC.

PMID: 24758521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Exp Bot. 2014 Jul;65(12):3111-9. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru154. Epub 2014 Apr 17.

The AP2/ERF transcription factor SlERF52 functions in flower pedicel abscission
in tomato.

Nakano T(1), Fujisawa M(1), Shima Y(1), Ito Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Food Research Institute, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8642,
Japan. (2)National Food Research Institute, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8642, Japan yasuito@affrc.go.jp.

In plants, abscission removes senescent, injured, infected, or dispensable
organs. Induced by auxin depletion and an ethylene burst, abscission requires
pronounced changes in gene expression, including genes for cell separation
enzymes and regulators of signal transduction and transcription. However, the
understanding of the molecular basis of this regulation remains incomplete. To
examine gene regulation in abscission, this study examined an ERF family
transcription factor, tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) ETHYLENE-RESPONSIVE FACTOR 52
(SlERF52). SlERF52 is specifically expressed in pedicel abscission zones (AZs)
and SlERF52 expression is suppressed in plants with impaired function of
MACROCALYX and JOINTLESS, which regulate pedicel AZ development. RNA interference
was used to knock down SlERF52 expression to show that SlERF52 functions in
flower pedicel abscission. When treated with an abscission-inducing stimulus, the
SlERF52-suppressed plants showed a significant delay in flower abscission
compared with wild type. They also showed reduced upregulation of the genes for
the abscission-associated enzymes cellulase and polygalacturonase. SlERF52
suppression also affected gene expression before the abscission stimulus,
inhibiting the expression of pedicel AZ-specific transcription factor genes, such
as the tomato WUSCHEL homologue, GOBLET, and Lateral suppressor, which may
regulate meristematic activities in pedicel AZs. These results suggest that
SlERF52 plays a pivotal role in transcriptional regulation in pedicel AZs at both
pre-abscission and abscission stages.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4071829
PMID: 24744429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014 Mar 4;2014:745091. doi: 10.1155/2014/745091.
eCollection 2014.

Expression patterns of ERF genes underlying abiotic stresses in di-haploid
Populus simonii × P. nigra.

Wang S(1), Yao W(1), Wei H(2), Jiang T(1), Zhou B(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding, Northeast Forestry 
University, 51 Hexing Road, Harbin 150040, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Forest Genetics and Tree Breeding, Northeast Forestry University, 51 Hexing Road,
Harbin 150040, China ; Biotechnology Research Center, School of Forest Resources 
and Environmental Science, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI 49931,
USA.

176 ERF genes from Populus were identified by bioinformatics analysis, 13 of
these in di-haploid Populus simonii × P. nigra were investigate by real-time
RT-PCR, the results demonstrated that 13 ERF genes were highly responsive to salt
stress, drought stress and ABA treatment, and all were expressed in root, stem,
and leaf tissues, whereas their expression levels were markedly different in the 
various tissues. In roots, PthERF99, 110, 119, and 168 were primarily
downregulated under drought and ABA treatment but were specifically upregulated
under high salt condition. Interestingly, in poplar stems, all ERF genes showed
the similar trends in expression in response to NaCl stress, drought stress, and 
ABA treatment, indicating that they may not play either specific or unique roles 
in stems in abiotic stress responses. In poplar leaves, PthERF168 was highly
induced by ABA treatment, but was suppressed by high salinity and drought
stresses, implying that PthERF168 participated in the ABA signaling pathway. The 
results of this study indicated that ERF genes could play essential but distinct 
roles in various plant tissues in response to different environment cues and
hormonal treatment.

PMCID: PMC3967781
PMID: 24737991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Plant Cell Rep. 2014 Aug;33(8):1255-62. doi: 10.1007/s00299-014-1613-8. Epub 2014
Apr 12.

Arabidopsis HRE1a, a splicing variant of AtERF73/HRE1, functions as a nuclear
transcription activator in hypoxia response and root development.

Seok HY(1), Tarte VN, Lee SY, Park HY, Moon YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan, 609-735,
Korea.

KEY MESSAGE: HRE1a shows transcriptional activation activity in its C-terminal
region via GCC box but not DRE/CRT and plays an important role in root
development via root meristem cell division regulation. AtERF73/HRE1 protein, a
member of the Arabidopsis AP2/ERF family, contains a conserved AP2/ERF
DNA-binding domain. Here, we studied the molecular function of HRE1a, a splicing 
variant of AtERF73/HRE1, as well as its role in root development.
HRE1a-overexpressing transgenic plants (OXs) showed tolerance to submergence.
HRE1a showed transcriptional activation activity via GCC box but not DRE/CRT. The
121-211 aa region of HRE1a was responsible for the transcriptional activation
activity, and the region was conserved among homologs of other species but was
not found in other Arabidopsis proteins. HRE1a OXs showed increased primary root 
length due to elevated root cell division. Our results suggest that HRE1a
functions as a transcription activator in the nucleus, and plays an important
role in root development through regulation of root meristem cell division.

PMID: 24728113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. New Phytol. 2014 May;202(3):986-1000. doi: 10.1111/nph.12710. Epub 2014 Feb 7.

Expansion of banana (Musa acuminata) gene families involved in ethylene
biosynthesis and signalling after lineage-specific whole-genome duplications.

Jourda C(1), Cardi C, Mbéguié-A-Mbéguié D, Bocs S, Garsmeur O, D'Hont A, Yahiaoui
N.

Author information: 
(1)CIRAD, UMR AGAP, F-34398, Montpellier, France.

Whole-genome duplications (WGDs) are widespread in plants, and three
lineage-specific WGDs occurred in the banana (Musa acuminata) genome. Here, we
analysed the impact of WGDs on the evolution of banana gene families involved in 
ethylene biosynthesis and signalling, a key pathway for banana fruit ripening.
Banana ethylene pathway genes were identified using comparative genomics
approaches and their duplication modes and expression profiles were analysed.
Seven out of 10 banana ethylene gene families evolved through WGD and four of
them (1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthase (ACS), ethylene-insensitive
3-like (EIL), ethylene-insensitive 3-binding F-box (EBF) and ethylene response
factor (ERF)) were preferentially retained. Banana orthologues of AtEIN3 and
AtEIL1, two major genes for ethylene signalling in Arabidopsis, were particularly
expanded. This expansion was paralleled by that of EBF genes which are
responsible for control of EIL protein levels. Gene expression profiles in banana
fruits suggested functional redundancy for several MaEBF and MaEIL genes derived 
from WGD and subfunctionalization for some of them. We propose that EIL and EBF
genes were co-retained after WGD in banana to maintain balanced control of EIL
protein levels and thus avoid detrimental effects of constitutive ethylene
signalling. In the course of evolution, subfunctionalization was favoured to
promote finer control of ethylene signalling.

© 2014 CIRAD New Phytologist © 2014 New Phytologist Trust.

PMID: 24716518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Plant Signal Behav. 2014;9(3):e28583. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

Ethylene and hydrogen peroxide are involved in hypoxia signaling that modulates
AtERF73/HRE1 expression.

Yang CY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agronomy; National Chung Hsing University; Taichung, Taiwan.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) have been reported to trigger signaling pathways
that interact with other signaling pathways mediated by nitric oxide, lipid
messengers, and plant hormones. In a previous study, we demonstrated that
ethylene was involved in hypoxia signaling to regulate the expression of
downstream genes such as AtERF73/HRE1 and ADH1. Furthermore, H 2O 2 and ethylene 
interplay has an effect on AtERF73/HRE1 and ADH1 expression during the early
stages of hypoxia signaling. Here, we propose a model for the main transcription 
factor AtERF73/HRE1, which is controlled by 3 pathways during hypoxia. These
include an ethylene-dependent pathway, an ethylene-independent/H 2O 2-dependent
pathway, and an ethylene and H 2O 2-independent pathway involved in hypoxia
signaling to modulate AtERF73/HRE1.

PMCID: PMC4091573
PMID: 24698791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Plant Cell. 2014 Apr 1;26(4):1666-1680. [Epub ahead of print]

Arabidopsis Cuticular Wax Biosynthesis Is Negatively Regulated by the DEWAX Gene 
Encoding an AP2/ERF-Type Transcription Factor.

Go YS(1), Kim H(1), Kim HJ(1), Suh MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioenergy Science and Technology, Chonnam National University,
Gwangju 500-757, Korea. (2)Department of Bioenergy Science and Technology,
Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, Korea mcsuh@chonnam.ac.kr.

The aerial parts of plants are protected from desiccation and other stress by
surface cuticular waxes. The total cuticular wax loads and the expression of wax 
biosynthetic genes are significantly downregulated in Arabidopsis thaliana under 
dark conditions. We isolated Decrease Wax Biosynthesis (DEWAX), which encodes an 
AP2/ERF-type transcription factor that is preferentially expressed in the
epidermis and induced by darkness. Disruption of DEWAX leads to an increase in
total leaf and stem wax loads, and the excess wax phenotype of dewax was restored
to wild type levels in complementation lines. Moreover, overexpression of DEWAX
resulted in a reduction in total wax loads in leaves and stems compared with the 
wild type and altered the ultrastructure of cuticular layers. DEWAX negatively
regulates the expression of alkane-forming enzyme, long-chain acyl-CoA
synthetase, ATP citrate lyase A subunit, enoyl-CoA reductase, and fatty acyl-CoA 
reductase, and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis suggested that DEWAX
directly interacts with the promoters of wax biosynthesis genes. Cuticular wax
biosynthesis is negatively regulated twice a day by the expression of DEWAX,
throughout the night and at stomata closing. Significantly higher levels (10- to 
100-fold) of DEWAX transcripts were found in leaves than in stems, suggesting
that DEWAX-mediated transcriptional repression may be an additional mechanism
contributing to the different total wax loads in leaves and stems.

© 2014 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4036578
PMID: 24692420  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


224. Foot Ankle Spec. 2014 Jun;7(3):211-25. doi: 10.1177/1938640014528042. Epub 2014
Mar 30.

Imaging of tarsal navicular disorders: a pictorial review.

Tuthill HL(1), Finkelstein ER, Sanchez AM, Clifford PD, Subhawong TK, Jose J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Miami Miller School of Medicine/Jackson Health System, Miami,
Florida (HLT, ERF, AMS, PDC, TKS, JJ).

The tarsal navicular is a bone within the midfoot that plays a critical role in
maintaining the arch of the foot. This bone is clinically relevant because it may
be affected by a wide array of pathologies. Our approach includes a detailed
description of the imaging characteristics and disorders affecting the tarsal
navicular. Organization includes (a) normal imaging, (b) accessory ossicles, (c) 
coalition, (d) fractures, (e) Kohler's disease, (f) osteonecrosis, (g)
osteochondral lesions, (h) arthropathies, and (i) tumors. The purpose of this
article is to discuss normal variants and pathological processes that can affect 
the tarsal navicular, with emphasis on the often-overlooked imaging findings.

PMID: 24686907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Plant Cell. 2014 Mar;26(3):1151-65. doi: 10.1105/tpc.113.121061. Epub 2014 Mar
25.

Fast retrograde signaling in response to high light involves metabolite export,
MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE6, and AP2/ERF transcription factors in
Arabidopsis.

Vogel MO(1), Moore M, König K, Pecher P, Alsharafa K, Lee J, Dietz KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants, Bielefeld University, 33501 Bielefeld, 
Germany.

Regulation of the expression of nuclear genes encoding chloroplast proteins
allows for metabolic adjustment in response to changing environmental conditions.
This regulation is linked to retrograde signals that transmit information on the 
metabolic state of the chloroplast to the nucleus. Transcripts of several
APETALA2/ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR transcription factors (AP2/ERF-TFs) were found 
to respond within 10 min after transfer of low-light-acclimated Arabidopsis
thaliana plants to high light. Initiation of this transcriptional response was
completed within 1 min after transfer to high light. The fast responses of four
AP2/ERF genes, ERF6, RRTF1, ERF104, and ERF105, were entirely deregulated in
triose phosphate/phosphate translocator (tpt) mutants. Similarly, activation of
MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE6 (MPK6) was upregulated after 1 min in the wild 
type but not in the tpt mutant. Based on this, together with altered transcript
regulation in mpk6 and erf6 mutants, a retrograde signal transmission model is
proposed starting with metabolite export through the triose phosphate/phosphate
translocator with subsequent MPK6 activation leading to initiation of AP2/ERF-TF 
gene expression and other downstream gene targets. The results show that
operational retrograde signaling in response to high light involves a
metabolite-linked pathway in addition to previously described redox and hormonal 
pathways.

PMCID: PMC4001375
PMID: 24668746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Psychophysiology. 2014 Jul;51(7):634-44. doi: 10.1111/psyp.12207. Epub 2014 Mar
20.

Episodic temporal structure modulates associative recognition processes: an MEG
study.

Tibon R(1), Vakil E, Levy DA, Goldstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel.

The formation of mnemonic associations can occur between items processed in
temporal proximity. It has been proposed that such intertemporal associations are
not unitizable, and may therefore be retrieved only via recollective processes.
To examine this claim, we conducted a magnetoencephalograph study of recognition 
memory for items encoded and retrieved sequentially. Participants studied
successively presented pairs of object pictures, and subsequently made old-new
item judgments under several retrieval conditions, differing in degree of
reinstatement of associative information. Correct recognition was accompanied by 
an early event-related field (ERF) component, seemingly corresponding to the
FN400 event-related potential component asserted to reflect familiarity; this
retrieval success effect was not modulated by degree of associative binding. A
later ERF component, corresponding to the late positive component asserted to
reflect recollection, was modulated by degree of associative reinstatement. These
results suggest that memory of intertemporal associations, which are not amenable
to unitization, is accessed via recollection.

Copyright © 2014 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

PMID: 24646344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. New Phytol. 2014 Jul;203(1):206-18. doi: 10.1111/nph.12771. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

The chimeric repressor version of an Ethylene Response Factor (ERF) family
member, Sl-ERF.B3, shows contrasting effects on tomato fruit ripening.

Liu M(1), Diretto G, Pirrello J, Roustan JP, Li Z, Giuliano G, Regad F, Bouzayen 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, INP-ENSA Toulouse, Génomique et Biotechnologie des
Fruits, Avenue de l'Agrobiopole, BP 32607, Castanet-Tolosan, F-31326, France;
INRA, Génomique et Biotechnologie des Fruits, Chemin de Borde Rouge,
Castanet-Tolosan, F-31326, France.

Fruit ripening involves a complex interplay between ethylene and
ripening-associated transcriptional regulators. Ethylene Response Factors (ERFs) 
are downstream components of ethylene signaling, known to regulate the expression
of ethylene-responsive genes. Although fruit ripening is an ethylene-regulated
process, the role of ERFs remains poorly understood. The role of Sl-ERF.B3 in
tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) fruit maturation and ripening is addressed here
using a chimeric dominant repressor version (ERF.B3-SRDX). Over-expression of
ERF.B3-SRDX results in a dramatic delay of the onset of ripening, enhanced
climacteric ethylene production and fruit softening, and reduced pigment
accumulation. Consistently, genes involved in ethylene biosynthesis and in
softening are up-regulated and those of carotenoid biosynthesis are
down-regulated. Moreover, the expression of ripening regulators, such as RIN,
NOR, CNR and HB-1, is stimulated in ERF.B3-SRDX dominant repressor fruits and the
expression pattern of a number of ERFs is severely altered. The data suggest the 
existence of a complex network enabling interconnection between ERF genes which
may account for the pleiotropic alterations in fruit maturation and ripening.
Overall, the study sheds new light on the role of Sl-ERF.B3 in the
transcriptional network controlling the ripening process and uncovers a means
towards uncoupling some of the main ripening-associated processes.

© 2014 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2014 New Phytologist Trust.

PMID: 24645853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Plant Physiol. 2014 Jun 15;171(10):860-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2013.12.015.
Epub 2014 Mar 5.

The Arabidopsis thaliana At4g13040 gene, a unique member of the AP2/EREBP family,
is a positive regulator for salicylic acid accumulation and basal defense against
bacterial pathogens.

Giri MK(1), Swain S(1), Gautam JK(1), Singh S(1), Singh N(1), Bhattacharjee L(1),
Nandi AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Room #415, School of life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
110067, India. (2)Room #415, School of life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi 110067, India. Electronic address: ashis_nandi@yahoo.com.

The Arabidopsis genome contains a large number of putative transcription factors,
containing a DNA binding domain similar to APETALA2/ethylene response element
binding protein (AP2/EREBP), for most of which a function is not known.
Phylogenetic analysis divides the Apetala 2 (AP2) super-family into 5 major
groups: AP2, RAV, ethylene response factor (ERF), dehydration response element
binding protein (DREB) and At4g13040. Similar to ERF and DREB, the At4g13040
protein contains only one AP2 domain; however, its structural uniqueness places
it into a distinct group. In this article, we report that At4g13040 (referred
herein as Apetala 2 family protein involved in SA mediated disease defense 1 -
APD1) is an important regulator for SA mediated plant defense. The APD1 gene is
upregulated upon pathogen inoculation, exogenous SA application and in the mutant
that constitutively activates SA signaling. The T-DNA insertion lines (inserted
in the APD1 promoter), which fail to induce expression upon pathogen inoculation,
are compromised for resistance against virulent bacterial pathogens and show
reduced induction of pathogenesis related 1 gene. Our results suggest that APD1
functions downstream of PAD4 in Arabidopsis and promotes pathogen-induced SA
accumulation. Exogenous SA application completely restores the loss-of-resistance
phenotype of the apd1 mutant. Thus, APD1 is a positive regulator of disease
defense that functions upstream of SA accumulation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24612849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Nat Commun. 2014 Mar 6;5:3425. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4425.

Plant cysteine oxidases control the oxygen-dependent branch of the N-end-rule
pathway.

Weits DA(1), Giuntoli B(2), Kosmacz M(3), Parlanti S(2), Hubberten HM(3), Riegler
H(3), Hoefgen R(3), Perata P(2), van Dongen JT(4), Licausi F(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa 56124, Italy
[2] Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, 14476 Potsdam-Golm,
Germany. (2)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa 56124,
Italy. (3)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, 14476 Potsdam-Golm,
Germany. (4)1] Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, 14476
Potsdam-Golm, Germany [2] Institute of Biology, RWTH Aachen University, 52074
Aachen, Germany.

In plant and animal cells, amino-terminal cysteine oxidation controls selective
proteolysis via an oxygen-dependent branch of the N-end rule pathway. It remains 
unknown how the N-terminal cysteine is specifically oxidized. Here we identify
plant cysteine oxidase (PCO) enzymes that oxidize the penultimate cysteine of
ERF-VII transcription factors by using oxygen as a co-substrate, thereby
controlling the lifetime of these proteins. Consequently, ERF-VII proteins are
stabilized under hypoxia and activate the molecular response to low oxygen while 
the expression of anaerobic genes is repressed in air. Members of the PCO family 
are themselves targets of ERF-VII transcription factors, generating a feedback
loop that adapts the stress response according to the extent of the hypoxic
condition. Our results reveal that PCOs act as sensor proteins for oxygen in
plants and provide an example of how proactive regulation of the N-end rule
pathway balances stress response to optimal growth and development in plants.

PMCID: PMC3959200
PMID: 24599061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2014 Apr;100(4):250-9. doi:
10.1002/bdra.23228. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Quantification of facial skeletal shape variation in fibroblast growth factor
receptor-related craniosynostosis syndromes.

Heuzé Y(1), Martínez-Abadías N, Stella JM, Arnaud E, Collet C, García Fructuoso
G, Alamar M, Lo LJ, Boyadjiev SA, Di Rocco F, Richtsmeier JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND: fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) -related craniosynostosis
syndromes are caused by many different mutations within FGFR-1, 2, 3, and certain
FGFR mutations are associated with more than one clinical syndrome. These
syndromes share coronal craniosynostosis and characteristic facial skeletal
features, although Apert syndrome (AS) is characterized by a more dysmorphic
facial skeleton relative to Crouzon (CS), Muenke (MS), or Pfeiffer syndromes.
METHODS: Here we perform a detailed three-dimensional evaluation of facial
skeletal shape in a retrospective sample of cases clinically and/or genetically
diagnosed as AS, CS, MS, and Pfeiffer syndrome to quantify variation in facial
dysmorphology, precisely identify specific facial features pertaining to these
four syndromes, and further elucidate what knowledge of the causative FGFR
mutation brings to our understanding of these syndromes.
RESULTS: Our results confirm a strong correspondence between genotype and facial 
phenotype for AS and MS with severity of facial dysmorphology diminishing from
Apert FGFR2(S252W) to Apert FGFR2(P253R) to MS. We show that AS facial shape
variation is increased relative to CS, although CS has been shown to be caused by
numerous distinct mutations within FGFRs and reduced dosage in ERF.
CONCLUSION: Our quantitative analysis of facial phenotypes demonstrate subtle
variation within and among craniosynostosis syndromes that might, with further
research, provide information about the impact of the mutation on facial skeletal
and nonskeletal development. We suggest that precise studies of the phenotypic
consequences of genetic mutations at many levels of analysis should accompany
next-generation genetic research and that these approaches should proceed
cooperatively.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4029055
PMID: 24578066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Poult Sci. 2014 Feb;93(2):307-17. doi: 10.3382/ps.2013-03359.

A quantitative trait locus for ascites on chromosome 9 in broiler chicken lines.

Krishnamoorthy S(1), Smith CD, Al-Rubaye AA, Erf GF, Wideman RF, Anthony NB,
Rhoads DD.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville
72701.

A genome-wide SNP survey was used to identify chromosomal regions that showed
linkage disequilibrium with respect to ascites susceptibility and ventricular
hypertrophy in an F2 cross between previously described ascites-resistant and
-susceptible lines. Variable number tandem repeats were used to obtain genotype
data to further characterize these regions. A region on chromosome 9 (12 to 13
Mbp in 2011 assembly) shows association with ascites in the ascites lines and in 
several commercial broiler breeder lines with a significant sex effect. There are
2 candidate genes, AGTR1 (an angiotensin II type 1 receptor) and UTS2D (urotensin
2 domain containing), in this region that have been associated with hypertension 
and hypoxic response in mammals.

PMID: 24570451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014 Feb 6;8:34. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00034. eCollection
2014.

Arousal and attention re-orienting in autism spectrum disorders: evidence from
auditory event-related potentials.

Orekhova EV(1), Stroganova TA(2).

Author information: 
(1)MEG Centre, Moscow State University of Psychology and Education Moscow, Russia
; MedTech West, Sahlgrenska Academy Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)MEG Centre, Moscow
State University of Psychology and Education Moscow, Russia.

The extended phenotype of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) includes a combination 
of arousal regulation problems, sensory modulation difficulties, and attention
re-orienting deficit. A slow and inefficient re-orienting to stimuli that appear 
outside of the attended sensory stream is thought to be especially detrimental
for social functioning. Event-related potentials (ERPs) and magnetic fields
(ERFs) may help to reveal which processing stages underlying brain response to
unattended but salient sensory event are affected in individuals with ASD.
Previous research focusing on two sequential stages of the brain
response-automatic detection of physical changes in auditory stream, indexed by
mismatch negativity (MMN), and evaluation of stimulus novelty, indexed by P3a
component,-found in individuals with ASD either increased, decreased, or normal
processing of deviance and novelty. The review examines these apparently
conflicting results, notes gaps in previous findings, and suggests a potentially 
unifying hypothesis relating the dampened responses to unattended sensory events 
to the deficit in rapid arousal process. Specifically, "sensory gating" studies
focused on pre-attentive arousal consistently demonstrated that brain response to
unattended and temporally novel sound in ASD is already affected at around 100 ms
after stimulus onset. We hypothesize that abnormalities in nicotinic cholinergic 
arousal pathways, previously reported in individuals with ASD, may contribute to 
these ERP/ERF aberrations and result in attention re-orienting deficit. Such
cholinergic dysfunction may be present in individuals with ASD early in life and 
can influence both sensory processing and attention re-orienting behavior.
Identification of early neurophysiological biomarkers for cholinergic deficit
would help to detect infants "at risk" who can potentially benefit from
particular types of therapies or interventions.

PMCID: PMC3915101
PMID: 24567709  [PubMed]


233. Plant Physiol. 2014 Apr;164(4):1967-90. doi: 10.1104/pp.113.225920. Epub 2014 Feb
24.

The Solanum lycopersicum Zinc Finger2 cysteine-2/histidine-2 repressor-like
transcription factor regulates development and tolerance to salinity in tomato
and Arabidopsis.

Hichri I(1), Muhovski Y, ikova E, Dobrev PI, Franco-Zorrilla JM, Solano R,
Lopez-Vidriero I, Motyka V, Lutts S.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Recherche en Physiologie Végétale, Earth and Life
Institute-Agronomy, Université Catholique de Louvain, B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve,
Belgium.

The zinc finger superfamily includes transcription factors that regulate multiple
aspects of plant development and were recently shown to regulate abiotic stress
tolerance. Cultivated tomato (Solanum lycopersicum Zinc Finger2 [SIZF2]) is a
cysteine-2/histidine-2-type zinc finger transcription factor bearing an
ERF-associated amphiphilic repression domain and binding to the ACGTCAGTG
sequence containing two AGT core motifs. SlZF2 is ubiquitously expressed during
plant development, and is rapidly induced by sodium chloride, drought, and
potassium chloride treatments. Its ectopic expression in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis
thaliana) and tomato impaired development and influenced leaf and flower shape,
while causing a general stress visible by anthocyanin and malonyldialdehyde
accumulation. SlZF2 enhanced salt sensitivity in Arabidopsis, whereas SlZF2
delayed senescence and improved tomato salt tolerance, particularly by
maintaining photosynthesis and increasing polyamine biosynthesis, in salt-treated
hydroponic cultures (125 mm sodium chloride, 20 d). SlZF2 may be involved in
abscisic acid (ABA) biosynthesis/signaling, because SlZF2 is rapidly induced by
ABA treatment and 35S::SlZF2 tomatoes accumulate more ABA than wild-type plants. 
Transcriptome analysis of 35S::SlZF2 revealed that SlZF2 both increased and
reduced expression of a comparable number of genes involved in various
physiological processes such as photosynthesis, polyamine biosynthesis, and
hormone (notably ABA) biosynthesis/signaling. Involvement of these different
metabolic pathways in salt stress tolerance is discussed.

PMCID: PMC3982756
PMID: 24567191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jul;41(7):4261-71. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3297-0. Epub 2014
Feb 25.

Isolation, classification and transcription profiles of the AP2/ERF transcription
factor superfamily in citrus.

Xie XL(1), Shen SL, Yin XR, Xu Q, Sun CD, Grierson D, Ferguson I, Chen KS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fruit Quality Biology/The State Agriculture Ministry Laboratory 
of Horticultural Plant Growth, Development and Quality Improvement, Zhejiang
University, Zijingang Campus, Hangzhou, 310058, People's Republic of China.

The AP2/ERF gene family encodes plant-specific transcription factors. In model
plants, AP2/ERF genes have been shown to be expressed in response to
developmental and environmental stimuli, and many function downstream of the
ethylene, biotic, and abiotic stress signaling pathways. In citrus, ethylene is
effective in regulation citrus fruit quality, such as degreening and aroma.
However, information about the citrus AP2/ERF family is limited, and would
enhance our understanding of fruit responses to environmental stress, fruit
development and quality. CitAP2/ERF genes were isolated using the citrus genome
database, and their expression patterns analyzed by real-time PCR using various
orange organs and samples from a fruit developmental series. 126 sequences with
homologies to AP2/ERF proteins were identified from the citrus genome, and, on
the basis of their structure and sequence, assigned to the ERF family (102), AP2 
family (18), RAV family (4) and Soloist (2). MEME motif analysis predicted the
defining AP2/ERF domain and EAR repressor domains. Analysis of transcript
accumulation in Citrus sinensis cv. 'Newhall' indicated that CitAP2/ERF genes
show organ-specific and temporal expression, and provided a framework for
understanding the transcriptional regulatory roles of AP2/ERF gene family members
in citrus. Hierarchical cluster analysis and t tests identified regulators that
potentially function during orange fruit growth and development.

PMID: 24566692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Plant Cell Environ. 2014 Oct;37(10):2421-32. doi: 10.1111/pce.12302. Epub 2014
Mar 19.

Group VII ethylene response factor diversification and regulation in four species
from flood-prone environments.

van Veen H(1), Akman M, Jamar DC, Vreugdenhil D, Kooiker M, van Tienderen P,
Voesenek LA, Schranz ME, Sasidharan R.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Ecophysiology, Institute of Environmental Biology, Utrecht University,
3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Flooding events negatively affect plant performance and survival. Flooding
gradients thereby determine the dynamics in vegetation composition and species
abundance. In adaptation to flooding, the group VII Ethylene Response Factor
genes (ERF-VIIs) play pivotal roles in rice and Arabidopsis through regulation of
anaerobic gene expression and antithetical survival strategies. We investigated
if ERF-VIIs have a similar role in mediating survival strategies in eudicot
species from flood-prone environments. Here, we studied the evolutionary origin
and regulation of ERF-VII transcript abundance and the physiological responses in
species from two genera of divergent taxonomic lineages (Rumex and Rorippa).
Synteny analysis revealed that angiosperm ERF-VIIs arose from two ancestral loci 
and that subsequent diversification and duplication led to the present ERF-VII
variation. We propose that subtle variation in the regulation of ERF-VII
transcript abundance could explain variation in tolerance among Rorippa species. 
In Rumex, the main difference in flood tolerance correlated with the genetic
variation in ERF-VII genes. Large transcriptional differences were found by
comparing the two genera: darkness and dark submergence-induced Rumex ERF-VIIs,
whereas HRE2 expression was increased in submerged Rorippa roots. We conclude
that the involvement of ERF-VIIs in flooding tolerance developed in a
phylogenetic-dependent manner, with subtle variations within taxonomic clades.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24548060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014 Feb;106(2):djt444. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djt444.

KRAS and cancer stem cells in APC-mutant colorectal cancer.

Fearon ER(1), Wicha MS.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliations of authors: Department of Internal Medicine (ERF, MSW),
Department of Human Genetics (ERF), Department of Pathology (ERF), and the Cancer
Center (ERF, MSW), University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI.

Comment on
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014 Feb;106(2):djt373.

PMID: 24491303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Physiol Plant. 2014 Sep;152(1):84-97. doi: 10.1111/ppl.12159. Epub 2014 Mar 3.

A novel ethylene-responsive factor from Tamarix hispida, ThERF1, is a GCC-box-
and DRE-motif binding protein that negatively modulates abiotic stress tolerance 
in Arabidopsis.

Wang L(1), Qin L, Liu W, Zhang D, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Biogeography and Bioresource in Arid Land, Xinjiang
Institute of Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi, 830011, 
China; State Key Laboratory of Tree Genetics and Breeding, Northeast Forestry
University, Harbin, 150040, China.

Ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) family is one of the largest families of
plant-specific transcription factor that can positively or negatively regulate
abiotic stress tolerance. However, their functions in regulating abiotic stress
tolerance are still not fully understood. In this study, we characterized the
functions of an ERF gene from Tamarix hispida, ThERF1, which can negatively
regulate abiotic stress tolerance. The expression of ThERF1 was induced by
salinity, PEG-simulated drought and abscisic acid (ABA) treatments. ThERF1 can
specifically bind to GCC-box and DRE motifs. Overexpression of ThERF1 in
transgenic Arabidopsis plants showed inhibited seed germination, and decreased
fresh weight gain and root growth compared with wild-type (WT) plants. In
addition, the transcript levels of several superoxide dismutase (SOD) and
peroxidase (POD) genes in transgenic plants were significantly inhibited compared
with in WT plants, resulting in decreased SOD and POD activities in transgenic
plants under salt and drought stress conditions. Furthermore, the reactive oxygen
species (ROS) levels, malondialdehyde (MDA) contents and cell membrane damage in 
ThERF1-transformed plants were all highly increased relative to WT plants. Our
results suggest that ThERF1 negatively regulates abiotic stress tolerance by
strongly inhibiting the expression of SOD and POD genes, leading to decreased
ROS-scavenging ability.

© 2014 Scandinavian Plant Physiology Society.

PMID: 24479715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2013 Dec;42(12):657-66.

What factors really matter? Health-related quality of life for patients on kidney
transplant waiting list.

Ong SC(1), Chow WL, van der Erf S, Joshi VD, Lim JF, Lim C, Tee PS, Lu YM, Kee
TY.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Health Services Research, Singapore Health Services Ptd Ltd,
Singapore.

INTRODUCTION: Waiting times for kidney transplant are long in Singapore.
Healthrelated quality of life (HRQoL) of patients might be affected as a result
of the stress of the long wait and the uncertainty of being called to undergo a
surgical operation. This study aimed to measure the HRQoL of patients on the
kidney transplant waiting list and to identify factors which could impact on the 
HRQoL scores in this group of patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study of kidney transplant
waiting list patients managed at a tertiary renal unit using the SF-36. A SF-36
normative calculator was used to generate HRQoL scores for the Singapore general 
population matched with the study cohort's age, gender and ethnicity.
RESULTS: There were 265 respondents with a response rate was 81%. Our study shows
that HRQoL scores for the kidney transplant waiting list patients were lower than
the population norms across all subscales and were clinically significant for
General Health, Role Physical, Bodily Pain, Social Functioning and Mental
Component Summary scores. Factors such as being Chinese, married, employed and
undergoing haemodialysis predicted better HRQoL scores after adjusting for
possible confounders. Age, gender, educational level, household income, history
of kidney transplant, duration on the transplant waiting list and years on
dialysis did not significantly influence SF-36 across all subscales scores.
CONCLUSION: Kidney transplant waiting list patients had worse HRQoL compared to
the general population. Factors such as ethnicity, marital status, employment
status, and type of dialysis treatment significantly influenced patients'
perception of their HRQoL.

PMID: 24463827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Cell. 2014 Feb 6;53(3):369-79. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.12.020. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

Nitric oxide sensing in plants is mediated by proteolytic control of group VII
ERF transcription factors.

Gibbs DJ(1), Md Isa N(1), Movahedi M(2), Lozano-Juste J(3), Mendiondo GM(1),
Berckhan S(1), Marín-de la Rosa N(3), Vicente Conde J(1), Sousa Correia C(1),
Pearce SP(1), Bassel GW(1), Hamali B(4), Talloji P(4), Tomé DF(5), Coego A(3),
Beynon J(5), Alabadí D(3), Bachmair A(4), León J(3), Gray JE(2), Theodoulou
FL(6), Holdsworth MJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plant and Crop Sciences, School of Biosciences, University of
Nottingham, Loughborough LE12 5RD, UK. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK. (3)Instituto de
Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Ciudad Politécnica de la
Innovación, 46022 Valencia, Spain. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr Gasse 9,
Vienna 1030, Austria. (5)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry
CV4 7AL, UK. (6)Biological Chemistry and Crop Protection Department, Rothamsted
Research, Harpenden AL5 2JQ, UK. (7)Division of Plant and Crop Sciences, School
of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Loughborough LE12 5RD, UK. Electronic
address: michael.holdsworth@nottingham.ac.uk.

Nitric oxide (NO) is an important signaling compound in prokaryotes and
eukaryotes. In plants, NO regulates critical developmental transitions and stress
responses. Here, we identify a mechanism for NO sensing that coordinates
responses throughout development based on targeted degradation of plant-specific 
transcriptional regulators, the group VII ethylene response factors (ERFs). We
show that the N-end rule pathway of targeted proteolysis targets these proteins
for destruction in the presence of NO, and we establish them as critical
regulators of diverse NO-regulated processes, including seed germination,
stomatal closure, and hypocotyl elongation. Furthermore, we define the molecular 
mechanism for NO control of germination and crosstalk with abscisic acid (ABA)
signaling through ERF-regulated expression of ABSCISIC ACID INSENSITIVE5 (ABI5). 
Our work demonstrates how NO sensing is integrated across multiple physiological 
processes by direct modulation of transcription factor stability and identifies
group VII ERFs as central hubs for the perception of gaseous signals in plants.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3969242
PMID: 24462115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Plant Physiol. 2014 Mar;164(3):1499-514. doi: 10.1104/pp.113.229575. Epub 2014
Jan 14.

The wheat ethylene response factor transcription factor pathogen-induced ERF1
mediates host responses to both the necrotrophic pathogen Rhizoctonia cerealis
and freezing stresses.

Zhu X(1), Qi L, Liu X, Cai S, Xu H, Huang R, Li J, Wei X, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement,
Institute of Crop Science , Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing
100081, China.

Sharp eyespot disease (primarily caused by the pathogen Rhizoctonia cerealis) and
freezing stress are important yield limitations for the production of wheat
(Triticum aestivum). Here, we report new insights into the function and
underlying mechanisms of an ethylene response factor (ERF) in wheat,
Pathogen-Induced ERF1 (TaPIE1), in host responses to R. cerealis and freezing
stresses. TaPIE1-overexpressing transgenic wheat exhibited significantly enhanced
resistance to both R. cerealis and freezing stresses, whereas
TaPIE1-underexpressing wheat plants were more susceptible to both stresses
relative to control plants. Following both stress treatments, electrolyte leakage
and hydrogen peroxide content were significantly reduced, and both proline and
soluble sugar contents were elevated in TaPIE1-overexpressing wheat, whereas
these physiological traits in TaPIE1-underexpressing wheat exhibited the opposite
trend. Microarray and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction analyses of TaPIE1-overexpressing and -underexpressing wheat plants
indicated that TaPIE1 activated a subset of defense- and stress-related genes.
Assays of DNA binding by electrophoretic mobility shift and transient expression 
in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) showed that the GCC boxes in the promoters of
TaPIE1-activated genes were essential for transactivation by TaPIE1. The
transactivation activity of TaPIE1 and the expression of TaPIE1-activated
defense- and stress-related genes were significantly elevated following R.
cerealis, freezing, and exogenous ethylene treatments. TaPIE1-mediated responses 
to R. cerealis and freezing were positively modulated by ethylene biosynthesis.
These data suggest that TaPIE1 positively regulates the defense responses to R.
cerealis and freezing stresses by activating defense- and stress-related genes
downstream of the ethylene signaling pathway and by modulating related
physiological traits in wheat.

PMCID: PMC3938636
PMID: 24424323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Front Plant Sci. 2013 Dec 30;4:539. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00539. eCollection
2013.

Onset of herbivore-induced resistance in systemic tissue primed for
jasmonate-dependent defenses is activated by abscisic acid.

Vos IA(1), Verhage A(2), Schuurink RC(1), Watt LG(1), Pieterse CM(1), Van Wees
SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Plant-Microbe Interactions, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht
University Utrecht, Netherlands. (2)Department of Plant Physiology, Swammerdam
Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam Amsterdam, Netherlands.

In Arabidopsis, the MYC2 transcription factor on the one hand and the AP2/ERF
transcription factors ORA59 and ERF1 on the other hand regulate distinct branches
of the jasmonic acid (JA) signaling pathway in an antagonistic fashion,
co-regulated by abscisic acid (ABA) and ethylene, respectively. Feeding by larvae
of the specialist herbivorous insect Pieris rapae (small cabbage white butterfly)
results in activation of the MYC-branch and concomitant suppression of the
ERF-branch in insect-damaged leaves. Here we investigated differential JA
signaling activation in undamaged systemic leaves of P. rapae-infested plants. We
found that the MYC2 transcription factor gene was induced both in the local
insect-damaged leaves and the systemic undamaged leaves of P. rapae-infested
Arabidopsis plants. However, in contrast to the insect-damaged leaves, the
undamaged tissue did not show activation of the MYC-branch marker gene VSP1.
Comparison of the hormone signal signature revealed that the levels of JA and
(+)-7-iso-jasmonoyl-L-isoleucine raised to similar extents in locally damaged and
systemically undamaged leaves, but the production of ABA and the JA precursor
12-oxo-phytodienoic acid was enhanced only in the local herbivore-damaged leaves,
and not in the distal undamaged leaves. Challenge of undamaged leaves of
pre-infested plants with either P. rapae larvae or exogenously applied ABA led to
potentiated expression levels of MYC2 and VSP1, with the latter reaching
extremely high expression levels. Moreover, P. rapae-induced resistance, as
measured by reduction of caterpillar growth on pre-infested plants, was blocked
in the ABA biosynthesis mutant aba2-1, that was also impaired in P. rapae-induced
expression of VSP1. Together, these results suggest that ABA is a crucial
regulator of herbivore-induced resistance by activating primed JA-regulated
defense responses upon secondary herbivore attack in Arabidopsis.

PMCID: PMC3874679
PMID: 24416038  [PubMed]


242. J Strength Cond Res. 2014 Nov;28(11):3013-23. doi: 10.1519/JSC.0000000000000365.

National collegiate athletic association strength and conditioning coaches'
knowledge and practices regarding prevention and recognition of exertional heat
stroke.

Valdes AS(1), Hoffman JR, Clark MH, Stout JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Exercise Physiology and Wellness, Sport and Exercise Science
Program, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida.

The purpose of this study was to assess and determine content knowledge of
National Collegiate Athletic Association Strength and Conditioning Coaches (SCCs)
regarding prevention and recognition of exertional heat stroke (EHS) and to
determine whether the type of professional certification is an indicator of
enhanced content knowledge. A questionnaire was e-mailed to 1305 SCCs and was
used to assess SCC's EHS knowledge in the areas of extrinsic risk factors (ERF), 
intrinsic risk factors (IRF), recognition of EHS (R), and general training safety
knowledge (TSK). The 319 SCC participants who responded were separated into 4
groups based on certification: Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialists
(CSCS) (116), Strength and Conditioning Coach Certification (SCCC) (46), combined
CSCS/SCCC (62), or no certification (NC) (95). Only 2.2% of the total coaches
surveyed scored =90% on the total score, whereas 47% earned a score =59%. When
comparing across certifications, NC scored significantly lower (p = 0.05) on
total score, and the IRF and TSK constructs than CSCS, SCCC, and CSCS/SCCC.
CSCS/SCCC coaches performed significantly better on the total score than SCCC (p 
= 0.047), whereas a trend toward a higher score (p = 0.085) was seen in CSCS
compared with SCCC. CSCS coaches and the combined CSCS/SCCC certifications scored
significantly higher (p < 0.000) than NC in the ERF and R constructs. In
conclusion, SCCs seemed to lack essential knowledge to prevent or recognize EHS
in each of the factors assessed. It is recommended that consideration be given to
include EHS prevention and recognition competencies as part of the professional
preparation and certification requirements for SCCs.

PMID: 24402452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Plant Biotechnol J. 2014 May;12(4):468-79. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12153. Epub 2014 Jan 
3.

The ERF transcription factor TaERF3 promotes tolerance to salt and drought
stresses in wheat.

Rong W(1), Qi L, Wang A, Ye X, Du L, Liang H, Xin Z, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement/Key
Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Triticeae Crops of the
Agriculture Ministry, Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Beijing, China; Central South University of Forestry and Technology,
Changsha, China.

Salinity and drought are major limiting factors of wheat (Triticum aestivum)
productivity worldwide. Here, we report the function of a wheat ERF transcription
factor TaERF3 in salt and drought responses and the underlying mechanism of
TaERF3 function. Upon treatment with 250 mM NaCl or 20% polyethylene glycol
(PEG), transcript levels of TaERF3 were rapidly induced in wheat. Using wheat
cultivar Yangmai 12 as the transformation recipient, four TaERF3-overexpressing
transgenic lines were generated and functionally characterized. The seedlings of 
the TaERF3-overexpressing transgenic lines exhibited significantly enhanced
tolerance to both salt and drought stresses as compared to untransformed wheat.
In the leaves of TaERF3-overexpressing lines, accumulation levels of both proline
and chlorophyll were significantly increased, whereas H2O2 content and stomatal
conductance were significantly reduced. Conversely, TaERF3-silencing wheat plants
that were generated through virus-induced gene silencing method displayed more
sensitivity to salt and drought stresses compared with the control plants.
Real-time quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed that transcript levels of ten
stress-related genes were increased in TaERF3-overexpressing lines, but
compromised in TaERF3-silencing wheat plants. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that the TaERF3 protein could interact with the GCC-box cis-element
present in the promoters of seven TaERF3-activated stress-related genes. These
results indicate that TaERF3 positively regulates wheat adaptation responses to
salt and drought stresses through the activation of stress-related genes and that
TaERF3 is an attractive engineering target in applied efforts to improve abiotic 
stress tolerances in wheat and other cereals.

© 2014 Society for Experimental Biology, Association of Applied Biologists and
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24393105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Plant Signal Behav. 2013;8(12):e27432. doi: 10.4161/psb.27432. Epub 2013 Dec 31.

Arabidopsis WIND1 induces callus formation in rapeseed, tomato, and tobacco.

Iwase A(1), Mitsuda N(2), Ikeuchi M(1), Ohnuma M(1), Koizuka C(3), Kawamoto K(4),
Imamura J(3), Ezura H(4), Sugimoto K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sustainable Resource Science; RIKEN; Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Bioproduction Research Institute; National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST); Tsukuba, Japan. (3)Graduate School of Agriculture;
Tamagawa University; Tokyo, Japan. (4)Gene Research Center; University of
Tsukuba; Tsukuba, Japan.

The capacity to promote cell dedifferentiation is widespread among plant species.
We have recently reported that an AP2/ERF transcription factor WOUND INDUCED
DEDIFFERENTIATION 1 (WIND1) and its paralogues, WIND2-4, promote cell
dedifferentiation in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Phylogenetic analyses
suggest that AtWIND1 orthologs are found in land plants and that the shared
peptide motifs between Arabidopsis paralogues are conserved in putative orthologs
in dicotyledonous and monocotyledonous plants. In this study we show that AtWIND1
chemically induced rapeseed and tomato, as well as AtWIND1 constitutively
expressed tobacco, promote callus formation on phytohormone-free medium. Our
results suggest that the WIND1-mediated signaling cascade to promote cell
dedifferentiation might be conserved in at least several species of Brassicaceae 
and Solanaceae.

PMCID: PMC4091253
PMID: 24389814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Plant Sci. 2014 Feb;215-216:59-68. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2013.10.013. Epub 2013
Nov 1.

Fruit specific variability in capsaicinoid accumulation and transcription of
structural and regulatory genes in Capsicum fruit.

Keyhaninejad N(1), Curry J(1), Romero J(1), O'Connell MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, New Mexico State University,
Las Cruces, NM 88003, USA. (2)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, New
Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003, USA. Electronic address:
moconnel@nmsu.edu.

Accumulation of capsaicinoids in the placental tissue of ripening chile (Capsicum
spp.) fruit follows the coordinated expression of multiple biosynthetic enzymes
producing the substrates for capsaicin synthase. Transcription factors are likely
agents to regulate expression of these biosynthetic genes. Placental RNAs from
habanero fruit (Capsicum chinense) were screened for expression of candidate
transcription factors; with two candidate genes identified, both in the ERF
family of transcription factors. Characterization of these transcription factors,
Erf and Jerf, in nine chile cultivars with distinct capsaicinoid contents
demonstrated a correlation of expression with pungency. Amino acid variants were 
observed in both ERF and JERF from different chile cultivars; none of these
changes involved the DNA binding domains. Little to no transcription of Erf was
detected in non-pungent Capsium annuum or C. chinense mutants. This correlation
was characterized at an individual fruit level in a set of jalapeño (C. annuum)
lines again with distinct and variable capsaicinoid contents. Both Erf and Jerf
are expressed early in fruit development, 16-20 days post-anthesis, at times
prior to the accumulation of capsaicinoids in the placental tissues. These data
support the hypothesis that these two members of the complex ERF family
participate in regulation of the pungency phenotype in chile.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3882758
PMID: 24388515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 30;8(12):e83444. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083444.
eCollection 2013.

Genome-wide identification, phylogeny, evolution and expression patterns of
AP2/ERF genes and cytokinin response factors in Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis.

Liu Z(1), Kong L(1), Zhang M(1), Lv Y(1), Liu Y(1), Zou M(1), Lu G(1), Cao J(1), 
Yu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell & Molecular Biology, Institute of Vegetable Science,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China ; Laboratory of
Horticultural Plant Growth & Quality Regulation, Ministry of Agriculture,
Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

The AP2/ERF transcription factor family is one of the largest families involved
in growth and development, hormone responses, and biotic or abiotic stress
responses in plants. In this study, 281 AP2/ERF transcription factor unigenes
were identified in Chinese cabbage. These superfamily members were classified
into three families (AP2, ERF, and RAV). The ERF family was subdivided into the
DREB subfamily and the ERF subfamily with 13 groups (I- XI) based on sequence
similarity. Duplication, evolution and divergence of the AP2/ERF genes in B. rapa
and Arabidopsis thaliana were investigated and estimated. Cytokinin response
factors (CRFs), as a subclade of the AP2/ERF family, are important transcription 
factors that define a branch point in the cytokinin two-component signal (TCS)
transduction pathway. Up to 21 CRFs with a conserved CRF domain were retrieved
and designated as BrCRFs. The amino acid sequences, conserved regions and motifs,
phylogenetic relationships, and promoter regions of the 21 BrCRFs were analyzed
in detail. The BrCRFs broadly expressed in various tissues and organs. The
transcripts of BrCRFs were regulated by factors such as drought, high salinity,
and exogenous 6-BA, NAA, and ABA, suggesting their involvement in abiotic stress 
conditions and regulatory mechanisms of plant hormone homeostasis. These results 
provide new insight into the divergence, variation, and evolution of AP2/ERF
genes at the genome-level in Chinese cabbage.

PMCID: PMC3875448
PMID: 24386201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 20;8(12):e83011. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083011.
eCollection 2013.

OsDREB2A, a rice transcription factor, significantly affects salt tolerance in
transgenic soybean.

Zhang XX(1), Tang YJ(1), Ma QB(1), Yang CY(1), Mu YH(1), Suo HC(1), Luo LH(2),
Nian H(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Guangdong Subcenter of National Center for Soybean Improvement, State Key 
Laboratory of Agricultural and Biological Resources Protection and Utilization in
Subtropics, College of Agriculture, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, China. (2)School of Life Science, Jiaying University, Meizhou, China.

The dehydration responsive element binding (DREB) transcription factors play an
important role in regulating stress-related genes. OsDREB2A, a member of the
DREBP subfamily of AP2/ERF transcription factors in rice (Oryza sativa), is
involved in the abiotic stress response. OsDREB2A expression is induced by
drought, low-temperature and salt stresses. Here, we report the ability of
OsDREB2A to regulate high-salt response in transgenic soybean. Overexpressing
OsDREB2A in soybeans enhanced salt tolerance by accumulating osmolytes, such as
soluble sugars and free proline, and improving the expression levels of some
stress-responsive transcription factors and key genes. The phenotypic
characterization of transgenic soybean were significantly better than those of
wild-type (WT). Electrophoresis mobility shift assay (EMSA) revealed that the
OsDREB2A can bind to the DRE core element in vitro. These results indicate that
OsDREB2A may participate in abiotic stress by directly binding with DRE element
to regulate the expression of downstream genes. Overexpression of OsDREB2A in
soybean might be used to improve tolerance to salt stress.

PMCID: PMC3869746
PMID: 24376625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Res Natl Inst Stand Technol. 2014 Dec 29;119:629-43. doi: 10.6028/jres.119.027.
eCollection 2014.

Measurement of Microsphere Concentration Using a Flow Cytometer with Volumetric
Sample Delivery.

Wang L(1), Zhang YZ(2), Choquette S(1), Gaigalas AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.
(2)National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899 ; Life 
Technologies Corp., Eugene, OR 97402.

Microsphere concentrations are needed to assign equivalent reference fluorophores
(ERF) units to microspheres used in quantitative flow cytometry. A flow cytometer
with a syringe based sample delivery system was evaluated for the measurement of 
the concentration of microspheres contained in a vial of lyophilized microspheres
certified by BD Biosciences to contain 50,600 microspheres. The concentration was
measured by counting the number of microspheres contained in the volume delivered
by the flow cytometer and dividing the number by the volume. The syringe volume
was calibrated both in the delivery and draw modes, and the results of the volume
calibration were summarized by two calibration lines. The delivered volume was
obtained by dividing the number of recorded events by the concentration of
microsphere count standard in the sample tube. The draw volume was obtained by
weighting the sample tube before and after the draw. The slope of the draw volume
calibration line was equal to 1.00 with an offset of -13 µL. The slope of the
delivered volume calibration was 0.93 suggesting a systematic volume-dependent
bias, which can be rationalized as an effect of suspension flow in capillaries.
When the sample volume was set to values between 150 µL and 300 µL, both
calibration curves gave similar results suggesting that a good estimate of the
true delivered volume can be obtained by subtracting 13 µL from the delivered
volume indicated by the syringe settings. The number of microspheres in the
volume was obtained by passing the suspension contained in the volume through a
laser beam and counting the number of events in which the signals from the
scattering and fluorescence detectors exceeded threshold values. Measurements
were performed with the lyophilized microspheres made by BD Biosciences and
fluorescein microspheres (expired reference material RM 8640) in three buffers: a
phosphate buffer saline (PBS), a buffer containing PBS and 0.05 % BSA (bovine
serum albumin) by mass, and a buffer containing PBS and 0.05 % TWEEN 20 detergent
solution (P1379 Sigma-Aldrich) by mass. It was found that the concentration of
count standard was significantly higher in the PBS+BSA buffer relative to the
value obtained in PBS buffer. Values for PBS+0.05 % TWEEN 20 buffer were
intermediate. The effect of buffer on the measured microsphere concentration was 
reported previously. The suggested procedure for the measurement of the
concentration of microspheres with the flow cytometer is to use PBS+0.05 % BSA
buffer, accumulate data for a delivered volume of 150 µL to 300 µL, and reduce
the indicated delivered volume by 13 µL when performing the concentration
calculation. The procedure was tested on a mixture of lyophilized microspheres
and RM 8640 microspheres. The resulting lyophilized microsphere concentration was
consistent with the certified value. The RM 8640 concentration determined using
the suggested procedure was consistent with the concentration value determined
using the relative method with the lyophilized microspheres as the reference. The
uncertainties, obtained from one standard deviation of repeated measurements,
were about 4 %.

PMCID: PMC4487291
PMID: 26601048  [PubMed]


249. Hortic Res. 2014 Oct 29;1:14053. doi: 10.1038/hortres.2014.53. eCollection 2014.

Transcriptional regulation of ethylene and jasmonate mediated defense response in
apple (Malus domestica) root during Pythium ultimum infection.

Shin S(1), Lv J(2), Fazio G(3), Mazzola M(1), Zhu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Tree
Fruit Research Laboratory , Wenatchee, WA 98801, USA. (2)College of Horticulture,
Northwest A&F University , Yangling, shanxi 712100, China. (3)United States
Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Plant Genetic Resources
Unit , Geneva, NY 14456, USA.

Apple replant disease (ARD) is a significant economic restraint to the successful
re-establishment of new apple orchards on sites previously planted to the same
crop. Pythium ultimum, an oomycete, is a significant component of the ARD
pathogen complex. Although ethylene (ET)- and jasmonic acid (JA)-mediated defense
responses are intensively studied in the foliar pathosystem, the transferability 
of this knowledge to the interaction between a perennial root system and
soilborne pathogens is unknown. The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis 
that the ET/JA-mediated defense response is conserved in roots of tree crops in
response to infection by P. ultimum. Apple genes with the annotated function of
ET/JA biosynthesis, MdERF (ethylene response factor) for signaling transduction
and a gene encoding a pathogenesis-related (PR) protein (ß-chitinase, the target 
of ERF) were identified from the apple genome sequences. The transcriptional
profiles of these genes during P. ultimum infection and after exogenous ET and/or
JA treatment were characterized using qRT-PCR. Several genes showed a 10- to
60-fold upregulation in apple root tissue 24-48 h post inoculation (hpi).
Exogenous ET and JA treatment exhibited either a positive or negative influence
on expression of ET or JA biosynthesis genes, depending upon gene isoforms and
the tissue types, while the expression of MdERF and the PR protein encoding gene 
was upregulated by both ET and JA treatment. Our data are consistent with the
hypothesis that ET/JA-mediated defense pathways are functional in the root system
of perennial tree species defending soilborne pathogens.

PMCID: PMC4596337
PMID: 26504552  [PubMed]


250. Gene. 2014 Mar 1;537(1):63-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.12.022. Epub 2013 Dec 22.

Characterization and expression analysis of WOX5 genes from wheat and its
relatives.

Zhao S(1), Jiang QT(1), Ma J(1), Zhang XW(1), Zhao QZ(1), Wang XY(1), Wang CS(1),
Cao X(1), Lu ZX(2), Zheng YL(3), Wei YM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Triticeae Research Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu,
Sichuan 611130, China. (2)Lethbridge Research Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada, Lethbridge T1J 4B1, Canada. (3)Key Laboratory of Southwestern Crop
Germplasm Utilization, Ministry of Agriculture, Sichuan Agricultural University, 
Ya'an, Sichuan 625014, China. (4)Triticeae Research Institute, Sichuan
Agricultural University, Chengdu, Sichuan 611130, China. Electronic address:
ymwei@sicau.edu.cn.

The WUSCHEL (WUS)-related homeobox (WOX) gene family plays an important role in
coordinating gene transcription in the early phases of embryogenesis. In this
study, we isolated and characterized WOX5 from common wheat and its relatives
Triticum monococcum, Triticum urartu, Aegilops speltoides, Aegilops searsii,
Aegilops sharonensis, Aegilops longissima, Aegilops bicornis, Aegilops tauschii, 
and Triticum turgidum. The size of the characterized WOX5 alleles ranged from
1029 to 1038 bp and encompassed the complete open reading frame (ORF) as well as 
5' upstream and 3' downstream sequences. Domain prediction analysis showed that
the putative primary structures of wheat WOX5 protein include the highly
conserved homeodomain besides the WUS-box domain and the EAR-like domain, which
is/are present in some members of the WOX protein family. The full-length ORF was
subcloned into a prokaryotic expression vector pET30a, and an approximate 26-kDa 
protein was successfully expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) cells with IPTG
induction. The WOX5 genes from wheat-related species exhibit a similar structure 
to and high sequence similarity with WOX5 genes from common wheat. The degree of 
divergence and phylogenetic tree analysis among WOX5 alleles suggested the
existence of three homoeologous copies in the A, B, or D genome of common wheat. 
Quantitative PCR results showed that TaWOX5 was primarily expressed in the root
and calli induced by auxin and cytokinin, indicating that TaWOX5 may play a role 
related to root formation or development and is associated with hormone
regulation in somatic embryogenesis.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24368329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Feb;41(2):599-611. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2897-4. Epub 2013
Dec 17.

Pathogenesis related-10 proteins are small, structurally similar but with diverse
role in stress signaling.

Agarwal P(1), Agarwal PK.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Wasteland Research, CSIR-Central Salt & Marine Chemicals
Research Institute, Gijubhai Badheka Marg, Bhavnagar, 364 002, Gujarat, India,
Parinitaa@csmcri.org.

Pathogenesis related-10 proteins are small proteins with cytosolic localization, 
conserved three dimensional structures and single intron at 185 bp position.
These proteins have a broad spectrum of roles significantly in biotic and abiotic
stresses. The RNase activity, ligand binding activity, posttranslational
modification (phosphorylation) and phytohormone signaling provide some
information into the mechanism of the regulation of PR-10 proteins, however the
presence of isoforms makes it difficult to decipher its exact mode of function.
The involvement of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation events in its activation is 
interesting and provides unique and unbiased insights into the complexity of its 
regulation. Studies on upstream region of different PR-10 genes indicate the
presence of cis-acting elements for WRKY, RAVI, bZ1P, ERF, SEBF and Pti4
transcription factors indicating their role in regulating PR-10 promoter. In this
review, we discuss in detail the structure and mechanism of regulation of PR-10
proteins.

PMID: 24343423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Gene. 2014 Feb 15;536(1):123-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.060. Epub 2013 Dec
12.

Isolation and characterization of a buffalograss (Buchloe dactyloides)
dehydration responsive element binding transcription factor, BdDREB2.

Zhang P(1), Yang P(2), Zhang Z(3), Han B(4), Wang W(5), Wang Y(6), Cao Y(7), Hu
T(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Grassland Science, College of Animal Science and Technology,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China. Electronic address:
zhangpgrass@126.com. (2)Department of Grassland Science, College of Animal
Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
China. Electronic address: yangpeizhi@126.com. (3)Department of Grassland
Science, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University,
Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China. Electronic address: zhangzq19890102@126.com.
(4)Department of Grassland Science, College of Animal Science and Technology,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China. Electronic address:
hanbo1983@126.com. (5)Department of Grassland Science, College of Animal Science 
and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.
Electronic address: wangweidong5153@126.com. (6)Department of Grassland Science, 
College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling,
Shaanxi 712100, China. Electronic address: wyf806346256@163.com. (7)Department of
Grassland Science, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China. Electronic address:
970539096@qq.com. (8)Department of Grassland Science, College of Animal Science
and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.
Electronic address: hutianming@126.com.

Dehydration responsive element binding (DREB) transcription factors play an
important role in the regulation of stress-related genes. These factors
contribute to resistance to different abiotic stresses. In the present study, a
novel DREB transcription factor, BdDREB2, isolated from Buchloe dactyloides, was 
cloned and characterized. The BdDREB2 protein was estimated to have a molecular
weight of 28.36kDa, a pI of 5.53 and a typical AP2/ERF domain. The expression of 
BdDREB2 was involved in responses to drought and salt stresses. Overexpression of
BdDREB2 in tobacco showed higher relative water and proline content, and was
associated with lower MDA content under drought stress, suggesting that the
transgenic tobacco may tolerate drought stress better. Results demonstrate that
BdDREB2 may play an important role in the regulation of abiotic stress responses,
and mediate many physiological pathways that enhance stress tolerance in plants.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24333268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Gene. 2014 Feb 10;535(2):140-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.047. Epub 2013 Dec 3.

Functional analysis of BpDREB2 gene involved in salt and drought response from a 
woody plant Broussonetia papyrifera.

Sun J(1), Peng X(2), Fan W(2), Tang M(2), Liu J(2), Shen S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, PR China; Ministry of Agriculture Key Laboratory of Crop
Nutrition and Fertilization, Institute of Agricultural Resources and Regional
Planning, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing,100081, PR China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, PR China. (3)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of
Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, PR China. Electronic address:
shshen@ibcas.ac.cn.

The dehydration-responsive element binding proteins (DREBs) are important
transcription factors in the regulation of plant responses to abiotic stresses.
In this study, BpDREB2, an AP2/DREB-type transcription factor gene, was cloned
from a woody plant, Broussonetia papyrifera by RACE-PCR. Sequence analyses
revealed that BpDREB2 protein has three characteristic domains, including an
AP2/EREBP, a nuclear localization signal and an acidic activation domain. Yeast
one-hybrid assays showed that BpDREB2 protein specifically binds to the DRE
sequence and activates the expression of reporter genes in yeast. These results
suggested that BpDREB2 protein could function as a transcription factor of DREB
family. The expression of BpDREB2 gene was remarkably induced by dehydration and 
high-salt treatments, but no significant change was observed under ABA or
low-temperature conditions. Importantly, transgenic expression of BpDREB2 gene in
Arabidopsis significantly enhanced its tolerance to salt and freezing without
causing growth retardation. Taken together, these results suggested that BpDREB2 
is a novel member of the AP2/EREBP trans-acting factor family which could enhance
salt stress tolerance of plants and has the potential application in the
improvement of crops and economical tree species.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24315817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. BMC Genomics. 2013 Dec 5;14:851. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-851.

Analysis of banana transcriptome and global gene expression profiles in banana
roots in response to infection by race 1 and tropical race 4 of Fusarium
oxysporum f. sp. cubense.

Li C, Shao J, Wang Y, Li W, Guo D, Yan B, Xia Y(1), Peng M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Tropical Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of
Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Haikou, China. yxia@hkbu.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND: Cavendish, the most widely grown banana cultivar, is relatively
resistant to Race 1 of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cubense (Foc1) which caused
widespread Panama disease during the first half of the 20th century but is
susceptible to Tropical Race 4 of Foc (Foc TR4) which is threatening world banana
production. The genome of the diploid species Musa acuminata which is the
ancestor of a majority of triploid banana cultivars has recently been sequenced. 
Availability of banana transcriptomes will be highly useful for improving banana 
genome annotation and for biological research. The knowledge of global gene
expression patterns influenced by infection of different Foc races will help to
understand the host responses to the infection.
RESULTS: RNA samples from different organs of the Cavendish cultivar were pooled 
for deep sequencing using the Illumina technology. Analysis of the banana
transcriptome led to identification of over 842 genes that were not annotated by 
the Musa genome project. A large number of simple nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
and short insertions and deletion (indels) were identified from the transcriptome
data. GFP-expressing Foc1 and Foc TR4 were used to monitor the infection process.
Both Foc1 and Foc TR4 were found to be able to invade banana roots and spread to 
root vascular tissues in the first two days following inoculation. Digital gene
expression (DGE) profiling analysis reveal that the infection by Foc1 and Foc TR4
caused very similar changes in the global gene expression profiles in the banana 
roots during the first two days of infection. The Foc infection led to induction 
of many well-known defense-related genes. Two genes encoding the ethylene
biosynthetic enzyme ACC oxidase and several ethylene-responsive transcription
factors (ERF) were among the strongly induced genes by both Foc1 and Foc TR4.
CONCLUSIONS: Both Foc1 and Foc TR4 are able to spread into the vascular system of
banana roots during the early infection process and their infection led to
similar gene expression profiles in banana roots. The transcriptome profiling
analysis indicates that the ethylene synthetic and signalling pathways were
activated in response to the Foc infection.

PMCID: PMC4046742
PMID: 24304681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Front Neurosci. 2013 Nov 18;7:214. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2013.00214. eCollection
2013.

Neural dynamics of reward probability coding: a Magnetoencephalographic study in 
humans.

Thomas J(1), Vanni-Mercier G, Dreher JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Center, Reward and Decision-Making Team, CNRS, UMR
5229, Université de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 Lyon, France.

Prediction of future rewards and discrepancy between actual and expected outcomes
(prediction error) are crucial signals for adaptive behavior. In humans, a number
of fMRI studies demonstrated that reward probability modulates these two signals 
in a large brain network. Yet, the spatio-temporal dynamics underlying the neural
coding of reward probability remains unknown. Here, using magnetoencephalography,
we investigated the neural dynamics of prediction and reward prediction error
computations while subjects learned to associate cues of slot machines with
monetary rewards with different probabilities. We showed that event-related
magnetic fields (ERFs) arising from the visual cortex coded the expected reward
value 155 ms after the cue, demonstrating that reward value signals emerge early 
in the visual stream. Moreover, a prediction error was reflected in ERF peaking
300 ms after the rewarded outcome and showing decreasing amplitude with higher
reward probability. This prediction error signal was generated in a network
including the anterior and posterior cingulate cortex. These findings pinpoint
the spatio-temporal characteristics underlying reward probability coding.
Together, our results provide insights into the neural dynamics underlying the
ability to learn probabilistic stimuli-reward contingencies.

PMCID: PMC3831091
PMID: 24302894  [PubMed]


256. Dev Reprod. 2013 Dec;17(4):389-97. doi: 10.12717/DR.2013.17.4.389.

Expression of Hr-Erf Gene during Ascidian Embryogenesis.

Kim JE(1), Lee WY(1), Kim GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Molecular Biotechnology, Gangneung-Wonju National
University, Gangneung 210-702, Republic of Korea.

FGF9/16/20 signaling pathway specify the developmental fates of notochord,
mesenchyme, and neural cells in ascidian embryos. Although a conserved
Ras/MEK/Erk/Ets pathway is known to be involved in this signaling, the detailed
mechanisms of regulation of FGF signaling pathway have remained largely elusive. 
In this study, we have isolated Hr-Erf, an ascidian orthologue of vertebrate Erf,
to elucidate interactions of transcription factors involved in FGF signaling of
the ascidian embryo. The Hr-Erf cDNA encompassed 3110 nucleotides including
sequence encoded a predicted polypeptide of 760 amino acids. The polypeptide had 
the Ets DNA-binding domain in its N-terminal region. In adult animals, Hr-Erf
mRNA was predominantly detected in muscle, and at lower levels in ganglion,
gills, gonad, hepatopancreas, and stomach by quantitative real-time PCR (QPCR)
method. During embryogenesis, Hr-Erf mRNA was detected from eggs to early
developmental stage embryos, whereas the transcript levels were decreased after
neurula stage. Similar to the QPCR results, maternal transcripts of Hr-Erf was
detected in the fertilized eggs by whole-mount in situ hybridization. Maternal
mRNA of Hr-Erf was gradually lost from the neurula stage. Zygotic expression of
Hr-Erf started in most blastomeres at the 8-cell stage. At gastrula stage, Hr-Erf
was specifically expressed in the precursor cells of brain and mesenchyme. When
MEK inhibitor was treated, embryos resulted in loss of Hr-Erf expression in
mesenchyme cells, and in excess of Hr-Erf in a-line neural cells. These results
suggest that zygotic Hr-Erf products are involved in specification of mesenchyme 
and neural cells.

PMCID: PMC4382941
PMID: 25949155  [PubMed]


257. Plant Cell Physiol. 2014 Feb;55(2):436-44. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pct179. Epub 2013 Nov
28.

Molecular evolution of N-methylputrescine oxidase in tobacco.

Naconsie M(1), Kato K, Shoji T, Hashimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara, 630-0192 Japan.

Biosynthesis of nicotine in tobacco requires N-methylputrescine oxidase (MPO),
which belongs to the copper-containing amine oxidase superfamily. Previous
studies identified tobacco MPO1 and its close homolog NtDAO1 (formerly called
MPO2), of which MPO1 has been shown preferentially to oxidize N-methylated
amines. We show here that NtDAO1, as well as a homologous Arabidopsis diamine
oxidase (DAO), accept non-N-methylated amines more efficiently than their
corresponding N-methylated amines. MPO1 is coordinately regulated with other
nicotine biosynthesis genes with regard to COI1-MYC2-dependent jasmonate
induction and its dependence on nicotine-specific ERF transcription factors,
whereas NtDAO1 is constitutively expressed at low basal levels in tobacco plants.
Both MPO1 and NtDAO1 are targeted to peroxisomes by their C-terminal motifs, and 
the peroxisomal localization of MPO1 is required for it to function in nicotine
biosynthesis in jasmonate-elicited cultured tobacco cells. Restricted occurrence 
of the MPO subfamily in Nicotiana and Solanum indicates that, during the
formation of the Solanaceae, MPO has evolved from a DAO, which functions in
polyamine catabolism within peroxisomes, by optimizing substrate preference and
gene expression patterns to be suitable for alkaloid formation.

PMID: 24287136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Trends Plant Sci. 2014 Mar;19(3):146-57. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2013.10.010. Epub
2013 Nov 24.

AINTEGUMENTA-LIKE proteins: hubs in a plethora of networks.

Horstman A(1), Willemsen V(2), Boutilier K(1), Heidstra R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Plant Research International, Wageningen University and Research Centre,
Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands. (2)Plant Developmental
Biology, Wageningen University and Research Centre, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB
Wageningen, The Netherlands. (3)Plant Developmental Biology, Wageningen
University and Research Centre, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB Wageningen, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: renze.heidstra@wur.nl.

Members of the AINTEGUMENTA-LIKE (AIL) family of APETALA 2/ETHYLENE RESPONSE
FACTOR (AP2/ERF) domain transcription factors are expressed in all dividing
tissues in the plant, where they have central roles in developmental processes
such as embryogenesis, stem cell niche specification, meristem maintenance, organ
positioning, and growth. When overexpressed, AIL proteins induce adventitious
growth, including somatic embryogenesis and ectopic organ formation. The
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome contains eight AIL genes, including
AINTEGUMENTA, BABY BOOM, and the PLETHORA genes. Studies on these transcription
factors have revealed their intricate relationship with auxin as well as their
involvement in an increasing number of gene regulatory networks, in which
extensive crosstalk and feedback loops have a major role.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24280109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. BMC Genomics. 2013 Nov 25;14:827. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-827.

De novo characterization of the Anthurium transcriptome and analysis of its
digital gene expression under cold stress.

Tian DQ, Pan XY, Yu YM, Wang WY, Zhang F, Ge YY, Shen XL, Shen FQ, Liu XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Botany, Jiangsu Province & Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing
210014, China. liuxiaojingcau@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Anthurium andraeanum is one of the most popular tropical flowers. In 
temperate and cold zones, a much greater risk of cold stress occurs in the supply
of Anthurium plants. Unlike the freeze-tolerant model plants, Anthurium plants
are particularly sensitive to low temperatures. Improvement of chilling tolerance
in Anthurium may significantly increase its production and extend its shelf-life.
To date, no previous genomic information has been reported in Anthurium plants.
RESULTS: Using Illumina sequencing technology, we generated over two billion base
of high-quality sequence in Anthurium, and demonstrated de novo assembly and
annotation of genes without prior genome information. These reads were assembled 
into 44,382 unigenes (mean length = 560 bp). Based on similarity search with
known protein in the non-redundant (nr) protein database, 27396 unigenes (62%)
were functionally annotated with a cut-off E-value of 10-5. Further, DGE tags
were mapped to the assembled transcriptome for gene expression analysis under
cold stress. In total, 4363 differentially expressed genes were identified. Among
these genes, 292, 805 and 708 genes were up-regulated after 1-h, 5-h and 24-h
cold treatment, respectively. Then we mapped these cold-induced genes to the KEGG
database. Specific enrichment was observed in photosynthesis pathway, metabolic
pathways and oxidative phosphorylation pathway in 1-h cold-treated plants. After 
a 5-h cold treatment, the metabolic pathways and oxidative phosphorylation
pathway were significantly identified as the top two pathways. After 24-h cold
treatment, mRNA surveillance pathway, RNA transport pathway and plant-pathogen
interaction pathway were significantly enriched. Together, a total of 39
cold-inducible transcription factors were identified, including subsets of
AP2/ERF, Zinc figure, NAC, MYB and bZIP family members.
CONCLUSION: Our study is the first to provide the transcriptome sequence resource
for Anthurium plants, and demonstrate its digital gene expression profiling under
cold conditions using the assembled transcriptome data for reference. These data 
provides a valuable resource for genetic and genomic studies under abiotic
conditions for Anthurium plants.

PMCID: PMC4046746
PMID: 24267953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 12;8(11):e75857. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075857.
eCollection 2013.

Roles of JnRAP2.6-like from the transition zone of black walnut in hormone
signaling.

Huang Z(1), Zhao P, Medina J, Meilan R, Woeste K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, Hardwood Tree Improvement and
Regeneration Center (HTIRC), Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, United
States of America.

An EST sequence, designated JnRAP2-like, was isolated from tissue at the
heartwood/sapwood transition zone (TZ) in black walnut (Juglans nigra L). The
deduced amino acid sequence of JnRAP2-like protein consists of a single
AP2-containing domain with significant similarity to conserved AP2/ERF
DNA-binding domains in other species. Based on multiple sequence alignment,
JnRAP2-like appears to be an ortholog of RAP2.6L (At5g13330), which encodes an
ethylene response element binding protein in Arabidopsis thaliana. Real-time PCR 
revealed that the JnRAP2-like was expressed most abundantly in TZ of trees
harvested in fall when compared with other xylem tissues harvested in the fall or
summer. Independent transgenic lines over-expressing JnRAP2-like in Arabidopsis
developed dramatic ethylene-related phenotypes when treated with 50 µM methyl
jasmonate (MeJA). Taken together, these results indicated that JnRAP2-like may
participate in the integration of ethylene and jasmonate signals in the xylem and
other tissues. Given the role of ethylene in heartwood formation, it is possible 
JnRAP2-like expression in the transition zone is part of the signal transduction 
pathway leading to heartwood formation in black walnut.

PMCID: PMC3827044
PMID: 24265672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Exp Bot. 2013 Dec;64(17):5395-409. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ert369.

The peptide-encoding CEP1 gene modulates lateral root and nodule numbers in
Medicago truncatula.

Imin N(1), Mohd-Radzman NA, Ogilvie HA, Djordjevic MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plant Sciences, Research School of Biology, College of Medicine,
Biology and Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra ACT 0200,
Australia.

The role of MtCEP1, a member of the CEP (C-terminally encoded peptide) signaling 
peptide family, was examined in Medicago truncatula root development. MtCEP1 was 
expressed in root tips, vascular tissue, and young lateral organs, and was
up-regulated by low nitrogen levels and, independently, by elevated CO2.
Overexpressing MtCEP1 or applying MtCEP1 peptide to roots elicited developmental 
phenotypes: inhibition of lateral root formation, enhancement of nodulation, and 
the induction of periodic circumferential root swellings, which arose from
cortical, epidermal, and pericycle cell divisions and featured an additional
cortical cell layer. MtCEP peptide addition to other legume species induced
similar phenotypes. The enhancement of nodulation by MtCEP1 is partially tolerant
to high nitrate, which normally strongly suppresses nodulation. These nodules
develop faster, are larger, and fix more nitrogen in the absence and presence of 
inhibiting nitrate levels. At 25mM nitrate, nodules formed on pre-existing
swelling sites induced by MtCEP1 overexpression. RNA interference-mediated
silencing of several MtCEP genes revealed a negative correlation between
transcript levels of MtCEP1 and MtCEP2 with the number of lateral roots. MtCEP1
peptide-dependent phenotypes were abolished or attenuated by altering or deleting
key residues in its 15 amino acid domain. RNA-Seq analysis revealed that 89 and
116 genes were significantly up- and down-regulated, respectively, by MtCEP1
overexpression, including transcription factors WRKY, bZIP, ERF, and MYB,
homologues of LOB29, SUPERROOT2, and BABY BOOM. Taken together, the data suggest 
that the MtCEP1 peptide modulates lateral root and nodule development in M.
truncatula.

PMID: 24259455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Poult Sci. 2013 Dec;92(12):3149-57. doi: 10.3382/ps.2013-03406.

Acquisition of immunity to the protozoan parasite Eimeria adenoeides in turkey
poults and cellular responses to infection.

Gadde U(1), Rathinam T, Erf GF, Chapman HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701.

Newly hatched turkey poults were infected with 10(2) oocysts of Eimeria
adenoeides and subsequently reinfected with 10(3) and 10(4) oocysts at 6 and 12 d
of age, respectively. Three peaks in oocyst production were observed in the feces
of poults following this series of infections. A second group of poults given the
same dosing regimen was challenged with 5 × 10(4) oocysts/poult at different
times to evaluate the acquisition of immunity. Judging by weight gain and
mortality, no protection had been acquired at 6 d of age, but partial protection 
was observed by 12 and 18 d of age. A third group of poults were also infected
with 10(2) oocysts and subsequently reinfected with 10(3) and 10(4) oocysts at 6 
and 12 d of age to evaluate cellular immune responses to infection. Sections of
ceca from infected poults showed a significantly higher leukocyte infiltration on
d 6, 10, 12, 16, and 18 after infection than uninfected controls. The percent
area occupied by CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes in the ceca, as assessed by
immunohistochemistry, was significantly elevated in infected poults on d 12, 16, 
and 18. The relative expression of chemokine CXCLi2, and cytokines IL1ß, IFN<U+03B3>,
IL10, IL13, IL2, IL12b, and IL18 was measured by real-time reverse-transcription 
PCR. The expression of CXCLi2 and IL10 was found to be elevated on d 12, and IFN<U+03B3>
on d 10, 12, and 16. Expression of IL13 and IL18 was increased on d 10 and IL2 on
d 10 and 16, and that of IL12b on d 16 in infected poults. Increase in the
infiltration of leukocytes, percent area occupied by CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes,
and changes in the relative expression of cytokines in the ceca characterize the 
dynamics of immune responses in turkey poults infected with E. adenoeides early
in life.

PMID: 24235224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. BMC Genomics. 2013 Nov 13;14:785. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-785.

Genome-wide survey and expression profiles of the AP2/ERF family in castor bean
(Ricinus communis L.).

Xu W, Li F, Ling L, Liu A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 132 Lanhei Road,
Kunming 650204, China. liuaizhong@mail.kib.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: The AP2/ERF transcription factor, one of the largest gene families in
plants, plays a crucial role in the regulation of growth and development,
metabolism, and responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. Castor bean (Ricinus
communis L., Euphobiaceae) is one of most important non-edible oilseed crops and 
its seed oil is broadly used for industrial applications. The available genome
provides a great chance to identify and characterize the global information on
AP2/ERF transcription factors in castor bean, which might provide insights in
understanding the molecular basis of the AP2/ERF family in castor bean.
RESULTS: A total of 114 AP2/ERF transcription factors were identified based on
the genome in castor bean. According to the number of the AP2/ERF domain, the
conserved amino acid residues within AP2/ERF domain, the conserved motifs and
gene organization in structure, and phylogenetical analysis, the identified 114
AP2/ERF transcription factors were characterized. Global expression profiles
among different tissues using high-throughput sequencing of digital gene
expression profiles (DGEs) displayed diverse expression patterns that may provide
basic information in understanding the function of the AP2/ERF gene family in
castor bean.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study is the first report on identification and
characterization of the AP2/ERF transcription factors based on the genome of
castor bean in the family Euphobiaceae. Results obtained from this study provide 
valuable information in understanding the molecular basis of the AP2/ERF family
in castor bean.

PMCID: PMC4046667
PMID: 24225250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 5;8(11):e80218. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080218. eCollection
2013.

Transcriptome analysis reveals crosstalk of responsive genes to multiple abiotic 
stresses in cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.).

Zhu YN(1), Shi DQ, Ruan MB, Zhang LL, Meng ZH, Liu J, Yang WC.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Abiotic stress is a major environmental factor that limits cotton growth and
yield, moreover, this problem has become more and more serious recently, as
multiple stresses often occur simultaneously due to the global climate change and
environmental pollution. In this study, we sought to identify genes involved in
diverse stresses including abscisic acid (ABA), cold, drought, salinity and
alkalinity by comparative microarray analysis. Our result showed that 5790, 3067,
5608, 778 and 6148 transcripts, were differentially expressed in cotton seedlings
under treatment of ABA (1 µM ABA), cold (4°C), drought (200 mM mannitol),
salinity (200 mM NaCl) and alkalinity (pH=11) respectively. Among the induced or 
suppressed genes, 126 transcripts were shared by all of the five kinds of abiotic
stresses, with 64 up-regulated and 62 down-regulated. These common members are
grouped as stress signal transduction, transcription factors (TFs), stress
response/defense proteins, metabolism, transport facilitation, as well as cell
wall/structure, according to the function annotation. We also noticed that large 
proportion of significant differentially expressed genes specifically regulated
in response to different stress. Nine of the common transcripts of multiple
stresses were selected for further validation with quantitative real time RT-PCR 
(qRT-PCR). Furthermore, several well characterized TF families, for example,
WRKY, MYB, NAC, AP2/ERF and zinc finger were shown to be involved in different
stresses. As an original report using comparative microarray to analyze
transcriptome of cotton under five abiotic stresses, valuable information about
functional genes and related pathways of anti-stress, and/or stress tolerance in 
cotton seedlings was unveiled in our result. Besides this, some important common 
factors were focused for detailed identification and characterization. According 
to our analysis, it suggested that there was crosstalk of responsive genes or
pathways to multiple abiotic or even biotic stresses, in cotton. These candidate 
genes will be worthy of functional study under diverse stresses.

PMCID: PMC3818253
PMID: 24224045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Exp Bot. 2014 Jan;65(1):61-74. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ert344. Epub 2013 Nov 9.

Comprehensive insights on how 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid retards senescence
in post-harvest citrus fruits using transcriptomic and proteomic approaches.

Ma Q(1), Ding Y, Chang J, Sun X, Zhang L, Wei Q, Cheng Y, Chen L, Xu J, Deng X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology of Ministry of Education,
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, PR China.

Auxin-like 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), a high-efficiency
anti-stalling agent for the post-harvest fresh fruit industry, has had its use
restricted due to environmental concerns. However, no other substitutes for 2,4-D
are available to the post-harvest industry. Insights into the molecular mechanism
underlying the effects of 2,4-D on fruit quality preservation will provide a
theoretical basis for exploring new safe and effective anti-stalling agents. This
study comprehensively analysed changes in the peel of Olinda Valencia orange
[Citrus sinensis (L.) Osbeck] induced by 500 ppm 2,4-D using 'omic'-driven
approaches. Transcriptional profiling revealed that transcriptional factor
(mainly AP2/ERF, WRKY, and NAC family members), transport, and hormone metabolism
genes were over-represented and up-regulated within 24h post-treatment (HPT).
Stress defence genes were up-regulated, while cell wall metabolism genes were
down-regulated after 48 HPT. However, secondary metabolism genes, especially
phenylpropanoid and lignin biosynthesis-related genes, were over-represented at
all the time points. Comparative proteomic analysis indicated that the expression
of proteins implicated in stress responses (25%), hormone metabolism, and signal 
transduction (12%) significantly accumulated at the post-transcriptional level.
Hormone levels detected by high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) showed that abscisic acid, salicylic acid, and 2,4-D
significantly increased, while ethylene production (detected by gas
chromatography) decreased after 2,4-D treatment. In addition, lignin and water
content in the fruit peel also increased and the epicuticle wax ultrastructure
was modified. In conclusion, 2,4-D retarded fruit senescence by altering the
levels of many endogenous hormones and by improving stress defence capabilities
by up-regulating defence-related genes and proteins.

PMCID: PMC3883282
PMID: 24215076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 21;8(10):e77454. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077454.
eCollection 2013.

The AP2-like gene OitaAP2 is alternatively spliced and differentially expressed
in inflorescence and vegetative tissues of the orchid Orchis italica.

Salemme M(1), Sica M, Iazzetti G, Gaudio L, Aceto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Naples Federico II, Napoli, Italy.

The AP2/ERF proteins are plant-specific transcription factors involved in
multiple regulatory pathways, from plant organ development to response to various
environmental stresses. One of the mechanisms that regulates the AP2-like genes
involves the microRNA miR172, which controls their activity at the
post-transcriptional level. Extensive studies on AP2-like genes are available in 
many different species; however, in orchids, one of the largest plant families,
studies are restricted to a few species, all belonging to the Epidendroideae
subfamily. In the present study, we report the isolation of an AP2-like gene in
the Mediterranean orchid Orchis italica (Orchidoideae). The OitaAP2 locus
includes 10 exons and 9 introns, and its transcript is alternatively spliced,
resulting in the long OitaAP2 and the short OitaAP2_ISO isoforms, with the latter
skipping exon 9. Both isoforms contain the conserved target site for miR172,
whose action is demonstrated by the presence of cleaved OitaAP2 mRNA. The OitaAP2
and OitaAP2_ISO mRNAs are present in the tepals and lip before and after anthesis
at different expression levels. In addition, the OitaAP2_ISO isoform is expressed
in the ovary before pollination and in the root and stem. The isoform-specific
expression pattern suggests a functional differentiation of the OitaAP2
alternatively spliced transcripts. The expression profile of miR172 is
complementary to that of the OitaAP2 isoforms in inflorescence tissues before
anthesis, whereas after anthesis and in ovary tissue before and after
pollination, this relationship disappears, suggesting the existence of OitaAP2
inhibitory mechanisms in these tissues that differ from that involving miR172.

PMCID: PMC3804621
PMID: 24204832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014 Jan;97(1):290-5. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2013.08.060.
Epub 2013 Nov 5.

Esophageal bypass operation prior to definitive chemoradiotherapy in advanced
esophageal cancer with tracheobronchial invasion.

Hihara J(1), Hamai Y(2), Emi M(2), Aoki Y(2), Taomoto J(2), Miyata Y(2), Okada
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and 
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. Electronic address:
hihara@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Surgical Oncology, Research Institute 
for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In T4 esophageal cancer with tracheobronchial invasion, an
esophagorespiratory fistula (ERF) often occurs during or after chemoradiotherapy.
We have performed esophageal bypass operations prior to definitive
chemoradiotherapy for these patients to increase the chemoradiotherapy completion
rate by minimizing the potential effect of an ERF. The aim of this study was to
examine the clinical outcome of esophageal bypass surgery prior to
chemoradiotherapy.
METHODS: Between 1997 and 2010, 17 patients underwent esophageal bypass surgery
followed by definitive chemoradiotherapy for esophageal cancer with
tracheobronchial invasion (bypass group). Ten patients in the same circumstances 
were treated with chemoradiotherapy alone (control group). Overall survival, the 
clinical effect of chemoradiotherapy, the ERF incidence rate, and the safety of
esophageal bypass surgery were assessed.
RESULTS: The overall response rate to chemoradiotherapy was 64.7% in the bypass
group and 90.0% in the control group. Except for 2 patients with ERF at initial
diagnosis, 4 (26.7%) of the 15 patients developed ERF in the bypass group, and 3 
(30.0%) of the 10 patients developed ERF in the control group during or after
chemoradiotherapy. The 2-year and 3-year overall survival rates were 17.6% and
17.6% in the bypass group and 20.0% and 0% in the control group, respectively (p 
= 0.924); long-term survival of more than 3 years was seen only in the bypass
group.
CONCLUSIONS: Esophageal bypass surgery prior to definitive chemoradiotherapy
could be performed safely, and this strategy contributed to long-term survival in
the patients who achieved a good response to chemoradiotherapy but developed an
ERF.

Copyright © 2014 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 24200399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 23;8(10):e78635. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078635.
eCollection 2013.

Overexpression of a cotton gene that encodes a putative transcription factor of
AP2/EREBP family in Arabidopsis affects growth and development of transgenic
plants.

Zhou Y(1), Xia H, Li XJ, Hu R, Chen Y, Li XB.

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrative Biology, College of
Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China.

In the study, a gene encoding a putative ethylene response factor of AP2/EREBP
family was isolated from cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) and designated as GhERF12.
Sequence alignment showed that GhERF12 protein contains a central AP2/ERF domain 
(58 amino acids) with two functional conserved amino acid residues (ala14 and
asp19). Transactivation assay indicated that GhERF12 displayed strong
transcription activation activity in yeast cells, suggesting that this protein
may be a transcriptional activator in cotton. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed
that GhERF12 expression in cotton was induced by ACC and IAA. Overexpression of
GhERF12 in Arabidopsis affected seedling growth and development. The GhERF12
transgenic plants grew slowly, and displayed a dwarf phenotype. The mean bolting 
time of the transgenic plants was delayed for about 10 days, compared with that
of wild type. Further study revealed that some ethylene-related and auxin-related
genes were dramatically up-regulated in the transgenic plants, compared with
those of wild type. Collectively, we speculated that GhERF12, as a transcription 
factor, may be involved in regulation of plant growth and development by
activating the constitutive ethylene response likely related to auxin
biosynthesis and/or signaling.

PMCID: PMC3806861
PMID: 24194949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jan;41(1):45-56. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2836-4. Epub 2013 Nov
2.

Analysis of Brassica napus ESTs: gene discovery and expression patterns of
AP2/ERF-family transcription factors.

Zhuang J(1), Zhu B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, College of
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, 1 Weigang, Nanjing, 210095, China,
zhuangjing@njau.edu.cn.

Starting from expressed sequence tag sequences and using the conserved amino acid
sequence of the Arabidopsis thaliana AP2/ERF domain as a probe, we used in silico
cloning to identify 87 genes that encode putative AP2/ERF transcription factors
(TFs) from the Brassica napus. Almost all of the putative AP2/ERF factors from B.
napus were similar to genes previously defined as AP2/ERF genes from A. thaliana.
Based on the number of AP2-domains and the function of the genes, the AP2/ERF TFs
from B. napus were classified into four subfamilies, named the AP2, DREB, ERF,
and RAV subfamilies. We then predicted and analyzed cDNA sequences and amino acid
sequences, amino acid compositions, physical and chemical characteristics,
phylogenetic trees, conserved domain sequences, functional domains, molecular
models, and folding states of the proteins they are predicted to encode.
Expression analysis showed that four factors, which belonged to the ERF and DREB 
subfamilies, were induced by abiotic stresses, as well as by hormone treatment.
This suggests that those AP2/ERF factors may be involved in signaling pathways
responsive to abiotic and biotic stresses. The results from this study, reported 
herein, form a basis for future functional analyses of B. napus TFs that belong
to the AP2/ERF family.

PMID: 24186851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Neuroimage Clin. 2013 May 15;2:695-702. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2013.05.002.
eCollection 2013.

Frontal and superior temporal auditory processing abnormalities in schizophrenia.

Chen YH(1), Edgar JC, Huang M, Hunter MA, Epstein E, Howell B, Lu BY, Bustillo J,
Miller GA, Cañive JM.

Author information: 
(1)University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry,
Albuquerque, NM, USA ; New Mexico Raymond G. Murphy VA Healthcare System,
Psychiatry Research, Albuquerque, NM, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although magnetoencephalography (MEG) studies show superior temporal 
gyrus (STG) auditory processing abnormalities in schizophrenia at 50 and 100 ms, 
EEG and corticography studies suggest involvement of additional brain areas
(e.g., frontal areas) during this interval. Study goals were to identify 30 to
130 ms auditory encoding processes in schizophrenia (SZ) and healthy controls
(HC) and group differences throughout the cortex.
METHODS: The standard paired-click task was administered to 19 SZ and 21 HC
subjects during MEG recording. Vector-based Spatial-temporal Analysis using
L1-minimum-norm (VESTAL) provided 4D maps of activity from 30 to 130 ms.
Within-group t-tests compared post-stimulus 50 ms and 100 ms activity to
baseline. Between-group t-tests examined 50 and 100 ms group differences.
RESULTS: Bilateral 50 and 100 ms STG activity was observed in both groups. HC had
stronger bilateral 50 and 100 ms STG activity than SZ. In addition to the STG
group difference, non-STG activity was also observed in both groups. For example,
whereas HC had stronger left and right inferior frontal gyrus activity than SZ,
SZ had stronger right superior frontal gyrus and left supramarginal gyrus
activity than HC.
CONCLUSIONS: Less STG activity was observed in SZ than HC, indicating encoding
problems in SZ. Yet auditory encoding abnormalities are not specific to STG, as
group differences were observed in frontal and SMG areas. Thus, present findings 
indicate that individuals with SZ show abnormalities in multiple nodes of a
concurrently activated auditory network.

PMCID: PMC3777790
PMID: 24179821  [PubMed]


271. Mol Plant. 2014 Apr;7(4):601-15. doi: 10.1093/mp/sst152. Epub 2013 Oct 31.

TRANSLUCENT GREEN, an ERF family transcription factor, controls water balance in 
Arabidopsis by activating the expression of aquaporin genes.

Zhu D(1), Wu Z, Cao G, Li J, Wei J, Tsuge T, Gu H, Aoyama T, Qu LJ.

Author information: 
(1)a State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, Peking-Tsinghua
Center for Life Sciences, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing
100871, China.

Water is the most abundant molecule in almost all living organisms. Aquaporins
are channel proteins that play critical roles in controlling the water content of
cells. Here, we report the identification of an AP2/EREBP family transcription
factor in Arabidopsis thaliana, TRANSLUCENT GREEN (TG), whose overexpression in
transgenic plants gave enhanced drought tolerance and vitrified leaves. TG
protein is localized in the nucleus, binds DRE and GCC elements in vitro, and
acts as a transcriptional activator in yeast cells. Microarray analysis revealed 
a total of 330 genes regulated by TG, among which five genes encode aquaporins. A
transient expression assay showed that TG directly binds to the promoters of
three aquaporin genes, such as AtTIP1;1, AtTIP2;3, and AtPIP2;2, indicating that 
TG directly regulates the expression of these genes. Moreover, overexpression of 
AtTIP1;1 resulted in vitrified phenotypes in transgenic Arabidopsis plants,
similar to those observed in TG overexpression lines. Water injection into
wild-type leaves recapitulated the vitrified leaf phenotypes, which was reversed 
by cutting off the water supply from vascular bundles. Taken together, our data
support that TG controls water balance in Arabidopsis through directly activating
the expression of aquaporin genes.

PMID: 24177687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Int J Oncol. 2014 Jan;44(1):222-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2149. Epub 2013 Oct 25.

Proteasome inhibitors and knockdown of SMG1 cause accumulation of Upf1 and Upf2
in human cells.

Zhao X(1), Nogawa A, Matsunaga T, Takegami T, Nakagawa H, Ishigaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, P.R. China.

The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is one of the most promising anticancer
drug targets of the century. However, the involved molecular mechanisms are still
unclear. The nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway is a highly conserved
pathway which degrades nonsense mutation-containing mRNA selectively and
efficiently. In this pathway, the SMG1-Upf1-eRF (SURF) complex binds to Upf2 on
the exon junction complex and finally causes degradation of nonsense-containing
mRNA. To reveal the relationship between the UPS and NMD pathways, we analyzed
the effects of proteasome inhibitors on Upf1 and Upf2. The data showed that
treatment with proteasome inhibitors caused the accumulation of the Upf1 and Upf2
proteins in A549 cells. In addition, we found that knockdown of SMG1 also caused 
the upregulation of Upf1 and Upf2 proteins, which was confirmed by different
target sequences of siRNA. SMG1 and UPS appear to participate in different
pathways of the degradation of Upf1 and Upf2, since simultaneous treatment with
both of them caused additive effects. This study demonstrated the quantitative
regulation of Upf1 and Upf2 proteins by UPS and SMG1.

PMID: 24173962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Transplant. 2013;2013:475964. doi: 10.1155/2013/475964. Epub 2013 Sep 12.

Renal transplantation from elderly living donors.

Akoh JA(1), Mathuram Thiyagarajan U.

Author information: 
(1)South West Transplant Centre, Plymouth Hospitals NHS Trust, Derriford
Hospital, Plymouth PL6 8DH, UK.

Acceptance of elderly living kidney donors remains controversial due to the
higher incidence of comorbidity and greater risk of postoperative complications. 
This is a review of publications in the English language between 2000 and 2013
about renal transplantation from elderly living donors to determine trends and
effects of donation, and the outcomes of such transplantation. The last decade
witnessed a 50% increase in living kidney donor transplants, with a
disproportionate increase in donors >60 years. There is no accelerated loss of
kidney function following donation, and the incidence of established renal
failure (ERF) and hypertension among donors is similar to that of the general
population. The overall incidence of ERF in living donors is about 0.134 per 1000
years. Elderly donors require rigorous assessment and should have a predicted
glomerular filtration rate of at least 37.5<U+2009>mL/min/1.73<U+2009>m(2) at the age of 80.
Though elderly donors had lower glomerular filtration rate before donation,
proportionate decline after donation was similar in both young and elderly
groups. The risks of delayed graft function, acute rejection, and graft failure
in transplants from living donors >65 years are significantly higher than
transplants from younger donors. A multicentred, long-term, and prospective
database addressing the outcomes of kidneys from elderly living donors is
recommended.

PMCID: PMC3791791
PMID: 24163758  [PubMed]


274. Plant Sci. 2013 Dec;213:79-87. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2013.08.008. Epub 2013 Sep
1.

The Arabidopsis transcriptional repressor ERF9 participates in resistance against
necrotrophic fungi.

Maruyama Y(1), Yamoto N, Suzuki Y, Chiba Y, Yamazaki K, Sato T, Yamaguchi J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science and Graduate School of Life Science, Hokkaido University,
Kita-ku N10-W8, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan. Electronic address:
ymaruyama@mail.sci.hokudai.ac.jp.

Complex plant defenses that include the hypersensitive response (HR) are mediated
by plant hormones, such as salicylic acid (SA), jasmonic acid (JA) and ethylene. 
We previously isolated the Arabidopsis DEAR1 (DREB AND EAR MOTIF PROTEIN 1)
regulator and showed that its overexpression DEAR1 (DEAR1ox) resulted in a dwarf 
phenotype and lesion-like cell death, accompanied by elevated expression of PR
(PATHOGENESIS-RELATED) genes. Here, we show that transgenic Arabidopsis
overexpressing DEAR1 (DEAR1ox) has enhanced resistance to the necrotrophic fungus
Botrytis cinerea (B. cinerea). This result indicates that DEAR1 represses
negative regulators of plant defense responses, including transcriptional
repressors belonging to the ERF (ETHYLEN RESPONSE FACTOR) family. Knockout
mutants of ERF9 (erf9), which were down-regulated in DEAR1ox plants, showed
transcriptional promotion of PDF1.2 (PATHOGEN-INDUCIBLE PLANT DEFENSIN) genes,
which serve as positive markers for the ethylene/jasmonic acid (JA) signaling
pathway and provide enhanced resistance to B. cinerea. Biochemical assays
demonstrated that the ERF9 in capable of binding to the GCC box, a cis-element
contained in the promoters of the PDF1.2 gene that possesses trans-repression
activity. Moreover, infection with B. cinerea resulted in the promotion of the
PDF1.2 expression, coinciding with suppression of the ERF9 gene under the control
of the DEAR1 gene. These results indicate that the transcriptional repressor ERF9
participates in plant defense mechanisms against necrotic fungi mediated by the
DEAR1-dependent ethylene/JA signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24157210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Planta. 2014 Feb;239(2):255-66. doi: 10.1007/s00425-013-1985-y. Epub 2013 Oct 22.

A systems biology perspective on the role of WRKY transcription factors in
drought responses in plants.

Tripathi P(1), Rabara RC, Rushton PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Computational Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, Dana
and David Dornsife College of Letters, Arts and Sciences, University of Southern 
California, TRF 108, 3430 S Vermont Ave, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA,
tprateek@usc.edu.

Drought is one of the major challenges affecting crop productivity and yield.
However, water stress responses are notoriously multigenic and quantitative with 
strong environmental effects on phenotypes. It is also clear that water stress
often does not occur alone under field conditions but rather in conjunction with 
other abiotic stresses such as high temperature and high light intensities. A
multidisciplinary approach with successful integration of a whole range of -omics
technologies will not only define the system, but also provide new gene targets
for both transgenic approaches and marker-assisted selection. Transcription
factors are major players in water stress signaling and some constitute major
hubs in the signaling webs. The main transcription factors in this network
include MYB, bHLH, bZIP, ERF, NAC, and WRKY transcription factors. The role of
WRKY transcription factors in abiotic stress signaling networks is just becoming 
apparent and systems biology approaches are starting to define their places in
the signaling network. Using systems biology approaches, there are now many
transcriptomic analyses and promoter analyses that concern WRKY transcription
factors. In addition, reports on nuclear proteomics have identified WRKY proteins
that are up-regulated at the protein level by water stress. Interactomics has
started to identify different classes of WRKY-interacting proteins. What are
often lacking are connections between metabolomics, WRKY transcription factors,
promoters, biosynthetic pathways, fluxes and downstream responses. As more levels
of the system are characterized, a more detailed understanding of the roles of
WRKY transcription factors in drought responses in crops will be obtained.

PMID: 24146023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Ter Arkh. 2013;85(8):56-9.

[Stepwise treatment in patients with isolated thermal inhalation injury].

[Article in Russian]

Degtiareva SA, Shmelev EI, Smirnov SV, Brygin PA.

AIM: To evaluate the efficiency of stepwise treatment in patients with isolated
thermal inhalation injury (TIJ).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The study enrolled 101 patients with isolated TIJ. A study 
group (n=56) was treated at the Pulmonology Department after managing at the Burn
Center (BC); a control group (n=45) received no systematic treatment after
discharging from BC. The magnitude of respiratory symptoms (according to the
rating system) and external respiratory function (ERF) was evaluated and
fibrobronchoscopy was made in all the included patients at their discharge from
BC. On admission to the Pulmonology Department, the study group patients
underwent evaluation of the magnitude of respiratory symptoms, EFR, and lung
diffusing capacity, determination of blood gas composition and exercise
tolerance, and chest computed tomography. Respiratory symptoms, ERF, and exercise
tolerance were evaluated in all the included patients one month after hospital
discharge.
RESULTS: Examination at the Pulmonology Department established preserved
respiratory manifestations in patients who had to continue therapy. The use of
beta2-agonists or inhaled steroids used in combination or alone need,
mucoregulators or antibiotics revealed the efficiency of a stepwise approach to
managing patients with TIJ.
CONCLUSION: There is evidence that it is expedient to perform two-stage treatment
in patients with TIJ, by transferring them from BC to a specialized pulmonology
hospital, which substantially enhances the efficiency of medical care for this
contingent of patients.

PMID: 24137965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Plant Cell Rep. 2014 Jan;33(1):111-29. doi: 10.1007/s00299-013-1516-0. Epub 2013 
Oct 17.

Transcriptomic analysis of cut tree peony with glucose supply using the RNA-Seq
technique.

Zhang C(1), Wang Y, Fu J, Dong L, Gao S, Du D.

Author information: 
(1)College of Landscape Architecture, National Flower Engineering Technology
Research Center, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing, 100083, People's Republic 
of China.

KEY MESSAGE: Several unigenes encoding ACS and ERF involved in ethylene
biosynthesis and signal transduction were greatly down-regulated in the petal
transcriptome of cut tree peony 'Luoyang Hong' with glucose treatment. Glucose
also repressed stress-related transcription factor genes DREB, CBF, NAC, WRKY and
bHLH. Tree peony (Paeonia suffruticosa Andrews) is a famous traditional flower in
China. Glucose supply prolonging vase life of cut tree peony flowers is
associated with its role in the suppression of sensitivity to ethylene and
ethylene production, but the regulation mechanism of sugar on ethylene
biosynthesis and signaling is unclear. In the present work, a normalized cDNA
pool was constructed as the reference transcriptome from mixed petals of
different developmental cut tree peony 'Luoyang Hong' and sequenced using the
Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform. We obtained 33,117 unigenes annotated with public 
protein databases. In addition, the transcriptome change in petals of cut tree
peony with glucose supply and the control treatment was investigated. With
non-redundant annotation, 173 differentially expressed genes were identified,
with 41 up-regulated genes and 132 down-regulated genes. According to RNA-Seq
data and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction validation, one unigene
encoding ACS, a key ethylene synthetic enzyme, and four unigenes encoding ERF,
which is involved in ethylene signal transduction was greatly down-regulated with
glucose treatment. Furthermore, stress-related transcription factor genes DREB,
CBF, NAC, WRKY and bHLH were also repressed with glucose supply, as well as
several other stress-responsive and stress-tolerance genes, indicating that
glucose supply probably releases the effects induced by various environmental
stress. All the results and analysis are valuable resources for better
understanding of the beneficial influence of exogenous sugars on cut tree peony.

PMID: 24132406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Funct Integr Genomics. 2014 Mar;14(1):135-48.

Heat and water stress induce unique transcriptional signatures of heat-shock
proteins and transcription factors in grapevine.

Rocheta M, Becker JD, Coito JL, Carvalho L, Amâncio S.

Grapevine is an extremely important crop worldwide.In southern Europe,
post-flowering phases of the growth cycle can occur under high temperatures,
excessive light, and drought conditions at soil and/or atmospheric level. In this
study, we subjected greenhouse grown grapevine, variety Aragonez, to two
individual abiotic stresses, water deficit stress(WDS), and heat stress (HS). The
adaptation of plants to stress is a complex response triggered by cascades of
molecular net works involved in stress perception, signal transduction, and the
expression of specific stress-related genes and metabolites. Approaches such as
array-based transcript profiling allow assessing the expression of thousands of
genes in control and stress tissues. Using microarrays, we analyzed the leaf
transcriptomic profile of the grapevine plants. Photosynthesis measurements
verified that the plants were significantly affected by the stresses applied.
Leaf gene expression was obtained using a high-throughput transcriptomic
grapevine array, the 23K custom-made Affymetrix Vitis GeneChip. We identified
1,594 genes as differentially expressed between control and treatments and
grouped them into ten major functional categories using MapMan software. The
transcriptome of Aragonez was more significantly affected by HS when compared
with WDS. The number of genes coding for heat-shock proteins and transcription
factors expressed solely in response to HS suggesting their expression as unique 
signatures of HS. However, across-talk between the response pathways to both
stresses was observed at the level of AP2/ERF transcription factors.

PMID: 24122211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Plant Physiol. 2014 Feb 15;171(3-4):349-58. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2013.09.003.
Epub 2013 Oct 11.

Expression patterns and regulation of SlCRF3 and SlCRF5 in response to cytokinin 
and abiotic stresses in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum).

Gupta S(1), Rashotte AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.
Electronic address: rashotte@auburn.edu.

Cytokinin is an influential hormone involved in numerous aspects of plant growth 
and development. A group of transcription factors-cytokinin response factors
(CRFs) has been included as a side branch to cytokinin signaling pathway which
also constitute a subset of the AP2/ERF family of transcription factor proteins. 
This study examined the expression patterns of two transcription factor genes
SlCRF3 and SlCRF5 in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) to determine their regulation 
in response to cytokinin and a variety of abiotic stress conditions. Analyses
conducted during different developmental stages by RT-PCR or GUS reporter gene
expression revealed that these genes are differentially expressed in vegetative
and reproductive organs. qRT-PCR experiments were also performed to study
regulation by the hormone cytokinin and abiotic stress conditions such as
flooding, drought, osmotic, oxidative, and temperature. These showed that SlCRF3 
and SlCRF5 have different patterns of regulation in leaf, stem, and roots with
SlCRF5 showing greater induction in leaf or root tissue compared to SlCRF3 in
most cases. Additionally, knockdown analysis for SlCRF5 revealed defects across
development including leaf morphology, primary root growth, and lateral root
formation. Together, these findings indicate that SlCRF3 and SlCRF5 are potential
regulators of tomato developmental processes associated with cytokinin or abiotic
stresses.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Sci Rep. 2013 Oct 9;3:2866. doi: 10.1038/srep02866.

The RNA-binding protein FPA regulates flg22-triggered defense responses and
transcription factor activity by alternative polyadenylation.

Lyons R(1), Iwase A, Gänsewig T, Sherstnev A, Duc C, Barton GJ, Hanada K,
Higuchi-Takeuchi M, Matsui M, Sugimoto K, Kazan K, Simpson GG, Shirasu K.

Author information: 
(1)1] RIKEN Plant Science Center, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan [2]
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization Plant Industry,
Queensland Bioscience Precinct, St. Lucia, Queensland 4067, Australia.

RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) play an important role in plant host-microbe
interactions. In this study, we show that the plant RBP known as FPA, which
regulates 3'-end mRNA polyadenylation, negatively regulates basal resistance to
bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae in Arabidopsis. A custom microarray
analysis reveals that flg22, a peptide derived from bacterial flagellins, induces
expression of alternatively polyadenylated isoforms of mRNA encoding the
defence-related transcriptional repressor ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 4 (ERF4),
which is regulated by FPA. Flg22 induces expression of a novel isoform of ERF4
that lacks the ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif, while FPA
inhibits this induction. The EAR-lacking isoform of ERF4 acts as a
transcriptional activator in vivo and suppresses the flg22-dependent reactive
oxygen species burst. We propose that FPA controls use of proximal
polyadenylation sites of ERF4, which quantitatively limit the defence response
output.

PMCID: PMC3793224
PMID: 24104185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Plant Cell Rep. 2014 Jan;33(1):35-45. doi: 10.1007/s00299-013-1510-6. Epub 2013
Oct 1.

Characterization of two tomato AP2/ERF genes, SlCRF1 and SlCRF2 in hormone and
stress responses.

Shi X(1), Gupta S, Rashotte AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, 101 Rouse Life Sciences,
Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.

KEY MESSAGE: SlCRF1 and SlCRF2 are expressed throughout the plant, prominently in
vascular tissue. Each SlCRF has a distinct pattern of cytokinin induction and
regulation by abiotic stresses in different organs. Cytokinin is an essential
plant hormone involved in the regulation of many growth and developmental
processes. While many cytokinin signaling pathway components have been well
characterized, the cytokinin response factors (CRFs) that form a branch of this
pathway are less well understood. This study examines the tomato (Solanum
lycopersicum (L.)) CRF genes, SlCRF1 and SlCRF2 presenting a detailed and novel
characterization of their developmental expression patterns, transcriptional
regulation by hormones particularly cytokinin, and response to abiotic stresses. 
Both SlCRF1 and SlCRF2 were predominantly expressed in vasculature in tissues
throughout the plant, with an overall trend for greater SlCRF2 expression in
younger organs. Hormone regulation of SlCRF1 and SlCRF2 transcripts is primarily 
by cytokinin, which induced both SlCRFs in different organs over a range of
developmental stages. The strongest cytokinin induction was found in leaves, with
SlCRF2 induced to a higher level than SlCRF1. Examination of SlCRF transcripts
during abiotic stress responses revealed that SlCRF1 and SlCRF2 have distinct
patterns of regulation from each other and between leaves and roots. Novel
connections between SlCRFs and stresses were found in particular including a
strong induction of SlCRF1 by cold stress and a strong induction of SlCRF2 by
oxidative stress in roots and unique patterns of induction/repression linking
both SlCRFs to drought stress and response during recovery. Overall, this study
provides a clear picture of SlCRF1 and SlCRF2 expression patterns across tissues 
during development and in response to cytokinin and specific stresses, indicating
their importance in plant growth and environmental responses.

PMID: 24081612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. BMC Genomics. 2013 Sep 22;14:637. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-637.

Transcriptome profiling of Gossypium barbadense inoculated with Verticillium
dahliae provides a resource for cotton improvement.

Zhang Y(1), Wang XF, Ding ZG, Ma Q, Zhang GR, Zhang SL, Li ZK, Wu LQ, Zhang GY,
Ma ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agriculture, North China Key Laboratory for Germplasm Resources 
of Education Ministry, Hebei Agricultural University, Baoding 071001, People's
Republic of China. mzhy@hebau.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Verticillium wilt, caused by the fungal pathogen Verticillium
dahliae, is the most severe disease in cotton (Gossypium spp.), causing great
lint losses worldwide. Disease management could be achieved in the field if
genetically improved, resistant plants were used. However, the interaction
between V. dahliae and cotton is a complicated process, and its molecular
mechanism remains obscure. To understand better the defense response to this
pathogen as a means for obtaining more tolerant cultivars, we monitored the
transcriptome profiles of roots from resistant plants of G. barbadense cv.
Pima90-53 that were challenged with V. dahliae.
RESULTS: In all, 46,192 high-quality expressed sequence tags (ESTs) were
generated from a full-length cDNA library of G. barbadense. They were clustered
and assembled into 23126 unigenes that comprised 2661 contigs and 20465
singletons. Those unigenes were assigned Gene Ontology terms and mapped to 289
KEGG pathways. A total of 3027 unigenes were found to be homologous to known
defense-related genes in other plants. They were assigned to the functional
classification of plant-pathogen interactions, including disease defenses and
signal transduction. The branch of "SA<U+2192>NPR1<U+2192>TGA<U+2192>PR-1<U+2192>Disease resistance" was
first discovered in the interaction of cotton-V. dahliae, indicating that this
wilt process includes both biotrophic and necrotrophic stages. In all, 4936 genes
coding for putative transcription factors (TF) were identified in our library.
The most abundant TF family was the NAC group (527), followed by G2-like (440),
MYB (372), BHLH (331), bZIP (271) ERF, C3H, and WRKY. We also analyzed the
expression of genes involved in pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)
recognition, the activation of effector-triggered immunity, TFs, and hormone
biosynthesis, as well as genes that are pathogenesis-related, or have roles in
signaling/regulatory functions and cell wall modification. Their differential
expression patterns were compared among mock-/inoculated- and
resistant/susceptible cotton. Our results suggest that the cotton defense
response has significant transcriptional complexity and that large accumulations 
of defense-related transcripts may contribute to V. dahliae resistance in cotton.
Therefore, these data provide a resource for cotton improvement through molecular
breeding approaches.
CONCLUSIONS: This study generated a substantial amount of cotton transcript
sequences that are related to defense responses against V. dahliae. These
genomics resources and knowledge of important related genes contribute to our
understanding of host-pathogen interactions and the defense mechanisms utilized
by G. barbadense, a non-model plant system. These tools can be applied in
establishing a modern breeding program that uses marker-assisted selections and
oligonucleotide arrays to identify candidate genes that can be linked to valuable
agronomic traits in cotton, including disease resistance.

PMCID: PMC3849602
PMID: 24053558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Gene. 2013 Dec 1;531(2):220-34. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.007. Epub 2013 Sep
11.

Isolation and expression profiling of GhNAC transcription factor genes in cotton 
(Gossypium hirsutum L.) during leaf senescence and in response to stresses.

Shah ST(1), Pang C, Fan S, Song M, Arain S, Yu S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, Cotton Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Anyang 455000, Henan Province, China; Nuclear
Institute for Food and Agriculture (NIFA), Tarnab, Peshawar, Pakistan. Electronic
address: stariq81@yahoo.com.

NAC (NAM, ATAF, and CUC) is a plant-specific transcription factor family with
diverse roles in plant development and stress regulation. In this report,
stress-responsive NAC genes (GhNAC8-GhNAC17) isolated from cotton (Gossypium
hirsutum L.) were characterised in the context of leaf senescence and stress
tolerance. The characterisation of NAC genes during leaf senescence has not yet
been reported for cotton. Based on the sequence characterisation, these GhNACs
could be classified into three groups belonging to three known NAC sub-families. 
Their predicted amino acid sequences exhibited similarities to NAC genes from
other plant species. Senescent leaves were the sites of maximum expression for
all GhNAC genes except GhNAC10 and GhNAC13, which showed maximum expression in
fibres, collected from 25 days post anthesis (DPA) plants. The ten GhNAC genes
displayed differential expression patterns and levels during natural and induced 
leaf senescence. Quantitative RT-PCR and promoter analyses suggest that these
genes are induced by ABA, ethylene, drought, salinity, cold, heat, and other
hormonal treatments. These results support a role for cotton GhNAC genes in
transcriptional regulation of leaf senescence, stress tolerance and other
developmental stages of cotton.

© 2013.

PMID: 24036432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. New Phytol. 2014 Jan;201(1):279-91. doi: 10.1111/nph.12484. Epub 2013 Sep 10.

Elevated CO2 decreases the response of the ethylene signaling pathway in Medicago
truncatula and increases the abundance of the pea aphid.

Guo H(1), Sun Y, Li Y, Liu X, Zhang W, Ge F.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Integrated Management of Pest Insects and Rodents,
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China;
Graduate School, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100039, China.

The performance of herbivorous insects is greatly affected by plant nutritional
quality and resistance, which are likely to be altered by rising concentrations
of atmospheric CO2 . We previously reported that elevated CO2 enhanced biological
nitrogen (N) fixation of Medicago truncatula, which could result in an increased 
supply of amino acids to the pea aphid (Acyrthosiphon pisum). The current study
examined the N nutritional quality and aphid resistance of sickle, an
ethylene-insensitive mutant of M. truncatula with supernodulation, and its
wild-type control A17 under elevated CO2 in open-top field chambers. Regardless
of CO2 concentration, growth and amino acid content were greater and aphid
resistance was lower in sickle than in A17. Elevated CO2 up-regulated N
assimilation and transamination-related enzymes activities and increased phloem
amino acids in both genotypes. Furthermore, elevated CO2 down-regulated
expression of 1-amino-cyclopropane-carboxylic acid (ACC), sickle gene (SKL) and
ethylene response transcription factors (ERF) genes in the ethylene signaling
pathway of A17 when infested by aphids and decreased resistance against aphids in
terms of lower activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), peroxidase (POD), and
polyphenol oxidase (PPO). Our results suggest that elevated CO2 suppresses the
ethylene signaling pathway in M. truncatula, which results in an increase in
plant nutritional quality for aphids and a decrease in plant resistance against
aphids.

© 2013 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2013 New Phytologist Trust.

PMID: 24015892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. New Phytol. 2013 Aug;199(3):639-49.

APETALA2/Ethylene Responsive Factor (AP2/ERF) transcription factors: mediators of
stress responses and developmental programs.

Licausi F(1), Ohme-Takagi M, Perata P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore SantAnna, Pisa, Italy.

Transcription factors belonging to the APETALA2/Ethylene Responsive Factor
(AP2/ERF) family are conservatively widespread in the plant kingdom. These
regulatory proteins are involved in the control of primary and secondary
metabolism, growth and developmental programs, as well as responses to
environmental stimuli. Due to their plasticity and to the specificity of
individual members of this family, AP2/ERF transcription factors represent
valuable targets for genetic engineering and breeding of crops. In this review,
we integrate the evidence collected from functional and structural studies to
describe their different mechanisms of action and the regulatory pathways that
affect their activity.

PMID: 24010138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. QJM. 2013 Dec;106(12):1077-85. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hct176. Epub 2013 Aug 22.

The delivery of renal replacement therapy in Scotland--why the geographic
variation?

Boyd J(1), Mackinnon MW, Severn A, Traynor JP, Whitworth CE, Metcalfe W; Scottish
Renal Registry.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Unit, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, Little France, Edinburgh, EH16 4SA, 
UK. wendy.metcalfe@nhs.net.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of patients starting renal replacement therapy (RRT)
for established renal failure (ERF) in Scotland has fallen from 2005 to 2011 due 
to a reduction in older patients starting RRT; there are significant differences 
between NHS Health board areas.
AIM: To understand the apparent inequality in provision of RRT between NHS board 
areas in Scotland.
DESIGN: Retrospective population analysis of Scottish renal registry (SRR) data, 
population statistics and quality outcomes framework summary statistics.
RESULTS: The incidence of patients starting RRT for ERF in Scotland fell from 123
per million population (pmp) in 2005 to 96 pmp in 2011. The incidence of =75 year
olds fell from 406 to 274 pmp. There are significant differences between NHS
board areas when standardized for age and social deprivation. There is no
relationship between the population prevalence of CKD as reported by QOF and the 
incidence of RRT for ERF. Those areas with high incidence rates of =75 year olds 
have higher 90-day [Spearman's rank correlation: coefficient = 0.662; P = 0.03]
and 1-year [Spearman's rank correlation: coefficient = 0.776; P = 0.003]
mortality rates.
CONCLUSION: The significant variation in provision of RRT for ERF between
Scottish NHS Board areas is not explained by age or social deprivation. There is 
evidence of change in practice towards RRT for patients aged =75 years but
variation between NHS Board areas. This disparity must be further investigated to
ensure equity of access to RRT for those who will benefit from it, and to
non-dialytic care for those who would not.

PMID: 23974056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. BMC Genomics. 2013 Aug 23;14:573. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-573.

Genome-wide analysis of the AP2/ERF transcription factor superfamily in Chinese
cabbage (Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis).

Song X(1), Li Y, Hou X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement/Key Laboratory
of Biology and Germplasm Enhancement of Horticultural Crops in East China,
Ministry of Agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.

BACKGROUND: Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis) is a member of one of
the most important leaf vegetables grown worldwide, which has experienced
thousands of years in cultivation and artificial selection. The entire Chinese
cabbage genome sequence, and more than forty thousand proteins have been obtained
to date. The genome has undergone triplication events since its divergence from
Arabidopsis thaliana (13 to 17 Mya), however a high degree of sequence similarity
and conserved genome structure remain between the two species. Arabidopsis is
therefore a viable reference species for comparative genomics studies. Variation 
in the number of members in gene families due to genome triplication may
contribute to the broad range of phenotypic plasticity, and increased tolerance
to environmental extremes observed in Brassica species. Transcription factors are
important regulators involved in plant developmental and physiological processes.
The AP2/ERF proteins, one of the most important families of transcriptional
regulators, play a crucial role in plant growth, and in response to biotic and
abiotic stressors. Our analysis will provide resources for understanding the
tolerance mechanisms in Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis.
RESULTS: In the present study, 291 putative AP2/ERF transcription factor proteins
were identified from the Chinese cabbage genome database, and compared with
proteins from 15 additional species. The Chinese cabbage AP2/ERF superfamily was 
classified into four families, including AP2, ERF, RAV, and Soloist. The ERF
family was further divided into DREB and ERF subfamilies. The AP2/ERF superfamily
was subsequently divided into 15 groups. The identification, classification,
phylogenetic reconstruction, conserved motifs, chromosome distribution,
functional annotation, expression patterns, and interaction networks of the
AP2/ERF transcription factor superfamily were predicted and analyzed.
Distribution mapping results showed AP2/ERF superfamily genes were localized on
the 10 Chinese cabbage chromosomes. AP2/ERF transcription factor expression
levels exhibited differences among six tissue types based on expressed sequence
tags (ESTs). In the AP2/ERF superfamily, 214 orthologous genes were identified
between Chinese cabbage and Arabidopsis. Orthologous gene interaction networks
were constructed, and included seven CBF and four AP2 genes, primarily involved
in cold regulatory pathways and ovule development, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The evolution of the AP2/ERF transcription factor superfamily in
Chinese cabbage resulted from genome triplication and tandem duplications. A
comprehensive analysis of the physiological functions and biological roles of
AP2/ERF superfamily genes in Chinese cabbage is required to fully elucidate
AP2/ERF, which provides us with rich resources and opportunities to understand
crop stress tolerance mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3765354
PMID: 23972083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw. 2014 Jan;17(1):52-8. doi: 10.1089/cyber.2012.0537.
Epub 2013 Aug 24.

Exploring the predicted effect of social networking site use on perceived social 
capital and psychological well-being of Chinese international students in Japan.

Guo Y(1), Li Y, Ito N.

Author information: 
(1)1 Graduate School of International Media, Communication, and Tourism Studies, 
Hokkaido University , Sapporo, Japan .

This study investigated how social networking sites (SNSs) use by Chinese
international students in Japan influenced their perceived social capital and
psychological well-being. In addition, it examined how, as sojourners, Chinese
international students' perceived acculturative stress varied. Data were
collected from 142 Chinese international students. The results indicated that the
intensity of SNS use was unable to predict individuals' perceived social capital 
and psychological well-being. The effect of SNS use varied according to the
functions it serves. Specifically, SNS use for social and informational functions
(SIF) increased individuals' levels of perceived bridging social capital and
perceived life satisfaction, while SNS use for entertaining recreational
functions (ERF) was unable to predict perceived social capital but increased
individuals' levels of loneliness. It was also found that, in the intercultural
environment, Chinese international students' levels of perceived acculturative
stress were decreased by their perceived bonding social capital and increased by 
their perceived loneliness but had no relationship with their SNS use. Findings
of the study suggest that individuals using SNSs to stay informed and connected
will benefit with regard to their social network building and psychological
well-being.

PMID: 23971431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Tree Physiol. 2013 Aug;33(8):866-77. doi: 10.1093/treephys/tpt056. Epub 2013 Aug 
15.

CBF gene expression in peach leaf and bark tissues is gated by a circadian clock.

Artlip TS(1), Wisniewski ME, Bassett CL, Norelli JL.

Author information: 
(1)USDA-ARS, Appalachian Fruit Research Station, Kearneysville, WV 25430, USA.

CBF (C-repeat Binding Factor) transcription factors are part of the AP2/ERF
(Apetala2-ethylene responsive factor) domain family of DNA-binding proteins that 
recognize a C-repeat response cis-acting element that regulates a number of
cold-responsive genes (CBF regulon). Induction of CBF gene expression by low
temperature in Arabidopsis has been shown to be gated by a circadian clock. In
peach (Prunus persica L.), five CBF genes are arranged in tandem on scaffold
(linkage group) 5 of the peach genome. Since CBF gene regulation has been shown
to be more complex in woody plants than herbaceous plants, the present study was 
conducted to determine if temperature-modulated CBF gene expression in peach leaf
and bark tissues was also influenced by a circadian clock. One-year-old 'Loring' 
peach trees grafted on 'Bailey' rootstocks were entrained to a 12-h day/12-h
night photoperiod at 25 °C. After 2 weeks, trees were exposed to 4 °C under
continuous light for up to 48 h beginning at either subjective dawn + 4 h (ZT4;
where ZT is Zeitgeber time) or subjective dawn + 16 h (ZT16) with leaf and bark
tissues harvested at various time points. Gene expression of the five peach CBF
genes and a DREB2 gene was assessed by real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. Results revealed a distinct gating of CBF gene expression by a
circadian clock for four CBF genes in both leaf and bark tissues. CBF genes were 
highly induced by 4 °C in ZT4 leaf samples with expression peaking at 6-24 h
depending on the specific CBF gene. In contrast, CBF gene expression was highly
attenuated in leaf, and to a lesser extent in bark, samples exposed to 4 °C at
ZT16. These results are similar to reports for Arabidopsis. Further experiments
were conducted to verify environmental influence on the induction of CBF and
DREB2 genes. In contrast to DREB2 genes from other dicots, the peach DREB2
ortholog was induced by both low temperature and dehydration. Induction of the
peach CBFs and DREB2 by either low temperature or dehydration corresponded with
regulatory motifs present in their promoter sequences. Low temperature and
dehydration induction data for three peach dehydrin genes indicated that the
regulation of these genes in peach is complex, with individual dehydrin gene
expression being correlated with the expression of one or more CBF genes.

PMID: 23956128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Yi Chuan. 2013 Aug;35(8):971-82.

[Transcription factors in resistance against pathogen Botrytis cinerea in
Arabidopsis].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang GB(1), Zhang XX, Wang YY, Yang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Agricultural Biodiversity and Pest Management of Ministry
of Education, College of Plant Protection, Yunnan Agri-cultural University,
Kunming 650201, China E-mail: zgb1982@126.com.

A large number of defense genes are activated in plants when responding to
pathogen infection. Furthermore, transcription factors are suggested to play
important roles in regulating huge defense network in plants. The necrotrophic
fungus Botrytis cinerea is one of the most destructive pathogens which could
result in massive economic losses in the agriculture. Our review summarized the
study results of members from transcription factor ERF, WRKY and MYB families
which function in resistance of Botrytis cinerea in Arabidopsis thaliana. The
transcription factors come into more elaborate regulation network through
interacting with target genes at mRNA or protein levels aiming at activating
expression of defense genes which lead to resistance against the fungus. Some
transcriptional factors were discovered to be the main nodes and regulators in
different phytohormones crosstalk, illustrating and connecting the molecular
mechanisms of plants against different types of pathogens. Study on the
transcription factor mentioned above, provides us clues for the study of other
plant pathogen defense mechanism. Further understanding of disease mechanisms
will help researchers to utilize the resis-tance genes in crop improvement and
protection practice.

PMID: 23956085  [PubMed - in process]


291. Phytochemistry. 2013 Oct;94:10-27. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2013.06.002. Epub
2013 Aug 15.

Molecular genetics of alkaloid biosynthesis in Nicotiana tabacum.

Dewey RE(1), Xie J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop Science, North Carolina State University, Box 8009,
Raleigh, NC 27695, USA. ralph_dewey@ncsu.edu

Alkaloids represent an extensive group of nitrogen-containing secondary
metabolites that are widely distributed throughout the plant kingdom. The
pyridine alkaloids of tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) have been the subject of
particularly intensive investigation, driven largely due to the widespread use of
tobacco products by society and the role that nicotine (16) (see Fig. 1) plays as
the primary compound responsible for making the consumption of these products
both pleasurable and addictive. In a typical commercial tobacco plant, nicotine
(16) comprises about 90% of the total alkaloid pool, with the alkaloids
nornicotine (17) (a demethylated derivative of nicotine), anatabine (15) and
anabasine (5) making up most of the remainder. Advances in molecular biology have
led to the characterization of the majority of the genes encoding the enzymes
directly responsible the biosynthesis of nicotine (16) and nornicotine (17),
while notable gaps remain within the anatabine (15) and anabasine (5)
biosynthetic pathways. Several of the genes involved in the transcriptional
regulation and transport of nicotine (16) have also been elucidated.
Investigations of the molecular genetics of tobacco alkaloids have not only
provided plant biologists with insights into the mechanisms underlying the
synthesis and accumulation of this important class of plant alkaloids, they have 
also yielded tools and strategies for modifying the tobacco alkaloid composition 
in a manner that can result in changing the levels of nicotine (16) within the
leaf, or reducing the levels of a potent carcinogenic tobacco-specific
nitrosamine (TSNA). This review summarizes recent advances in our understanding
of the molecular genetics of alkaloid biosynthesis in tobacco, and discusses the 
potential for applying information accrued from these studies toward efforts
designed to help mitigate some of the negative health consequences associated
with the use of tobacco products.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23953973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 5;8(8):e70289. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070289. Print 2013.

Ethylene response factor 6 is a regulator of reactive oxygen species signaling in
Arabidopsis.

Sewelam N(1), Kazan K, Thomas-Hall SR, Kidd BN, Manners JM, Schenk PM.

Author information: 
(1)Plant-Microbe Interactions Laboratory, School of Agriculture and Food
Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are produced in plant cells in response to diverse 
biotic and abiotic stresses as well as during normal growth and development.
Although a large number of transcription factor (TF) genes are up- or
down-regulated by ROS, currently very little is known about the functions of
these TFs during oxidative stress. In this work, we examined the role of ERF6
(ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR6), an AP2/ERF domain-containing TF, during oxidative
stress responses in Arabidopsis. Mutant analyses showed that NADPH oxidase
(RbohD) and calcium signaling are required for ROS-responsive expression of ERF6.
erf6 insertion mutant plants showed reduced growth and increased H2O2 and
anthocyanin levels. Expression analyses of selected ROS-responsive genes during
oxidative stress identified several differentially expressed genes in the erf6
mutant. In particular, a number of ROS responsive genes, such as ZAT12, HSFs,
WRKYs, MAPKs, RBOHs, DHAR1, APX4, and CAT1 were more strongly induced by H2O2 in 
erf6 plants than in wild-type. In contrast, MDAR3, CAT3, VTC2 and EX1 showed
reduced expression levels in the erf6 mutant. Taken together, our results
indicate that ERF6 plays an important role as a positive antioxidant regulator
during plant growth and in response to biotic and abiotic stresses.

PMCID: PMC3734174
PMID: 23940555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 31;8(7):e69696. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069696. Print 2013.

MEG correlates of learning novel objects properties in children.

Urbain C(1), Bourguignon M, Op de Beeck M, Schmitz R, Galer S, Wens V, Marty B,
De Tiège X, Van Bogaert P, Peigneux P.

Author information: 
(1)UR2NF - Neuropsychology and Functional Neuroimaging Research Group at CRCN -
Center for Research in Cognition and Neurosciences, and UNI - ULB Neurosciences
Institute, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.
curbain@ulb.ac.be

Learning the functional properties of objects is a core mechanism in the
development of conceptual, cognitive and linguistic knowledge in children. The
cerebral processes underlying these learning mechanisms remain unclear in adults 
and unexplored in children. Here, we investigated the neurophysiological patterns
underpinning the learning of functions for novel objects in 10-year-old healthy
children. Event-related fields (ERFs) were recorded using magnetoencephalography 
(MEG) during a picture-definition task. Two MEG sessions were administered,
separated by a behavioral verbal learning session during which children learned
short definitions about the "magical" function of 50 unknown non-objects.
Additionally, 50 familiar real objects and 50 other unknown non-objects for which
no functions were taught were presented at both MEG sessions. Children learned at
least 75% of the 50 proposed definitions in less than one hour, illustrating
children's powerful ability to rapidly map new functional meanings to novel
objects. Pre- and post-learning ERFs differences were analyzed first in sensor
then in source space. Results in sensor space disclosed a learning-dependent
modulation of ERFs for newly learned non-objects, developing 500-800 msec after
stimulus onset. Analyses in the source space windowed over this late temporal
component of interest disclosed underlying activity in right parietal, bilateral 
orbito-frontal and right temporal regions. Altogether, our results suggest that
learning-related evolution in late ERF components over those regions may support 
the challenging task of rapidly creating new semantic representations supporting 
the processing of the meaning and functions of novel objects in children.

PMCID: PMC3729701
PMID: 23936082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Plant Mol Biol. 2014 Jan;84(1-2):49-66. doi: 10.1007/s11103-013-0116-2. Epub 2013
Aug 11.

NtERF32: a non-NIC2 locus AP2/ERF transcription factor required in
jasmonate-inducible nicotine biosynthesis in tobacco.

Sears MT(1), Zhang H, Rushton PJ, Wu M, Han S, Spano AJ, Timko MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Gilmer Hall 044,
Charlottesville, VA, 22904, USA, mtb8u@virginia.edu.

Nicotine biosynthesis in tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) is highly regulated by
jasmonic acid (JA). Two nuclear loci, A and B (renamed NIC1 and NIC2) have been
identified that mediate JA-inducible nicotine formation and total alkaloid
accumulation. NIC2 was recently shown to be a cluster of seven genes encoding
Apetala2/Ethylene-Response Factor (AP2/ERF)-domain transcription factors (TFs) in
Group IX of the tobacco AP2/ERF family. Here we report the characterization of
several NtERF TF genes that are not within the NIC2 locus, but required for
methyl JA (MeJA)-induced nicotine biosynthesis. Expression of NtERF1, NtERF32,
and NtERF121 is rapidly induced (<30 min) by MeJA treatment. All three of these
TFs specifically bind the GCC box-like element of the GAG motif required for
MeJA-induced transcription of NtPMT1a, a gene encoding putrescine
N-methyltransferase, the first committed step in the synthesis of the nicotine
pyrrolidine ring. Ectopic overexpression of NtERF32 increases expression of
NtPMT1a in vivo and elevates total alkaloid contents, whereas RNAi-mediated
knockdown of NtERF32 reduces the mRNA levels of multiple genes in the nicotine
biosynthetic pathway including NtPMT1a and quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase 
(NtQPT2), and lowers nicotine and total alkaloid levels. We conclude that NtERF32
and related ERF genes are important non-NIC2 locus associated transcriptional
regulators of nicotine and total alkaloid formation.

PMID: 23934400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Plant J. 2013 Nov;76(3):406-19. doi: 10.1111/tpj.12305. Epub 2013 Oct 3.

A dominant repressor version of the tomato Sl-ERF.B3 gene confers ethylene
hypersensitivity via feedback regulation of ethylene signaling and response
components.

Liu M(1), Pirrello J, Kesari R, Mila I, Roustan JP, Li Z, Latché A, Pech JC,
Bouzayen M, Regad F.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, INP-ENSA Toulouse, Génomique et Biotechnologie des
Fruits, Avenue de l'Agrobiopole BP 32607, Castanet-Tolosan, F-31326, France;
INRA, Génomique et Biotechnologie des Fruits, Chemin de Borde Rouge,
Castanet-Tolosan, F-31326, France.

Ethylene Response Factors (ERFs) are downstream components of the ethylene signal
transduction pathway, although their role in ethylene-dependent developmental
processes remains poorly understood. As the ethylene-inducible tomato Sl-ERF.B3
has been shown previously to display a strong binding affinity to
GCC-box-containing promoters, its physiological significance was addressed here
by a reverse genetics approach. However, classical up- and down-regulation
strategies failed to give clear clues to its roles in planta, probably due to
functional redundancy among ERF family members. Expression of a dominant
repressor ERF.B3-SRDX version of Sl-ERF.B3 in the tomato resulted in pleiotropic 
ethylene responses and vegetative and reproductive growth phenotypes. The
dominant repressor etiolated seedlings displayed partial constitutive ethylene
response in the absence of ethylene and adult plants exhibited typical
ethylene-related alterations such as leaf epinasty, premature flower senescence
and accelerated fruit abscission. The multiple symptoms related to enhanced
ethylene sensitivity correlated with the altered expression of ethylene
biosynthesis and signaling genes and suggested the involvement of Sl-ERF.B3 in a 
feedback mechanism that regulates components of ethylene production and response.
Moreover, Sl-ERF.B3 was shown to modulate the transcription of a set of ERFs and 
revealed the existence of a complex network interconnecting different ERF genes. 
Overall, the study indicated that Sl-ERF.B3 had a critical role in the regulation
of multiple genes and identified a number of ERFs among its primary targets,
consistent with the pleiotropic phenotypes displayed by the dominant repression
lines.

© 2013 The Authors The Plant Journal © 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23931552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. OMICS. 2013 Aug;17(8):439-50. doi: 10.1089/omi.2012.0074.

Plant omics: genome-wide analysis of ABA repressor1 (ABR1) related genes in rice 
during abiotic stress and development.

Mishra M(1), Kanwar P, Singh A, Pandey A, Kapoor S, Pandey GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Molecular Biology, University of Delhi South Campus,
Dhaula Kuan, New Delhi, India.

Rice is one of the world's most important food crops. Approximately 50% of rice
production is affected by drought, an abiotic stress greatly impacting crop
quality and yield. Agrigenomics research now offers the promise of understanding 
the drought stress impacts at a systems level. ABA repressor 1 (ABR1) is a member
of the ethylene-responsive element-binding factor (ERF/AP2) superfamily of ERF
transcription factors. We report here a global expression analysis of the rice
ABR1-related genes where we identified the expression pattern of each Oryza
sativa ERF (OsERF) during various developmental stages and abiotic stress
treatments. The group X OsERFs, closely related genes orthologous to ABR1,
exhibited significant differential expression profiles during certain stages of
development and in response to abiotic stresses. We selected a subset of these
genes and validated their observed expression profiles in response to abiotic
stresses using quantitative RT-PCR. Moreover, we discovered that pairs of
recently duplicated group X OsERFs display highly distinct expression profiles
from one another. We determined the subcellular localization of two group X OsERF
genes and observed localization to the nucleolus. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first report of localization of rice ERF protein to the nucleolus.
This study also points out an overlap of expression under abiotic stress and
reproductive developmental stages, indicating cross talk among different
signaling pathways. This genome-wide expression analysis of rice ABR1 homologs
paves the way for future functional analyses, with the goal to develop strategies
to improve rice abiotic stress tolerance.

PMID: 23895290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Int Rev Cell Mol Biol. 2013;305:339-82. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407695-2.00008-1.

Transcription factors in alkaloid biosynthesis.

Yamada Y(1), Sato F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Gene and Totipotency, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto
University, Kitashirakawa, Sakyo, Kyoto, Japan.

Higher plants produce a large variety of low-molecular weight secondary
compounds. Among them, nitrogen-containing alkaloids are the most biologically
active and are often used pharmaceutically. Whereas alkaloid chemistry has been
intensively investigated, alkaloid biosynthesis, including the relevant
biosynthetic enzymes, genes and their regulation, and especially transcription
factors, is largely unknown, as only a limited number of plant species produce
certain types of alkaloids and they are difficult to study. Recently, however,
several groups have succeeded in isolating the transcription factors that are
involved in the biosynthesis of several types of alkaloids, including bHLH, ERF, 
and WRKY. Most of them show Jasmonate (JA) responsiveness, which suggests that
the JA signaling cascade plays an important role in alkaloid biosynthesis. Here, 
we summarize the types and functions of transcription factors that have been
isolated in alkaloid biosynthesis, and characterize their similarities and
differences compared to those in other secondary metabolite pathways, such as
phenylpropanoid and terpenoid biosyntheses. The evolution of this biosynthetic
pathway and regulatory network, as well as the application of these transcription
factors to metabolic engineering, is discussed.

© 2013, Elsevier Inc. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 23890386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Exp Bot. 2013 Sep;64(12):3911-22. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ert223. Epub 2013 Jul 25.

A novel Arabidopsis MYB-like transcription factor, MYBH, regulates hypocotyl
elongation by enhancing auxin accumulation.

Kwon Y(1), Kim JH, Nguyen HN, Jikumaru Y, Kamiya Y, Hong SW, Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosystems and Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Korea University, 1, 5-ka Anam-dong, Seongbuk-ku, Seoul 136-713,
Republic of Korea.

Critical responses to developmental or environmental stimuli are mediated by
different transcription factors, including members of the ERF, bZIP, MYB, MYC,
and WRKY families. Of these, MYB genes play roles in many developmental
processes. The overexpression of one MYB gene, MYBH, significantly increased
hypocotyl elongation in Arabidopsis thaliana plants grown in the light, and the
expression of this gene increased markedly in the dark. The MYBH protein contains
a conserved motif, R/KLFGV, which was implicated in transcriptional repression.
Interestingly, the gibberellin biosynthesis inhibitor paclobutrazol blocked the
increase in hypocotyl elongation in seedlings that overexpressed MYBH. Moreover, 
the function of MYBH was dependent on phytochrome-interacting factor (PIF)
proteins. Taken together, these results suggest that hypocotyl elongation is
regulated by a delicate and efficient mechanism in which MYBH expression is
triggered by challenging environmental conditions such as darkness, leading to an
increase in PIF accumulation and subsequent enhanced auxin biosynthesis. These
results indicate that MYBH is one of the molecular components that regulate
hypocotyl elongation in response to darkness.

PMCID: PMC3745742
PMID: 23888064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Hear Res. 2014 Jan;307:111-20. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2013.06.010. Epub 2013 Jul
9.

Using neuroimaging to understand the cortical mechanisms of auditory selective
attention.

Lee AK(1), Larson E, Maddox RK, Shinn-Cunningham BG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington, WA 98195,
USA; Department of Speech & Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98195, USA. Electronic address: akclee@uw.edu.

Over the last four decades, a range of different neuroimaging tools have been
used to study human auditory attention, spanning from classic event-related
potential studies using electroencephalography to modern multimodal imaging
approaches (e.g., combining anatomical information based on magnetic resonance
imaging with magneto- and electroencephalography). This review begins by
exploring the different strengths and limitations inherent to different
neuroimaging methods, and then outlines some common behavioral paradigms that
have been adopted to study auditory attention. We argue that in order to design a
neuroimaging experiment that produces interpretable, unambiguous results, the
experimenter must not only have a deep appreciation of the imaging technique
employed, but also a sophisticated understanding of perception and behavior. Only
with the proper caveats in mind can one begin to infer how the cortex supports a 
human in solving the "cocktail party" problem. This article is part of a Special 
Issue entitled Human Auditory Neuroimaging.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3844039
PMID: 23850664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2013 Apr;38(7):957-61.

[Expression analysis and subcellular localization of an ERF transcription factor 
from Salvia miltiorrhiza].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu WY(1), Jiang XH, Liu CS, Huang LQ, Shen Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of traditional Chinese Medicine Beijing University of Chinese Medicine,
Beijing 100029, China.

OBJECTIVE: A SmERF1 gene was isolated from Salvia miltiorrhiza, and expression
patterns to different stress condition were analysed in the root tissues of S.
miltiorrhiza.
METHOD: The cDNA of SmERF1 gene from S. miltiorrhiza was isolated by RTPCR, and
the phylogenetic tree using the neighbour-joining tree method in Mega 5 was
obtained. To confirm the protein is likely to localize in the nucleus, the SmERF1
coding region was fused to the N-terminus of the GFP gene under the control of
the CaMV 35S promoter and transferred into onion epidermal cells using the
particle bombardment method. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed different
expression pattern of SmERF1 gene in response to exogenous ABA, MeJA and SA.
RESULT: The phylogenetic tree analysis revealed that SmERF1 is most similar to
AP2/ERF VII subgroup members. The transient expression of the SmERF1::GFP fusion 
protein indicated that the SmERF1 was exclusively localized to the nucleus. The
transcript of SmERF1 highly accumulated when the plants were treated with MeJA,
while accumulated slightly in response to exogenous ABA, salicylic acid.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest hormone such as ABA, MeJA and SA signaling
pathways can be involved in the activation and inhibition of the SmERF1.

PMID: 23847936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Exp Bot. 2013 Aug;64(11):3237-47. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ert162. Epub 2013 Jul 9.

SlERF36, an EAR-motif-containing ERF gene from tomato, alters stomatal density
and modulates photosynthesis and growth.

Upadhyay RK(1), Soni DK, Singh R, Dwivedi UN, Pathre UV, Nath P, Sane AP.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Gene Expression Laboratory, CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute, 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Lucknow 226001, India.

The AP2 domain class of transcription factors is a large family of genes with
various roles in plant development and adaptation but with very little functional
information in plants other than Arabidopsis. Here, the characterization of an
EAR motif-containing transcription factor, SlERF36, from tomato that affects
stomatal density, conductance, and photosynthesis is described. Heterologous
expression of SlERF36 under the CaMV35S promoter in tobacco leads to a 25-35%
reduction in stomatal density but without any effect on stomatal size or
sensitivity. Reduction in stomatal density leads to a marked reduction in
stomatal conductance (42-56%) as well as transpiration and is associated with
reduced CO2 assimilation rates, reduction in growth, early flowering, and
senescence. A prominent adaptive response of SlERF36 overexpressors is
development of constitutively high non-photochemical quenching (NPQ) that might
function as a protective measure to prevent damage from high excitation pressure.
The high NPQ leads to markedly reduced light utilization and low electron
transport rates even at low light intensities. Taken together, these data suggest
that SlERF36 exerts a negative control over stomatal density and modulates
photosynthesis and plant development through its direct or indirect effects.

PMCID: PMC3733148
PMID: 23840010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Development. 2013 Aug;140(15):3095-106. doi: 10.1242/dev.093716. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

ERF and ETV3L are retinoic acid-inducible repressors required for primary
neurogenesis.

Janesick A(1), Abbey R, Chung C, Liu S, Taketani M, Blumberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, 2011 Biological Sciences 3,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-2300, USA.

Cells in the developing neural tissue demonstrate an exquisite balance between
proliferation and differentiation. Retinoic acid (RA) is required for neuronal
differentiation by promoting expression of proneural and neurogenic genes. We
show that RA acts early in the neurogenic pathway by inhibiting expression of
neural progenitor markers Geminin and Foxd4l1, thereby promoting differentiation.
Our screen for RA target genes in early Xenopus development identified Ets2
Repressor Factor (Erf) and the closely related ETS repressors Etv3 and Etv3-like 
(Etv3l). Erf and Etv3l are RA responsive and inhibit the action of ETS genes
downstream of FGF signaling, placing them at the intersection of RA and growth
factor signaling. We hypothesized that RA regulates primary neurogenesis by
inducing Erf and Etv3l to antagonize proliferative signals. Loss-of-function
analysis showed that Erf and Etv3l are required to inhibit proliferation of
neural progenitors to allow differentiation, whereas overexpression of Erf led to
an increase in the number of primary neurons. Therefore, these RA-induced ETS
repressors are key components of the proliferation-differentiation switch during 
primary neurogenesis in vivo.

PMID: 23824578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. New Phytol. 2013 Oct;200(2):511-22. doi: 10.1111/nph.12386. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

A genome-wide screen for ethylene-induced ethylene response factors (ERFs) in
hybrid aspen stem identifies ERF genes that modify stem growth and wood
properties.

Vahala J(1), Felten J, Love J, Gorzsás A, Gerber L, Lamminmäki A, Kangasjärvi J, 
Sundberg B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Division of Plant Biology, University of Helsinki, 
FI-00014, Helsinki, Finland.

Ethylene Response Factors (ERFs) are a large family of transcription factors that
mediate responses to ethylene. Ethylene affects many aspects of wood development 
and is involved in tension wood formation. Thus ERFs could be key players
connecting ethylene action to wood development. We identified 170 gene models
encoding ERFs in the Populus trichocarpa genome. The transcriptional responses of
ERF genes to ethylene treatments were determined in stem tissues of hybrid aspen 
(Populus tremula × tremuloides) by qPCR. Selected ethylene-responsive ERFs were
overexpressed in wood-forming tissues and characterized for growth and wood
chemotypes by FT-IR. Fifty ERFs in Populus showed more than five-fold increased
transcript accumulation in response to ethylene treatments. Twenty-six ERFs were 
selected for further analyses. A majority of these were induced during tension
wood formation. Overexpression of ERFs 18, 21, 30, 85 and 139 in wood-forming
tissues of hybrid aspen modified the wood chemotype. Moreover, overexpression of 
ERF139 caused a dwarf-phenotype with altered wood development, and overexpression
of ERF18, 34 and 35 slightly increased stem diameter. We identified
ethylene-induced ERFs that respond to tension wood formation, and modify wood
formation when overexpressed. This provides support for their role in
ethylene-mediated regulation of wood development.

© 2013 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2013 New Phytologist Trust.

PMID: 23815789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Cell. 2013 Jul 25;51(2):249-64. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.05.026. Epub 2013 
Jun 27.

Reinitiation and other unconventional posttermination events during eukaryotic
translation.

Skabkin MA(1), Skabkina OV, Hellen CU, Pestova TV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, 450 Clarkson
Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA.

During ribosome recycling, posttermination complexes are dissociated by ABCE1 and
eRF1 into 60S and tRNA/mRNA-associated 40S subunits, after which tRNA and mRNA
are released by eIF1/eIF1A, Ligatin, or MCT-1/DENR. Occasionally, 40S subunits
remain associated with mRNA and reinitiate at nearby AUGs. We recapitulated
reinitiation using a reconstituted mammalian translation system. The presence of 
eIF2, eIF3, eIF1, eIF1A, and Met-tRNAi(Met) was sufficient for recycled 40S
subunits to remain on mRNA, scan bidirectionally, and reinitiate at upstream and 
downstream AUGs if mRNA regions flanking the stop codon were unstructured.
Imposition of 3' directionality additionally required eIF4F. Strikingly,
posttermination ribosomes were not stably anchored on mRNA and migrated
bidirectionally to codons cognate to the P site tRNA. Migration depended on the
mode of peptide release (puromycin > eRF1·eRF3) and nature of tRNA and was
enhanced by eEF2. The mobility of posttermination ribosomes suggests that some
reinitiation events could involve 80S ribosomes rather than 40S subunits.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4038429
PMID: 23810859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Plant Cell. 2013 Jun;25(6):2253-64. doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.107292. Epub 2013 Jun
21.

Arabidopsis BPM proteins function as substrate adaptors to a cullin3-based E3
ligase to affect fatty acid metabolism in plants.

Chen L(1), Lee JH, Weber H, Tohge T, Witt S, Roje S, Fernie AR, Hellmann H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington 99164, USA.

Regulation of transcriptional processes is a critical mechanism that enables
efficient coordination of the synthesis of required proteins in response to
environmental and cellular changes. Transcription factors require accurate
activity regulation because they play a critical role as key mediators assuring
specific expression of target genes. In this work, we show that cullin3-based E3 
ligases have the potential to interact with a broad range of ethylene response
factor (ERF)/APETALA2 (AP2) transcription factors, mediated by Math-BTB/POZ (for 
Meprin and TRAF [tumor necrosis factor receptor associated factor] homolog)-Broad
complex, Tramtrack, Bric-a-brac/Pox virus and Zinc finger) proteins. The assembly
with an E3 ligase causes degradation of their substrates via the 26S proteasome, 
as demonstrated for the wrinkled1 ERF/AP2 protein. Furthermore, loss of
Math-BTB/POZ proteins widely affects plant development and causes altered fatty
acid contents in mutant seeds. Overall, this work demonstrates a link between
fatty acid metabolism and E3 ligase activities in plants and establishes
CUL3-based E3 ligases as key regulators in transcriptional processes that involve
ERF/AP2 family members.

PMCID: PMC3723624
PMID: 23792371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Nephron Clin Pract. 2013;123 Suppl 1:81-92. doi: 10.1159/000353323. Epub 2013 Jun
10.

UK Renal Registry 15th annual report: Chapter 4 demography of the UK paediatric
renal replacement therapy population in 2011.

Pruthi R(1), O'Brien C, Casula A, Braddon F, Lewis M, Maxwell H, Tse Y, Inward C,
Sinha MD.

Author information: 
(1)UK Renal Registry, Bristol, UK.

AIMS: To describe the demographics of the paediatric RRT population under the age
of 16 years in the UK and to analyse changes in demography with time.
METHODS: Data were collected from all 13 paediatric renal centres within the UK. 
A series of cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses were performed to describe 
the demographics of paediatric RRT patients.
RESULTS: A total of 856 children and young people under 18 with ERF were
receiving treatment at paediatric nephrology centres in 2011. At the census date,
80.1% had a functioning transplant, 10.5% were receiving peritoneal dialysis (PD)
and 9.4% were receiving haemodialysis (HD). In patients aged <16 years the
prevalence of ERF was 56.8 pmarp and the incidence 8.3 pmarp. Analysis of trends 
over the last 15 years shows that both incidence and prevalence are increasing. A
third of the prevalent patients had one or more reported comorbidities. At
transfer to adult services, 86% of patients had a functioning renal transplant.
Pre-emptive transplantation was seen to occur in 31% of children starting RRT
under 16 years, with lower rates seen in girls and ethnic minorities. Survival in
childhood amongst children starting RRT was the lowest in those aged less than 2 
years.
CONCLUSIONS: The data provided in this report show increasing trends over 15
years in the incidence and prevalence of established renal failure. This is
important for the planning of the provision of care for children needing renal
replacement therapy. Further research is required to understand the gender and
ethnic differences in pre-emptive transplantation rates and the reduced survival 
amongst children aged less than 2 years.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23774487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2013 Sep;70:81-92. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2013.05.020. Epub
2013 May 25.

Isolation and characterization of ethylene response factor family genes during
development, ethylene regulation and stress treatments in papaya fruit.

Li X(1), Zhu X, Mao J, Zou Y, Fu D, Chen W, Lu W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical
Agro-Bioresources/Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory for Postharvest Science and
Technology of Fruits and Vegetables, College of Horticulture, South China
Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, PR China. lxp280477@yahoo.cn

Ethylene response factors (ERFs) play important roles in fruit development,
ripening, defense responses and stress signaling pathways. After harvest,
climacteric fruit such as papaya are subject to a range of problems associated
with postharvest handling and storage treatments. There have been few attempts to
evaluate the role of ERFs in fruit's responses to environmental stimuli. To
investigate the transcriptional mechanisms underlying fruit developmental,
ripening and stresses, we cloned four ERFs from papaya. The deduced amino acid
sequence of CpERFs contained the conserved apetalous (AP2)/ERF domain, which
shared high similarity with other reported AP2/ERF domains. The phylogeny, gene
structures, and putatively conserved motifs in papaya ERF proteins were analyzed,
and compared with those of Arabidopsis. Expression patterns of CpERFs were
examined during fruit development, under 1-MCP treatment, ethephon treatment,
biotic stress (temperature stress) and pathogen stress. CpERFs displayed
differential expression patterns and expression levels under different
experimental conditions. CpERF2 and CpERF3 showed a close association with fruit 
ripening and CpERFs had a high expression level in the earlier stages during the 
fruit development period. The expression of CpERFs strongly associated with
stress response. These results support the role for papaya ERFs in
transcriptional regulation of ripening-related or stress-respond genes and thus, 
in the regulation of papaya fruit-ripening processes and stress responses.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23770597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Jun 21;12(2):2038-55. doi: 10.4238/2013.May.13.1.

A genome-wide analysis of the ERF gene family in sorghum.

Yan HW(1), Hong L, Zhou YQ, Jiang HY, Zhu SW, Fan J, Cheng BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Crop Biology of Anhui Province, Anhui Agricultural
University, Hefei, China.

The ethylene response factor (ERF) family are members of the APETALA2 (AP2)/ERF
transcription factor superfamily; they are known to play an important role in
plant adaptation to biotic and abiotic stress. ERF genes have been studied in
Arabidopsis, rice, grape, and maize; however, there are few reports of ERF genes 
in sorghum. We identified 105 sorghum ERF (SbERF) genes, which were categorized
into 12 groups (A-1 to A-6 and B-1 to B-6) based on their sequence similarity,
and this new method of classification for ERF genes was then further
characterized. A comprehensive bioinformatic analysis of SbERF genes was
performed using a sorghum genomic database, to analyze the phylogeny of SbERF
genes, identify other conserved motifs apart from the AP2/ERF domain, map SbERF
genes to the 10 sorghum chromosomes, and determine the tissue-specific expression
patterns of SbERF genes. Gene clustering indicates that SbERF genes were
generated by tandem duplications. Comparison of SbERF genes with maize ERF
homologs suggests lateral gene transfer between monocot species. These results
can contribute to our understanting of the evolution of the ERF gene family.

PMID: 23766026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Plant Sci. 2013 Aug;209:12-23. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2013.04.003. Epub 2013 Apr
24.

Analysis of the cell death-inducing ability of the ethylene response factors in
group VIII of the AP2/ERF family.

Ogata T(1), Kida Y, Tochigi M, Matsushita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Research Center, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, 3-5-8
Saiwai-cho, Fuchu, Tokyo 183-8509, Japan.

The ethylene response factor (ERF) family is one of the largest families of
plant-specific transcription factors. We have shown previously that the
overexpression of the gene for NtERF3, a tobacco transcriptional repressor
containing the ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif in the
C-terminal region, induces hypersensitive reaction (HR)-like cell death. Many EAR
motif-containing ERFs, including NtERF3, are clustered in group VIII of the ERF
family. In this study, we aimed at revealing the cell death-inducing ability of
group VIII ERFs and the correlation between ERFs and HR. The results showed that 
many of the EAR motif-containing ERFs classified into subgroup VIII-a of
Arabidopsis, rice, and tobacco had cell death-inducing ability in tobacco leaves.
Seven AtERFs in subgroup VIII-b did not induce cell death; however, some ERFs in 
subgroup VIII-b of rice and tobacco showed cell death-inducing ability. An
expression analysis of group VIII ERFs in HR-inducing tobacco suggested that the 
cell death-inducing ability of NtERFs was not necessarily associated with
induction of HR. In addition, it was revealed that the EAR motif-containing
AtERFs in subgroup II-a also showed cell death-inducing ability. The influence of
sequence variation in the EAR motif on the ability to induce cell death is also
discussed.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23759099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. BMJ Case Rep. 2013 Jun 3;2013. pii: bcr2012008217. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2012-008217.

Agitation after minor trauma: combativeness as a cardinal catatonic feature.

Luykx JJ(1), Post EH, van der Erf M, Van Hecke J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, ZNA Hospital Stuivenberg, Antwerp, Belgium.

Catatonia is a syndrome of motor dysregulation, usually associated with
psychiatric, neurological, systemic and drug-related diseases. Retarded and
excited types exist, both of which often go unrecognised in clinical practice. We
describe a 64-year-old woman who gradually developed insomnia, started
communicating less, complained of feeling restless and ended up injuring
relatives. Initiation of symptoms followed a fibula fracture. The patient was
diagnosed with excited-type catatonia with prominent combativeness because of
minor trauma and rapidly recovered after lorazepam treatment instatement. Our
case demonstrates that catatonia can follow minor traumatic injury and how
excited-type catatonic features may go unrecognised in general practitioner and
specialist settings. Moreover, we show that catatonia may be recurrent,
necessitating long-term treatment and very gradual lorazepam tapering.

PMCID: PMC3703089
PMID: 23737566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. BMC Plant Biol. 2013 May 29;13:85. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-13-85.

Two recently duplicated maize NAC transcription factor paralogs are induced in
response to Colletotrichum graminicola infection.

Voitsik AM(1), Muench S, Deising HB, Voll LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Staudtstrasse 5, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: NAC transcription factors belong to a large family of plant-specific 
transcription factors with more than 100 family members in monocot and dicot
species. To date, the majority of the studied NAC proteins are involved in the
response to abiotic stress, to biotic stress and in the regulation of
developmental processes. Maize NAC transcription factors involved in the biotic
stress response have not yet been identified.
RESULTS: We have found that two NAC transcription factors, ZmNAC41 and ZmNAC100, 
are transcriptionally induced both during the initial biotrophic as well as the
ensuing necrotrophic colonization of maize leaves by the hemibiotrophic
ascomycete fungus C. graminicola. ZmNAC41 transcripts were also induced upon
infection with C. graminicola mutants that are defective in host penetration,
while the induction of ZmNAC100 did not occur in such interactions. While ZmNAC41
transcripts accumulated specifically in response to jasmonate (JA), ZmNAC100
transcripts were also induced by the salicylic acid analog
2,6-dichloroisonicotinic acid (INA).To assess the phylogenetic relation of
ZmNAC41 and ZmNAC100, we studied the family of maize NAC transcription factors
based on the recently annotated B73 genome information. We identified 116 maize
NAC transcription factor genes that clustered into 12 clades. ZmNAC41 and
ZmNAC100 both belong to clade G and appear to have arisen by a recent gene
duplication event. Including four other defence-related NAC transcription factors
of maize and functionally characterized Arabidopsis and rice NAC transcription
factors, we observed an enrichment of NAC transcription factors involved in host 
defense regulation in clade G. In silico analyses identified putative binding
elements for the defence-induced ERF, Myc2, TGA and WRKY transcription factors in
the promoters of four out of the six defence-related maize NAC transcription
factors, while one of the analysed maize NAC did not contain any of these
potential binding sites.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides a systematic in silico analysis of maize NAC
transcription factors in which we propose a nomenclature for maize genes encoding
NAC transcription factors, based on their chromosomal position. We have further
identified five pathogen-responsive maize NAC transcription factors that harbour 
putative binding elements for other defence-associated transcription factors in
the proximal promoter region, indicating an involvement of the described NACs in 
the maize defence network. Our phylogenetic analysis has revealed that the
majority of the yet described pathogen responsive NAC proteins from all plant
species belong to clade G and suggests that they are phylogenetically related.

PMCID: PMC3694029
PMID: 23718541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Plant Mol Biol. 2013 Jul;82(4-5):439-55. doi: 10.1007/s11103-013-0073-9. Epub
2013 May 24.

OsRMC, a negative regulator of salt stress response in rice, is regulated by two 
AP2/ERF transcription factors.

Serra TS(1), Figueiredo DD, Cordeiro AM, Almeida DM, Lourenço T, Abreu IA,
Sebastián A, Fernandes L, Contreras-Moreira B, Oliveira MM, Saibo NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics of Plant Stress Laboratory, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e
Biológica, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Oeiras, Portugal.

High salinity causes remarkable losses in rice productivity worldwide mainly
because it inhibits growth and reduces grain yield. To cope with environmental
changes, plants evolved several adaptive mechanisms, which involve the regulation
of many stress-responsive genes. Among these, we have chosen OsRMC to study its
transcriptional regulation in rice seedlings subjected to high salinity. Its
transcription was highly induced by salt treatment and showed a
stress-dose-dependent pattern. OsRMC encodes a receptor-like kinase described as 
a negative regulator of salt stress responses in rice. To investigate how OsRMC
is regulated in response to high salinity, a salt-induced rice cDNA expression
library was constructed and subsequently screened using the yeast one-hybrid
system and the OsRMC promoter as bait. Thereby, two transcription factors (TFs), 
OsEREBP1 and OsEREBP2, belonging to the AP2/ERF family were identified. Both TFs 
were shown to bind to the same GCC-like DNA motif in OsRMC promoter and to
negatively regulate its gene expression. The identified TFs were characterized
regarding their gene expression under different abiotic stress conditions. This
study revealed that OsEREBP1 transcript level is not significantly affected by
salt, ABA or severe cold (5 °C) and is only slightly regulated by drought and
moderate cold. On the other hand, the OsEREBP2 transcript level increased after
cold, ABA, drought and high salinity treatments, indicating that OsEREBP2 may
play a central role mediating the response to different abiotic stresses. Gene
expression analysis in rice varieties with contrasting salt tolerance further
suggests that OsEREBP2 is involved in salt stress response in rice.

PMID: 23703395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e62294. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062294. Print 2013.

Expression patterns of GmAP2/EREB-like transcription factors involved in soybean 
responses to water deficit.

Marcolino-Gomes J(1), Rodrigues FA, Oliveira MC, Farias JR, Neumaier N, Abdelnoor
RV, Marcelino-Guimarães FC, Nepomuceno AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, State University of Londrina, Londrina, Brazil.

Soybean farming has faced several losses in productivity due to drought events in
the last few decades. However, plants have molecular mechanisms to prevent and
protect against water deficit injuries, and transcription factors play an
important role in triggering different defense mechanisms. Understanding the
expression patterns of transcription factors in response to water deficit and to 
environmental diurnal changes is very important for unveiling water deficit
stress tolerance mechanisms. Here, we analyzed the expression patterns of ten
APETALA2/Ethylene Responsive Element Binding-like (AP2/EREB-like) transcription
factors in two soybean genotypes (BR16: drought-sensitive; and Embrapa 48:
drought-tolerant). According to phylogenetic and domain analyses, these genes can
be included in the DREB and ERF subfamilies. We also analyzed a GmDRIP-like gene 
that encodes a DREB negative regulator. We detected the up-regulation of 9
GmAP2/EREB-like genes and identified transcriptional differences that were
dependent on the levels of the stress applied and the tissue type analyzed (the
expression of the GmDREB1F-like gene, for example, was four times higher in roots
than in leaves). The GmDRIP-like gene was not induced by water deficit in BR16
during the longest periods of stress, but was significantly induced in Embrapa
48; this suggests a possible genetic/molecular difference between the responses
of these cultivars to water deficit stress. Additionally, RNAseq gene expression 
analysis over a 24-h time course indicates that the expression patterns of
several GmDREB-like genes are subject to oscillation over the course of the day, 
indicating a possible circadian regulation.

PMCID: PMC3646874
PMID: 23667465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Plant Cell Physiol. 2013 Jul;54(7):1200-16. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pct071. Epub 2013
May 9.

Thermotolerance responses in ripening berries of Vitis vinifera L. cv Muscat
Hamburg.

Carbonell-Bejerano P(1), Santa María E, Torres-Pérez R, Royo C, Lijavetzky D,
Bravo G, Aguirreolea J, Sánchez-Díaz M, Antolín MC, Martínez-Zapater JM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ciencias de la Vid y del Vino ICVV, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas CSIC-Universidad de La Rioja-Gobierno de La Rioja, C/
Madre de Dios 51, 26006 Logroño, Spain. pablo.carbonell@icvv.es

Berry organoleptic properties are highly influenced by ripening environmental
conditions. In this study, we used grapevine fruiting cuttings to follow berry
ripening under different controlled conditions of temperature and irradiation
intensity. Berries ripened at higher temperatures showed reduced anthocyanin
accumulation and hastened ripening, leading to a characteristic drop in malic
acid and total acidity. The GrapeGen GeneChip® combined with a newly developed
GrapeGen 12Xv1 MapMan version were utilized for the functional analysis of berry 
transcriptomic differences after 2 week treatments from veraison onset. These
analyses revealed the establishment of a thermotolerance response in berries
under high temperatures marked by the induction of heat shock protein (HSP)
chaperones and the repression of transmembrane transporter-encoding transcripts. 
The thermotolerance response was coincident with up-regulation of ERF subfamily
transcription factors and increased ABA levels, suggesting their participation in
the maintenance of the acclimation response. Lower expression of amino acid
transporter-encoding transcripts at high temperature correlated with balanced
amino acid content, suggesting a transcriptional compensation of temperature
effects on protein and membrane stability to allow for completion of berry
ripening. In contrast, the lower accumulation of anthocyanins and higher malate
metabolization measured under high temperature might partly result from imbalance
in the expression and function of their specific transmembrane transporters and
expression changes in genes involved in their metabolic pathways. These results
open up new views to improve our understanding of berry ripening under high
temperatures.

PMID: 23659918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2013 May 22;5(10):4031-4. doi: 10.1021/am401104d. Epub
2013 May 9.

Electrorheological fluids based on metallo-supramolecular
polyelectrolyte-silicate composites.

Schwarz G, Maisch S, Ullrich S, Wagenhöfer J, Kurth DG.

We present an innovative concept for the design of electrorheological fluids
(ERF) based on a dispersed phase of rigid-rod-shaped metallo-supramolecular
polyelectrolytes (MEPE) intercalated in mesoporous SBA-15 silica. While applying 
an electric field to this composite dispersed in silicone oil, rheological
measurements reveal a strong increase in the storage modulus, indicating the
solidification of the fluid. Besides the strong electrorheological effect and the
low current densities, we note that the required amount of MEPE is five times
lower than in comparable host-guest ERFs. Composites based on mononuclear
complexes do not show a comparable electrorheological effect.

PMID: 23647305  [PubMed]


316. Planta. 2013 Aug;238(2):271-82. doi: 10.1007/s00425-013-1890-4. Epub 2013 May 5.

Identification, characterization of an AP2/ERF transcription factor that promotes
adventitious, lateral root formation in Populus.

Trupiano D(1), Yordanov Y, Regan S, Meilan R, Tschaplinski T, Scippa GS, Busov V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Bioscienze e Territorio, University of Molise, Pesche, IS,
Italy.

Using activation tagging in Populus, we have identified five mutant lines showing
changes in their adventitious rooting. Among the affected lines, three showed
increased and two decreased adventitious rooting. We have positioned the tag in
the mutant lines via recovering genomic sequences flanking the left-hand border
of the activation tagging vector and validated the transcriptional activation of 
the proximal genes. We further characterized one line in which the cause of the
observed rooting phenotype was up-regulation of a gene encoding a transcription
factor of the AP2/ERF family of unknown function (PtaERF003). We show, through
retransformation, that this gene has a positive effect on both adventitious and
lateral root proliferation. Comparative expression analyses show that the
phenotype does not result from ectopic expression but rather up-regulation of the
native expression pattern of the gene. PtaERF003 function is linked to auxin
signal transduction pathway, as suggested by the rapid induction and accentuated 
phenotypes of the transgenic plants in presence of the hormone. Upregulation of
PtaERF003 led to most significant metabolic changes in the shoot suggesting of a 
broader regulatory role of the gene that is not restricted to root growth and
development. Our study shows that dominant tagging approaches in poplar can
successfully identify novel molecular factors controlling adventitious and
lateral root formation in woody plants. Such discoveries can lead to technologies
that can increase root proliferation and, thus, have significant economic and
environmental benefits.

PMID: 23645259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Plant Physiol. 2013 Jun;162(2):991-1005. doi: 10.1104/pp.113.218115. Epub 2013
Apr 29.

A regulatory cascade involving class II ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR transcriptional 
repressors operates in the progression of leaf senescence.

Koyama T(1), Nii H, Mitsuda N, Ohta M, Kitajima S, Ohme-Takagi M, Sato F.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.
koyama@sunbor.or.jp

Leaf senescence is the final process of leaf development that involves the
mobilization of nutrients from old leaves to newly growing tissues. Despite the
identification of several transcription factors involved in the regulation of
this process, the mechanisms underlying the progression of leaf senescence are
largely unknown. Herein, we describe the proteasome-mediated regulation of class 
II ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR (ERF) transcriptional repressors and involvement of
these factors in the progression of leaf senescence in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis
thaliana). Based on previous results showing that the tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum)
ERF3 (NtERF3) specifically interacts with a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, we
examined the stability of NtERF3 in vitro and confirmed its rapid degradation by 
plant protein extracts. Furthermore, NtERF3 accumulated in plants treated with a 
proteasome inhibitor. The Arabidopsis class II ERFs AtERF4 and AtERF8 were also
regulated by the proteasome and increased with plant aging. Transgenic
Arabidopsis plants with enhanced expression of NtERF3, AtERF4, or AtERF8 showed
precocious leaf senescence. Our gene expression and chromatin immunoprecipitation
analyses suggest that AtERF4 and AtERF8 targeted the EPITHIOSPECIFIER
PROTEIN/EPITHIOSPECIFYING SENESCENCE REGULATOR gene and regulated the expression 
of many genes involved in the progression of leaf senescence. By contrast, an
aterf4 aterf8 double mutant exhibited delayed leaf senescence. Our results
provide insight into the important role of class II ERFs in the progression of
leaf senescence.

PMCID: PMC3668086
PMID: 23629833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Plant Physiol. 2013 Jun;162(2):872-84. doi: 10.1104/pp.113.216044. Epub 2013 Apr 
29.

MULTI-FLORET SPIKELET1, which encodes an AP2/ERF protein, determines spikelet
meristem fate and sterile lemma identity in rice.

Ren D(1), Li Y, Zhao F, Sang X, Shi J, Wang N, Guo S, Ling Y, Zhang C, Yang Z, He
G.

Author information: 
(1)Rice Research Institute, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China.

The spikelet is a unique inflorescence structure of grass. The molecular
mechanism that controls the development of the spikelet remains unclear. In this 
study, we identified a rice (Oryza sativa) spikelet mutant, multi-floret
spikelet1 (mfs1), that showed delayed transformation of spikelet meristems to
floral meristems, which resulted in an extra hull-like organ and an elongated
rachilla. In addition, the sterile lemma was homeotically converted to the
rudimentary glume and the body of the palea was degenerated in mfs1. These
results suggest that the MULTI-FLORET SPIKELET1 (MFS1) gene plays an important
role in the regulation of spikelet meristem determinacy and floral organ
identity. MFS1 belongs to an unknown function clade in the
APETALA2/ethylene-responsive factor (AP2/ERF) family. The MFS1-green fluorescent 
protein fusion protein is localized in the nucleus. MFS1 messenger RNA is
expressed in various tissues, especially in the spikelet and floral meristems.
Furthermore, our findings suggest that MFS1 positively regulates the expression
of LONG STERILE LEMMA and the INDETERMINATE SPIKELET1 (IDS1)-like genes
SUPERNUMERARY BRACT and OsIDS1.

PMCID: PMC3668076
PMID: 23629832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Apr 29;14(5):9459-74. doi: 10.3390/ijms14059459.

Improved nutritive quality and salt resistance in transgenic maize by
simultaneously overexpression of a natural lysine-rich protein gene, SBgLR, and
an ERF transcription factor gene, TSRF1.

Wang M(1), Liu C, Li S, Zhu D, Zhao Q, Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, No. 2 Yuanmingyuan West Road, Haidian District,
Beijing 100193, China. yujj@cau.edu.cn.

Maize (Zea mays L.), as one of the most important crops in the world, is
deficient in lysine and tryptophan. Environmental conditions greatly impact plant
growth, development and productivity. In this study, we used particle bombardment
mediated co-transformation to obtain marker-free transgenic maize inbred X178
lines harboring a lysine-rich protein gene SBgLR from potato and an ethylene
responsive factor (ERF) transcription factor gene, TSRF1, from tomato. Both of
the target genes were successfully expressed and showed various expression levels
in different transgenic lines. Analysis showed that the protein and lysine
content in T1 transgenic maize seeds increased significantly. Compared to
non-transformed maize, the protein and lysine content increased by 7.7% to 24.38%
and 8.70% to 30.43%, respectively. Moreover, transgenic maize exhibited more
tolerance to salt stress. When treated with 200 mM NaCl for 48 h, both
non-transformed and transgenic plant leaves displayed wilting and losing green
symptoms and dramatic increase of the free proline contents. However, the degree 
of control seedlings was much more serious than that of transgenic lines and much
more increases of the free proline contents in the transgenic lines than that in 
the control seedlings were observed. Meanwhile, lower extent decreases of the
chlorophyll contents were detected in the transgenic seedlings. Quantitative
RT-PCR was performed to analyze the expression of ten stress-related genes,
including stress responsive transcription factor genes, ZmMYB59 and ZmMYC1,
proline synthesis related genes, ZmP5CS1 and ZmP5CS2, photosynthesis-related
genes, ZmELIP, ZmPSI-N, ZmOEE, Zmrbcs and ZmPLAS, and one ABA biosynthesis
related gene, ZmSDR. The results showed that with the exception of ZmP5CS1 and
ZmP5CS2 in line 9-10 and 19-11, ZmMYC1 in line 19-11 and ZmSDR in line 19-11, the
expression of other stress-related genes were inhibited in transgenic lines under
normal conditions. After salt treatment, the expressions of the ten
stress-related genes were significantly induced in both wild-type (WT) and
transgenic lines. However, compared to WT, the increases of ZmP5CS1 in all these 
three transgenic lines and ZmP5CS2 in line 9-10 were less than WT plants. This
study provides an effective approach of maize genetic engineering for improved
nutritive quality and salt tolerance.

PMCID: PMC3676793
PMID: 23629675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Plant Mol Biol. 2013 Jun;82(3):223-37. doi: 10.1007/s11103-013-0054-z. Epub 2013 
Apr 28.

Functional characterization of an abiotic stress-inducible transcription factor
AtERF53 in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Hsieh EJ(1), Cheng MC, Lin TP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Biology, National Taiwan University, 1 Roosevelt Road,
Section 4, Taipei 106, Taiwan.

AP2/ERF proteins play crucial roles in plant growth and development and in
responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 53 (AtERF53)
belongs to group 1 in the ERF family and is induced in the early hours of
dehydration and salt treatment. The functional study of AtERF53 is hampered
because its protein expression in Arabidopsis is vulnerable to degradation in
overexpressed transgenic lines. Taking advantage of the RING domain ligase1/RING 
domain ligase2 (rglg1rglg2) double mutant in which the AtERF53 can express
stably, we investigate the physiological function of AtERF53. In this study, we
demonstrate that expression of AtERF53 in wild-type Arabidopsis was responsive to
heat and abscisic acid (ABA) treatment. From results of the cotransfection
experiment, we concluded that AtERF53 has positive transactivation activity.
Overexpression of AtERF53 in the rglg1rglg2 double mutant conferred better
heat-stress tolerance and had resulted in higher endogenous ABA and proline
levels compared to rglg1rglg2 double mutants. AtERF53 also has a function to
regulate guard-cell movement because the stomatal aperture of AtERF53
overexpressed in rglg1rglg2 double mutant was smaller than that in the rglg1rglg2
double mutant under ABA treatment. In a global gene expression study, we found
higher expressions of many stress-related genes, such as DREB1A, COR15A, COR15B, 
PLC, P5CS1, cpHSC70 s and proline and ABA metabolic-related genes. Furthermore,
we identified several downstream target genes of AtERF53 by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. In conclusion, the genetic, molecular and biochemical 
result might explain how AtERF53 serving as a transcription factor contributes to
abiotic stress tolerance in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 23625358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2013 Jul 1;401:58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jcis.2013.03.040.
Epub 2013 Apr 4.

Sedimentation behaviour in electrorheological fluids based on suspensions of
zeolite particles in silicone oil.

Prekas K(1), Shah T, Soin N, Rangoussi M, Vassiliadis S, Siores E.

Author information: 
(1)Technological Education Institute (TEI), Piraeus, Athens, Greece.

Sedimentation is a known and expected shortcoming of electrorheological fluids
(ERFs) due to the inherent difference in the constituent densities. The long-term
sedimentation causes loss of the electrorheological phenomenon and the
exploitable electromechanical and viscoelastic properties despite the presence of
the stimulating electric field. In this work, we report the effect of temperature
and surfactant concentration on the stability of ERFs prepared from zeolite
particles and silicone oil with primary focus on the sedimentation of the
particles in the ERF. As the temperature stability of the ERFs is fundamentally
important, we have studied three different ERF suspensions composed of different 
zeolite particles, in silicone oil. These ERFs have been comparatively evaluated 
for their sedimentation over time, across a wide range of temperatures (-40°C to 
+60°C). The influence of surfactant concentration on the colloidal stability of
the ERFs has also been investigated. A novel method of acoustic stirring (kHz
range) on the homogenisation of the ERFs has been proposed and its effect on the 
sedimentation process evaluated. These results are useful for assessment of
alternative suspension methods for specific applications.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23623409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2013 Aug;26(8):868-79. doi:
10.1094/MPMI-10-12-0253-R.

Ethylene-responsive AP2/ERF transcription factor MACD1 participates in
phytotoxin-triggered programmed cell death.

Mase K(1), Ishihama N, Mori H, Takahashi H, Kaminaka H, Kodama M, Yoshioka H.

Author information: 
(1)Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.

To investigate plant programmed cell death (PCD), we developed the model system
using phytotoxin AAL, which is produced by necrotrophic pathogen Alternaria
alternata f. sp. lycopersici, and AAL-sensitive Nicotiana umbratica. We
previously reported that ethylene (ET) signaling plays a pivotal role in
AAL-triggered cell death (ACD). However, downstream signaling of ET to ACD
remains unclear. Here, we show that the modulator of AAL cell death 1 (MACD1),
which is an APETALA2/ET response factor (ERF) transcription factor, participates 
in ACD and acts downstream of ET signaling during ACD. MACD1 is a transcriptional
activator and MACD1 overexpression plants showed earlier ACD induction than
control plants, suggesting that MACD1 positively regulates factors affecting cell
death. To investigate the role of MACD1 in PCD, we used Arabidopsis thaliana and 
a structural analog of AAL, fumonisin B1 (FB1). FB1-triggered cell death was
compromised in ET signaling and erf102 mutants. The loh2 mutants showed
sensitivity to AAL, and the loh2-1/erf102 double mutant compromised ACD,
indicating that ERF102 also participates in ACD. To investigate the
PCD-associated genes regulated by ERF102, we compared our microarray data using
ERF102 overexpression plants with the database of upregulated genes by AAL
treatment in loh2 mutants, and found genes under the control of ERF102 in ACD.

PMID: 23617414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Plant Physiol. 2013 Jun;162(2):842-57. doi: 10.1104/pp.113.214049. Epub 2013 Apr 
24.

EBE, an AP2/ERF transcription factor highly expressed in proliferating cells,
affects shoot architecture in Arabidopsis.

Mehrnia M(1), Balazadeh S, Zanor MI, Mueller-Roeber B.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Cooperative Research
Group, D-14476 Golm/Potsdam, Germany.

We report about ERF BUD ENHANCER (EBE; At5g61890), a transcription factor that
affects cell proliferation as well as axillary bud outgrowth and shoot branching 
in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). EBE encodes a member of the
APETALA2/ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR (AP2/ERF) transcription factor superfamily; the
gene is strongly expressed in proliferating cells and is rapidly and transiently 
up-regulated in axillary meristems upon main stem decapitation. Overexpression of
EBE promotes cell proliferation in growing calli, while the opposite is observed 
in EBE-RNAi lines. EBE overexpression also stimulates axillary bud formation and 
outgrowth, while repressing it results in inhibition of bud growth. Global
transcriptome analysis of estradiol-inducible EBE overexpression lines revealed
48 EBE early-responsive genes, of which 14 were up-regulated and 34 were
down-regulated. EBE activates several genes involved in cell cycle regulation and
dormancy breaking, including D-type cyclin CYCD3;3, transcription regulator DPa, 
and BRCA1-ASSOCIATED RING DOMAIN1. Among the down-regulated genes were
DORMANCY-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN1 (AtDRM1), AtDRM1 homolog, MEDIATOR OF ABA-REGULATED 
DORMANCY1, and ZINC FINGER HOMEODOMAIN5. Our data indicate that the effect of EBE
on shoot branching likely results from an activation of genes involved in cell
cycle regulation and dormancy breaking.

PMCID: PMC3668074
PMID: 23616605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Chemosens Percept. 2012 Mar 1;5(1):87-99.

Time for Taste-A Review of the Early Cerebral Processing of Gustatory Perception.

Ohla K(1), Busch NA, Lundström JN.

Author information: 
(1)Monell Chemical Senses Center, 3500 Market Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

The first successfully recorded event-related potential (ERP) for taste, one of
our basic senses, was published nearly half a century ago. Despite this large
time span, surprisingly little is known about the early neural processing of
taste perception. Here, we are providing a comprehensive and critical overview of
over four decades of research, with a focus on the temporal dimension of cerebral
taste processing in healthy humans. For this purpose, we review studies using
techniques that permit a high temporal resolution, namely, electroencephalography
and magnetoencephalography, ERP, and event-related magnetic fields (ERF). Our
current knowledge of taste ERP is interpreted in the context of our understanding
of other, nonchemical senses. Gaps in the existing literature are identified and 
discussed. Finally, we suggest directions for future investigations using
gustatory ERP/ERF.

PMCID: PMC3630074
PMID: 23606923  [PubMed]


325. Planta. 2013 Jul;238(1):155-70. doi: 10.1007/s00425-013-1880-6. Epub 2013 Apr 19.

A transcriptional repressor of the ERF family confers drought tolerance to rice
and regulates genes preferentially located on chromosome 11.

Joo J(1), Choi HJ, Lee YH, Kim YK, Song SI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioscience and Bioinformatics, Myongji University, Yongin 449-728,
Korea.

Plant-specific ethylene response factors (ERFs) play important roles in abiotic
and biotic stress responses in plants. Using a transgenic approach, we identified
two rice ERF genes, OsERF4a and OsERF10a, which conferred drought stress
tolerance. In particular, OsERF4a contains a conserved ERF-associated amphiphilic
repression (EAR) motif in its C-terminal region that has been shown to function
as a transcriptional repression domain. Expression profiling of transgenic rice
plants over-expressing OsERF4a using either a constitutively active or an
ABA-inducible promoter identified 45 down-regulated and 79 up-regulated genes in 
common. The increased stress tolerance by over-expression of the EAR
domain-containing protein OsERF4a could result from suppression of a repressor of
the defense response. Expression of the putative silent information regulator 2
(Sir2) repressor protein was repressed, and expression of several stress-response
genes were induced by OsERF4a over-expression. The Sir2 and 7 out of 9 genes that
were down-regulated by OsERF4a over-expression were induced by high salinity and 
drought treatments in non-transgenic control plants. Genes that were down- and
up-regulated by OsERF4a over-expression were highly biased toward chromosome 11. 
Rice chromosome 11 has several large clusters of disease-resistance and
defense-response genes. Taken together, our results suggest that OsERF4a is a
positive regulator of shoot growth and water-stress tolerance in rice during
early growth stages. We propose that OsERF4a could work by suppressing a
repressor of the defense responses and/or by controlling the expression of a
large number of genes located on chromosome 11.

PMID: 23605194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2013 Apr 19;10(4):1609-30. doi:
10.3390/ijerph10041609.

Integrated environmental risk assessment and whole-process management system in
chemical industry parks.

Shao C(1), Yang J, Tian X, Ju M, Huang L.

Author information: 
(1)College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin
300071, China. shaocf@nankai.edu.cn

Chemical industry parks in China are considered high-risk areas because they
present numerous risks that can damage the environment, such as pollution
incidents. In order to identify the environmental risks and the principal risk
factors in these areas, we have developed a simple physical model of a regional
environmental risk field (ERF) using existing dispersal patterns and migration
models. The regional ERF zoning was also conducted and a reference value for
diagnostic methods was developed to determine risk-acceptable, risk-warning, and 
risk-mitigation zones, which can provide a risk source layout for chemical
industry parks. In accordance with the environmental risk control requirements,
this study focused on the three stages of control and management of environmental
risk and established an environmental risk management system including risk
source identification and assessment, environmental safety planning, early risk
warning, emergency management, assessment of environmental effects, and
environmental remediation of pollution accidents. By using this model, the
environmental risks in Tianjin Binhai New Area, the largest chemical industry
park in China, were assessed and the environmental risk zoning map was drawn,
which suggested the existence of many unacceptable environmental risks in this
area. Thus, relevant suggestions have been proposed from the perspective of the
adjustment of risk source layout, intensified management of environmental risk
control and so on.

PMCID: PMC3709338
PMID: 23603866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Exp Bot. 2013 May;64(8):2499-510. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ert108. Epub 2013 Apr 18.

Banana ethylene response factors are involved in fruit ripening through their
interactions with ethylene biosynthesis genes.

Xiao YY(1), Chen JY, Kuang JF, Shan W, Xie H, Jiang YM, Lu WJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical
Agro-bioresources/Guangdong Key Laboratory for Postharvest Science, College of
Horticultural Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642,
China.

The involvement of ethylene response factor (ERF) transcription factor (TF) in
the transcriptional regulation of ethylene biosynthesis genes during fruit
ripening remains largely unclear. In this study, 15 ERF genes, designated as
MaERF1-MaERF15, were isolated and characterized from banana fruit. These MaERFs
were classified into seven of the 12 known ERF families. Subcellular localization
showed that MaERF proteins of five different subfamilies preferentially localized
to the nucleus. The 15 MaERF genes displayed differential expression patterns and
levels in peel and pulp of banana fruit, in association with four different
ripening treatments caused by natural, ethylene-induced, 1-methylcyclopropene
(1-MCP)-delayed, and combined 1-MCP and ethylene treatments. MaERF9 was
upregulated while MaERF11 was downregulated in peel and pulp of banana fruit
during ripening or after treatment with ethylene. Furthermore, yeast-one hybrid
(Y1H) and transient expression assays showed that the potential repressor MaERF11
bound to MaACS1 and MaACO1 promoters to suppress their activities and that MaERF9
activated MaACO1 promoter activity. Interestingly, protein-protein interaction
analysis revealed that MaERF9 and -11 physically interacted with MaACO1. Taken
together, these results suggest that MaERFs are involved in banana fruit ripening
via transcriptional regulation of or interaction with ethylene biosynthesis
genes.

PMCID: PMC3654433
PMID: 23599278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Plant Physiol. 2013 Jul 1;170(10):923-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2013.01.017.
Epub 2013 Mar 29.

Three ERF transcription factors from Chinese wild grapevine Vitis
pseudoreticulata participate in different biotic and abiotic stress-responsive
pathways.

Zhu Z(1), Shi J, Xu W, Li H, He M, Xu Y, Xu T, Yang Y, Cao J, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, Shaanxi,
People's Republic of China.

Ethylene response factor (ERF) functions as an important plant-specific
transcription factor in regulating biotic and abiotic stress response through
interaction with various stress pathways. We previously obtained three ERF
members, VpERF1, VpERF2, and VpERF3 from a highly powdery mildew (PM)-resistant
Chinese wild Vitis pseudoreticulata cDNA full-length library. To explore their
functions associated with plant disease resistance or biotic stress, we report
here to characterize three ERF members from this library. PM-inoculation analysis
on three different resistant grapevine genotypes revealed that three VpERFs
displayed significant responses, but a different expression pattern.
Over-expression of VpERF1, VpERF2, and VpERF3 in transgenic tobacco plants
demonstrated that VpERF2 and VpERF3 enhanced resistance to both bacterial
pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum and fungal pathogen Phytophtora parasitica var.
nicotianae Tucker. Importantly, VpERF1-overexpressing transgenic Arabidopsis
plants increased susceptibility toward these pathogens. Investigation on drought,
cold, and heat treatments suggested, VpERF2 was distinctly induced, whereas
VpERF3 displayed a very weak response and VpERF1 was distinctly induced by
drought and heat. Concurrently, VpERF3 was significantly induced by salicylic
acid (SA), methyl jasmonate (MeJA), and ET. Our results showed that the three
VpERFs from Chinese wild V. pseudoreticulata play different roles in either
preventing disease progression via regulating the expression of relevant defense 
genes, or directly involving abiotic stress responsive pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23541511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Plant Cell Physiol. 2013 Jun;54(6):971-81. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pct049. Epub 2013 Mar
28.

Cytokinin response factor 6 negatively regulates leaf senescence and is induced
in response to cytokinin and numerous abiotic stresses.

Zwack PJ(1), Robinson BR, Risley MG, Rashotte AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, 101 Rouse Life Sciences, Auburn University,
Auburn, AL 36849, USA.

Cytokinin response factor 6 (CRF6) is an Arabidopsis AP2/ERF transcription factor
which is transcriptionally induced by cytokinin. Cytokinin is known to delay leaf
senescence in wild-type (WT) plants, for example in dark-incubated detached
leaves. This response is mediated by the cytokinin receptor Arabidopsis histidine
kinase receptor 3 (AHK3). Similar to ahk3 mutants, crf6 leaves show decreased
sensitivity to this cytokinin effect. Leaves overexpressing CRF6 retain more Chl 
than those of the WT under these conditions without exogenous cytokinin. It
therefore appears that an increase in expression of CRF6 downstream of the
perception of cytokinin by AHK3 is involved in the delay of leaf senescence.
Intact crf6 plants also begin to undergo monocarpic senescence sooner than WT
plants. Interestingly, plants overexpressing CRF6 display a more extreme
acceleration of development than crf6 mutants, suggesting that a specific
expression level or localization of CRF6 is necessary to prevent premature
senescence. Expression analyses indicate that CRF6 is highly expressed in the
veins of mature leaves and that this expression decreases with age. CRF6
expression is shown to be induced by abiotic stress, in addition to increased
cytokinin. Together, these findings suggest that CRF6 functions to regulate
developmental senescence negatively and may have a similar role in response to
stress. CRF6 may therefore be involved in fine-tuning the timing of developmental
and stress-induced senescence. CRF6 functioning in negative regulation of
senescence is significant in that it is the first process known to be regulated
by cytokinin, in which a CRF can be placed specifically downstream of the
cytokinin signaling pathway.

PMID: 23539244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58987. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058987. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Molecular signatures in Arabidopsis thaliana in response to insect attack and
bacterial infection.

Barah P(1), Winge P, Kusnierczyk A, Tran DH, Bones AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), 
Trondheim, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Under the threat of global climatic change and food shortages, it is 
essential to take the initiative to obtain a comprehensive understanding of
common and specific defence mechanisms existing in plant systems for protection
against different types of biotic invaders. We have implemented an integrated
approach to analyse the overall transcriptomic reprogramming and systems-level
defence responses in the model plant species Arabidopsis thaliana (A. thaliana
henceforth) during insect Brevicoryne brassicae (B. brassicae henceforth) and
bacterial Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato strain DC3000 (P. syringae henceforth) 
attacks. The main aim of this study was to identify the attacker-specific and
general defence response signatures in A. thaliana when attacked by
phloem-feeding aphids or pathogenic bacteria.
RESULTS: The obtained annotated networks of differentially expressed transcripts 
indicated that members of transcription factor families, such as WRKY, MYB, ERF, 
BHLH and bZIP, could be crucial for stress-specific defence regulation in
Arabidopsis during aphid and P. syringae attack. The defence response pathways,
signalling pathways and metabolic processes associated with aphid attack and P.
syringae infection partially overlapped. Components of several important
biosynthesis and signalling pathways, such as salicylic acid (SA), jasmonic acid 
(JA), ethylene (ET) and glucosinolates, were differentially affected during the
two the treatments. Several stress-regulated transcription factors were known to 
be associated with stress-inducible microRNAs. The differentially regulated gene 
sets included many signature transcription factors, and our co-expression
analysis showed that they were also strongly co-expressed during 69 other biotic 
stress experiments.
CONCLUSIONS: Defence responses and functional networks that were unique and
specific to aphid or P. syringae stresses were identified. Furthermore, our
analysis revealed a probable link between biotic stress and microRNAs in
Arabidopsis and, thus gives indicates a new direction for conducting large-scale 
targeted experiments to explore the detailed regulatory links between them. The
presented results provide a comparative understanding of Arabidopsis - B.
brassicae and Arabidopsis - P. syringae interactions at the transcriptomic level.

PMCID: PMC3607608
PMID: 23536844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58713. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058713. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Complex regulation by Apetala2 domain-containing transcription factors revealed
through analysis of the stress-responsive TdCor410b promoter from durum wheat.

Eini O(1), Yang N, Pyvovarenko T, Pillman K, Bazanova N, Tikhomirov N, Eliby S,
Shirley N, Sivasankar S, Tingey S, Langridge P, Hrmova M, Lopato S.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Centre for Plant Functional Genomics, University of Adelaide, Glen 
Osmond, South Australia, Australia.

Expression of the wheat dehydrin gene Cor410b is induced several fold above its
non-stressed levels upon exposure to stresses such as cold, drought and wounding.
Deletion analysis of the TdCor410b promoter revealed a single functional C-repeat
(CRT) element. Seven transcription factors (TFs) were shown to bind to this CRT
element using yeast one-hybrid screens of wheat and barley cDNA libraries, of
which only one belonged to the DREB class of TFs. The remaining six encoded
ethylene response factors (ERFs) belong to three separate subfamilies. Analysis
of binding selectivity of these TFs indicated that all seven could bind to the
CRT element (GCCGAC), and that three of the six ERFs could bind both to the CRT
element and the ethylene-responsive GCC-box (GCCGCC). The TaERF4 subfamily
members specifically bound the CRT element, and did not bind either the GCC-box
or DRE element (ACCGAC). Molecular modeling and site-directed mutagenesis
identified a single residue Pro42 in the Apetala2 (AP2) domain of TaERF4-like
proteins that is conserved in monocotyledonous plants and is responsible for the 
recognition selectivity of this subfamily. We suggest that both DREB and ERF
proteins regulate expression of the Cor410b gene through a single, critical CRT
element. Members of the TaERF4 subfamily are specific, positive regulators of
Cor410b gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3602543
PMID: 23527011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Plant Cell. 2013 Mar;25(3):1126-42. doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.109074. Epub 2013 Mar
22.

Phosphorylation of an ERF transcription factor by Arabidopsis MPK3/MPK6 regulates
plant defense gene induction and fungal resistance.

Meng X(1), Xu J, He Y, Yang KY, Mordorski B, Liu Y, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, Interdisciplinary Plant Group, Bond Life Sciences
Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA.

Arabidopsis thaliana MPK3 and MPK6, two mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs 
or MPKs), play critical roles in plant disease resistance by regulating multiple 
defense responses. Previously, we characterized the regulation of phytoalexin
biosynthesis by Arabidopsis MPK3/MPK6 cascade and its downstream WRKY33
transcription factor. Here, we report another substrate of MPK3/MPK6, ETHYLENE
RESPONSE FACTOR6 (ERF6), in regulating Arabidopsis defense gene expression and
resistance to the necrotrophic fungal pathogen Botrytis cinerea. Phosphorylation 
of ERF6 by MPK3/MPK6 in either the gain-of-function transgenic plants or in
response to B. cinerea infection increases ERF6 protein stability in vivo.
Phospho-mimicking ERF6 is able to constitutively activate defense-related genes, 
especially those related to fungal resistance, including PDF1.1 and PDF1.2, and
confers enhanced resistance to B. cinerea. By contrast, expression of ERF6-EAR,
in which ERF6 was fused to the ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif,
strongly suppresses B. cinerea-induced defense gene expression, leading to
hypersusceptibility of the ERF6-EAR transgenic plants to B. cinerea. Different
from ERF1, the regulation and function of ERF6 in defensin gene activation is
independent of ethylene. Based on these data, we conclude that ERF6, another
substrate of MPK3 and MPK6, plays important roles downstream of the MPK3/MPK6
cascade in regulating plant defense against fungal pathogens.

PMCID: PMC3634681
PMID: 23524660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Plant Cell Rep. 2013 Jul;32(7):1111-24. doi: 10.1007/s00299-013-1405-6. Epub 2013
Mar 21.

PpERF3b, a transcriptional repressor from peach, contributes to disease
susceptibility and side branching in EAR-dependent and -independent fashions.

Sherif S(1), El-Sharkawy I, Paliyath G, Jayasankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Agriculture, University of Guelph, 4890 Victoria Av. N.,
PO Box 7000, Vineland Station, ON L0R 2E0, Canada.

KEY MESSAGE: Peach ERF3b is a potent transcriptional repressor for
defense-related genes even in the presence of similar levels of transcriptional
activators and can interfere with plant development through pathways independent 
of the EAR motif. Ethylene response factors (ERFs) are a major group of plant
transcription factors with either activation or repression capabilities on gene
transcription. Repressor-type ERFs are characterised by an intrinsic motif,
namely the ERF-associated amphiphilic repression motif (EAR). Here we report the 
identification of three genes from peach (Prunus persica), PpERF12, PpERF3a and
PpERF3b, encoding for ERF repressors. The transcription kinetics of these genes
was investigated by qRT-PCR after inoculation of peach leaves with Xanthomonas
campestris pv. pruni. All three genes showed higher induction in the susceptible 
'BabyGold 5', than in the resistant 'Venture' peach varieties suggesting a
negative role for these genes in disease resistance. The functional potency of
PpERF3b has been confirmed in vivo by its ability to repress the expression of
GUS-reporter gene. To better understand the functional role of PpERF3b, the
full-length and the EAR-truncated (PpERF3b<U+2206>EAR) genes were overexpressed in
tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum). Both transgenic plants (PpERF3b and PpERF3b<U+2206>EAR)
uniformly exhibited precocious side branching, which suggests the interference of
PpERF3b with auxin-mediated dormancy of lateral shoots. Consistent with that the 
expression of auxin-response factors (Nt-ARF1, Nt-ARF6 and Nt-ARF8) was
significantly downregulated in transgenic plants compared to the wild type (WT). 
Although side branching was independent of EAR motif, the response of transgenic 
plants to inoculation by Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci was EAR dependent.
Transgenic plants overexpressing PpERF3b<U+2206>EAR showed less disease symptoms than
those overexpressing the full-length gene or WT plants. Resistance of PpERF3b<U+2206>EAR
plants was associated with enhanced induction of pathogenesis-related (PR) genes.
Our results indicate that repressor-type ERFs might act through pathways that are
dependent or independent of the EAR motif.

PMID: 23515898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. BMC Plant Biol. 2013 Mar 19;13:47. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-13-47.

Overexpression of the transcription factor RAP2.6 leads to enhanced callose
deposition in syncytia and enhanced resistance against the beet cyst nematode
Heterodera schachtii in Arabidopsis roots.

Ali MA(1), Abbas A, Kreil DP, Bohlmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plant Protection, Department of Crop Sciences, University of
Natural Resources and Life Sciences Vienna, UFT Tulln, Tulln, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Cyst nematodes invade the roots of their host plants as second stage 
juveniles and induce a syncytium which is their source of nutrients throughout
their life. A transcriptome analysis of syncytia induced by the beet cyst
nematode Heterodera schachtii in Arabidopsis roots has shown that gene expression
in the syncytium is different from that of the root with thousands of genes
upregulated or downregulated. Among the downregulated genes are many which code
for defense-related proteins. One gene which is strongly downregulated codes for 
the ethylene response transcription factor RAP2.6. The genome of Arabidopsis
contains 122 ERF transcription factor genes which are involved in a variety of
developmental and stress responses.
RESULTS: Expression of RAP2.6 was studied with RT-PCR and a promoter::GUS line.
During normal growth conditions the gene was expressed especially in roots and
stems. It was inducible by Pseudomonas syringae but downregulated in syncytia
from a very early time point on. Overexpression of the gene enhanced the
resistance against H. schachtii which was seen by a lower number of nematodes
developing on these plants as well as smaller syncytia and smaller female
nematodes. A T-DNA mutant had a reduced RAP2.6 transcript level but this did not 
further increase the susceptibility against H. schachtii. Neither overexpression 
lines nor mutants had an effect on P. syringae. Overexpression of RAP2.6 led to
an elevated expression of JA-responsive genes during early time points after
infection by H. schachtii. Syncytia developing on overexpression lines showed
enhanced deposition of callose.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that H. schachtii infection is accompanied by a
downregulation of RAP2.6. It seems likely that the nematodes use effectors to
actively downregulate the expression of this and other defense-related genes to
avoid resistance responses of the host plant. Enhanced resistance of RAP2.6
overexpression lines seemed to be due to enhanced callose deposition at syncytia 
which might interfere with nutrient import into syncytia.

PMCID: PMC3623832
PMID: 23510309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. New Phytol. 2013 Jun;198(4):1060-70. doi: 10.1111/nph.12202. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

SUB1A-mediated submergence tolerance response in rice involves differential
regulation of the brassinosteroid pathway.

Schmitz AJ(1), Folsom JJ, Jikamaru Y, Ronald P, Walia H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE
68583, USA.

· Submergence 1A (SUB1A), is an ethylene response factor (ERF) that confers
submergence tolerance in rice (Oryza sativa) via limiting shoot elongation during
the inundation period. SUB1A has been proposed to restrict shoot growth by
modulating gibberellic acid (GA) signaling. · Our transcriptome analysis
indicated that SUB1A differentially regulates genes associated with
brassinosteroid (BR) synthesis during submergence. Consistent with the gene
expression data, the SUB1A genotype had higher brassinosteroid levels after
submergence compared to the intolerant genotype. Tolerance to submergence can be 
activated in the intolerant genotype by pretreatment with exogenous brassinolide,
which results in restricted shoot elongation during submergence. · BR induced a
GA catabolic gene, resulting in lower GA levels in SUB1A plants. BR treatment
also induced the DELLA protein SLR1, a known repressor of GA responses such as
shoot elongation. We propose that BR limits GA levels during submergence in the
SUB1A rice through a GA catabolic enzyme as part of an early response and may
repress GA responses by inducing SLR1 after several days of submergence. · Our
results suggest that BR biosynthesis is regulated in a SUB1A-dependent manner
during submergence and is involved in modulating the GA signaling and
homeostasis.

No claim to original US government works New Phytologist © 2013 New Phytologist
Trust.

PMID: 23496140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58363. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058363. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

Transcriptomic events involved in melon mature-fruit abscission comprise the
sequential induction of cell-wall degrading genes coupled to a stimulation of
endo and exocytosis.

Corbacho J(1), Romojaro F, Pech JC, Latché A, Gomez-Jimenez MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Physiology, University of Extremadura, Avda de Elvas s/n, 
Badajoz, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Mature-fruit abscission (MFA) in fleshy-fruit is a genetically
controlled process with mechanisms that, contrary to immature-fruit abscission,
has not been fully characterized. Here, we use pyrosequencing to characterize the
transcriptomes of melon abscission zone (AZ) at three stages during AZ-cell
separation in order to understand MFA control at an early stage of AZ-activation.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The results show that by early induction of MFA, the melon AZ
exhibits major gene induction, while by late induction of MFA, melon AZ shows
major gene repression. Although some genes displayed similar regulation in both
early and late induction of abscission, such as EXT1-EXT4, EGase1, IAA2, ERF1,
AP2D15, FLC, MADS2, ERAF17, SAP5 and SCL13 genes, the majority had different
expression patterns. This implies that time-specific events occur during MFA, and
emphasizes the value of characterizing multiple time-specific abscission
transcriptomes. Analysis of gene-expression from these AZs reveal that a
sequential induction of cell-wall-degrading genes is associated with the
upregulation of genes involved in endo and exocytosis, and a shift in
plant-hormone metabolism and signaling genes during MFA. This is accompanied by
transcriptional activity of small-GTPases and synthaxins together with tubulins, 
dynamins, V-type ATPases and kinesin-like proteins potentially involved in MFA
signaling. Early events are potentially controlled by down-regulation of
MADS-box, AP2/ERF and Aux/IAA transcription-factors, and up-regulation of
homeobox, zinc finger, bZIP, and WRKY transcription-factors, while late events
may be controlled by up-regulation of MYB transcription-factors.
SIGNIFICANCE: Overall, the data provide a comprehensive view on MFA in
fleshy-fruit, identifying candidate genes and pathways associated with early
induction of MFA. Our comprehensive gene-expression profile will be very useful
for elucidating gene regulatory networks of the MFA in fleshy-fruit.

PMCID: PMC3590154
PMID: 23484021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57657. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057657. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

AaERF1 positively regulates the resistance to Botrytis cinerea in Artemisia
annua.

Lu X(1), Jiang W, Zhang L, Zhang F, Zhang F, Shen Q, Wang G, Tang K.

Author information: 
(1)Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology R&D Center, School of Agriculture
and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Plants are sessile organisms, and they can not move away under abiotic or biotic 
stresses. Thus plants have evolved a set of genes that response to adverse
environment to modulate gene expression. In this study, we characterized and
functionally studied an ERF transcription factor from Artemisia annua, AaERF1,
which plays an important role in biotic stress responses. The AaERF1 promoter had
been cloned and GUS staining results of AaERF1 promoter-GUS transgenic A. annua
showed that AaERF1 is expressed ubiquitiously in all organs. Several putative
cis-acting elements such as W-box, TGA-box and Py-rich element, which are
involved in defense responsiveness, are present in the promoter. The expression
of AaERF1 can be induced vigorously by methyl jasmonate as well as by ethephon
and wounding, implying that AaERF1 may activate some of the defense genes via the
jasmonic acid and ethylene signaling pathways of A. annua. The results of
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and yeast one-hybrid experiments
showed that AaERF1 was able to bind to the GCC box cis-acting element in vitro
and in yeast. Ectopic expression of AaERF1 could enhance the expression levels of
the defense marker genes PLANT DEFENSIN1.2 (PDF1.2) and BASIC CHITINASE (ChiB),
and increase the resistance to Botrytis cinerea in the 35S::AaERF1 transgenic
Arabidopsis. The down-regulated expression level of AaERF1 evidently reduced the 
resistance to B. cinerea in A. annua. The overall results showed that AaERF1
positively regulated the resistance to B. cinerea in A. annua.

PMCID: PMC3585223
PMID: 23469042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. New Phytol. 2013 Jun;198(4):1191-202. doi: 10.1111/nph.12207. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

AaORA, a trichome-specific AP2/ERF transcription factor of Artemisia annua, is a 
positive regulator in the artemisinin biosynthetic pathway and in disease
resistance to Botrytis cinerea.

Lu X(1), Zhang L, Zhang F, Jiang W, Shen Q, Zhang L, Lv Z, Wang G, Tang K.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology
R&D Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China.

· Six transcription factors of APETALA2/ethylene-response factor (AP2/ERF) family
were cloned and analyzed in Artemisia annua. Real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (RT-Q-PCR) showed that AaORA exhibited similar expression patterns
to those of amorpha-4,11-diene synthase gene (ADS), cytochrome P450-dependent
hydroxylase gene (CYP71AV1) and double bond reductase 2 gene (DBR2) in different 
tissues of A. annua. · AaORA is a trichome-specific transcription factor, which
is expressed in both glandular secretory trichomes (GSTs) and nonglandular
T-shaped trichomes (TSTs) of A. annua. The result of subcellular localization
shows that AaORA is targeted to the nuclei and the cytoplasm. · Overexpression
and RNA interference (RNAi) of AaORA in A. annua regulated, positively and
significantly, the expression levels of ADS, CYP71AV1, DBR2 and AaERF1. The
up-regulated or down-regulated expression levels of these genes resulted in a
significant increase or decrease in artemisinin and dihydroartemisinic acid. The 
results demonstrate that AaORA is a positive regulator in the biosynthesis of
artemisinin. · Overexpression of AaORA in Arabidopsis thaliana increased greatly 
the transcript levels of the defense marker genes PLANT DEFENSIN1.2 (PDF1.2),
HEVEIN-LIKE PROTEIN (HEL) and BASIC CHITINASE (B-CHI). After inoculation with
Botrytis cinerea, the phenotypes of AaORA overexpression in A. thaliana and AaORA
RNAi in A. annua demonstrate that AaORA is a positive regulator of disease
resistance to B. cinerea.

© 2013 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2013 New Phytologist Trust.

PMID: 23448426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Nat Genet. 2013 Mar;45(3):231-2. doi: 10.1038/ng.2557.

Filling in the gaps in cranial suture biology.

Fitzpatrick DR.

PMID: 23438589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Plant Mol Biol. 2013 Apr;81(6):577-93. doi: 10.1007/s11103-013-0026-3. Epub 2013 
Feb 24.

Induction of endodormancy in crown buds of leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula L.)
implicates a role for ethylene and cross-talk between photoperiod and
temperature.

Dogramaci M(1), Foley ME, Chao WS, Christoffers MJ, Anderson JV.

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Research Laboratory, USDA-Agricultural Research Service, 1605
Albrecht Blvd. N., Fargo, ND, 58102-2765, USA.

Leafy spurge is a model for studying well-defined phases of dormancy in
underground adventitious buds (UABs) of herbaceous perennial weeds, which is a
primary factor facilitating their escape from conventional control measures. A
12-week ramp down in both temperature (27 <U+2192> 10 °C) and photoperiod (16 <U+2192> 8 h
light) is required to induce a transition from para- to endo-dormancy in UABs of 
leafy spurge. To evaluate the effects of photoperiod and temperature on molecular
networks of UABs during this transition, we compared global transcriptome
data-sets obtained from leafy spurge exposed to a ramp down in both temperature
and photoperiod (RDtp) versus a ramp down in temperature (RDt) alone. Analysis of
data-sets indicated that transcript abundance for genes associated with circadian
clock, photoperiodism, flowering, and hormone responses (CCA1, COP1, HY5, MAF3,
MAX2) preferentially increased in endodormant UABs. Gene-set enrichment analyses 
also highlighted metabolic pathways involved in endodormancy induction that were 
associated with ethylene, auxin, flavonoids, and carbohydrate metabolism;
whereas, sub-network enrichment analyses identified hubs (CCA1, CO, FRI, miR172A,
EINs, DREBs) of molecular networks associated with carbohydrate metabolism,
circadian clock, flowering, and stress and hormone responses. These results
helped refine existing models for the transition to endodormancy in UABs of leafy
spurge, which strengthened the roles of circadian clock associated genes, DREBs, 
COP1-HY5, carbohydrate metabolism, and involvement of hormones (ABA, ethylene,
and strigolactones). We further examined the effects of ethylene by application
of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC) to paradormant plants without a ramp
down treatment. New vegetative growth from UABs of ACC-treated plants resulted in
a dwarfed phenotype that mimicked the growth response in RDtp-induced endodormant
UABs. The results of this study provide new insights into dormancy regulation
suggesting a short-photoperiod treatment provides an additive cross-talk effect
with temperature signals that may impact ethylene's effect on AP2/ERF family
members.

PMID: 23436173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Plant Cell. 2013 Feb;25(2):744-61. doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.108548. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

Salicylic acid suppresses jasmonic acid signaling downstream of SCFCOI1-JAZ by
targeting GCC promoter motifs via transcription factor ORA59.

Van der Does D(1), Leon-Reyes A, Koornneef A, Van Verk MC, Rodenburg N, Pauwels
L, Goossens A, Körbes AP, Memelink J, Ritsema T, Van Wees SC, Pieterse CM.

Author information: 
(1)Plant-Microbe Interactions, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht
University, 3508 TB Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Antagonism between the defense hormones salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid
(JA) plays a central role in the modulation of the plant immune signaling
network, but the molecular mechanisms underlying this phenomenon are largely
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that suppression of the JA pathway by SA functions 
downstream of the E3 ubiquitin-ligase Skip-Cullin-F-box complex SCF(COI1), which 
targets JASMONATE ZIM-domain transcriptional repressor proteins (JAZs) for
proteasome-mediated degradation. In addition, neither the stability nor the
JA-induced degradation of JAZs was affected by SA. In silico promoter analysis of
the SA/JA crosstalk transcriptome revealed that the 1-kb promoter regions of
JA-responsive genes that are suppressed by SA are significantly enriched in the
JA-responsive GCC-box motifs. Using GCC:GUS lines carrying four copies of the
GCC-box fused to the ß-glucuronidase reporter gene, we showed that the GCC-box
motif is sufficient for SA-mediated suppression of JA-responsive gene expression.
Using plants overexpressing the GCC-box binding APETALA2/ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR
(AP2/ERF) transcription factors ERF1 or ORA59, we found that SA strongly reduces 
the accumulation of ORA59 but not that of ERF1. Collectively, these data indicate
that the SA pathway inhibits JA signaling downstream of the SCF(COI1)-JAZ complex
by targeting GCC-box motifs in JA-responsive promoters via a negative effect on
the transcriptional activator ORA59.

PMCID: PMC3608790
PMID: 23435661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Clin Endosc. 2013 Jan;46(1):91-4. doi: 10.5946/ce.2013.46.1.91. Epub 2013 Jan 31.

A case of spontaneous esophagopleural fistula successfully treated by endoscopic 
stent insertion.

Kang GH(1), Yoon BY, Kim BH, Moon HS, Jeong HY, Sung JK, Lee ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chungnam National University School of
Medicine, Daejeon, Korea.

The most common cause of esophagorespiratory fistulas (ERFs) is associated with
malignancy. The use of self-expandable metal stents is effective for the
treatment of malignant ERFs, but benign ERF is rare, which is why its optimal
treatment is not defined yet. There have been few reports describing benign
esophagopleural fistula and its treatments in South Korea. Here, we report a rare
case of spontaneous esophagopleural fistula, which was successfully treated by
endoscopic placement of a membrane covered metal stent.

PMCID: PMC3572360
PMID: 23423837  [PubMed]


343. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;776:347-55. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-6093-0_32.

Taurine enhances the sexual response and mating ability in aged male rats.

Yang J(1), Lin S, Feng Y, Wu G, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science & Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural
University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

It has been demonstrated that taurine is abundant in male reproductive organs,
and can be biosynthesized by testis, but the taurine concentration will reduce
with aging. The levels of serum LH, T, NOS, and NO were found to be obviously
increased by taurine supplementation in aged rats in our previous study. In
addition, aging will result in a significant decline in sexual response and
function, which may be attributed to the androgen deficiency. Furthermore, NO has
been proposed as a crucial mediator of penile erection. That makes us hypothesize
that there is potential relationship between taurine decline and erection
dysfunction in aged males. So the primary aim of the present study was to
investigate the effect of taurine on male sexuality in rats. Taurine was offered 
in water to male aged (20 months old) rats for 110 days. The effects of taurine
on the sexual response, mating ability, levels of serum reproductive hormones,
and penile NOS and NO levels were investigated. The results showed that taurine
can significantly reduce the EL and ML; obviously increase the ERF, MF, IF, and
EJF; stimulate the secretion of GnRH, LH, and T; and elevate penis NOS and NO
level in aged rats. The results indicated that taurine can enhance the sexual
response and mating ability in aged male rats by increasing the level of
testosterone and NO, but the exact mechanism of which needs to be further
investigated.

PMID: 23392896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2013;77(2):243-8. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Effect of a fermented brown rice extract on the gastrointestinal function in
methotrexate-treated rats.

Ochiai M(1), Shiomi S, Ushikubo S, Inai R, Matsuo T.

Author information: 
(1)Kagawa University, Kagawa, Japan. x742012z@mails.cc.ehime-u.ac.jp

We investigated the protective effect of a hydrous ethanol extract of brown rice 
fermented with Aspergillus oryzae (ERF) which contained nucleobases and low fiber
on the methotrexate (MTX)-induced gastrointestinal damage in rats. The rats were 
assigned to three groups: control (CON), MTX, and MTX-ERF. The rats in the CON
and MTX groups were fed for 4 weeks on a basal diet, and those in the MTX-ERF
group were fed on a 9.16% ERF-containing basal diet. The rats in the MTX and
MTX-ERF groups were administered with MTX after 3 weeks. The survival rate and
incidence rate of diarrhea were monitored over 1 week. On day 4 after the
administration, half of the rats in each group were killed, and gastrointestinal 
samples were collected. Feeding with ERF improved the incidence rate of diarrhea,
increased the protein content in small intestinal mucosa, and also apparently
improved the survival rate. These results indicate that dietary ERF could protect
against MTX-induced gastrointestinal damage.

PMID: 23391910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2012;2012:554-7. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2012.6345991.

A real-time detector system for precise timing of audiovisual stimuli.

Henelius A(1), Jagadeesan S, Huotilainen M.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Work Research Centre, Finnish Institute of Occupational Health,
Helsinki, Finland. andreas.henelius@ttl.fi

The successful recording of neurophysiologic signals, such as event-related
potentials (ERPs) or event-related magnetic fields (ERFs), relies on precise
information of stimulus presentation times. We have developed an accurate and
flexible audiovisual sensor solution operating in real-time for on-line use in
both auditory and visual ERP and ERF paradigms. The sensor functions
independently of the used audio or video stimulus presentation tools or signal
acquisition system. The sensor solution consists of two independent sensors; one 
for sound and one for light. The microcontroller-based audio sensor incorporates 
a novel approach to the detection of natural sounds such as multipart audio
stimuli, using an adjustable dead time. This aids in producing exact markers for 
complex auditory stimuli and reduces the number of false detections. The analog
photosensor circuit detects changes in light intensity on the screen and produces
a marker for changes exceeding a threshold. The microcontroller software for the 
audio sensor is free and open source, allowing other researchers to customise the
sensor for use in specific auditory ERP/ERF paradigms. The hardware schematics
and software for the audiovisual sensor are freely available from the webpage of 
the authors' lab.

PMID: 23365952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Nat Genet. 2013 Mar;45(3):308-13. doi: 10.1038/ng.2539. Epub 2013 Jan 27.

Reduced dosage of ERF causes complex craniosynostosis in humans and mice and
links ERK1/2 signaling to regulation of osteogenesis.

Twigg SR(1), Vorgia E, McGowan SJ, Peraki I, Fenwick AL, Sharma VP, Allegra M,
Zaragkoulias A, Sadighi Akha E, Knight SJ, Lord H, Lester T, Izatt L, Lampe AK,
Mohammed SN, Stewart FJ, Verloes A, Wilson LC, Healy C, Sharpe PT, Hammond P,
Hughes J, Taylor S, Johnson D, Wall SA, Mavrothalassitis G, Wilkie AO.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics Group, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

The extracellular signal-related kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) are key proteins
mediating mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling downstream of RAS:
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 leads to nuclear uptake and modulation of multiple
targets. Here, we show that reduced dosage of ERF, which encodes an inhibitory
ETS transcription factor directly bound by ERK1/2 (refs. 2,3,4,5,6,7), causes
complex craniosynostosis (premature fusion of the cranial sutures) in humans and 
mice. Features of this newly recognized clinical disorder include multiple-suture
synostosis, craniofacial dysmorphism, Chiari malformation and language delay.
Mice with functional Erf levels reduced to ~30% of normal exhibit postnatal
multiple-suture synostosis; by contrast, embryonic calvarial development appears 
mildly delayed. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts and high-throughput sequencing, we find that ERF binds preferentially
to elements away from promoters that contain RUNX or AP-1 motifs. This work
identifies ERF as a novel regulator of osteogenic stimulation by RAS-ERK
signaling, potentially by competing with activating ETS factors in multifactor
transcriptional complexes.

PMCID: PMC3683605
PMID: 23354439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jan 16;14:30. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-30.

Identification of the Hevea brasiliensis AP2/ERF superfamily by RNA sequencing.

Duan C(1), Argout X, Gébelin V, Summo M, Dufayard JF, Leclercq J, Kuswanhadi,
Piyatrakul P, Pirrello J, Rio M, Champion A, Montoro P.

Author information: 
(1)CIRAD, UMR AGAP, Montpellier, France.

BACKGROUND: Rubber tree (Hevea brasiliensis) laticifers are the source of natural
rubber. Rubber production depends on endogenous and exogenous ethylene
(ethephon). AP2/ERF transcription factors, and especially Ethylene-Response
Factors, play a crucial role in plant development and response to biotic and
abiotic stresses. This study set out to sequence transcript expressed in various 
tissues using next-generation sequencing and to identify AP2/ERF superfamily in
the rubber tree.
RESULTS: The 454 sequencing technique was used to produce five tissue-type
transcript libraries (leaf, bark, latex, embryogenic tissues and root). Reads
from all libraries were pooled and reassembled to improve mRNA lengths and
produce a global library. One hundred and seventy-three AP2/ERF contigs were
identified by in silico analysis based on the amino acid sequence of the
conserved AP2 domain from the global library. The 142 contigs with the full AP2
domain were classified into three main families (20 AP2 members, 115 ERF members 
divided into 11 groups, and 4 RAV members) and 3 soloist members. Fifty-nine
AP2/ERF transcripts were found in latex. Alongside the microRNA172 already
described in plants, eleven additional microRNAs were predicted to inhibit Hevea 
AP2/ERF transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: Hevea has a similar number of AP2/ERF genes to that of other dicot
species. We adapted the alignment and classification methods to data from
next-generation sequencing techniques to provide reliable information. We
observed several specific features for the ERF family. Three HbSoloist members
form a group in Hevea. Several AP2/ERF genes highly expressed in latex suggest
they have a specific function in Hevea. The analysis of AP2/ERF transcripts in
Hevea presented here provides the basis for studying the molecular regulation of 
latex production in response to abiotic stresses and latex cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3644242
PMID: 23324139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Ying Yong Sheng Tai Xue Bao. 2012 Sep;23(9):2422-8.

[Transferability of remote sensing-based models for estimating moso bamboo forest
aboveground biomass].

[Article in Chinese]

Yu CL(1), Du HQ, Zhou GM, Xu XJ, Gui ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of Carbon Cycling in Forest Ecosystems and
Carbon Sequestration, Zhejiang A & F University, Lin'an 311300, Zhejiang, China. 
yuzhendao923@163.com

Taking the moso bamboo production areas Lin'an, Anji, and Longquan in Zhejiang
Province of East China as study areas, and based on the integration of field
survey data and Landsat 5 Thematic Mappr images, five models for estimating the
moso bamboo (Phyllostachys heterocycla var. pubescens) forest biomass were
constructed by using linear, nonlinear, stepwise regression, multiple regression,
and Erf-BP neural network, and the models were evaluated. The models with higher 
precision were then transferred to the study areas for examining the model's
transferability. The results indicated that for the three moso bamboo production 
areas, Erf-BP neural network model presented the highest precision, followed by
stepwise regression and nonlinear models. The Erf-BP neural network model had the
best transferability. Model type and independent variables had relatively high
effects on the transferability of statistical-based models.

PMID: 23285997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Translation (Austin). 2013 Sep 23;1(2):e26574. doi: 10.4161/trla.26574.
eCollection 2013.

Clearance of yeast eRF-3 prion [PSI+] by amyloid enlargement due to the imbalance
between chaperone Ssa1 and cochaperone Sgt2.

Arai C(1), Kurahashi H(2), Pack CG(3), Sako Y(3), Nakamura Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science; University of Tokyo; Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan;
Department of Medical Genome Sciences; Graduate School of Frontier Sciences; The 
University of Tokyo; Chiba, Japan. (2)Institute of Medical Science; University of
Tokyo; Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Cellular Informatics Laboratory; RIKEN
Advanced Science Institute; Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

The cytoplasmic [PSI+] element of budding yeast represents the prion conformation
of translation release factor eRF-3 (Sup35). Prions are transmissible agents
caused by self-seeded highly ordered aggregates (amyloids). Much interest lies in
understanding how prions are developed and transmitted. However, the cellular
mechanism involved in the prion clearance is unknown. Recently we have reported
that excess misfolded multi-transmembrane protein, Dip5<U+0394>C-v82, eliminates yeast
prion [PSI+]. In this study, we showed that the prion loss was caused by
enlargement of prion amyloids, unsuitable for transmission, and its efficiency
was affected by the cellular balance between the chaperone Hsp70-Ssa1 and Sgt2, a
small cochaperone known as a regulator of chaperone targeting to different types 
of aggregation-prone proteins. The present findings suggest that Sgt2 is titrated
by excess Dip5<U+0394>C-v82, and the shortage of Sgt2 led to non-productive binding of
Ssa1 on [PSI+] amyloids. Clearance of prion [PSI+] by the imbalance between Ssa1 
and Sgt2 might provide a novel array to regulate the release factor function in
yeast.

PMCID: PMC4718058
PMID: 26824024  [PubMed]


350. Nephron Clin Pract. 2013;125(1-4):259-73. doi: 10.1159/000360032. Epub 2014 Feb
14.

UK Renal Registry 16th annual report: chapter 13 clinical, haematological and
biochemical parameters in patients receiving renal replacement therapy in
paediatric centres in the uk in 2012: national and centre-specific analyses.

Pruthi R(1), Maxwell H, Casula A, Braddon F, Lewis M, O'Brien C, Stojanovic J,
Tse Y, Inward C, Sinha MD.

Author information: 
(1)UK Renal Registry, Bristol, UK.

INTRODUCTION: The British Association for Paediatric Nephrology Registry (BAPN)
was established to analyse data related to renal replacement therapy (RRT) in
children. The registry receives data from the 13 paediatric nephrology centres in
the UK. This chapter aims to provide centre specific data so that individual
centres can reflect on the contribution that their data makes to the national
picture and to determine the extent to which their patient parameters meet
nationally agreed audit standards for the management of children with established
renal failure (ERF).
METHODS: Data returns included a mixture of electronic (92%) and paper (8%)
returns. Data were analysed to calculate summary statistics and where applicable 
the percentage achieving an audit standard. The standards used were those set out
by the Renal Association and the National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence.
RESULTS: Anthropometric data confirmed that children receiving RRT were short
compared to healthy peers. Amongst patients with a height of <2SD between 2001
and 2012, 29.2%were receiving growth hormone if they were on dialysis compared to
11.9% if they had a functioning transplant. Prevalence rates of overweight and
obese status in children with ERF remain concerningly high. Blood pressure
control remained challenging with wide inter-centre variation although this was
significantly better in children with a functioning transplant. Over a quarter of
haemodialysis patients and 17.3% of peritoneal dialysis patients were anaemic,
compared to only 8.3% of transplanted patients. ESA use in the dialysis
population exceeded 90% amongst anaemic patients. The control of renal bone
disease remained challenging.
CONCLUSIONS: Optimising growth and reducing prevalent excess weight in children
on RRT remains challenging. The likelihood of complete electronic reporting in
the near future with plans for quarterly reporting in the format of the recently 
finalised NEW paediatric dataset will hopefully improve quality of data and their
reporting, allowing improvements in patient care.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24662177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Nephron Clin Pract. 2013;125(1-4):127-38. doi: 10.1159/000360026. Epub 2014 Feb
14.

UK Renal Registry 16th annual report: chapter 7 demography of the UK paediatric
renal replacement therapy population in 2012.

Pruthi R(1), O'Brien C, Casula A, Braddon F, Lewis M, Maxwell H, Stojanovic J,
Tse Y, Inward C, Sinha MD.

Author information: 
(1)UK Renal Registry, Bristol, UK.

INTRODUCTION: To describe the demographics of the paediatric renal replacement
therapy (RRT) population under the age of 18 years in the UK and to analyse
changes in demography with time.
METHODS: Data were collected from all 13 paediatric renal centres within the UK. 
A series of crosssectional and longitudinal analyses were performed to describe
the demographics of paediatric RRT patients.
RESULTS: A total of 861 children and young people under 18 with established renal
failure (ERF) were receiving treatment at paediatric nephrology centres in 2012. 
At the census date, 80.2% had a functioning transplant, 10.6% were receiving
haemodialysis (HD) and 9.2% were receiving peritoneal dialysis (PD). In patients 
aged <16 years the prevalence of ERF was 56.7 pmarp and the incidence 9.0 pmarp. 
A third of the prevalent patients had one or more reported comorbidities. At
transfer to adult services, 81.5% of patients had a functioning renal transplant.
Preemptive transplantation was seen to occur in a third of children starting RRT 
under 16 years, with lower rates seen in girls and ethnic minorities. Over the
past 15 years for those referred early, there has been a rise in pre-emptive
transplantation rates, rising from 26.2% in 1998-2002 to 36.3% in 2008-2012. Over
the same period there has also been an increase in living donation from 7.1% to
18%. Survival in childhood amongst children starting RRT was the lowest in those 
aged less than two years.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this report are similar to last year with continued 
improvement in data quality and electronic submission of data returns. The data
provided in this report show slowly increasing trends of incidence and prevalence
in children with established renal failure.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24662171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. BMC Plant Biol. 2012 Dec 26;12:244. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-12-244.

Some ethylene biosynthesis and AP2/ERF genes reveal a specific pattern of
expression during somatic embryogenesis in Hevea brasiliensis.

Piyatrakul P(1), Putranto RA, Martin F, Rio M, Dessailly F, Leclercq J, Dufayard 
JF, Lardet L, Montoro P.

Author information: 
(1)CIRAD, UMR AGAP, F-34398, Montpellier, France.

BACKGROUND: Ethylene production and signalling play an important role in somatic 
embryogenesis, especially for species that are recalcitrant in in vitro culture. 
The AP2/ERF superfamily has been identified and classified in Hevea brasiliensis.
This superfamily includes the ERFs involved in response to ethylene. The relative
transcript abundance of ethylene biosynthesis genes and of AP2/ERF genes was
analysed during somatic embryogenesis for callus lines with different
regeneration potential, in order to identify genes regulated during that process.
RESULTS: The analysis of relative transcript abundance was carried out by
real-time RT-PCR for 142 genes. The transcripts of ERFs from group I, VII and
VIII were abundant at all stages of the somatic embryogenesis process. Forty
genetic expression markers for callus regeneration capacity were identified.
Fourteen markers were found for proliferating calli and 35 markers for calli at
the end of the embryogenesis induction phase. Sixteen markers discriminated
between normal and abnormal embryos and, lastly, there were 36 markers of
conversion into plantlets. A phylogenetic analysis comparing the sequences of the
AP2 domains of Hevea and Arabidopsis genes enabled us to predict the function of 
13 expression marker genes.
CONCLUSIONS: This first characterization of the AP2/ERF superfamily in Hevea
revealed dramatic regulation of the expression of AP2/ERF genes during the
somatic embryogenesis process. The gene expression markers of proliferating
callus capacity to regenerate plants by somatic embryogenesis should make it
possible to predict callus lines suitable to be used for multiplication. Further 
functional characterization of these markers opens up prospects for discovering
specific AP2/ERF functions in the Hevea species for which somatic embryogenesis
is difficult.

PMCID: PMC3561283
PMID: 23268714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. BMC Plant Biol. 2012 Dec 21;12:242. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-12-242.

Analysis of ripening-related gene expression in papaya using an Arabidopsis-based
microarray.

Fabi JP(1), Seymour GB, Graham NS, Broadley MR, May ST, Lajolo FM, Cordenunsi BR,
Oliveira do Nascimento JR.

Author information: 
(1)University of São Paulo, Department of Food Science and Experimental
Nutrition, FCF, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Papaya (Carica papaya L.) is a commercially important crop that
produces climacteric fruits with a soft and sweet pulp that contain a wide range 
of health promoting phytochemicals. Despite its importance, little is known about
transcriptional modifications during papaya fruit ripening and their control. In 
this study we report the analysis of ripe papaya transcriptome by using a
cross-species (XSpecies) microarray technique based on the phylogenetic proximity
between papaya and Arabidopsis thaliana.
RESULTS: Papaya transcriptome analyses resulted in the identification of 414
ripening-related genes with some having their expression validated by qPCR. The
transcription profile was compared with that from ripening tomato and grape.
There were many similarities between papaya and tomato especially with respect to
the expression of genes encoding proteins involved in primary metabolism,
regulation of transcription, biotic and abiotic stress and cell wall metabolism. 
XSpecies microarray data indicated that transcription factors (TFs) of the
MADS-box, NAC and AP2/ERF gene families were involved in the control of papaya
ripening and revealed that cell wall-related gene expression in papaya had
similarities to the expression profiles seen in Arabidopsis during hypocotyl
development.
CONCLUSION: The cross-species array experiment identified a ripening-related set 
of genes in papaya allowing the comparison of transcription control between
papaya and other fruit bearing taxa during the ripening process.

PMCID: PMC3562526
PMID: 23256600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Poult Sci. 2013 Jan;92(1):64-83. doi: 10.3382/ps.2012-02745.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (ascites syndrome) in broilers: a review.

Wideman RF(1), Rhoads DD, Erf GF, Anthony NB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, FAyetteville 72701,
USA. rwideman@uark.edu

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) syndrome in broilers (also known as ascites
syndrome and pulmonary hypertension syndrome) can be attributed to imbalances
between cardiac output and the anatomical capacity of the pulmonary vasculature
to accommodate ever-increasing rates of blood flow, as well as to an
inappropriately elevated tone (degree of constriction) maintained by the
pulmonary arterioles. Comparisons of PAH-susceptible and PAH-resistant broilers
do not consistently reveal differences in cardiac output, but PAH-susceptible
broilers consistently have higher pulmonary arterial pressures and pulmonary
vascular resistances compared with PAH-resistant broilers. Efforts clarify the
causes of excessive pulmonary vascular resistance have focused on evaluating the 
roles of chemical mediators of vasoconstriction and vasodilation, as well as on
pathological (structural) changes occurring within the pulmonary arterioles
(e.g., vascular remodeling and pathology) during the pathogenesis of PAH. The
objectives of this review are to (1) summarize the pathophysiological progression
initiated by the onset of pulmonary hypertension and culminating in terminal
ascites; (2) review recent information regarding the factors contributing to
excessively elevated resistance to blood flow through the lungs; (3) assess the
role of the immune system during the pathogenesis of PAH; and (4) present new
insights into the genetic basis of PAH. The cumulative evidence attributes the
elevated pulmonary vascular resistance in PAH-susceptible broilers to an
anatomically inadequate pulmonary vascular capacity, to excessive vascular tone
reflecting the dominance of pulmonary vasoconstrictors over vasodilators, and to 
vascular pathology elicited by excessive hemodynamic stress. Emerging evidence
also demonstrates that the pathogenesis of PAH includes characteristics of an
inflammatory/autoimmune disease involving multifactorial genetic, environmental, 
and immune system components. Pulmonary arterial hypertension susceptibility
appears to be multigenic and may be manifested in aberrant stress sensitivity,
function, and regulation of pulmonary vascular tissue components, as well as
aberrant activities of innate and adaptive immune system components. Major
genetic influences and high heritabilities for PAH susceptibility have been
demonstrated by numerous investigators. Selection pressures rigorously focused to
challenge the pulmonary vascular capacity readily expose the genetic basis for
spontaneous PAH in broilers. Chromosomal mapping continues to identify regions
associated with ascites susceptibility, and candidate genes have been identified.
Ongoing immunological and genomic investigations are likely to continue
generating important new knowledge regarding the fundamental biological bases for
the PAH/ascites syndrome.

PMID: 23243232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Kardiologiia. 2012;52(12):57-63.

[The place of ß-adrenoblockers in the treatment of cardiovascular disease in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Russian]

Statsenko ME, Derevianchenko MV.

Review is devoted to the place of ß-adrenoblockers in the treatment of
cardiovascular disease (CVD) in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Currently, it is expedient to use cardioselective
-adrenoblockers, such as bisoprolol, metoprolol succinate, carvedilol and
nebivolol for the treatment of patients with CVD and COPD. Bisoprolol has the
greatest (of all the cardioselective ß-adrenoblockers) evidence base of data on
the efficacy and safety of using in patients with COPD and CVD. While using a
cardioselective ß-adrenoblockers external respiration function (ERF) should be
controlled. When clinical signs of worsening airway conductance appear, and
adverse effects on ERF parameters are observed, ß-adrenoblockers dosage should be
reduced, while maintaining lower respiratory functions need to be canceled. In
general, the use of cardioselective ß-adrenoblockers in patients with CVD and
COPD is safe, and the benefits of the drugs in this group exceed the risks of
exacerbation of COPD. If possible the use of 2-agonists should be limited in
patients with CVD in the treatment of COPD because of their negative impact on
the cardiovascular system - the preferred use of anticholinergic drugs.

PMID: 23237442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2013 Jan;62:70-8. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2012.10.010. Epub 
2012 Nov 7.

Overexpression of a Chinese cabbage BrERF11 transcription factor enhances disease
resistance to Ralstonia solanacearum in tobacco.

Lai Y(1), Dang F, Lin J, Yu L, Shi Y, Xiao Y, Huang M, Lin J, Chen C, Qi A, Liu
Z, Guan D, Mou S, Qiu A, He S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou,
Fujian 350002, China.

Ethylene-responsive factors (ERFs) play diverse roles in plant growth,
developmental processes and stress responses. However, the roles and underlying
mechanism of ERFs remain poorly understood, especially in non-model plants. In
this study, a full length cDNA of ERF gene was isolated from the cDNA library of 
Chinese cabbage. According to sequence alignment, we found a highly conservative 
AP2/ERF domain, two nuclear localization signals, and an ERF-associated
Amphiphilic Repression (EAR) motif in its C-terminal region. It belonged to VIIIa
group ERFs sharing the highest sequence identity with AtERF11 in all of the ERFs 
in Arabidopsis and designated BrERF11. BrERF11-green fluorescence protein (GFP)
transient expressed in onion epidermis cells localized to the nucleus. The
transcript levels of BrERF11 were induced by exogenous salicylic acid (SA),
methyl jasmonate (MeJA), ethephon (ETH), and hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)).
Constitutive expression of BrERF11 enhanced tolerance to Ralstonia solanacearum
infection in transgenic tobacco plants, which was coupled with hypersensitive
response (HR), burst of H(2)O(2) and upregulation of defense-related genes
including HR marker genes, SA-, JA-dependent pathogen-related genes and ET
biosynthesis associated genes and downregulation of CAT1, suggesting BrERF11 may 
participate in pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)- and
effector-triggered immunity (PTI and ETI) mediated by SA-, JA- and ET-dependent
signaling mechanisms.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23201563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. BMC Genomics. 2012 Nov 29;13:680. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-680.

Comparative transcriptomic analysis of roots of contrasting Gossypium herbaceum
genotypes revealing adaptation to drought.

Ranjan A(1), Pandey N, Lakhwani D, Dubey NK, Pathre UV, Sawant SV.

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-, National Botanical Research Institute, Rana Pratap Marg, Lucknow,
226001, India.

BACKGROUND: Root length and its architecture govern the adaptability of plants to
various stress conditions, including drought stress. Genetic variations in root
growth, length, and architecture are genotypes dependent. In this study, we
compared the drought-induced transcriptome of four genotypes of Gossypium
herbaceum that differed in their drought tolerance adaptability. Three different 
methodologies, namely, microarray, pyrosequencing, and qRT-PCR, were used for
transcriptome analysis and validation.
RESULTS: The variations in root length and growth were found among four genotypes
of G.herbaceum when exposed to mannitol-induced osmotic stress. Under osmotic
stress, the drought tolerant genotypes Vagad and GujCot-21 showed a longer root
length than did by drought sensitive RAHS-14 and RAHS-IPS-187. Further, the gene 
expression patterns in the root tissue of all genotypes were analyzed. We
obtained a total of 794 differentially expressed genes by microarray and 104928
high-quality reads representing 53195 unigenes from the root transcriptome. The
Vagad and GujCot-21 respond to water stress by inducing various genes and
pathways such as response to stresses, response to water deprivation, and
flavonoid pathways. Some key regulatory genes involved in abiotic stress such as 
AP2 EREBP, MYB, WRKY, ERF, ERD9, and LEA were highly expressed in Vagad and
GujCot-21. The genes RHD3, NAP1, LBD, and transcription factor WRKY75, known for 
root development under various stress conditions, were expressed specifically in 
Vagad and GujCot-21. The genes related to peroxidases, transporters, cell
wall-modifying enzymes, and compatible solutes (amino acids, amino sugars,
betaine, sugars, or sugar alcohols) were also highly expressed in Vagad and
Gujcot-21.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis highlights changes in the expression pattern of genes
and depicts a small but highly specific set of drought responsive genes induced
in response to drought stress. Some of these genes were very likely to be
involved in drought stress signaling and adaptation, such as transmembrane
nitrate transporter, alcohol dehydrogenase, pyruvate decarboxylase, sucrose
synthase, and LEA. These results might serve as the basis for an in-depth
genomics study of Gossypium herbaceum, including a comparative transcriptome
analysis and the selection of genes for root traits and drought tolerance.

PMCID: PMC3558330
PMID: 23194183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Physiol Plant. 2013 May;148(1):1-8. doi: 10.1111/ppl.12011. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

Molecular elements of low-oxygen signaling in plants.

Licausi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, 56124, Pisa, Italy. f.licausi@sssup.it

Oxygen and its limitation are emerging as a crucial factor in plant fitness,
growth and development. Recent studies revealed the mechanisms by which oxygen is
perceived by plant cells. This sensory system partly relies on an oxygen-mediated
branch of the N-end rule pathway for protein degradation acting on a specific
clade of ethylene responsive transcription factors (ERF-VII). A complementary
regulative step is provided by aerobic sequestration of an ERF-VII protein at the
plasma membrane and its timely release when hypoxia occurs. Complete absence of
oxygen triggers the transient accumulation of reactive hydrogen peroxide and
induces an additional set of reactive oxygen species-related genes involved in
both signaling and attenuation of oxidative stress. Moreover, temporary hypoxic
environments that are built up as consequence of dense cell packing have been
demonstrated to trigger cell-fate determination in maize anthers. Similarly,
limited oxygen delivery in bulky fruit or tuber tissues growing in aerobic
conditions were shown to stimulate anaerobic-like responses. These advances in
low-oxygen signaling and its effect on cell development highlight the importance 
of taking hypoxia into account in agronomical practices as well as in breeding
programs.

© 2012 Scandinavian Plant Physiology Society.

PMID: 23167298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(11):e1002997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002997. Epub 2012 Nov
15.

Plant vascular cell division is maintained by an interaction between PXY and
ethylene signalling.

Etchells JP(1), Provost CM, Turner SR.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

The procambium and cambium are meristematic tissues from which vascular tissue is
derived. Vascular initials differentiate into phloem towards the outside of the
stem and xylem towards the inside. A small peptide derived from CLV-3/ESR1-LIKE
41 (CLE41) is thought to promote cell divisions in vascular meristems by
signalling through the PHLOEM INTERCALLATED WITH XYLEM (PXY) receptor kinase. pxy
mutants, however, display only small reductions in vascular cell number,
suggesting a mechanism exists that allows plants to compensate for the absence of
PXY. Consistent with this idea, we identify a large number of genes specifically 
upregulated in pxy mutants, including several AP2/ERF transcription factors.
These transcription factors are required for normal cell division in the cambium 
and procambium. These same transcription factors are also upregulated by ethylene
and in ethylene-overproducing eto1 mutants. eto1 mutants also exhibit an increase
in vascular cell division that is dependent upon the function of at least 2 of
these ERF genes. Furthermore, blocking ethylene signalling using a variety of
ethylene insensitive mutants such as ein2 enhances the cell division defect of
pxy. Our results suggest that these factors define a novel pathway that acts in
parallel to PXY/CLE41 to regulate cell division in developing vascular tissue. We
propose a model whereby vascular cell division is regulated both by PXY
signalling and ethylene/ERF signalling. Under normal circumstances, however, PXY 
signalling acts to repress the ethylene/ERF pathway.

PMCID: PMC3499249
PMID: 23166504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Integr Plant Biol. 2013 Jan;55(1):31-9. doi: 10.1111/jipb.12011.

New role for an old rule: N-end rule-mediated degradation of ethylene responsive 
factor proteins governs low oxygen response in plants(F).

Licausi F(1), Pucciariello C, Perata P.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Lab, Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant' Anna, Pisa
56124, Italy.

The N-end rule pathway regulates protein degradation, which depends on exposed
N-terminal sequences in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In plants, conserved and
specific enzymes stimulate selective proteolysis. Although a number of
developmental and growth phenotypes have been reported for mutants in the N-end
rule, its function has remained unrelated to specific physiological pathways. The
first report of the direct involvement of the N-end rule in stress responses
focused on hypoxic signaling and how the oxygen-dependent oxidation of cystein
promotes the N-end rule-mediated degradation of ethylene responsive factor
(ERF)-VII proteins, the master regulators of anaerobic responses. It has been
suggested that plants have evolved specific mechanisms to tune ERF-VII
availability in the nucleus. In this review, we speculate that ERF-VII proteins
are reversibly protected from degradation via membrane sequestration. The
oxidative response in plants subjected to anoxic conditions suggests that
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (reactive oxygen species and reactive
nitrogen species) may interact or interfere with the N-end rule pathway-mediated 
response to hypoxia.

© 2013 Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 23164408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49652. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049652. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

Expression profile in rice panicle: insights into heat response mechanism at
reproductive stage.

Zhang X(1), Li J, Liu A, Zou J, Zhou X, Xiang J, Rerksiri W, Peng Y, Xiong X,
Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Crop Germplasm Innovation and Utilization of Hunan
Province, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, China.

Rice at reproductive stage is more sensitive to environmental changes, and little
is known about the mechanism of heat response in rice panicle. Here, using rice
microarray, we provided a time course gene expression profile of rice panicle at 
anther developmental stage 8 after 40°C treatment for 0 min, 20 min, 60 min, 2 h,
4 h, and 8 h. The identified differentially expressed genes were mainly involved 
in transcriptional regulation, transport, cellular homeostasis, and stress
response. The predominant transcription factor gene families responsive to heat
stress were Hsf, NAC, AP2/ERF, WRKY, MYB, and C(2)H(2). KMC analysis discovered
the time-dependent gene expression pattern under heat stress. The motif
co-occurrence analysis on the promoters of genes from an early up-regulated
cluster showed the important roles of GCC box, HSE, ABRE, and CE3 in response to 
heat stress. The regulation model central to ROS combined with transcriptome and 
ROS quantification data in rice panicle indicated the great importance to
maintain ROS balance and the existence of wide cross-talk in heat response. The
present study increased our understanding of the heat response in rice panicle
and provided good candidate genes for crop improvement.

PMCID: PMC3498232
PMID: 23155476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Food Prot. 2012 Nov;75(11):1951-9. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-11-516.

Efficient separation and sensitive detection of Listeria monocytogenes using an
impedance immunosensor based on magnetic nanoparticles, a microfluidic chip, and 
an interdigitated microelectrode.

Kanayeva DA(1), Wang R, Rhoads D, Erf GF, Slavik MF, Tung S, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Program, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR
72701, USA.

Listeria monocytogenes continues to be a major foodborne pathogen that causes
food poisoning, and sometimes death, among immunosuppressed people and abortion
among pregnant women. In this study, magnetic nanoparticles with a diameter of 30
nm were functionalized with anti-L. monocytogenes antibodies via
biotin-streptavidin bonds to become immunomagnetic nanoparticles (IMNPs) to
capture L. monocytogenes in a sample during a 2-h immunoreaction. A magnetic
separator was used to collect and hold the IMNPs-L. monocytogenes complex while
the supernatants were removed. After the washing step, the nanoparticle-L.
monocytogenes complex was separated from the sample and injected into a
microfluidic chip. The impedance change caused by L. monocytogenes was measured
by an impedance analyzer through the interdigitated microelectrode in the
microfluidic chip. For L. monocytogenes in phosphate-buffered saline solution, up
to 75% of the cells in the sample could be separated, and as few as three to five
cells in the microfluidic chip could be detected, which is equivalent to 10(3)
CFU/ml of cells in the original sample. The detection of L. monocytogenes was not
interfered with by other major foodborne bacteria, including E. coli O157:H7, E. 
coli K-12, L. innocua, Salmonella Typhimurium, and Staphylococcus aureus. A
linear correlation (R(2) = 0.86) was found between the impedance change and the
number of L. monocytogenes in a range of 10(3) to 10(7) CFU/ml. Equivalent
circuit analysis indicated that the impedance change was mainly due to the
decrease in medium resistance when the IMNPs-L. monocytogenes complexes existed
in mannitol solution. Finally, the immunosensor was evaluated with food sample
tests; the results showed that, without preenrichment and labeling, 10(4) and
10(5) CFU/ml L. monocytogenes in lettuce, milk, and ground beef samples could be 
detected in 3 h.

PMID: 23127703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Gene. 2013 Jan 15;513(1):174-83. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.10.018. Epub 2012 Oct
27.

Isolation and molecular characterization of GmERF7, a soybean ethylene-response
factor that increases salt stress tolerance in tobacco.

Zhai Y(1), Wang Y, Li Y, Lei T, Yan F, Su L, Li X, Zhao Y, Sun X, Li J, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)College of Plant Science, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, Jilin, China.

Ethylene-response factors (ERFs) play an important role in regulating gene
expression in plant responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. In this study, a
new ERF transcription factor, GmERF7, was isolated from soybean. Sequence
analysis showed that GmERF7 contained an AP2/ERF domain with 58 amino acids, two 
putative nuclear localization signal (NLS) domains, an acidic amino acid-rich
transcriptional activation domain and a conserved N-terminal motif [MCGGAI(I/L)].
The expression of GmERF7 was induced by drought, salt, methyl jasmonate (MeJA),
ethylene (ETH) and abscisic acid (ABA) treatments. However, the expression of
GmERF7 decreased under cold treatment. GmERF7 localized to the nucleus when
transiently expressed in onion epidermal cells. Furthermore, GmERF7 protein bound
to the GCC-box element in vitro and activated the expression of the
ß-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene in tobacco leaves. Activities of GmERF7
promoter (GmERF7P) upregulated in tobacco leaves with 10h drought, salt and ETH
treatments. However, activities of GmERF7P decreased with 10h cold and ABA
treatments. Overexpression of GmERF7 in tobacco plants led to higher levels of
chlorophyll and soluble carbohydrates and a lower level of malondialdehyde
compared with wild-type tobacco plants under salt stress conditions, which
indicated that GmERF7 enhanced salt tolerance in transgenic plants.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23111158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Feb;40(2):1743-52. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2228-1. Epub 2012
Oct 29.

Transcription factor OsAP21 gene increases salt/drought tolerance in transgenic
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Jin X(1), Xue Y, Wang R, Xu R, Bian L, Zhu B, Han H, Peng R, Yao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Agricultural Genetic Breeding, Biotech Research
Institute, Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai, 201106, China.

Transcription factors play vital roles in stress signal transduction and gene
expression modulation during plant growth and development. Sequence analysis
showed that OsAP21 contained an AP2/ERF domain of 57 amino acids. By comparison
of deduced amino acid sequences of AP2/ERF-related proteins, we deduced that
OsAP21 is a transcription factor gene, which belonging to rice AP2/ERF family
CBF/DREB subfamily. Further, we report that transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana
plants expressing the OsAP21 gene exhibited stronger growth than wild type plants
under salt/drought stress. Analysis of RT-PCR for RD29B gene implied that OsAP21 
over-expressed plants had a higher expression level of RD29B gene than wild type 
plants, and drought and salt treatments could enlarge these differences.
Collectively, our results indicate that OsAP21 may play an important role in the 
response of transgenic Arabidopsis plants to salt/drought stresses.

PMID: 23104474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Brain Topogr. 2013 Jul;26(3):410-27. doi: 10.1007/s10548-012-0262-x. Epub 2012
Oct 27.

Auditory magnetic response to clicks in children and adults: its components,
hemispheric lateralization and repetition suppression effect.

Orekhova EV(1), Butorina AV, Tsetlin MM, Novikova SI, Sokolov PA, Elam M,
Stroganova TA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, University of Gothenburg, 413 45,
Gothenburg, Sweden. elena.orekhova@neuro.gu.se

The auditory magnetic event-related fields (ERF) qualitatively change through the
child development, reflecting maturation of auditory cortical areas. Clicks
presented with long inter-stimulus interval produce distinct ERF components, and 
may appear useful to characterize immature EFR morphology in children. The
present study is aimed to investigate morphology of the auditory ERFs in
school-age children, as well as lateralization and repetition suppression of ERF 
components evoked by the clicks. School-age children and adults passively
listened to pairs of click presented to the right ear, left ear or binaurally,
with 8-11 s intervals between the pairs and a 1 s interval within a pair. Adults 
demonstrated a typical P50m/N100m response. Unlike adults, children had two
distinct components preceding the N100m-P50m (at ~65 ms) and P100m (at ~100 ms). 
The P100m dominated the child ERF, and was most prominent in response to binaural
stimulation. The N100m in children was less developed than in adults and partly
overlapped in time with the P100m, especially in response to monaural clicks.
Strong repetition suppression was observed for P50m both in children and adults, 
P100m in children and N100m in adults. Both children and adults demonstrated ERF 
amplitude and/or latency right hemispheric advantage effects that may reflect
right hemisphere dominance for preattentive arousal processes. Our results
contribute to the knowledge concerning development of auditory processing and its
lateralization in children and have implications for investigation of the
auditory evoked fields in developmental disorders.

PMID: 23104186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Genet Mol Res. 2012 Oct 17;11(4):4789-809. doi: 10.4238/2012.October.17.6.

Genome-wide analysis of the AP2/ERF superfamily in peach (Prunus persica).

Zhang CH(1), Shangguan LF, Ma RJ, Sun X, Tao R, Guo L, Korir NK, Yu ML.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Horticulture, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, China.

We identified 131 AP2/ERF (APETALA2/ethylene-responsive factor) genes in material
from peach using the gene sequences of AP2/ERF amino acids of Arabidopsis
thaliana (Brassicaceae) as probes. Based on the number of AP2/ERF domains and
individual gene characteristics, the AP2/ERF superfamily gene in peach can be
classified broadly into three families, ERF (ethylene-responsive factor), RAV
(related to ABI3/VP1), and AP2 (APETALA2), containing 104, 5, and 21 members,
respectively, along with a solo gene (ppa005376m). The 104 genes in the ERF
family were further divided into 11 groups based on the group classification made
for Arabidopsis. The scaffold localizations of the AP2/ERF genes indicated that
129 AP2/ERF genes were all located on scaffolds 1 to 8, except for two genes,
which were on scaffolds 17 and 10. Although the primary structure varied among
AP2/ERF superfamily proteins, their tertiary structures were similar. Most ERF
family genes have no introns, while members of the AP2 family have more introns
than genes in the ERF and RAV families. All sequences of AP2 family genes were
disrupted by introns into several segments of varying sizes. The expression of
the AP2/ERF superfamily genes was highest in the mesocarp; it was far higher than
in the other seven tissues that we examined, implying that AP2/ERF superfamily
genes play an important role in fruit growth and development in the peach. These 
results will be useful for selecting candidate genes from specific subgroups for 
functional analysis.

PMID: 23096924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Exp Bot. 2012 Nov;63(18):6393-405. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ers296. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Ethylene-responsive transcription factors interact with promoters of ADH and PDC 
involved in persimmon (Diospyros kaki) fruit de-astringency.

Min T(1), Yin XR, Shi YN, Luo ZR, Yao YC, Grierson D, Ferguson IB, Chen KS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fruit Quality Biology/The State Agriculture Ministry Laboratory 
of Horticultural Plant Growth, Development and Quality Improvement, Zhejiang
University, Zijingang Campus, Hangzhou 310058, PR China.

The persimmon fruit is a particularly good model for studying fruit response to
hypoxia, in particular, the hypoxia-response ERF (HRE) genes. An anaerobic
environment reduces fruit astringency by converting soluble condensed tannins
(SCTs) into an insoluble form. Although the physiology of de-astringency has been
widely studied, its molecular control is poorly understood. Both CO(2) and
ethylene treatments efficiently removed the astringency from 'Mopan' persimmon
fruit, as indicated by a decrease in SCTs. Acetaldehyde, the putative agent for
causing de-astringency, accumulated during these treatments, as did activities of
the key enzymes of acetaldehyde synthesis, alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), and
pyruvate decarboxylase (PDC). Eight DkADH and DkPDC genes were isolated, and
three candidates for a role in de-astringency, DkADH1, DkPDC1, and DkPDC2, were
characterized by transcriptional analysis in different tissues. The significance 
of these specific isoforms was confirmed by principal component analysis.
Transient expression in leaf tissue showed that DkPDC2 decreased SCTs.
Interactions of six hypoxia-responsive ERF genes and target promoters were tested
in transient assays. The results indicated that two hypoxia-responsive ERF genes,
DkERF9 and DkERF10, were involved in separately regulating the DkPDC2 and DkADH1 
promoters. It is proposed that a DkERF-DkADH/DkPDC cascade is involved in
regulating persimmon de-astringency.

PMCID: PMC3504493
PMID: 23095993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cell Adh Migr. 2013 Jan-Feb;7(1):33-7. doi: 10.4161/cam.22263. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

ERK-ERF-EGR1, a novel switch underlying acquisition of a motile phenotype.

Ben-Chetrit N(1), Tarcic G, Yarden Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

Comment on
    FASEB J. 2012 Apr;26(4):1582-92.

Unlike the well-characterized checkpoints of the cell cycle, which establish
commitment to cell division, signaling pathways and gene expression programs that
commit cells to migration are incompletely understood. Apparently, several
molecular switches are activated in response to an extracellular cue, such as the
epidermal growth factor (EGF), and they simultaneously confer distinct features
of an integrated motile phenotype. Here we review such early
(transcription-independent) and late switches, in light of a novel ERK-ERF-EGR1
switch we recently reported in the FASEB Journal. The study employed human
mammary cells and two stimuli: EGF, which induced mammary cell migration, and
serum factors, which stimulated cell growth. By contrasting the underlying
pathways we unveiled a cascade that allows the active form of the ERK
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade to export the ERF repressor from 
the nucleus, thereby permitting tightly balanced stimulation of an EGR1-centered 
gene expression program.

PMCID: PMC3544783
PMID: 23076209  [PubMed]


369. Front Plant Sci. 2012 Sep 17;3:215. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2012.00215. eCollection
2012.

Global SUMO Proteome Responses Guide Gene Regulation, mRNA Biogenesis, and Plant 
Stress Responses.

Mazur MJ(1), van den Burg HA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Plant Pathology, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University 
of Amsterdam Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Small Ubiquitin-like MOdifier (SUMO) is a key regulator of abiotic stress,
disease resistance, and development in plants. The identification of >350 plant
SUMO targets has revealed many processes modulated by SUMO and potential
consequences of SUMO on its targets. Importantly, highly related proteins are
SUMO-modified in plants, yeast, and metazoans. Overlapping SUMO targets include
heat-shock proteins (HSPs), transcription regulators, histones, histone-modifying
enzymes, proteins involved in DNA damage repair, but also proteins involved in
mRNA biogenesis and nucleo-cytoplasmic transport. Proteomics studies indicate key
roles for SUMO in gene repression by controlling histone (de)acetylation activity
at genomic loci. The responsible heavily sumoylated transcriptional repressor
complexes are recruited by plant transcription factors (TFs) containing an
(ERF)-associated Amphiphilic Repression (EAR) motif. These TFs are not
necessarily themselves a SUMO target. Conversely, SUMO acetylation (Ac) prevents 
binding of downstream partners by blocking binding of their SUMO-interaction
peptide motifs to Ac-SUMO. In addition, SUMO acetylation has emerged as a
mechanism to recruit specifically bromodomains. Bromodomains are generally linked
with gene activation. These findings strengthen the idea of a bi-directional
sumo-acetylation switch in gene regulation. Quantitative proteomics has
highlighted that global sumoylation provides a dynamic response to protein damage
involving SUMO chain-mediated protein degradation, but also SUMO E3
ligase-dependent transcription of HSP genes. With these insights in SUMO function
and novel technical advancements, we can now study SUMO dynamics in responses to 
(a)biotic stress in plants.

PMCID: PMC3443746
PMID: 23060889  [PubMed]


370. BMC Plant Biol. 2012 Oct 11;12:190. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-12-190.

Functional analysis and binding affinity of tomato ethylene response factors
provide insight on the molecular bases of plant differential responses to
ethylene.

Pirrello J(1), Prasad BC, Zhang W, Chen K, Mila I, Zouine M, Latché A, Pech JC,
Ohme-Takagi M, Regad F, Bouzayen M.

Author information: 
(1)INP-ENSA Toulouse, Université de Toulouse, GBF, Avenue de l'Agrobiopole BP
32607, Castanet-Tolosan F-31326, France.

BACKGROUND: The phytohormone ethylene is involved in a wide range of
developmental processes and in mediating plant responses to biotic and abiotic
stresses. Ethylene signalling acts via a linear transduction pathway leading to
the activation of Ethylene Response Factor genes (ERF) which represent one of the
largest gene families of plant transcription factors. How an apparently simple
signalling pathway can account for the complex and widely diverse plant responses
to ethylene remains yet an unanswered question. Building on the recent release of
the complete tomato genome sequence, the present study aims at gaining better
insight on distinctive features among ERF proteins.
RESULTS: A set of 28 cDNA clones encoding ERFs in the tomato (Solanum
lycopersicon) were isolated and shown to fall into nine distinct subclasses
characterised by specific conserved motifs most of which with unknown function.
In addition of being able to regulate the transcriptional activity of GCC-box
containing promoters, tomato ERFs are also shown to be active on promoters
lacking this canonical ethylene-responsive-element. Moreover, the data reveal
that ERF affinity to the GCC-box depends on the nucleotide environment
surrounding this cis-acting element. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that the 
nature of the flanking nucleotides can either enhance or reduce the binding
affinity, thus conferring the binding specificity of various ERFs to target
promoters.Based on their expression pattern, ERF genes can be clustered in two
main clades given their preferential expression in reproductive or vegetative
tissues. The regulation of several tomato ERF genes by both ethylene and auxin,
suggests their potential contribution to the convergence mechanism between the
signalling pathways of the two hormones.
CONCLUSIONS: The data reveal that regions flanking the core GCC-box sequence are 
part of the discrimination mechanism by which ERFs selectively bind to their
target promoters. ERF tissue-specific expression combined to their responsiveness
to both ethylene and auxin bring some insight on the complexity and fine
regulation mechanisms involving these transcriptional mediators. All together the
data support the hypothesis that ERFs are the main component enabling ethylene to
regulate a wide range of physiological processes in a highly specific and
coordinated manner.

PMCID: PMC3548740
PMID: 23057995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Plant Cell Rep. 2013 Jan;32(1):161-71. doi: 10.1007/s00299-012-1350-9. Epub 2012 
Oct 6.

Over-expression of a subgroup 4 R2R3 type MYB transcription factor gene from
Leucaena leucocephala reduces lignin content in transgenic tobacco.

Omer S(1), Kumar S, Khan BM.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Tissue Culture Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 411008,
India.

KEY MESSAGE : LlMYB1 , a subgroup 4 R2R3-type MYB transcription factor gene from 
Leucaena leucocephala appears to be a repressor of lignin biosynthesis pathway by
regulating the transcription of general phenylpropanoid pathway genes. R2R3MYB
transcription factors are known to play a wide role in regulating the
phenylpropanoid pathway in plants. In this study, we report isolation, cloning
and characterization of an R2R3MYB transcription factor gene (LlMYB1) from an
economically important tree species, Leucaena leucocephala. LlMYB1 consists of
705 bp coding sequence corresponding to 235 amino acids. Sequence alignment
revealed that the N-terminal (MYB) domain of the gene shares up to 95 %
similarity with subgroup 4 (Sg4) members of R2R3Myb gene family functionally
known to be lignin repressors. Highly divergent C-terminal region of the gene
carried an ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif, another
characteristic of the Sg4. The gene was phylogenetically grouped closest with
AmMYB308, a known repressor of monolignol biosynthetic pathway genes.
Spatio-temporal expression studies at different ages of seedlings using
quantitative real-time PCR (QRT-PCR) showed highest transcript level of the gene 
in 10 day old stem tissues. Over-expression of the gene in transgenic tobacco
showed statistically significant decline in the transcript levels of the general 
phenylpropanoid pathway genes and reduction in lignin content. Our study suggests
that LlMYB1 might be playing the role of a repressor of lignin biosynthesis in L.
leucocephala.

PMID: 23052594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Voice. 2013 Jan;27(1):130.e7-130.e14. doi: 10.1016/j.jvoice.2012.07.006. Epub
2012 Oct 6.

Cross-cultural adaptation and validation of the Voice Handicap Index into
Croatian.

Bonetti A(1), Bonetti L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Speech and Language Pathology, Faculty of Education and
Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Zagreb, Croatia. anab@erf.hr

This article presents preliminary results of cultural adaptation and validation
of the Croatian version of Voice Handicap Index (VHI). The translated version was
completed by 38 subjects with voice disorders and 30 subjects without voice
complaints. Compared with the subjects in the control group, subjects with voice 
disorders had significantly higher average total VHI score and scores in each of 
the three VHI domains (functional, physical, and emotional). Cronbach alpha for
total VHI was .94, and coefficients obtained for the three VHI subscales were as 
follows: a = .87 for functional, a = .88 for physical, and a = .85 for emotional 
subscales. Intraclass correlation coefficient estimation was also high, for both 
total VHI (0.92) and subscales (0.85 for functional subscale, 0.87 for physical
subscale, and 0.81 for emotional subscale). The overall VHI score positively
correlated with auditory perceived grade of dysphonia. In the group with voice
disorders, age was not correlated to the total VHI or the subscales. Also, there 
was no significant difference between male and female voice subjects in total VHI
or the subscales. Preliminary findings of this research indicate that the
Croatian VHI could provide a reliable and clinically valid measure of patient's
current perception of voice problem and its reflection on the quality of life.

Copyright © 2013 The Voice Foundation. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 23044461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Trends Plant Sci. 2013 May;18(5):267-76. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2012.09.001. Epub
2012 Oct 3.

DNA-binding domains of plant-specific transcription factors: structure, function,
and evolution.

Yamasaki K(1), Kigawa T, Seki M, Shinozaki K, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology-AIST, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba 305-8566, Japan.
k-yamasaki@aist.go.jp

The families of the plant-specific transcription factors (TFs) are defined by
their characteristic DNA-binding domains (DBDs), such as AP2/ERF, B3, NAC, SBP,
and WRKY. Recently, three-dimensional structures of the DBDs, including those in 
complexes with DNA, were determined by NMR spectroscopy and X-ray
crystallography. In this review we summarize the functional and evolutionary
implications arising from structure analyses. The unexpected structural
similarity between B3 and the noncatalytic DBD of the restriction endonuclease
EcoRII allowed us to build structural models of the B3/DNA complex. Most of the
DBDs of plant-specific TFs are likely to have originated from endonucleases
associated with transposable elements. After the DBDs have been established in
unicellular eukaryotes, they experienced extensive plant-specific expansion, by
acquiring new functions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23040085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Gene. 2012 Dec 15;511(2):235-42. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.09.048. Epub 2012 Sep
23.

Patterns of cis-element enrichment reveal potential regulatory modules involved
in the transcriptional regulation of anoxia response of japonica rice.

Mohanty B(1), Herath V, Wijaya E, Yeo HC, de Los Reyes BG, Lee DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of
Singapore, 4 Engineering Drive 4, Singapore 117576, Singapore.

Unlike other cereal species, rice is able to germinate and elongate under anoxia.
The regulatory mechanism that configures the transcriptome of rice during
anaerobic germination is yet to be established. In this study, the major
regulatory modules among anoxia-responsive genes in rice identified from
published microarray data were predicted by ab initio analysis of cis-regulatory 
information content. Statistically overrepresented sequence motifs were detected 
from bona fide promoter sequences [-1000 to +200], revealing various patterns of 
cis-element enrichment that are highly correlated with bZIP, ERF and MYB types of
transcription factors. As implied by the cis-element enrichment patterns,
combinatorial mechanisms configure the overall changes in gene expression during 
anoxic germination and coleoptile elongation. High enrichment of cis-elements
associated with ARF, bZIP, ERF, MYB and WRKY (SUSIBA2) transcription factors was 
also detected among the glycolytic and fermentative associated genes that were
upregulated during anoxia. The patterns established from the global analysis of
cis-element distribution for upregulated and downregulated genes and their
associations with potential cognate regulatory transcription factors indicate the
significant roles of ethylene and abscisic acid mediated signaling during
coleoptile elongation under anoxia. In addition, the regulation of genes encoding
enzymes in the glycolytic and fermentative metabolism could be associated with
abscisic acid and auxin in rice coleoptiles to maintain sugar and ATP levels for 
longer survival.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23010196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Gene. 2012 Dec 10;511(1):38-45. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.09.039. Epub 2012 Sep
19.

Isolation and characterization of a bread wheat salinity responsive ERF
transcription factor.

Dong W(1), Ai X, Xu F, Quan T, Liu S, Xia G.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Plant Cell Engineering and Germplasm Innovation,
Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences, Shandong University, Jinan
250100, PR China.

A screen conducted on both a suppression subtractive hybridization and a full
length cDNA library made from a salinity tolerant bread wheat cultivar SR3
(Triticum aestivum cv. SR3) resulted in the recognition of TaERF4, a gene
including both an AP2/ERF domain and a nuclear localization signal. The 982 bp
TaERF4 cDNA comprised a 582 bp open reading frame, encoding a 193 residue
polypeptide of molecular weight 20 kDa and calculated pI 8.48. A TaERF4-GFP
fusion protein localized preferentially to the nuclei of Arabidopsis thaliana
protoplasts. TaERF4 is a member of the B-1 group within the ERF sub-family and
was not transactivatable in yeast. The presence of an ERF-associated amphiphilic 
repression (EAR) motif at its C-terminus suggests that TaERF4 is probably a
transcription repressor. TaERF4 was inducible by exposure to salinity and osmotic
stresses, but not to exogenously supplied abscisic acid (ABA). The heterologous
constitutive expression of TaERF4 in Arabidopsis enhanced the level of
sensitivity to salinity stress, possibly via the repression of tonoplast
Na(+)/H(+) antiporter activity. There was no phenotype associated with the
transgene's presence when plants were subjected to either osmotic stress or ABA
treatment. TaERF4 appears to be a transcription repressor acting within the
ABA-independent response to salinity stress.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23000066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Nephron Clin Pract. 2012;120 Suppl 1:c93-103. Epub 2012 Sep 1.

Chapter 5 Demography of the UK paediatric renal replacement therapy population in
2010.

Pruthi R(1), Sinha MD, Casula A, Tse Y, Maxwell H, O'Brien C, Lewis M, Inward C.

Author information: 
(1)UK Renal Registry, Bristol, UK.

AIMS: To describe the demographics of the paediatric RRT population under the age
of 16 years in the UK and to analyse changes in demography with time.
METHODS: Data were collected from all 13 paediatric renal centres within the UK. 
A series of cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses were performed to describe 
the demographics of prevalent paediatric RRT patients.
RESULTS: A total of 870 children and young people under 18 with ERF were
receiving treatment at paediatric nephrology centres in 2010. At the census date,
76.7% had a functioning transplant, 14.3% were receiving peritoneal dialysis (PD)
and 9.0% were receiving haemodialysis (HD). In patients aged <16 years the
prevalence of ERF was 59.3 pmarp and the incidence 8.1 pmarp. Analysis of trends 
over the last 15 years shows that both incidence and prevalence are increasing
with the most marked increases in children aged 12-16 years and in ethnic
minority groups. A third of the patients have one or more reported comorbidities.
At transfer to adult services, 84.9% of patients had a functioning renal
transplant.
CONCLUSIONS: The data provided in this report show increasing trends over 15
years in the incidence and prevalence of established renal failure. This is
important for the planning of the provision of care for children needing renal
replacement therapy. The inclusion this year of an analysis of the patients
transferring to adult services may assist in developing care pathways for this
vulnerable group.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22964576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Neuroimage. 2012 Nov 15;63(3):1614-22. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.08.046.
Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Reward modulates the neural dynamics of early visual category processing.

Apitz T(1), Bunzeck N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Neuroscience, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

Converging evidence suggests that visual brain regions are part of a widespread
network that signals forthcoming reward. However, the precise temporal dynamics
underlying the interaction between reward and visual information processing
remain unclear. To further investigate this issue, we used magnetoencephalography
(MEG) in combination with two versions of a face/scene discrimination task
followed by a recognition memory test. In experiment 1, the distinction between
faces and scenes was associated with monetary reward prospect, whereas in
experiment 2 subjects distinguished between both categories in the absence of
reward. In both experiments characteristic neural category effects (i.e.,
differences between faces and scenes) were observed in the event-related magnetic
fields (ERF) at ~100 ms (M100) and ~170 ms (M170) after stimulus onset.
Importantly, both ERF components (M100 and M170) were amplified in the context of
reward (i.e., experiment 1) and this interaction could be source localized to the
lateral occipital cortex (~100 ms) and fusiform gyrus (~170 ms). Furthermore,
neural effects of reward prediction emerged over frontal sensors at ~300 ms after
stimulus onset which reliably correlated with subsequent recognition memory
performance. These results demonstrate that reward motivation can modulate early 
neural computations of complex visual information, possibly by tuning sensory
neurons within the visual cortex.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22971547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Med Phys. 2012 Sep;39(9):5639-51. doi: 10.1118/1.4747260.

Impact of flat panel-imager veiling glare on scatter-estimation accuracy and
image quality of a commercial on-board cone-beam CT imaging system.

Lazos D(1), Williamson JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 
VA 23298, USA. dlazos@chpnet.org

PURPOSE: The purposes of this study is to measure the low frequency drop (LFD) of
the modulation transfer function (MTF), associated with the long tails of the
detector point spread function (PSF) of an on-board flat panel imager and study
its impact on cone-beam CT (CBCT) image quality and scatter measurement accuracy.
METHODS: Two different experimental methods were used to characterize LFD and its
associated PSF of a Varian OBI flat-panel detector system: the edge response
function (ERF) method and the disk transfer function (DTF) method. PSF was
estimated by fitting parametric models to these measurements for four values of
the applied voltage (kVp). The resultant PSF was used to demonstrate the effect
of LFD on image contrast and CT number accuracy in CBCT images reconstructed from
synthetic datasets, as well as, accuracy of scatter measurements with the
beam-stop method.
RESULTS: The MTFs derived from the measured ERF data revealed LFDs varying from
8% (at 60 kVp) to 10.5% (at 120 kVp), while the intensity of the long PSF tails
was found to increase with increasing kVp. The veiling glare line spread
functions derived from the ERF and DTF methods were in excellent agreement.
Uncorrected veiling glare reduced contrast and the image intensity in CBCT
reconstruction, near the phantom periphery (by 67 Hounsfield units in a 20
cm-in-diameter water phantom) and (to a smaller degree) near inhomogeneities. Use
of the bow-tie filter mitigated these effects. Veiling glare also resulted in
about 10%-15% overestimation of the scatter-to-primary ratio when measured with
the beam-stop or beam-stop array method.
CONCLUSIONS: The long tails of the detector PSF were found to have a modest
dependence of beam spectrum, which is reflected on the MTF curve LFD. Our
findings show that uncorrected veiling glare can affect quantitative accuracy and
contrast in CBCT imaging, based on flat panel imager. In addition, it results in 
overestimation of the scatter-to-primary ratio, measured with the beam-stop
methods.

PMCID: PMC3443192
PMID: 22957630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42796. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042796. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

Identification of genes required for nonhost resistance to Xanthomonas oryzae pv.
oryzae reveals novel signaling components.

Li W(1), Xu YP, Zhang ZX, Cao WY, Li F, Zhou X, Chen GY, Cai XZ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Nonhost resistance is a generalized, durable, broad-spectrum
resistance exhibited by plant species to a wide variety of microbial pathogens.
Although nonhost resistance is an attractive breeding strategy, the molecular
basis of this form of resistance remains unclear for many plant-microbe
pathosystems, including interactions with the bacterial pathogen of rice,
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo).
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) and an assay to detect 
the hypersensitive response (HR) were used to screen for genes required for
nonhost resistance to Xoo in N. benthamiana. When infiltrated with Xoo strain
YN-1, N. benthamiana plants exhibited a strong necrosis within 24 h and produced 
a large amount of H(2)O(2) in the infiltrated area. Expression of HR- and
defense-related genes was induced, whereas bacterial numbers dramatically
decreased during necrosis. VIGS of 45 ACE (Avr/Cf-elicited) genes revealed
identified seven genes required for nonhost resistance to Xoo in N. benthamiana. 
The seven genes encoded a calreticulin protein (ACE35), an ERF transcriptional
factor (ACE43), a novel Solanaceous protein (ACE80), a hydrolase (ACE117), a
peroxidase (ACE175) and two proteins with unknown function (ACE95 and ACE112).
The results indicate that oxidative burst and calcium-dependent signaling
pathways play an important role in nonhost resistance to Xoo. VIGS analysis
further revealed that ACE35, ACE80, ACE95 and ACE175, but not the other three ACE
genes, interfered with the Cf-4/Avr4-dependent HR.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: N. benthamiana plants inoculated with Xoo respond by
rapidly eliciting an HR and nonhost resistance. The oxidative burst and other
signaling pathways are pivotal in Xoo-N. benthamiana nonhost resistance, and
genes involved in this response partially overlap with those involved in
Cf/Avr4-dependent HR. The seven genes required for N. benthamiana-mediated
resistance to Xoo provide a basis for further dissecting the molecular mechanism 
of nonhost resistance.

PMCID: PMC3418293
PMID: 22912739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Oct;23(19):3873-81. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-04-0276. Epub 2012
Aug 8.

Semaphorin-7a reverses the ERF-induced inhibition of EMT in Ras-dependent mouse
mammary epithelial cells.

Allegra M(1), Zaragkoulias A, Vorgia E, Ioannou M, Litos G, Beug H,
Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Crete, Crete, Greece.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a key process in cancer progression
and metastasis, requiring cooperation of the epidermal growth factor/Ras with the
transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) signaling pathway in a multistep process.
The molecular mechanisms by which Ras signaling contributes to EMT, however,
remain elusive to a large extent. We therefore examined the transcriptional
repressor Ets2-repressor factor (ERF)-a bona fide Ras-extracellular
signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase effector-for its ability
to interfere with TGF-ß-induced EMT in mammary epithelial cells (EpH4) expressing
oncogenic Ras (EpRas). ERF-overexpressing EpRas cells failed to undergo
TGF-ß-induced EMT, formed three-dimensional tubular structures in collagen gels, 
and retained expression of epithelial markers. Transcriptome analysis indicated
that TGF-ß signaling through Smads was mostly unaffected, and ERF suppressed the 
TGF-ß-induced EMT via Semaphorin-7a repression. Forced expression of
Semaphorin-7a in ERF-overexpressing EpRas cells reestablished their ability to
undergo EMT. In contrast, inhibition of Semaphorin-7a in the parental EpRas cells
inhibited their ability to undergo TGF-ß-induced EMT. Our data suggest that
oncogenic Ras may play an additional role in EMT via the ERF, regulating
Semaphorin-7a and providing a new interconnection between the Ras- and the
TGF-ß-signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3459863
PMID: 22875994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Plant Cell Physiol. 2012 Oct;53(10):1683-95. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcs110. Epub 2012
Aug 3.

Vascular expression and C-terminal sequence divergence of cytokinin response
factors in flowering plants.

Zwack PJ(1), Shi X, Robinson BR, Gupta S, Compton MA, Gerken DM, Goertzen LR,
Rashotte AM.

Author information: 
(1)101 Rouse Life Sciences Building, Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn
University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.

Cytokinin response factors (CRFs) are important transcription factors that form a
side branch of the cytokinin signaling pathway and have been linked to
cytokinin-regulated processes during development. CRF proteins are defined as
belonging to a specific transcription factor family by the presence of an AP2/ERF
DNA-binding domain and can be distinguished within this family by a
group-specific CRF domain involved in protein-protein interactions. Here we
further delimit CRFs into five distinct clades (I-V) represented across all major
angiosperm lineages. Protein sequences within each clade contain a clade-specific
C-terminal region distinct from other CRFs, suggesting ancient evolutionary
divergence and specialization within this gene family. Conserved patterns of
transcriptional regulation support these clade divisions. Despite these important
differences, CRFs appear to show preferential localization or targeting to
vascular tissue in quantitative real-time PCR and reporter line analyses of
Arabidopsis thaliana and Solanum lycopersicum (tomato). Phloem tissue expression 
within the vasculature often appears the strongest in CRF reporter lines, and an 
analysis of CRF promoter sequences revealed conservation and significant
enrichment of phloem targeting cis-elements, suggesting a potential role for CRFs
in this tissue. An examination of CRF loss-of-function mutants from
cytokinin-regulated clades revealed alterations in higher order vein patterning. 
This supports both the general link of CRFs to vascular tissue and clade-specific
differences between CRFs, since alterations in vascular patterning appear to be
clade specific. Together these findings indicate that CRFs are potential
regulators of developmental processes associated with vascular tissues.

PMID: 22864451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Interdiscip Sci. 2012 Jun;4(2):133-41. doi: 10.1007/s12539-012-0121-1. Epub 2012 
Jul 29.

In silico targeted genome mining and comparative modelling reveals a putative
protein similar to an Arabidopsis drought tolerance DNA binding transcription
factor in Chromosome 6 of Sorghum bicolor genome.

Shanker AK(1), Maddaala A, Kumar MA, Yadav SK, Maheswari M, Venkateswarlu B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Crop Sciences, Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture 
(CRIDA), Santosh Nagar, Saidabad P.O., Hyderabad, 500059, India.
arunshank@gmail.com

Arabidopsis Thaliana HARDY (AtHRD) is a gene with an APETELA 2 / Ethylene
Responsive Factor (AP2/ERF) domain linked to improved performance under drought
in rice. We hypothesized that the sorghum genome could possess a similar gene
product and were motivated to conduct a computational genome scale mining for the
protein and analyse its structural and functional properties. AtHRD sequence was 
used as a query to BLAST against the sorghum genome dataset followed by multiple 
alignment analysis. A homology model of the target was built using a template
detected based on the pair-wise comparison of hidden Markov models for
alignments. DNA docking with a matrix of homologous interface contacts was done. 
Functional and structural analysis of the query and target was conducted using
various online servers. A High-scoring segment pair from Chromosome 6 of the
sorghum genome in the region between 54948120 and 54948668 had 68 amino acid
similarities out of the 184 residues and was 1.4% above twilight zone threshold. 
The homology model showed 86.8% residues in most favoured regions. The target
protein which had an AP2/ERF domain when docked with GCC box DNA motif had
conserved residues involved in binding; it had a long unstructured region beyond 
the AP2 domain with several motifs for the recognition of serine/threonine
protein kinase group. The protein model showed that it could bind to a GCC box
which is present in several drought responsive genes. The presence of possible
signalling domains and intrinsic disorder in the target protein suggest that this
could play a role in drought tolerance which is an inherent character of sorghum.
These results offer a jumpstart for validation experiments which could pave the
way for cis/trans genic improvement of a range of crops.

PMID: 22843236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. BMC Plant Biol. 2012 Jul 23;12:112. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-12-112.

Transcript profiling of cytokinin action in Arabidopsis roots and shoots
discovers largely similar but also organ-specific responses.

Brenner WG(1), Schmülling T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology/Applied Genetics, Dahlem Centre of Plant Sciences (DCPS),
Freie Universität Berlin, Albrecht-Thaer-Weg 6, D-14195, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The plant hormone cytokinin regulates growth and development of roots
and shoots in opposite ways. In shoots it is a positive growth regulator whereas 
it inhibits growth in roots. It may be assumed that organ-specific regulation of 
gene expression is involved in these differential activities, but little is known
about it. To get more insight into the transcriptional events triggered by
cytokinin in roots and shoots, we studied genome-wide gene expression in
cytokinin-treated and cytokinin-deficient roots and shoots.
RESULTS: It was found by principal component analysis of the transcriptomic data 
that the immediate-early response to a cytokinin stimulus differs from the later 
response, and that the transcriptome of cytokinin-deficient plants is different
from both the early and the late cytokinin induction response. A higher cytokinin
status in the roots activated the expression of numerous genes normally expressed
predominantly in the shoot, while a lower cytokinin status in the shoot reduced
the expression of genes normally more active in the shoot to a more root-like
level. This shift predominantly affected nuclear genes encoding plastid proteins.
An organ-specific regulation was assigned to a number of genes previously known
to react to a cytokinin signal, including root-specificity for the cytokinin
hydroxylase gene CYP735A2 and shoot specificity for the cell cycle regulator gene
CDKA;1. Numerous cytokinin-regulated genes were newly discovered or confirmed,
including the meristem regulator genes SHEPHERD and CLAVATA1, auxin-related genes
(IAA7, IAA13, AXR1, PIN2, PID), several genes involved in brassinosteroid
(CYP710A1, CYP710A2, DIM/DWF) and flavonol (MYB12, CHS, FLS1) synthesis, various 
transporter genes (e.g. HKT1), numerous members of the AP2/ERF transcription
factor gene family, genes involved in light signalling (PhyA, COP1, SPA1), and
more than 80 ribosomal genes. However, contrasting with the fundamental
difference of the growth response of roots and shoots to the hormone, the vast
majority of the cytokinin-regulated transcriptome showed similar response
patterns in roots and shoots.
CONCLUSIONS: The shift of the root and shoot transcriptomes towards the
respective other organ depending on the cytokinin status indicated that the
hormone determines part of the organ-specific transcriptome pattern independent
of morphological organ identity. Numerous novel cytokinin-regulated genes were
discovered which had escaped earlier discovery, most probably due to unspecific
sampling. These offer novel insights into the diverse activities of cytokinin,
including crosstalk with other hormones and different environmental cues,
identify the AP2/ERF class of transcriptions factors as particularly cytokinin
sensitive, and also suggest translational control of cytokinin-induced changes.

PMCID: PMC3519560
PMID: 22824128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Plant Physiol. 2012 Sep;160(1):541-55. doi: 10.1104/pp.112.202697. Epub 2012 Jul 
22.

MEDIATOR25 acts as an integrative hub for the regulation of jasmonate-responsive 
gene expression in Arabidopsis.

Çevik V(1), Kidd BN, Zhang P, Hill C, Kiddle S, Denby KJ, Holub EB, Cahill DM,
Manners JM, Schenk PM, Beynon J, Kazan K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Wellesbourne, Warwick CV35
9EF, United Kingdom. volkan.cevik@sainsburylaboratory.ac.uk

The PHYTOCHROME AND FLOWERING TIME1 gene encoding the MEDIATOR25 (MED25) subunit 
of the eukaryotic Mediator complex is a positive regulator of jasmonate
(JA)-responsive gene expression in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Based on
the function of the Mediator complex as a bridge between DNA-bound
transcriptional activators and the RNA polymerase II complex, MED25 has been
hypothesized to function in association with transcriptional regulators of the JA
pathway. However, it is currently not known mechanistically how MED25 functions
to regulate JA-responsive gene expression. In this study, we show that MED25
physically interacts with several key transcriptional regulators of the JA
signaling pathway, including the APETALA2 (AP2)/ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR (ERF)
transcription factors OCTADECANOID-RESPONSIVE ARABIDOPSIS AP2/ERF59 and ERF1 as
well as the master regulator MYC2. Physical interaction detected between MED25
and four group IX AP2/ERF transcription factors was shown to require the
activator interaction domain of MED25 as well as the recently discovered
Conserved Motif IX-1/EDLL transcription activation motif of MED25-interacting
AP2/ERFs. Using transcriptional activation experiments, we also show that
OCTADECANOID-RESPONSIVE ARABIDOPSIS AP2/ERF59- and ERF1-dependent activation of
PLANT DEFENSIN1.2 as well as MYC2-dependent activation of VEGETATIVE STORAGE
PROTEIN1 requires a functional MED25. In addition, MED25 is required for
MYC2-dependent repression of pathogen defense genes. These results suggest an
important role for MED25 as an integrative hub within the Mediator complex during
the regulation of JA-associated gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3440227
PMID: 22822211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Evol Bioinform Online. 2012;8:321-55. doi: 10.4137/EBO.S9369. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

AP2/ERF Transcription Factor in Rice: Genome-Wide Canvas and Syntenic
Relationships between Monocots and Eudicots.

Rashid M(1), Guangyuan H, Guangxiao Y, Hussain J, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)China-UK HUST-RRes Genetic Engineering and Genomics Joint Laboratory,
International Science and Technology Cooperation Base (Genetic Engineering) of
Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology, The key laboratory of Molecular
Biophysics of Chinese Ministry of Education, College of Life Science and
Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Luoyu Road
1037, Wuhan 430074, China.

The transcription factor family intimately regulates gene expression in response 
to hormones, biotic and abiotic factors, symbiotic interactions, cell
differentiation, and stress signalling pathways in plants. In this study, 170
AP2/ERF family genes are identified by phylogenetic analysis of the rice genome
(Oryza sativa l. japonica) and they are divided into a total of 11 groups,
including four major groups (AP2, ERF, DREB, and RAV), 10 subgroups, and two
soloists. Gene structure analysis revealed that, at position-6, the amino acid
threonine (Thr-6) is conserved in the double domain AP2 proteins compared to the 
amino acid arginine (Arg-6), which is preserved in the single domain of ERF
proteins. In addition, the histidine (His) amino acid is found in both domains of
the double domain AP2 protein, which is missing in single domain ERF proteins.
Motif analysis indicates that most of the conserved motifs, apart from the
AP2/ERF domain, are exclusively distributed among the specific clades in the
phylogenetic tree and regulate plausible functions. Expression analysis reveals a
widespread distribution of the rice AP2/ERF family genes within plant tissues. In
the vegetative organs, the transcripts of these genes are found most abundant in 
the roots followed by the leaf and stem; whereas, in reproductive tissues, the
gene expression of this family is observed high in the embryo and lemma. From
chromosomal localization, it appears that repetition and tandem-duplication may
contribute to the evolution of new genes in the rice genome. In this study,
interspecies comparisons between rice and wheat reveal 34 rice loci and unveil
the extent of collinearity between the two genomes. It was subsequently
ascertained that chromosome-9 has more orthologous loci for CRT/DRE genes whereas
chromosome-2 exhibits orthologs for ERF subfamily members. Maximum conserved
synteny is found in chromosome-3 for AP2 double domain subfamily genes.
Macrosynteny between rice and Arabidopsis, a distant, related genome, uncovered
11 homologs/orthologs loci in both genomes. The distribution of AP2/ERF family
gene paralogs in Arabidopsis was most frequent in chromosome-1 followed by
chromosome-5. In Arabidopsis, ERF subfamily gene orthologs are found on
chromosome-1, chromosome-3, and chromosome-5, whereas DRE subfamily genes are
found on chromosome-2 and chromosome-5. Orthologs for RAV and AP2 with double
domains in Arabidopsis are located on chromosome-1 and chromosome-3,
respectively. In conclusion, the data generated in this survey will be useful for
conducting genomic research to determine the precise role of the AP2/ERF gene
during stress responses with the ultimate goal of improving crops.

PMCID: PMC3396566
PMID: 22807623  [PubMed]


386. Yi Chuan. 2012 Jul;34(7):835-47.

[Progresses on plant AP2/ERF transcription factors].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang JY(1), Wang QJ, Guo ZR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Botany, Jiangsu Province and the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Nanjing 210014, China. maxzhangjy@163.com

Plant AP2/ERF transcription factor with AP2/ERF domain containing 60-70 amino
acids is a huge gene family present in all plant. AP2/ERF transcriptional factors
are involved in various biological functions such as plant development, flower
development, fruit and seed maturation, wounding, pathogen defense, high salty,
drought, and so on. AP2/ERF transcription factor are involved in salicylic acid, 
jasmonic acid, ethylene, abscisic acid signal transduction pathways and among
them. The transcription factors are cross-talk factor in stress signal pathway.
This paper summarizes the most advanced researches on types, biological
functions, and gene regulations of plant AP2/ERF transcription factors.

PMID: 22805209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Int J Mol Sci. 2012;13(5):5933-51. doi: 10.3390/ijms13055933. Epub 2012 May 16.

Combinatorial signal integration by APETALA2/Ethylene Response Factor
(ERF)-transcription factors and the involvement of AP2-2 in starvation response.

Vogel MO(1), Gomez-Perez D, Probst N, Dietz KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants, Bielefeld University, 33501 Bielefeld, 
Germany; E-Mails: marc_oliver.vogel@uni-bielefeld.de (M.O.V.); debsgp@gmail.com
(D.G.-P.); nina.probst@gmx.net (N.P.).

Transcription factors of the APETALA 2/Ethylene Response Factor (AP2/ERF)- family
have been implicated in diverse processes during development, stress acclimation 
and retrograde signaling. Fifty-three leaf-expressed AP2/ERFs were screened for
their transcriptional response to abscisic acid (ABA),
3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea (DCMU), methylviologen (MV), sucrose and 
high or low light, respectively, and revealed high reactivity to these effectors.
Six of them (AP2-2, ARF14, CEJ1, ERF8, ERF11, RAP2.5) were selected for
combinatorial response analysis to ABA, DCMU and high light. Additive,
synergistic and antagonistic effects demonstrated that these transcription
factors are components of multiple signaling pathways. AP2-2 (At1g79700) was
subjected to an in depth study. AP2-2 transcripts were high under conditions
linked to limited carbohydrate availability and stress and down-regulated in
extended light phase, high light or in the presence of sugar. ap2-2 knock out
plants had unchanged metabolite profiles and transcript levels of co-expressed
genes in extended darkness. However, ap2-2 revealed more efficient germination
and faster early growth under high sugar, osmotic or salinity stress, but the
difference was abolished in the absence of sugar or during subsequent growth. It 
is suggested that AP2-2 is involved in mediating starvation-related and hormonal 
signals.

PMCID: PMC3382747
PMID: 22754341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. BMC Nephrol. 2012 Jul 2;13:54. doi: 10.1186/1471-2369-13-54.

Limited knowledge of chronic kidney disease among primary care patients--a
cross-sectional survey.

Chow WL(1), Joshi VD, Tin AS, van der Erf S, Lim JF, Swah TS, Teo SS, Goh PS, Tan
GC, Lim C, Kee TY.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Health Services Research, Singapore Health Services, 168 Jalan
Bukit Merah, #06-08 Tower 3, Singapore, 150169, Singapore. wailengc@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Kidney disease is the 9th leading cause of death in Singapore. While 
preventive effects have focused on early detection and education, little is known
about the knowledge level of chronic kidney disease (CKD) locally. We seek to
evaluate the knowledge of CKD among primary care patients.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional survey of a convenience sample of 1520
patients from 3 primary care centers. Those with existing CKD or on dialysis were
excluded. Knowledge was assessed based on 7 questions on CKD in the
self-administered questionnaire. One point was given for each correct answer with
a maximum of 7 points.
RESULTS: 1435 completed all 7 questions on CKD. Mean age was 48.9 ± 5.0 (SD)
years. 50.9% were male. 62.3% had a secondary and below education and 52.4% had a
monthly household income of =<U+2009>$2000. 43.7% had chronic diseases. Mean score was
3.44 ± 1.53 (out of a maximum of 7). Median score was 4. In multivariate logistic
regression, being older {>60 years [Odds Ratio (OR) 0.50, 95% Confidence Interval
(CI) 0.32-0.79]; 40-60 years (OR 0.62, 95% CI 0.43,0.89)}, less educated [up to
primary education (OR 0.33, 95% CI 0.22-0.49)], having a lower monthly household 
income [<S$2000 (OR 0.41, 95% CI 0.26-0.66); S$2000-4999 (OR 0.53, 95%CI,
0.33-0.83)], and being non-professionals [OR 0.66, 95% CI 0.43-0.99] (all p <
0.05)] were likely to score less.
CONCLUSION: This suggests that CKD education should be targeted at older patients
with lower education and lower socioeconomic status.

PMCID: PMC3411443
PMID: 22747853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Neurosci Methods. 2012 Jul 30;209(1):212-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2012.06.011. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

Systematic biases in early ERP and ERF components as a result of high-pass
filtering.

Acunzo DJ(1), Mackenzie G, van Rossum MC.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroinformatics Doctoral Training Centre, Institute for Adaptive and Neural
Computation, School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, UK.
david.acunzo@ed.ac.uk

Erratum in
    J Neurosci Methods. 2012 Nov 15;211(2):309.

The event-related potential (ERP) and event-related field (ERF) techniques
provide valuable insights into the time course of processes in the brain. Because
neural signals are typically weak, researchers commonly filter the data to
increase the signal-to-noise ratio. However, filtering may distort the data,
leading to false results. Using our own EEG data, we show that acausal high-pass 
filtering can generate a systematic bias easily leading to misinterpretations of 
neural activity. In particular, we show that the early ERP component C1 is very
sensitive to such effects. Moreover, we found that about half of the papers
reporting modulations in the C1 range used a high-pass digital filter cut-off
above the recommended maximum of 0.1 Hz. More generally, among 185 relevant
ERP/ERF publications, 80 used cutoffs above 0.1 Hz. As a consequence, part of the
ERP/ERF literature may need to be re-analyzed. We provide guidelines on how to
minimize filtering artifacts.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22743800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Integr Plant Biol. 2012 Sep;54(9):640-51. doi:
10.1111/j.1744-7909.2012.01137.x. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

A proximal promoter region of Arabidopsis DREB2C confers tissue-specific
expression under heat stress.

Chen H(1), Je J, Song C, Hwang JE, Lim CO.

Author information: 
(1)Systems and Synthetic Agrobiotech Center and PMBBRC, Division of Applied Life 
Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701, Korea.

The dehydration-responsive element-binding factor 2C (DREB2C) is a member of the 
CBF/DREB subfamily of proteins, which contains a single APETALA2/Ethylene
responsive element-binding factor (AP2/ERF) domain. To identify the expression
pattern of the DREB2C gene, which contains multiple transcription cis-regulatory 
elements in its promoter, an approximately 1.4 kb upstream DREB2C sequence was
fused to the ß-glucuronidase reporter gene (GUS) and the recombinant p1244
construct was transformed into Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. The promoter of
the gene directed prominent GUS activity in the vasculature in diverse young
dividing tissues. Upon applying heat stress (HS), GUS staining was also enhanced 
in the vasculature of the growing tissues. Analysis of a series of 5'-deletions
of the DREB2C promoter revealed that a proximal upstream sequence sufficient for 
the tissue-specific spatial and temporal induction of GUS expression by HS is
localized in the promoter region between -204 and -34 bps relative to the
transcriptional start site. Furthermore, electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA) demonstrated that nuclear protein binding activities specific to a -120 to
-32 bp promoter fragment increased after HS. These results indicate that the
TATA-proximal region and some latent trans-acting factors may cooperate in
HS-induced activation of the Arabidopsis DREB2C promoter.

© 2012 Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22716647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Clin EEG Neurosci. 2012 Apr;43(2):145-53. doi: 10.1177/1550059412443182. Epub
2012 Apr 16.

The temporal, spatial, and frequency dimensions of neural oscillations associated
with verbal working memory.

Stephane M(1), Leuthold A, Kuskowski M, McClannahan K, Xu T.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatry Service line, VA Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN 55417, USA.
mstephan@umn.edu

Cognitive operations engage neural generators oscillating at different
frequencies distributed in time and space. Accordingly, oscillatory activity
detected by magnetoencephalography (MEG)/electroencephalography (EEG) should be
analyzed along frequency, time, and spatial dimensions. MEG data were obtained
from 19 healthy individuals while performing a modified Sternberg paradigm. The
stimuli were letters, which constituted words or pronounceable nonwords. We
applied tridimensional analysis of oscillations and also computed event-related
fields (ERFs) in areas where significant changes in oscillatory activity were
observed. Verbal working memory for visual verbal stimuli was associated with
oscillatory interplay between the bilateral occipital lobes and the left
frontoparietotemporal areas. Spatially stable occipital desynchrony was noted
during information encoding, while a left hemisphere desynchronization,
increasing in amplitude and spatial extent over time, was observed during
information encoding and maintenance. No ERF changes were detected during
information maintenance. Oscillatory activity associated with verbal working
memory is consistent with the above hypothesis. These findings underscore the
importance of multidimensional evaluation of oscillations. The findings also
indicate that combining electrophysiological methods increase the chance of
signal detection.

PMID: 22715489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Oct;39(10):9521-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1816-4. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

Characterization of a novel ERF transcription factor in Artemisia annua and its
induction kinetics after hormones and stress treatments.

Lu X(1), Jiang W, Zhang L, Zhang F, Shen Q, Wang T, Chen Y, Wu S, Lv Z, Gao E,
Qiu B, Tang K.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biotechnology Research Center, SJTU-Cornell Institute of Sustainable
Agriculture and Biotechnology, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology R&D
Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, People's Republic of China.

The full-length cDNA sequence of AaERF3 was cloned and characterized from
Artemisia annua. The bioinformatic analysis and phylogenetic tree analysis
implied that the AaERF3 encoded a putative protein of 193 amino acids which
formed a closely related subgroup with AtERF1, ERF1 and ORA59 in Arabidopsis. The
result of subcellular localization showed that AaERF3 targeted to both of the
nuclei and the cytoplasm. The qRT-PCR analysis showed that Green young
alabastrums had the highest expression level of AaERF3 in the 5-months-old
plants. The qRT-PCR analysis also revealed that ABA, Wound and Cold treatments
significantly enhanced the transcript expression of AaERF3. MeJA and Ethylene
treatment could also slightly induce the accumulation of AaERF3 transcription.

PMID: 22714923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Plant Physiol. 2012 Aug;159(4):1644-57. doi: 10.1104/pp.112.200634. Epub 2012 Jun
8.

High-resolution mapping of a fruit firmness-related quantitative trait locus in
tomato reveals epistatic interactions associated with a complex combinatorial
locus.

Chapman NH(1), Bonnet J, Grivet L, Lynn J, Graham N, Smith R, Sun G, Walley PG,
Poole M, Causse M, King GJ, Baxter C, Seymour GB.

Author information: 
(1)Plant and Crop Sciences Division, School of Biosciences, University of
Nottingham, Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, Leicstershire LE12 5RD, United
Kingdom.

Fruit firmness in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) is determined by a number of
factors including cell wall structure, turgor, and cuticle properties. Firmness
is a complex polygenic trait involving the coregulation of many genes and has
proved especially challenging to unravel. In this study, a quantitative trait
locus (QTL) for fruit firmness was mapped to tomato chromosome 2 using the Zamir 
Solanum pennellii interspecific introgression lines (ILs) and fine-mapped in a
population consisting of 7,500 F2 and F3 lines from IL 2-3 and IL 2-4. This
firmness QTL contained five distinct subpeaks, Fir(s.p.)QTL2.1 to
Fir(s.p.)QTL2.5, and an effect on a distal region of IL 2-4 that was
nonoverlapping with IL 2-3. All these effects were located within an 8.6-Mb
region. Using genetic markers, each subpeak within this combinatorial locus was
mapped to a physical location within the genome, and an ethylene response factor 
(ERF) underlying Fir(s.p.)QTL2.2 and a region containing three pectin
methylesterase (PME) genes underlying Fir(s.p.)QTL2.5 were nominated as QTL
candidate genes. Statistical models used to explain the observed variability
between lines indicated that these candidates and the nonoverlapping portion of
IL 2-4 were sufficient to account for the majority of the fruit firmness effects.
Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was used to quantify
the expression of each candidate gene. ERF showed increased expression associated
with soft fruit texture in the mapping population. In contrast, PME expression
was tightly linked with firm fruit texture. Analysis of a range of recombinant
lines revealed evidence for an epistatic interaction that was associated with
this combinatorial locus.

PMCID: PMC3425203
PMID: 22685170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Psychophysiology. 2012 Aug;49(8):1133-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2012.01391.x. 
Epub 2012 Jun 8.

The role of sustained posterior brain activity in the serial chaining of two
cognitive operations: a MEG study.

Fan Z(1), Muthukumaraswamy SD, Singh KD, Shapiro K.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Adolescent Cyberpsychology and Behavior (CCNU), Ministry of 
Education, Wuhan, China.

A fundamental necessity in human cognition is to link sequential mental
operations where appropriate execution of the second task requires input from the
first. The present study explores the neural basis of such "chaining" using a
novel psychological refractory period (PRP) task. Participants were required to
make speeded responses to two sequential visual tasks that were chained or
independent. Magnetoencephalography (MEG) signals were recorded simultaneously to
reveal the brain's response to these similar but fundamentally different
conditions. RTs to Task 1 and 2 were slower in the Chained condition, and their
temporal coupling weakened, relative to the Independent condition. MEG analysis
of the accompanying event-related fields (ERFs) revealed an increased sustained
posterior component in the Chained condition beginning approximately 350<U+2009>ms after
Task 2 onset and lasting for 450<U+2009>ms. Beamformer localization of this ERF effect
revealed a left hemisphere source near the junction of the temporal, parietal,
and occipital lobes. These results extend our understanding of the behavioral and
corresponding neural mechanisms required by everyday decision making.

Copyright © 2012 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

PMID: 22681405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Plant Physiol. 2012 Aug;159(4):1686-99. doi: 10.1104/pp.112.197061. Epub 2012 Jun
7.

A Medicago truncatula tobacco retrotransposon insertion mutant collection with
defects in nodule development and symbiotic nitrogen fixation.

Pislariu CI(1), Murray JD, Wen J, Cosson V, Muni RR, Wang M, Benedito VA,
Andriankaja A, Cheng X, Jerez IT, Mondy S, Zhang S, Taylor ME, Tadege M, Ratet P,
Mysore KS, Chen R, Udvardi MK.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biology Division, Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, Ardmore, Oklahoma
73401, USA.

A Tnt1-insertion mutant population of Medicago truncatula ecotype R108 was
screened for defects in nodulation and symbiotic nitrogen fixation. Primary
screening of 9,300 mutant lines yielded 317 lines with putative defects in nodule
development and/or nitrogen fixation. Of these, 230 lines were rescreened, and
156 lines were confirmed with defective symbiotic nitrogen fixation. Mutants were
sorted into six distinct phenotypic categories: 72 nonnodulating mutants (Nod-), 
51 mutants with totally ineffective nodules (Nod+ Fix-), 17 mutants with
partially ineffective nodules (Nod+ Fix+/-), 27 mutants defective in nodule
emergence, elongation, and nitrogen fixation (Nod+/- Fix-), one mutant with
delayed and reduced nodulation but effective in nitrogen fixation (dNod+/- Fix+),
and 11 supernodulating mutants (Nod++Fix+/-). A total of 2,801 flanking sequence 
tags were generated from the 156 symbiotic mutant lines. Analysis of flanking
sequence tags revealed 14 insertion alleles of the following known symbiotic
genes: NODULE INCEPTION (NIN), DOESN'T MAKE INFECTIONS3 (DMI3/CCaMK), ERF
REQUIRED FOR NODULATION, and SUPERNUMERARY NODULES (SUNN). In parallel, a
polymerase chain reaction-based strategy was used to identify Tnt1 insertions in 
known symbiotic genes, which revealed 25 additional insertion alleles in the
following genes: DMI1, DMI2, DMI3, NIN, NODULATION SIGNALING PATHWAY1 (NSP1),
NSP2, SUNN, and SICKLE. Thirty-nine Nod- lines were also screened for arbuscular 
mycorrhizal symbiosis phenotypes, and 30 mutants exhibited defects in arbuscular 
mycorrhizal symbiosis. Morphological and developmental features of several new
symbiotic mutants are reported. The collection of mutants described here is a
source of novel alleles of known symbiotic genes and a resource for cloning novel
symbiotic genes via Tnt1 tagging.

PMCID: PMC3425206
PMID: 22679222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2012 Nov;14(6):914-22. doi:
10.1111/j.1438-8677.2012.00585.x. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Identification and expression analysis of components involved in rice
Xa21-mediated disease resistance signalling.

Bai H(1), Lan JP, Gan Q, Wang XY, Hou MM, Cao YH, Li LY, Liu LJ, Hao YJ, Yin CC, 
Wu L, Zhu LH, Liu GZ.

Author information: 
(1)Hebei Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Shijiazhuang, China.

Rice Xa21 gene encodes a receptor-like kinase that confers broad-spectrum
resistance against Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo). Recently, a number of
genes involved in the Xa21-mediated disease resistance pathway have been
identified. Based on our previous data and the literature, we chose 16 candidate 
proteins and made corresponding antibodies. Using Western blotting, we
systematically investigated the expression profile of the proteins in
Xa21-mediated disease resistance response. We found nine proteins with altered
expression. We further compared their expression in resistance, susceptible and
mock responses, and found that GST expression was up-regulated during the
resistance process, indicating GST is a positive regulator in resistance
responses. ATPsB expression was down-regulated during both the resistance and
susceptible response processes, although it was higher in the resistance response
than that in the susceptible response. The total amount of MYB, GAPDH, CatB, Trx 
and NB-ARC proteins was lower in the resistance than in the susceptible response,
but their abundance per unit bacteria in the resistance response was still higher
than in the susceptible response, suggesting that these proteins might be
positive regulators in the resistance response. In addition, expression of
another ERF was induced by inoculation with bacterial blight pathogen, and
expression of Zf-LSD1 was activated by wounding stress alone. Interestingly, most
proteins showed similar altered expression patterns in the resistance and
susceptible responses, but differed to some extents, implying that both responses
might share common molecular mechanisms. This study revealed evidence of
resistance-related protein expression, providing a foundation for better
understanding of their functions.

© 2012 German Botanical Society and The Royal Botanical Society of the
Netherlands.

PMID: 22672582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Plant Mol Biol. 2012 Sep;80(2):157-67. doi: 10.1007/s11103-012-9935-9. Epub 2012 
Jun 6.

Delta subclass HD-Zip proteins and a B-3 AP2/ERF transcription factor interact
with promoter elements required for expression of the Arabidopsis cytochrome c
oxidase 5b-1 gene.

Comelli RN(1), Welchen E, Kim HJ, Hong JC, Gonzalez DH.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Agrobiotecnología del Litoral, Cátedra de Biología Celular y
Molecular, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, CC 242 Paraje El Pozo, 3000 Santa
Fe, Argentina.

We have identified transcription factors that interact with a promoter region
involved in expression of the Arabidopsis thaliana COX5b-1 gene, which encodes an
isoform of the cytochrome c oxidase zinc binding subunit. Elements with the core 
sequence ATCATT, involved in induction by sugars, are recognized both in vitro
and in one-hybrid assays in yeast by HD-Zip proteins from the delta subclass and,
though less efficiently, by the trihelix transcription factor GT-3b. DistalB-like
elements (CCACTTG), required for induction by abscisic acid (ABA), interact with 
ESE1, a member of the B-3 subgroup of AP2/ERF transcription factors. The HD-Zip
protein Athb-21 and ESE1 are able to interact in yeast two-hybrid assays with the
ABA responsive element binding factor AREB2/ABF4, which binds to a G-box
absolutely required for expression of the COX5b-1 gene. Overexpression of the
identified transcription factors in plants produces an increase in COX5b-1
transcript levels. Moreover, these factors are able to induce the expression of a
reporter gene located in plants under the control of the relevant COX5b-1
promoter regions required for expression. Analysis of promoter regions of COX5b
genes from different plant species suggests that the identified transcription
factors were recruited for the regulation of COX5b gene expression at different
stages during the evolution of dicot plants.

PMID: 22669746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Front Plant Sci. 2012 Jan 31;3:8. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2012.00008. eCollection 2012.

Gene regulation by cytokinin in Arabidopsis.

Brenner WG(1), Ramireddy E, Heyl A, Schmülling T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology/Applied Genetics, Dahlem Centre of Plant Sciences, Freie 
Universität Berlin Berlin, Germany.

The plant hormone cytokinin realizes at least part of its signaling output
through the regulation of gene expression. A great part of the early
transcriptional regulation is mediated by type-B response regulators, which are
transcription factors of the MYB family. Other transcription factors, such as the
cytokinin response factors of the AP2/ERF family, have also been shown to be
involved in this process. Additional transcription factors mediate distinct parts
of the cytokinin response through tissue- and cell-specific downstream
transcriptional cascades. In Arabidopsis, only a single cytokinin response
element, to which type-B response regulators bind, has been clearly proven so
far, which has 5'-GAT(T/C)-3' as a core sequence. This motif has served to
construct a synthetic cytokinin-sensitive two-component system response element, 
which is useful for monitoring the cellular cytokinin status. Insight into the
extent of transcriptional regulation has been gained by genome-wide gene
expression analyses following cytokinin treatment and from plants having an
altered cytokinin content or signaling. This review presents a meta analysis of
such microarray data resulting in a core list of cytokinin response genes. Genes 
encoding type-A response regulators displayed the most stable response to
cytokinin, but a number of cytokinin metabolism genes (CKX4, CKX5, CYP735A2,
UGT76C2) also belong to them, indicating homeostatic mechanisms operating at the 
transcriptional level. The cytokinin core response genes are also the target of
other hormones as well as biotic and abiotic stresses, documenting crosstalk of
the cytokinin system with other hormonal and environmental signaling pathways.
The multiple links of cytokinin to diverse functions, ranging from control of
meristem activity, hormonal crosstalk, nutrient acquisition, and various stress
responses, are also corroborated by a compilation of genes that have been
repeatedly found by independent gene expression profiling studies. Such functions
are, at least in part, supported by genetic studies.

PMCID: PMC3355611
PMID: 22639635  [PubMed]


399. Anticancer Res. 2012 May;32(5):1785-90.

Airway stenting for malignant respiratory complications in esophageal cancer.

Hamai Y(1), Hihara J, Emi M, Aoki Y, Miyata Y, Okada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and 
Medicine, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551,
Japan.

Airway stenting is required for the palliative treatment of advanced esophageal
cancer. This study retrospectively analyzes the outcomes of airway stenting for
esophageal cancer at our institution. Data from nine patients who underwent
airway stenting were reviewed. All patients had poor respiratory status due to
esophagorespiratory fistula and/or respiratory stenosis. We retrospectively
assessed the results of airway stenting as five grades of respiratory symptoms,
regarding stent-related complications and clinical course and survival. Six
silicone and six covered self-expandable metallic stents were deployed in five
and six patients, respectively. Two types of airway stents were deployed in two
patients, and double stents were positioned in the airway and in the esophagus of
three other patients. The grade of respiratory symptoms improved in seven
patients. The mean dyspnea grade was 3.0±0.9 and 1.3±1.3 before and after airway 
stenting, respectively. Stent-related complications comprised of chest pain,
incomplete closure of the ERF, sputum retention and stent migration. The mean±SD 
survival of all patients was 103±108 (range, 0 to 325) days, and the survival of 
patients without relapsed cancer at the time of stenting, who underwent
cancer-specific therapy after stenting, was prolonged. Although the airway should
be stented according to the status and the prognosis of each patient individually
stenting can relieve symptoms and improve the prognosis even when esophageal
cancer is at very advanced stages. Airway stenting could play a role in the
multidisciplinary management of advanced esophageal cancer.

PMID: 22593462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35995. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035995. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

ERF5 and ERF6 play redundant roles as positive regulators of JA/Et-mediated
defense against Botrytis cinerea in Arabidopsis.

Moffat CS(1), Ingle RA, Wathugala DL, Saunders NJ, Knight H, Knight MR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Durham Centre for Crop
Improvement Technology, Durham University, Durham, United Kingdom.

The ethylene response factor (ERF) family in Arabidopsis thaliana comprises 122
members in 12 groups, yet the biological functions of the majority remain
unknown. Of the group IX ERFs, the IXc subgroup has been studied the most, and
includes ERF1, ERF14 and ORA59, which play roles in plant innate immunity. Here
we investigate the biological functions of two members of the less studied IXb
subgroup: ERF5 and ERF6. In order to identify potential targets of these
transcription factors, microarray analyses were performed on plants
constitutively expressing either ERF5 or ERF6. Expression of defense genes,
JA/Et-responsive genes and genes containing the GCC box promoter motif were
significantly upregulated in both ERF5 and ERF6 transgenic plants, suggesting
that ERF5 and ERF6 may act as positive regulators of JA-mediated defense and
potentially overlap in their function. Since defense against necrotrophic
pathogens is generally mediated through JA/Et-signalling, resistance against the 
fungal necrotroph Botrytis cinerea was examined. Constitutive expression of ERF5 
or ERF6 resulted in significantly increased resistance. Although no significant
difference in susceptibility to B. cinerea was observed in either erf5 or erf6
mutants, the erf5 erf6 double mutant showed a significant increase in
susceptibility, which was likely due to compromised JA-mediated gene expression, 
since JA-induced gene expression was reduced in the double mutant. Taken together
these data suggest that ERF5 and ERF6 play positive but redundant roles in
defense against B. cinerea. Since mutual antagonism between JA/Et and salicylic
acid (SA) signalling is well known, the UV-C inducibility of an SA-inducible
gene, PR-1, was examined. Reduced inducibilty in both ERF5 and ERF6 constitutive 
overexepressors was consistent with suppression of SA-mediated signalling, as was
an increased susceptibility to avirulent Pseudomonas syringae. These data suggest
that ERF5 and ERF6 may also play a role in the antagonistic crosstalk between the
JA/Et and SA signalling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3338558
PMID: 22563431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Opt Lett. 2012 May 1;37(9):1397-9. doi: 10.1364/OL.37.001397.

Vector erf-Gaussian beams: fractional optical vortices and asymmetric TE and TM
modes.

Fadeyeva T(1), Alexeyev C, Rubass A, Volyar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Taurida National VI Vernadsky University, Simferopol,
Ukraine.

We have considered the paraxial vector erf-Gaussian beams with field distribution
in the form of the error function that are shaped by the cone of plane waves with
a fractional step of the azimuthal phase distribution modulated by the Gaussian
envelope. We have revealed that the initial distributions of the transverse
electric and transverse magnetic fields have a far from standard form but at the 
far diffraction field the field distributions recover nearly the symmetric form.

PMID: 22555683  [PubMed]


402. New Phytol. 2012 Jul;195(2):450-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2012.04160.x. Epub
2012 Apr 24.

Arabidopsis RAP2.2 plays an important role in plant resistance to Botrytis
cinerea and ethylene responses.

Zhao Y(1), Wei T, Yin KQ, Chen Z, Gu H, Qu LJ, Qin G.

Author information: 
(1)College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100094, China.

 Ethylene plays a crucial role in plant resistance to necrotrophic pathogens, in
which ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTORs (ERFs) are often involved.  Here, we evaluated
the role of an ERF transcription factor, RELATED TO AP2 2 (RAP2.2), in Botrytis
resistance and ethylene responses in Arabidopsis. We analyzed the resistance of
transgenic plants overexpressing RAP2.2 and the T-DNA insertion mutant to
Botrytis cinerea. We assessed its role in the ethylene signaling pathway by
molecular and genetic approaches.  RAP2.2-overexpressing transgenic plants
showed increased resistance to B. cinerea, whereas its T-DNA insertion mutant
rap2.2-3 showed decreased resistance. Overexpression of RAP2.2 in ethylene
insensitive 2 (ein2) and ein3 ein3-like 1 (eil1) mutants restored their
resistance to B. cinerea. Both ethylene and Botrytis infection induced the
expression of RAP2.2 and the induction was disrupted in ein2 and ein3 eil1
mutants. We identified rap2.12-1 as a T-DNA insertion mutant of RAP2.12, the
closest homolog of RAP2.2. The hypocotyls of rap2.2-3 rap2.12-1 double mutants
showed ethylene insensitivity. The constitutive triple response in constitutive
triple response1 (ctr1) was partially released in the rap2.2-3 rap2.12-1 ctr1
triple mutants.  Our findings demonstrate that RAP2.2 functions as an important 
regulator in Botrytis resistance and ethylene responses.

© 2012 The Authors. New Phytologist © 2012 New Phytologist Trust.

PMID: 22530619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Plant Sci. 2012 Jun;188-189:102-10. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2012.02.008. Epub
2012 Feb 17.

Structure and expression of the quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase (QPT) gene 
family in Nicotiana.

Ryan SM(1), Cane KA, DeBoer KD, Sinclair SJ, Brimblecombe R, Hamill JD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800,
Australia.

Synthesis of wound-inducible pyridine alkaloids is characteristic of species in
the genus Nicotiana. The enzyme quinolinate phosphoribosyltransferase (QPT) plays
a key role in facilitating the availability of precursors for alkaloid synthesis,
in addition to its ubiquitous role in enabling NAD(P)(H) synthesis. In a previous
study, we reported that Nicotiana tabacum L. var. NC 95 possesses a QPT RFLP
pattern similar to its model paternal progenitor species, Nicotiana
tomentosiformis Goodsp. Here we show that although some varieties of N. tabacum
(e.g. NC 95 and LAFC 53) possess QPT genomic contributions from only its paternal
progenitor species, this is not the case for many other N. tabacum varieties
(e.g. Xanthi, Samsun, Petite Havana SR1 and SC 58) where genomic QPT sequences
from both diploid progenitor species have been retained. We also report that QPT 
is encoded by duplicate genes (designated QPT1 and QPT2) not only in N. tabacum, 
but also its model progenitor species Nicotiana sylvestris Speg. and Comes and N.
tomentosiformis as well as in the diploid species Nicotiana glauca Graham.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the N. tabacum QPT2 gene encodes a
functional enzyme via complementation of a nadC(-)Escherichia coli mutant. Using 
a similar experimental approach here, we demonstrate that the N. tabacum QPT1
gene also encodes a functional QPT protein. We observe too that QPT2 is the
predominate transcript present in both alkaloid and non-alkaloid synthesising
tissues in N. tabacum and that promoter regions of both QPT1 and QPT2 are able to
produce GUS activity in reproductive tissues. In N. tabacum and in several other 
Nicotiana species tested, QPT2 transcript levels increase following wounding or
methyl jasmonate treatment whilst QPT1 transcript levels remain largely unaltered
by these treatments. Together with conclusions from recently published studies
involving functional interaction of MYC2-bHLH and specific ERF-type and
transcription factors with QPT2-promoter sequences from N. tabacum, our results
suggest that whilst both members of the QPT gene family can contribute to the
transcript pool in both alkaloid producing and non-producing tissues, it is QPT2 
that is regulated in association with inducible defensive pyridine alkaloid
synthesis in species across the genus Nicotiana.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22525250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Avian Pathol. 2012;41(2):211-9. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2012.663077.

Immunohistochemical examination of plexiform-like complex vascular lesions in the
lungs of broiler chickens selected for susceptibility to idiopathic pulmonary
arterial hypertension.

Hamal KR(1), Erf GF, Anthony NB, Wideman RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, 1260 West Maple,
Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA. krishna.hamal@gmail.com

Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) is a disease of unknown cause
that is characterized by elevated pulmonary arterial pressure and pulmonary
vascular resistance, and by extensive vascular remodelling. In human IPAH
patients, remodelling of the pulmonary vasculature results in the formation of
plexiform lesions in the terminal pulmonary arterioles. Various molecules are
expressed in the human plexiform lesions, including alpha smooth muscle actin,
von Willebrand factor, vascular endothelial growth factor, vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor type 2, hypoxia inducible factor-1a, survivin, tenascin,
collagen, fibronectin, and various immune/inflammatory cells such as, cytotoxic
lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, MHC class II cells, and monocytes/macrophages are
also present. Plexiform lesions rarely develop in the lungs of laboratory
animals, but plexiform-like complex vascular lesions (CVL) do develop
spontaneously in the lungs of broiler chickens from an IPAH-susceptible line. To 
examine angioproliferative and immune-system-related activities associated with
CVL in broiler lungs, paraformaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded lung sections
from 8-week-old to 24-week-old broiler chickens were stained
immunohistochemically using monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies specific for
angioproliferative molecules and immune/inflammatory cells. The CVL in the lungs 
of broiler chickens exhibited positive staining for both angioproliferative
molecules and immune/inflammatory cells. These observations combined with the
close histological resemblance of broiler CVL to the plexiform lesions of human
IPAH patients further validates chickens from our IPAH-susceptible line as an
excellent animal model of spontaneous plexogenic arteriopathy.

PMID: 22515539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. BMC Immunol. 2012 Apr 13;13:18. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-13-18.

Understanding mechanisms of vitiligo development in Smyth line of chickens by
transcriptomic microarray analysis of evolving autoimmune lesions.

Shi F(1), Kong BW, Song JJ, Lee JY, Dienglewicz RL, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence for Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Division of 
Agriculture, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Smyth line (SL) of chicken is an excellent avian model for human 
autoimmune vitiligo. The etiology of vitiligo is complicated and far from clear. 
In order to better understand critical components leading to vitiligo
development, cDNA microarray technology was used to compare gene expression
profiles in the target tissue (the growing feather) of SL chickens at different
vitiligo (SLV) states.
RESULTS: Compared to the reference sample, which was from Brown line chickens
(the parental control), 395, 522, 524 and 526 out of the 44 k genes were
differentially expressed (DE) (P = 0.05) in feather samples collected from SL
chickens that never developed SLV (NV), from SLV chickens prior to SLV onset
(EV), during active loss of pigmentation (AV), and after complete loss of
melanocytes (CV). Comparisons of gene expression levels within SL samples (NV,
EV, AV and CV) revealed 206 DE genes, which could be categorized into immune
system-, melanocyte-, stress-, and apoptosis-related genes based on the
biological functions of their corresponding proteins. The autoimmune nature of
SLV was supported by predominant presence of immune system related DE genes and
their remarkably elevated expression in AV samples compared to NV, EV and/or CV
samples. Melanocyte loss was confirmed by decreased expression of genes for
melanocyte related proteins in AV and CV samples compared to NV and EV samples.
In addition, SLV development was also accompanied by altered expression of genes 
associated with disturbed redox status and apoptosis. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis 
of DE genes provided functional interpretations involving but not limited to
innate and adaptive immune response, oxidative stress and cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: The microarray results provided comprehensive information at the
transcriptome level supporting the multifactorial etiology of vitiligo, where
together with apparent inflammatory/innate immune activity and oxidative stress, 
the adaptive immune response plays a predominant role in melanocyte loss.

PMCID: PMC3353230
PMID: 22500953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Poult Sci. 2012 May;91(5):1240-7. doi: 10.3382/ps.2011-01947.

Consumer acceptance of visual appearance of broiler breast meat with varying
degrees of white striping.

Kuttappan VA(1), Lee YS, Erf GF, Meullenet JF, McKee SR, Owens CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, USA.

White striping is a condition associated with heavier broiler breast fillets and 
is observed grossly as white striations seen parallel to the direction of the
muscle fibers. The present study was intended to assess the consumer acceptance
of broiler fillets with different degrees of white striping condition. High
resolution digital images of fillets, representative of varying degrees of white 
striping, were shown to 75 consumers in a blind study. Individual images were
presented using a completely randomized design. There were 4 replicates of
individual fillets within each white striping category (normal = NORM, moderate =
MOD, and severe = SEV) and one picture of tray pack (3 fillets) for each
category. The consumers were asked to express their overall liking for appearance
with a 9-point hedonic scale (9 = like extremely; 1 = dislike extremely) and
purchase intent using a 5-point scale (5 = definitely would buy; 1 = definitely
would not buy). An open-ended comments section was also included. The results
showed that NORM fillets had a significantly higher hedonic score (6.9) than the 
MOD fillets (6.1), which was also significantly higher than the SEV fillets
(4.5), indicating that as severity of white striping increased, the consumer
acceptance decreased. From the distribution of the responses, 10.7, 22.4, and
56.7% of the consumers disliked the NORM, MOD, and SEV fillets, respectively.
Furthermore, the average purchase intent score for the NORM fillets (3.6) was
significantly higher than those with 2 degrees of white striping (2.4 and 2.5,
respectively), suggesting that the consumers were more likely to buy NORM
fillets. Over 50% of the consumers indicated that they would probably not or
definitely not buy MOD or SEV fillets. The correspondence analysis of open-ended 
comments revealed the major reasons for the dislike of the white-striped meat was
that the fillets had a more fatty or marbled appearance. The results of the study
suggest that the white striping does affect the consumer acceptance based on the 
appearance of the fillets.

PMID: 22499884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Prog Transplant. 2012 Mar;22(1):95-101.

Factors influencing living kidney donation in Singapore.

Meng OY(1), Lim C, Leng CW, van der Erf S, Joshi VD, Sin ST, Hong ST, Chye PG,
Seng GT, Yi-Shern TK.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Social Services, Singapore General Hospital, Outram Road, Singapore
169608. ow.yong.lai.meng@sgh.com.sg

CONTEXT: Kidney transplantation is the best treatment option for kidney failure, 
but the supply of donor kidneys remains small.
OBJECTIVE: To understand the public's attitude toward living donor kidney
donation in Singapore. DESIGN, SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS, INTERVENTION, OUTCOME
MEASURES: A crosssectional study of a convenience sample of 1520 members of the
general public seeking care at local medical centers. A self-administered
questionnaire included questions on demographics and subjects' willingness and
unwillingness to donate a kidney. Respondents were aged at least 18 years and did
not have underlying chronic kidney disease, end-stage renal disease requiring
dialysis, or history of kidney transplant.
RESULTS: Overall mean age of respondents was 49 (SD, 15) years and 50% were male.
Response rate to the question on "willingness to donate kidney while alive" was
96% (1460); 707 (48.4%) were willing to donate a kidney while alive. Respondents 
who were willing to donate were younger (<40 years; P<.001); had above a
secondary level education (P<.001); had monthly household income 2000 SGD (or
US$1660; exchange rate at 1 SGD = US$0.83) or higher (P<.001); were not married, 
single, or divorced (P<.001); and were professionals (P<.001). Fear of surgical
risks (86.5% strongly agree or agree) and poorer health consequent to donation
(87.5% strongly agree or agree) were the main reasons for not considering being a
living kidney donor. Demographic factors and concerns of surgical risks and ill
health after transplant influenced willingness to donate a kidney while alive.
Addressing these concerns may alleviate anxiety with regard to living kidney
donation.

PMID: 22489450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Plant Physiol. 2012 Jul 15;169(11):1112-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2012.03.002.
Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Molecular characterization of two ethylene response factor genes in sweetpotato
that respond to stress and activate the expression of defense genes in tobacco
leaves.

Kim YH(1), Jeong JC, Park S, Lee HS, Kwak SS.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Biotechnology Research Center, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology-KRIBB, Gwahak-ro 125, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806,
Republic of Korea.

Two ethylene response factor (ERF) genes, IbERF1 and IbERF2, were isolated from a
library of expressed sequence tags (EST) prepared from suspension-cultured cells 
and dehydration-treated fibrous roots of sweetpotato (Ipomoea batatas). The
deduced IbERFs contained a nuclear localization signal and the AP2/ERF
DNA-binding domain. RT-PCR analysis revealed that IbERF1 was expressed abundantly
during the growth of suspension-cultured cells, whereas the expression levels of 
IbERF2 transcripts were high in fibrous, thick pigmented roots. Two ERF genes
also showed different responses to various types of abiotic stress and pathogen
infection. Transient expression of the two ERF genes in tobacco (Nicotiana
tabacum) leaves resulted in increased transcript levels of the
pathogenesis-related 5 (PR5) gene, the early response to dehydration ten gene
(ERD10), the CuZn superoxide dismutase gene (CuZnSOD) and the catalase gene
(CAT). It is suggested that the two ERF genes play roles in the stress
defense-signaling pathway as transcriptional regulators of the PR5, ERD10,
CuZnSOD and CAT genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22459326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Plant Physiol. 2012 May;159(1):156-68. doi: 10.1104/pp.112.194563. Epub 2012 Mar 
28.

Regulation of plasmodesmatal permeability and stomatal patterning by the
glycosyltransferase-like protein KOBITO1.

Kong D(1), Karve R, Willet A, Chen MK, Oden J, Shpak ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Cellular, and Molecular Biology, University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, USA.

The differentiation of stomata provides a convenient model for studying pattern
formation in plant tissues. Stomata formation is induced by a set of basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factors and inhibited by a signal transduction
pathway initiated by TOO MANY MOUTHS (TMM) and ERECTA family (ERf) receptors. The
formation of a proper stomata pattern is also dependent upon the restriction of
symplastic movement of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors into
neighboring cells, especially in the backgrounds where the function of the
TMM/ERf signaling pathway is compromised. Here, we describe a novel mutant of
KOBITO1 in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). The kob1-3 mutation leads to the
formation of stomata clusters in the erl1 erl2 background but not in the wild
type. Cell-to-cell mobility assays demonstrated an increase in intercellular
protein trafficking in kob1-3, including increased diffusion of SPEECHLESS,
suggesting that the formation of stomata clusters is due to an escape of cell
fate-specifying factors from stomatal lineage cells. While plasmodesmatal
permeability is increased in kob1-3, we did not detect drastic changes in callose
accumulation at the neck regions of the plasmodesmata. Previously, KOBITO1 has
been proposed to function in cellulose biosynthesis. Our data demonstrate that
disruption of cellulose biosynthesis in the erl1 erl2 background does not lead to
the formation of stomata clusters, indicating that cellulose biosynthesis is not 
a major determining factor for regulating plasmodesmatal permeability. Analysis
of KOBITO1 structure suggests that it is a glycosyltransferase-like protein.
KOBITO1 might be involved in a carbohydrate metabolic pathway that is essential
for both cellulose biosynthesis and the regulation of plasmodesmatal
permeability.

PMCID: PMC3406890
PMID: 22457425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Exp Bot. 2012 Jun;63(10):3899-911. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ers079. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

The rice ERF transcription factor OsERF922 negatively regulates resistance to
Magnaporthe oryzae and salt tolerance.

Liu D(1), Chen X, Liu J, Ye J, Guo Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Pathology, Department of Plant Pathology, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

Rice OsERF922, encoding an APETELA2/ethylene response factor (AP2/ERF) type
transcription factor, is rapidly and strongly induced by abscisic acid (ABA) and 
salt treatments, as well as by both virulent and avirulent pathovars of
Magnaporthe oryzae, the causal agent of rice blast disease. OsERF922 is localized
to the nucleus, binds specifically to the GCC box sequence, and acts as a
transcriptional activator in plant cells. Knockdown of OsERF922 by means of RNAi 
enhanced resistance against M. oryzae. The elevated disease resistance of the
RNAi plants was associated with increased expression of PR, PAL, and the other
genes encoding phytoalexin biosynthetic enzymes and without M. oryzae infection. 
In contrast, OsERF922-overexpressing plants showed reduced expression of these
defence-related genes and enhanced susceptibility to M. oryzae. In addition, the 
OsERF922-overexpressing lines exhibited decreased tolerance to salt stress with
an increased Na(+)/K(+) ratio in the shoots. The ABA levels were found increased 
in the overexpressing lines and decreased in the RNAi plants. Expression of the
ABA biosynthesis-related genes, 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase (NCED) 3 and 4,
was upregulated in the OsERF922-overexpressing plants, and NCED4 was
downregulated in the RNAi lines. These results suggest that OsERF922 is
integrated into the cross-talk between biotic and abiotic stress-signalling
networks perhaps through modulation of the ABA levels.

PMCID: PMC3388842
PMID: 22442415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. BMC Genomics. 2012 Mar 16;13:94. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-94.

Genome wide expression profiling of two accession of G. herbaceum L. in response 
to drought.

Ranjan A(1), Nigam D, Asif MH, Singh R, Ranjan S, Mantri S, Pandey N, Trivedi I, 
Rai KM, Jena SN, Koul B, Tuli R, Pathre UV, Sawant SV.

Author information: 
(1)Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-National Botanical Research
Institute, Rana Pratap Marg, Lucknow 226001, UP, India.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide gene expression profiling and detailed physiological
investigation were used for understanding the molecular mechanism and
physiological response of Gossypium herbaceum, which governs the adaptability of 
plants in drought conditions. Recently, microarray-based gene expression analysis
is commonly used to decipher genes and genetic networks controlling the traits of
interest. However, the results of such an analysis are often plagued due to a
limited number of genes (probe sets) on microarrays. On the other hand,
pyrosequencing of a transcriptome has the potential to detect rare as well as a
large number of transcripts in the samples quantitatively. We used Affymetrix
microarray as well as Roche's GS-FLX transcriptome sequencing for a comparative
analysis of cotton transcriptome in leaf tissues under drought conditions.
RESULTS: Fourteen accessions of Gossypium herbaceum were subjected to mannitol
stress for preliminary screening; two accessions, namely Vagad and RAHS-14, were 
selected as being the most tolerant and most sensitive to osmotic stress,
respectively. Affymetrix cotton arrays containing 24,045 probe sets and Roche's
GS-FLX transcriptome sequencing of leaf tissue were used to analyze the gene
expression profiling of Vagad and RAHS-14 under drought conditions. The analysis 
of physiological measurements and gene expression profiling showed that Vagad has
the inherent ability to sense drought at a much earlier stage and to respond to
it in a much more efficient manner than does RAHS-14. Gene Ontology (GO) studies 
showed that the phenyl propanoid pathway, pigment biosynthesis, polyketide
biosynthesis, and other secondary metabolite pathways were enriched in Vagad
under control and drought conditions as compared with RAHS-14. Similarly, GO
analysis of transcriptome sequencing showed that the GO terms responses to
various abiotic stresses were significantly higher in Vagad. Among the classes of
transcription factors (TFs) uniquely expressed in both accessions, RAHS-14 showed
the expression of ERF and WRKY families. The unique expression of ERFs in
response to drought conditions reveals that RAHS-14 responds to drought by
inducing senescence. This was further supported by transcriptome analysis which
revealed that RAHS-14 responds to drought by inducing many transcripts related to
senescence and cell death.
CONCLUSION: The comparative genome-wide gene expression profiling study of two
accessions of G.herbaceum under drought stress deciphers the differential
patterns of gene expression, including TFs and physiologically relevant
processes. Our results indicate that drought tolerance observed in Vagad is not
because of a single molecular reason but is rather due to several unique
mechanisms which Vagad has developed as an adaptation strategy.

PMCID: PMC3320563
PMID: 22424186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Plant Physiol. 2012 May 1;169(7):731-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2012.02.003. Epub 
2012 Mar 10.

Differential expression of peach ERF transcriptional activators in response to
signaling molecules and inoculation with Xanthomonas campestris pv. pruni.

Sherif S(1), El-Sharkawy I, Paliyath G, Jayasankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Agriculture, University of Guelph, 4890 Victoria Av. N.,
PO Box 7000 Vineland Station, ON L0R 2E0, Canada.

Ethylene response factors (ERFs) are a large family of transcription factors
(TFs) that have diverse functions in plant development and immunity. However,
very little is known about the molecular regulation of these TFs in stone fruits 
during disease incidence. In the present study, we describe the identification of
five peach ERFs (Pp-ERFs), aiming to elucidate their potential roles in defense
against Xanthomonas campestris pv. pruni (Xcp), the causal agent of bacterial
spot disease. The phylogenetic analysis along with sequence comparisons indicated
that all Pp-ERFs are transcriptional activators belonging to groups IX and IIV
ERFs. The transactivation capacity of these proteins was verified in vivo where
they all induced the expression of the GUS reporter gene and in a GCC-dependent
manner. The nuclear localization was also confirmed for two of these proteins,
Pp-ERF2.b and Pp-ERF2.c, after their transient expression in onion epidermal
cells. The induction kinetics of Pp-ERFs after inoculation with Xcp was
determined by qRT-PCR. Except for Pp-ERF2.b, transcript levels of Pp-ERFs
increased strongly and rapidly in the resistant 'Venture' compared to the
susceptible 'BabyGold 5' cultivar after infection with Xcp. In contrast, the
expression of Pp-ERF2.b was several-fold higher in the susceptible cultivar after
bacterial infection. The expression of Pp-ERFs was also monitored after treating 
with signaling compounds; salicylic acid (SA) (1 mM), ethephon (1 mM) and methyl 
jasmonate (MeJA) (50 µM). Although the results generally emphasize the role of
ethylene/jasmonic acid (ET/JA) signaling pathways in regulating the expression of
Pp-ERFs, there was a coordination of the timing of ET/JA responses, suggesting
compensatory rather than synergistic interactions between these pathways during
defense against Xcp.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22410465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Mol Plant. 2012 Sep;5(5):1042-57. doi: 10.1093/mp/sss003. Epub 2012 Mar 9.

The Arabidopsis AP2/ERF transcription factor RAP2.11 modulates plant response to 
low-potassium conditions.

Kim MJ(1), Ruzicka D, Shin R, Schachtman DP.

Author information: 
(1)Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St Louis, MO 63132, USA.

Plants respond to low-nutrient conditions through metabolic and morphology
changes that increase their ability to survive and grow. The transcription factor
RAP2.11 was identified as a component in the response to low potassium through
regulation of the high-affinity K(+) uptake transporter AtHAK5 and other
components of the low-potassium signal transduction pathway. RAP2.11 was
identified through the activation tagging of Arabidopsis lines that contained a
luciferase marker driven by the AtHAK5 promoter that is normally only induced by 
low potassium. This factor bound to a GCC-box of the AtHAK5 promoter in vitro and
in vivo. Transcript profiling revealed that a large number of genes were
up-regulated in roots by RAP2.11 overexpression. Many regulated genes were
identified to be in functional categories that are important in low-K(+)
signaling. These categories included ethylene signaling, reactive oxygen species 
production, and calcium signaling. Promoter regions of the up-regulated genes
were enriched in the GCCGGC motif also contained in the AtHAK5 promoter. These
results suggest that RAP2.11 regulates AtHAK5 expression under low-K(+)
conditions and also contributes to a coordinated response to low-potassium
conditions through the regulation of other genes in the low-K(+) signaling
cascade.

PMID: 22406475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Exp Bot. 2012 May;63(8):3257-70. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ers056. Epub 2012 Mar 2.

Roles for a soybean RAV-like orthologue in shoot regeneration and
photoperiodicity inferred from transgenic plants.

Zhao L(1), Hao D, Chen L, Lu Q, Zhang Y, Li Y, Duan Y, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Soybean Biology in the Chinese Ministry of Education,
Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin 150030, PR China.

The soybean gene Glyma10g34760 appears to encode a RAV2-like transcription factor
orthologue (DQ147914; hereafter GmRAV) based on sequence similarity. The gene is 
a member of the ERF/AP2 transcription factor family that has been shown to be
increased in transcript abundance by cytokinins (CKs). Transgenic
GmRAV-overexpressing (-ox) tobacco plants exhibited increased CK
signalling-related phenotypes including dwarfism, reduced apical dominance,
extreme longevity, vigorous outgrowth of lateral buds, small and dark green
leaves, reduced root growth, repressed flowering under both long- and short-day
conditions, and altered sensitivity to daylength. In contrast, inhibition (-i) of
GmRAV in soybean displayed the opposite phenotypic alterations which were
consistent with defects in CK signalling. Phenotypes included earlier time of
emergence; reduced numbers of branches, leaves, and flower buds; increased plant 
height; increased apical dominance; and earlier flowering and maturity. GmRAV-i
soybean was less sensitive to cytokinin in hypocotyls and root growth inhibition 
assays. GmRAV-i soybean showed decreased frequency of adventious shoot formation 
in tissue culture in the presence of CKs, which might be attributed to the
significantly decreased activities of CUC2, STM, and WUS involved in shoot
meristem specification. GmRAV protein was localized in the nucleus in leaves. The
GmRAV promoter-ß-glucuronidase (GUS) fusion was largely expressed in a
meristematic region of the shoot apex, which was consistent with expressed
sequence tag and microarray data. GmRAV was inferred to play a key role in CK and
photoperiod signalling that subsequently regulated plant development.

PMID: 22389516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Appl Radiat Isot. 2012 May;70(5):893-6. doi: 10.1016/j.apradiso.2012.02.006. Epub
2012 Feb 21.

Thermoluminescence property of LiMgF3 erbium activated phosphor.

Muñoz IC(1), Cruz-Zaragoza E, Favalli A, Furetta C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Químico Biológicas, Universidad de Sonora, Mexico.

The perovskite-like LiMgF(3):ErF(3) pellets were obtained from the melt formed by
LiF and MgF(2) mixed salts in the stoichiometric ratio. The perovskite material
was doped with 1, 2 and 4 mol% of ErF(3) impurity. The pellets samples were
(60)Co gamma irradiated and their thermoluminescence (TL) properties were
analyzed, i.e., dose-response, fading at RT and under UV irradiation, TL signal
reproducibility, and kinetic parameters. The intensity of the TL response against
irradiation dose was increased remarkably by the high concentration of impurity, 
and a linear dose-response was observed in the range of 1-10 Gy. The fading
observed at RT was about 10-30% after 24h from irradiation. All samples were
exposed from 1 to 200 Gy gamma dose range. The TL glow peaks were found around
367-376, 438-447, 509-521, and 594-611 K, when the doped samples were 1, 2 and 4 
mol% of the erbium impurity concentration. The thermoluminescence kinetics
parameters of the glow curves have been analyzed using the Computerized Glow
Curve Deconvolution (CGCD) method.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22381701  [PubMed]


416. Mol Biotechnol. 2013 Feb;53(2):198-206. doi: 10.1007/s12033-012-9515-x.

Expression and function of a modified AP2/ERF transcription factor from Brassica 
napus enhances cold tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis.

Xiong AS(1), Jiang HH, Zhuang J, Peng RH, Jin XF, Zhu B, Wang F, Zhang J, Yao QH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, College of
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, 1 Weigang, 210095 Nanjing, China. 
xiongaisheng@njau.edu.cn

One of the most rapid and effective defensive mechanisms plants have for
protecting themselves, from a variety of biotic and abiotic stresses, is the
regulation of plant signal transcription factors. AP2/ERF factors play an
important role in plant development as well as in hormonal regulation and cold
response. Directed evolution is a powerful tool to modify proteins, improving
their properties, and for studying their structure-function relations. Here, the 
transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressed a mutant gene, BnaERF-B3-hy15-mu3,
which encoded for a factor that exhibited more binding activity with the GCC box 
element than the wild-type gene BnaERF-B3-hy15 encode factor, and exhibited more 
freezing tolerance than transgenic plants containing the original BnaERF-B3-hy15 
gene. Real-time PCR analyses also revealed that the expression levels of several 
stress-regulated genes were altered in the over-expressed BnaERF-B3-hy15-mu3
transgenic lines. The BnaERF-B3-hy15 responded to exogenous ABA. Using RT-PCR
analysis, the expression of BnaERF-B3-hy15 at different stages and stress
treatments were also analyzed.

PMID: 22351429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2012 Apr;166(7):1674-84. doi: 10.1007/s12010-012-9568-0.
Epub 2012 Feb 11.

An protocol for genetic transformation of Catharanthus roseus by Agrobacterium
rhizogenes A4.

Zhou ML(1), Zhu XM, Shao JR, Wu YM, Tang YX.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences-CAAS, Room 211, Zhongguancun south, Street No. 12, Haidian District,
Beijing 100081, China.

Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don is a plant species known for its production of a 
variety of terpenoid indole alkaloids, many of which have pharmacological
activities. Catharanthine can be chemically coupled to the abundant leaf alkaloid
vindoline to form the valuable anticancer drug vinblastine. To study and extract 
catharanthine and other metabolites from C. roseus, a technique was developed for
producing hairy root cultures. In this study, the Agrobacterium rhizogenes A4 was
induced in the hairy roots from leaf explants, and the concentration of
antibiotics (100 mg/L kanamycin) was elucidated for selection after
transformation. The polymerase chain reaction amplification of rol genes results 
revealed that transgenic hairy roots contained rol genes from the root induced
(Ri)-plasmid. Catharanthine from C. roseus hairy roots was separated and analyzed
using high-performance liquid chromatography. Over-expression of CrOrca3
(octadecanoid-responsive Catharanthus AP2/ERF domain), and cytohistochemical
staining methods were used to validate transgenic hairy roots from C. roseus.
Hairy root culture of C. roseus is a valuable approach for future efforts in the 
metabolic engineering of terpenoid indole alkaloids in plants.

PMID: 22328251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Plant Cell. 2012 Feb;24(2):536-50. doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.093005. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

JAZ8 lacks a canonical degron and has an EAR motif that mediates transcriptional 
repression of jasmonate responses in Arabidopsis.

Shyu C(1), Figueroa P, Depew CL, Cooke TF, Sheard LB, Moreno JE, Katsir L, Zheng 
N, Browse J, Howe GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Energy-Plant Research Laboratory, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824.

The lipid-derived hormone jasmonoyl-L-Ile (JA-Ile) initiates large-scale changes 
in gene expression by stabilizing the interaction of JASMONATE ZIM domain (JAZ)
repressors with the F-box protein CORONATINE INSENSITIVE1 (COI1), which results
in JAZ degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Recent structural studies
show that the JAZ1 degradation signal (degron) includes a short conserved LPIAR
motif that seals JA-Ile in its binding pocket at the COI1-JAZ interface. Here, we
show that Arabidopsis thaliana JAZ8 lacks this motif and thus is unable to
associate strongly with COI1 in the presence of JA-Ile. As a consequence, JAZ8 is
stabilized against jasmonate (JA)-mediated degradation and, when ectopically
expressed in Arabidopsis, represses JA-regulated growth and defense responses.
These findings indicate that sequence variation in a hypervariable region of the 
degron affects JAZ stability and JA-regulated physiological responses. We also
show that JAZ8-mediated repression depends on an LxLxL-type EAR (for
ERF-associated amphiphilic repression) motif at the JAZ8 N terminus that binds
the corepressor TOPLESS and represses transcriptional activation. JAZ8-mediated
repression does not require the ZIM domain, which, in other JAZ proteins,
recruits TOPLESS through the EAR motif-containing adaptor protein NINJA. These
findings show that EAR repression domains in a subgroup of JAZ proteins repress
gene expression through direct recruitment of corepressors to cognate
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3315231
PMID: 22327740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Plant J. 2012 Jun;70(5):855-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2012.04935.x. Epub 2012 
Mar 12.

The EDLL motif: a potent plant transcriptional activation domain from AP2/ERF
transcription factors.

Tiwari SB(1), Belachew A, Ma SF, Young M, Ade J, Shen Y, Marion CM, Holtan HE,
Bailey A, Stone JK, Edwards L, Wallace AD, Canales RD, Adam L, Ratcliffe OJ,
Repetti PP.

Author information: 
(1)Mendel Biotechnology Inc., 3935 Point Eden Way, Hayward, CA 94545, USA.

In plants, the ERF/EREBP family of transcriptional regulators plays a key role in
adaptation to various biotic and abiotic stresses. These proteins contain a
conserved AP2 DNA-binding domain and several uncharacterized motifs. Here, we
describe a short motif, termed 'EDLL', that is present in AtERF98/TDR1 and other 
clade members from the same AP2 sub-family. We show that the EDLL motif, which
has a unique arrangement of acidic amino acids and hydrophobic leucines,
functions as a strong activation domain. The motif is transferable to other
proteins, and is active at both proximal and distal positions of target
promoters. As such, the EDLL motif is able to partly overcome the repression
conferred by the AtHB2 transcription factor, which contains an ERF-associated
amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif. We further examined the activation potential 
of EDLL by analysis of the regulation of flowering time by NF-Y (nuclear factor
Y) proteins. Genetic evidence indicates that NF-Y protein complexes potentiate
the action of CONSTANS in regulation of flowering in Arabidopsis; we show that
the transcriptional activation function of CONSTANS can be substituted by direct 
fusion of the EDLL activation motif to NF-YB subunits. The EDLL motif represents 
a potent plant activation domain that can be used as a tool to confer
transcriptional activation potential to heterologous DNA-binding proteins.

© 2012 Mendel Biotechnology Inc. The Plant Journal © 2012 Blackwell Publishing
Ltd.

PMID: 22321262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Plant Mol Biol. 2012 Apr;78(6):545-59. doi: 10.1007/s11103-012-9888-z. Epub 2012 
Feb 9.

The Arabidopsis thaliana transcriptional activator STYLISH1 regulates genes
affecting stamen development, cell expansion and timing of flowering.

Ståldal V(1), Cierlik I, Chen S, Landberg K, Baylis T, Myrenås M, Sundström JF,
Eklund DM, Ljung K, Sundberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology and Forest Genetics, Uppsala BioCenter, Linnean
Centre of Plant Biology in Uppsala, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, 
PO-Box 7080, 75007 Uppsala, Sweden.

SHORT-INTERNODES/STYLISH (SHI/STY)-family proteins redundantly regulate
development of lateral organs in Arabidopsis thaliana. We have previously shown
that STY1 interacts with the promoter of the auxin biosynthesis gene YUCCA (YUC)4
and activates transcription of the genes YUC4, YUC8 and OCTADECANOID-RESPONSIVE
ARABIDOPSIS AP2/ERF (ORA)59 independently of protein translation. STY1 also
affects auxin levels and auxin biosynthesis rates. Here we show that STY1 induces
the transcription of 16 additional genes independently of protein translation.
Several of these genes are tightly co-expressed with SHI/STY-family genes and/or 
down-regulated in SHI/STY-family multiple mutant lines, suggesting them to be
regulated by SHI/STY proteins during plant development. The majority of the
identified genes encode transcription factors or cell expansion-related enzymes
and functional studies suggest their involvement in stamen and leaf development
or flowering time regulation.

PMID: 22318676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Jan 21;18(3):225-36. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i3.225.

Stress-induced visceral analgesia assessed non-invasively in rats is enhanced by 
prebiotic diet.

Larauche M(1), Mulak A, Yuan PQ, Kanauchi O, Taché Y.

Author information: 
(1)VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA 90073, USA.
mlarauche@mednet.ucla.edu

AIM: To investigate the influence of repeated water avoidance stress (rWAS) on
the visceromotor response (VMR) to colorectal distension (CRD) and the modulation
of the response by a prebiotic diet in rats using a novel surgery-free method of 
solid-state manometry.
METHODS: Male Wistar rats fed a standard diet with or without 4% enzyme-treated
rice fiber (ERF) for 5 wk were subjected to rWAS (1 h daily x 10 d) or no stress.
The VMR to graded phasic CRD was assessed by intraluminal colonic pressure
recording on days 0 (baseline), 1 and 10 (45 min) and 11 (24 h) after rWAS and
expressed as percentage change from baseline. Cecal content of short chain fatty 
acids and distal colonic histology were assessed on day 11.
RESULTS: WAS on day 1 reduced the VMR to CRD at 40 and 60 mmHg similarly by 28.9%
± 6.6% in both diet groups. On day 10, rWAS-induced reduction of VMR occurred
only at 40 mmHg in the standard diet group (36.2% ± 17.8%) while in the ERF group
VMR was lowered at 20, 40 and 60 mmHg by 64.9% ± 20.9%, 49.3% ± 11.6% and 38.9% ±
7.3% respectively. The visceral analgesia was still observed on day 11 in ERF-
but not in standard diet-fed rats. By contrast the non-stressed groups (standard 
or ERF diet) exhibited no changes in VMR to CRD. In standard diet-fed rats, rWAS 
induced mild colonic histological changes that were absent in ERF-fed rats
exposed to stress compared to non-stressed rats. The reduction of cecal content
of isobutyrate and total butyrate, but not butyrate alone, was correlated with
lower visceral pain response. Additionally, ERF diet increased rWAS-induced
defecation by 26% and 75% during the first 0-15 min and last 15-60 min,
respectively, compared to standard diet, and reduced rats' body weight gain by
1.3 fold independently of their stress status.
CONCLUSION: These data provide the first evidence of psychological stress-related
visceral analgesia in rats that was enhanced by chronic intake of ERF prebiotic.

PMCID: PMC3261539
PMID: 22294825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Front Hum Neurosci. 2012 Jan 5;5:185. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2011.00185. eCollection 
2011.

Aesthetic appreciation: event-related field and time-frequency analyses.

Munar E(1), Nadal M, Castellanos NP, Flexas A, Maestú F, Mirasso C, Cela-Conde
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Human Evolution and Cognition (EvoCog), University of the Balearic Islands
Palma (Mallorca), Spain.

Improvements in neuroimaging methods have afforded significant advances in our
knowledge of the cognitive and neural foundations of aesthetic appreciation. We
used magnetoencephalography (MEG) to register brain activity while participants
decided about the beauty of visual stimuli. The data were analyzed with
event-related field (ERF) and Time-Frequency (TF) procedures. ERFs revealed no
significant differences between brain activity related with stimuli rated as
"beautiful" and "not beautiful." TF analysis showed clear differences between
both conditions 400 ms after stimulus onset. Oscillatory power was greater for
stimuli rated as "beautiful" than those regarded as "not beautiful" in the four
frequency bands (theta, alpha, beta, and gamma). These results are interpreted in
the frame of synchronization studies.

PMCID: PMC3251833
PMID: 22287948  [PubMed]


423. Trends Plant Sci. 2012 Mar;17(3):129-38. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2011.12.004. Epub
2012 Jan 24.

Making sense of low oxygen sensing.

Bailey-Serres J(1), Fukao T, Gibbs DJ, Holdsworth MJ, Lee SC, Licausi F, Perata
P, Voesenek LA, van Dongen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Plant Cell Biology, Department of Botany and Plant Sciences,
University of California, Riverside, CA 92521-0124, USA.
jgardiner@mail.usyd.edu.au

Plant-specific group VII Ethylene Response Factor (ERF) transcription factors
have emerged as pivotal regulators of flooding and low oxygen responses. In rice 
(Oryza sativa), these proteins regulate contrasting strategies of flooding
survival. Recent studies on Arabidopsis thaliana group VII ERFs show they are
stabilized under hypoxia but destabilized under oxygen-replete conditions via the
N-end rule pathway of targeted proteolysis. Oxygen-dependent sequestration at the
plasma membrane maintains at least one of these proteins, RAP2.12, under
normoxia. Remarkably, SUB1A, the rice group VII ERF that enables prolonged
submergence tolerance, appears to evade oxygen-regulated N-end rule degradation. 
We propose that the turnover of group VII ERFs is of ecological relevance in
wetland species and might be manipulated to improve flood tolerance of crops.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22280796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Mar 21;53(3):1485-91. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-7384.

A genetic epidemiologic study of candidate genes involved in the optic nerve head
morphology.

Gasten AC(1), Ramdas WD, Broer L, van Koolwijk LM, Ikram MK, de Jong PT,
Aulchenko YS, Wolfs RC, Hofman A, Rivadeneira F, Uitterlinden AG, Oostra BA,
Lemij HG, Klaver CC, Jansonius NM, Vingerling JR, van Duijn CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

PURPOSE: The size of the optic nerve head, referred to as disc area (DA), and the
vertical cup-disc ratio (VCDR), are clinically relevant parameters for
glaucomatous optic neuropathy. Although these measures have a high heritability, 
little is known about the underlying genes. Previously, the genes SALL1 and SIX1 
were found to be genome-wide significantly associated with DA and VCDR. The
purpose of the present study was to investigate whether genes encoding protein
known to interact with protein encoded by SALL1 and SIX1 are also associated with
either DA or VCDR.
METHODS: A total of 38 candidate genes were chosen covering all known proteins
interacting with SALL1 and SIX1. These were initially studied in the Rotterdam
Study (RS)-I, including 5312 Caucasian subjects characterized for DA and VCDR.
Positive findings were further investigated in two independent cohorts (RS-II and
RS-III) and finally replicated in a fourth population (ERF). Bonferroni
correction was applied to the meta-analyses.
RESULTS: Three loci were found to be associated with DA. The only locus
significant after correcting for multiple testing is located on chromosome 11p13.
Three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ELP4, a gene which neighbors and 
plays a crucial role in the expression of PAX6, show association in meta-analysis
of the four cohorts yielding P values of respectively 4.79 × 10(-6), 3.92 ×
10(-6), and 4.88 × 10(-6) which is below the threshold dictated by the most
conservative Bonferroni correction (P = 5.2 × 10(-6)).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the ELP4-PAX6 region plays a role in the
DA. Further research to confirm this finding is needed.

PMID: 22266513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Genet Mol Biol. 2011 Oct;34(4):624-33. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572011005000054. Epub
2011 Oct 1.

Genome-wide identification and phylogenetic analysis of the ERF gene family in
cucumbers.

Hu L(1), Liu S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China.

Members of the ERF transcription-factor family participate in a number of
biological processes, viz., responses to hormones, adaptation to biotic and
abiotic stress, metabolism regulation, beneficial symbiotic interactions, cell
differentiation and developmental processes. So far, no tissue-expression profile
of any cucumber ERF protein has been reported in detail. Recent completion of the
cucumber full-genome sequence has come to facilitate, not only genome-wide
analysis of ERF family members in cucumbers themselves, but also a comparative
analysis with those in Arabidopsis and rice. In this study, 103 hypothetical ERF 
family genes in the cucumber genome were identified, phylogenetic analysis
indicating their classification into 10 groups, designated I to X. Motif analysis
further indicated that most of the conserved motifs outside the AP2/ERF domain,
are selectively distributed among the specific clades in the phylogenetic tree.
From chromosomal localization and genome distribution analysis, it appears that
tandem-duplication may have contributed to CsERF gene expansion. Intron/exon
structure analysis indicated that a few CsERFs still conserved the former
intron-position patterns existent in the common ancestor of monocots and
eudicots. Expression analysis revealed the widespread distribution of the
cucumber ERF gene family within plant tissues, thereby implying the probability
of their performing various roles therein. Furthermore, members of some groups
presented mutually similar expression patterns that might be related to their
phylogenetic groups.

PMCID: PMC3229118
PMID: 22215967  [PubMed]


426. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 May;39(5):6067-75. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1421-y. Epub 2011
Dec 31.

Expression of an alfalfa (Medicago sativa L.) ethylene response factor gene
MsERF8 in tobacco plants enhances resistance to salinity.

Chen T(1), Yang Q, Gruber M, Kang J, Sun Y, Ding W, Zhang T, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Grassland Science, College of Animal Science and Technology,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100193, People's Republic of China.

Ethylene response factors (ERF) play crucial roles in plant development and
response to stresses. Here, a novel cDNA fragment (MsERF8) encoding an ERF
protein with an AP2 domain was isolated and characterized from alfalfa. The
MsERF8 cDNA has an open reading frame of 603 bp and encodes a nuclear protein of 
201 amino acids. Q-RT-PCR analysis revealed that MsERF8 was strongly enriched in 
roots and leaves compared with stems, flower buds and flowers of mature alfalfa
plants. Bioinformatic analysis of the MsERF8 promoter indicated a number of
elements associated with stress-related responses, and MsERF8 transcripts in
alfalfa seedlings were induced by NaCl, PEG6000, Al(2)(SO(4))(3) and five
different hormones. Expression of MsERF8 in transgenic tobacco plants resulted in
higher tolerance to salinity than with non-transgenic plants. This data shows
that MsERF8 is a gene which prevents or alleviates salinity damage and has strong
potential to impart salt tolerance to other crop plants.

PMID: 22209951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Rice (N Y). 2012 Mar 8;5(1):6. doi: 10.1186/1939-8433-5-6. eCollection 2012.

Toward understanding transcriptional regulatory networks in abiotic stress
responses and tolerance in rice.

Todaka D(1), Nakashima K(1), Shinozaki K(2), Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biological Resources and Post-harvest Division, Japan International Research
Center for Agricultural Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8686, Japan. (2)RIKEN
Plant Science Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (3)Biological Resources
and Post-harvest Division, Japan International Research Center for Agricultural
Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8686, Japan ; Laboratory of Plant Molecular
Physiology, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The University of 
Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Abiotic stress causes loss of crop production. Under abiotic stress conditions,
expression of many genes is induced, and their products have important roles in
stress responses and tolerance. Progress has been made in understanding the
biological roles of regulons in abiotic stress responses in rice. A number of
transcription factors (TFs) regulate stress-responsive gene expression. OsDREB1s 
and OsDREB2s were identified as abiotic-stress responsive TFs that belong to the 
AP2/ERF family. Similar to Arabidopsis, these DREB regulons were most likely not 
involved in the abscisic acid (ABA) pathway. OsAREBs such as OsAREB1 were
identified as key components in ABA-dependent transcriptional networks in rice.
OsNAC/SNACs including OsNAC6 were characterized as factors that regulate
expression of genes important for abiotic stress responses in rice. Here, we
review on the rice abiotic-stress responses mediated by transcriptional networks,
with the main focus on TFs that function in abiotic stress responses and confer
stress tolerance in rice.

PMCID: PMC3834508
PMID: 24764506  [PubMed]


428. Ter Arkh. 2012;84(12):115-9.

[An external respiratory failure classification: scientific rationale for its
clinical use].

[Article in Russian]

Tetenev FF.

The paper presents an external respiratory failure (ERF) classification, a
scientific rationale for its use in the clinical practice of departments of
different profiles. The setting up of interclinical functional diagnostic
laboratories and preventive health care facilities for the preclinical diagnosis 
of ERF is substantiated. The introduction of the classification of ERF into wide 
clinical practice is intended to form a social order for the design and purchase 
of diagnostic equipment for therapeutic-and-prophylactic institutions and to
stimulate researches in clinical respiratory physiology, and to improve
physicians' knowledge of this section of clinical science.

PMID: 23480002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mol Plant. 2012 Jul;5(4):831-40. doi: 10.1093/mp/ssr113. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Repression of the Arabidopsis thaliana jasmonic acid/ethylene-induced defense
pathway by TGA-interacting glutaredoxins depends on their C-terminal ALWL motif.

Zander M(1), Chen S, Imkampe J, Thurow C, Gatz C.

Author information: 
(1)Albrecht-von-Haller-Institute for Plant Sciences, Georg-August-University
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

Glutaredoxins are small heat-stable oxidoreductases that transfer electrons from 
glutathione (GSH) to oxidized cysteine residues, thereby contributing to protein 
integrity and regulation. In Arabidopsis thaliana, floral glutaredoxins ROXY1 and
ROXY2 and pathogen-induced ROXY19/GRX480 interact with bZIP transcription factors
of the TGACG (TGA) motif-binding family. ROXY1, ROXY2, and TGA factors
PERIANTHIA, TGA9, and TGA10 play essential roles in floral development. In
contrast, ectopically expressed ROXY19/GRX480 negatively regulates expression of 
jasmonic acid (JA)/ethylene (ET)-induced defense genes through an unknown
mechanism that requires clade II transcription factors TGA2, TGA5, and/or TGA6.
Here, we report that at least 17 of the 21 land plant-specific glutaredoxins
encoded in the Arabidopsis genome interact with TGA2 in a yeast-two-hybrid
system. To investigate their capacity to interfere with the expression of
JA/ET-induced genes, we developed a transient expression system. Activation of
the ORA59 (OCTADECANOID-RESPONSIVE ARABIDOPSIS AP2/ERF-domain protein 59)
promoter by transcription factor EIN3 (ETHYLENE INSENSITVE 3) was suppressed by
co-expressed ROXY19/GRX480. Suppression depended on the L**LL motif in the
C-terminus of ROXY19/GRX480. This putative protein interaction domain was
recently described as being essential for the TGA/ROXY interaction. Ten of the 17
tested ROXY proteins suppressed ORA59 promoter activity, which correlated with
the presence of the C-terminal ALWL motif, which is essential for ROXY1 function 
in flower development. ROXY19/GRX480-mediated repression depended on the GSH
binding site, suggesting that redox modification of either TGA factors or as yet 
unknown target proteins is important for the suppression of ORA59 promoter
activity.

PMID: 22207719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. FASEB J. 2012 Apr;26(4):1582-92. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-194654. Epub 2011 Dec 23.

EGR1 and the ERK-ERF axis drive mammary cell migration in response to EGF.

Tarcic G(1), Avraham R, Pines G, Amit I, Shay T, Lu Y, Zwang Y, Katz M,
Ben-Chetrit N, Jacob-Hirsch J, Virgilio L, Rechavi G, Mavrothalassitis G, Mills
GB, Domany E, Yarden Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

Comment in
    Cell Adh Migr. 2013 Jan-Feb;7(1):33-7.

The signaling pathways that commit cells to migration are incompletely
understood. We employed human mammary cells and two stimuli: epidermal growth
factor (EGF), which induced cellular migration, and serum factors, which
stimulated cell growth. In addition to strong activation of ERK by EGF, and AKT
by serum, early transcription remarkably differed: while EGF induced early growth
response-1 (EGR1), and this was required for migration, serum induced c-Fos and
FosB to enhance proliferation. We demonstrate that induction of EGR1 involves
ERK-mediated down-regulation of microRNA-191 and phosphorylation of the ETS2
repressor factor (ERF) repressor, which subsequently leaves the nucleus.
Unexpectedly, knockdown of ERF inhibited migration, which implies migratory roles
for exported ERF molecules. On the other hand, chromatin immunoprecipitation
identified a subset of direct EGR1 targets, including EGR1 autostimulation and
SERPINB2, whose transcription is essential for EGF-induced cell migration. In
summary, EGR1 and the EGF-ERK-ERF axis emerge from our study as major drivers of 
growth factor-induced mammary cell migration.

PMCID: PMC3316897
PMID: 22198386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai Zasshi. 2011;67(12):1523-32.

[Suggestion of new slice thickness mensuration using partial volume effect in
magnetic resonance imaging].

[Article in Japanese]

Kimura T(1), Higashida M, Takatsu Y, Ogura A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, HIMEDIC Clinic West.

The wedge and the slab methods are standard procedures as slice thickness
mensuration of the MRI needs an expensive and exclusive phantom, and they are
poor in versatility. We suggest a new method, that we call "differential edge
response function method". This is a modified version of the partial method which
Higashida and others proposed. In this method, we use an original phantom which
has an acrylic disk on the bottom, and take an image of it while moving a slice
position so it includes the disk part. We established the region of interest on
an image set up and got the edge response function (ERF) from the mean signal
intensity and relations of the Z position of the image. In this method, the
effective slice thickness is the half width of the slice profile, which is
differentiated ERF. This method can be measured even if the linearity of the
signal intensity is poor compared to the partial method. It is possible to
correct the alignment. In this method the measurement accuracy was approximately 
equal to the wedge method. This method is minimally influenced by signal-to-noise
ratio in comparison with the wedge method. Furthermore, versatility is high,
because it is simple and relatively easy to use.

PMID: 22186197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Biotechnol Lett. 2012 Apr;34(4):763-9. doi: 10.1007/s10529-011-0826-y. Epub 2011 
Dec 10.

Increase in pectin deposition by overexpression of an ERF gene in cultured cells 
of Arabidopsis thaliana.

Nakano T(1), Naito Y, Kakegawa K, Ohtsuki N, Tsujimoto-Inui Y, Shinshi H, Suzuki 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Bioproduction Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, 305-8566, Japan. tonakano@affrc.go.jp

Ethylene-responsive transcription factor (ERF) family genes, which are involved
in regulation of metabolic pathways and/or are useful for metabolic engineering, 
were investigated in the cultured cells of Arabidopsis thaliana. The pectin
content in the gelatinous precipitates after the ethanol precipitation of
extracts derived from calli of a transgenic cell line, A17, overexpressing an ERF
gene (At1g44830), increased in comparison with the control. Expression of genes
involved in pectin biosynthesis was up-regulated in the A17 calli. Overexpression
of the ERF gene coordinately activates the pectin biosynthetic pathway genes and 
increases the content of pectin. These results therefore will be useful as a
genetic resource for engineering pectin biosynthesis in plants.

PMID: 22160296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Am J Med Sci. 2012 Aug;344(2):105-9. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3182367b6a.

Airway ultraflex stenting in esophageal cancer with esophagorespiratory fistula.

Chung FT(1), Lin HC, Chou CL, Chen HC, Kuo CH, Yu CT, Lin SM, Kuo HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou, Chang
Gung University, College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

INTRODUCTION: Esophagorespiratory fistula (ERF) caused by esophageal cancer has a
poor prognosis. This study describes the clinical effects of airway ultraflex
stenting as an alternative method for ERF caused by esophageal cancer.
METHODS: In an university-affiliated hospital, consecutive patients with ERF
caused by esophageal cancer and confirmed by bronchoscopy were included. The
demography, clinical manifestations and survival between groups with and without 
airway stenting were compared by case-control study.
RESULTS: From 2001 to 2007, 817 patients with esophageal cancer received
bronchoscopy. Among these patients, 59 patients with ERF were included in this
study. The demography and clinical manifestations between groups with and without
airway stenting were similar, but survival improved in group with airway
stenting, which was compared using log-rank test [P = 0.04; hazard ratio, 0.56;
95% confidence interval (CI), 0.31-0.99]. After adjusted with age and gender by
multinominal logistic regression, airway stenting [adjusted odds ratio (OR), 5.2;
P = 0.01; 95% CI, 1.4-18.8], performance status (adjusted OR, 6.1; P = 0.004; 95%
CI, 1.8-20.8), further treatment (adjusted OR, 8.7; P = 0.001; 95% CI, 2.3-32.8) 
and prolonged pneumonia (adjusted OR, 0.14; P = 0.008; 95% CI, 0.03-0.59)
remained as significant factors that impacted survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Surgical treatment remains the first choice in patients with
esophageal cancer with ERF; however, the authors provided an alternative airway
stenting for those patients whom surgery is unsuitable. It improved survival in
the group with airway stenting than those without. Performance status improvement
and further treatment for esophageal cancer may improve survival, but prolonged
pneumonia may worsen survival.

PMID: 22143123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e28224. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028224. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

The role of histone methylation and H2A.Z occupancy during rapid activation of
ethylene responsive genes.

Hu Y(1), Shen Y, Conde E Silva N, Zhou DX.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie des Plantes, Université Paris-Sud, Orsay, France.

Ethylene signaling pathway leads to rapid gene activation by two hierarchies of
transcription factors with EIN3/EIL proteins as primary ones and ERF proteins as 
secondary ones. The role of chromatin modifications during the rapid gene
activation is not known. In this work we studied trimethylated histone H3 lysine 
4 (H3K4me3) and lysine 27 (H3K27me3), two opposite histone methylation marks for 
gene activity, during the induction course of three ethylene-responsive genes
(ERF1, AtERF14 and ChiB). We found that the three genes displayed different
histone modification profiles before induction. After induction, H3K4me3 was
increased in the 5' region and the gene body of ERF1, while H3K27me3 was
decreased in the promoter of AtERF14. But the modification changes were later
than the gene activation. Analysis of other rapidly inducible ERF genes confirmed
the observation. In addition, histone H2A.Z occupancy on the three genes and the 
association of the H3K27me3-binding protein LHP1 with AtERF14 and ChiB were not
affected by the inductive signal. However, the mutation of genes encoding H2A.Z
and LHP1 attenuated and enhanced respectively the induction of target genes and
altered H3K4me3. These results indicate that the induction of ethylene-responsive
genes does not require immediate modulation of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 and
dissociation of LHP1 and H2A.Z from the targets, and suggest that the chromatin
structure of the genes before induction is committed for transcriptional
activation and that H3K4me3 is not required for ethylene-responsive gene
activation, but may serve as a mark for gene activity.

PMCID: PMC3225391
PMID: 22140554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Mar;132(3 Pt 1):642-9. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.377. Epub
2011 Nov 24.

IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-21, and IL-10 co-expression in evolving autoimmune vitiligo lesions of 
Smyth line chickens.

Shi F(1), Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas Division of Agriculture,
Fayetteville, Arkansas 72701, USA.

The Smyth line (SL) of chicken is an excellent animal model for human autoimmune 
vitiligo. In SL vitiligo (SLV), postnatal loss of melanocytes in feathers appears
to be due to cell-mediated immunity. In this study, leukocyte infiltration and
associated expression (RNA) of immune function-related cytokines in growing
feathers were investigated throughout SLV development and progression. Both
leukocyte infiltration and cytokine expression levels started to increase near
visible SLV onset (early SLV), reached peak levels during active SLV, and
decreased to near pre-vitiligo levels after complete loss of melanocytes.
Specifically, significant increases were noticed in relative proportions of T
cells, B cells, and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II-expressing cells
during active SLV. Levels of T-cell infiltration were higher than those of B
cells, with more CD8+ than CD4+ cells throughout SLV. Elevated leukocyte
infiltration in early and active SLV was accompanied by increased levels of
cytokine expression, especially in IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-10, and IL-21. Low expression of
IL-4 and IL-17 did not suggest important roles of Th2 and Th17 cells in SLV
pathogenesis. Taken together, SLV appears to be a Th1-polarized autoimmune
disease, whereby IFN-<U+03B3> expression is strongly associated with parallel increases 
in IL-10 and IL-21, particularly during early and active stages of SLV.

PMCID: PMC3278581
PMID: 22113479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Plant Signal Behav. 2011 Dec;6(12):1943-5.

WIND1: a key molecular switch for plant cell dedifferentiation.

Iwase A(1), Ohme-Takagi M, Sugimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Plant Science Center, Yokohama, Japan,

Cellular dedifferentiation is often observed in both plants and animals at an
early step of wound-induced regeneration. Some plant species develop callus, a
mass of unorganised cells, after wounding and this response is thought to involve
cell dedifferentiation since callus cells are usually ready to exert totipotency,
an ability to regenerate any new organ including somatic embryos. It is well
established that a balance of the two plant hormones, auxin and cytokinin, is
central in controlling plant cell dedifferentiation and subsequent
redifferentiation but molecular mechanisms underlying these processes are still
unclear. In a recent study we reported that an AP2/ERF transcription factor WOUND
INDUCED DEDIFFERENTIATION 1 (WIND1) and its close homologs, WIND24, are induced 
by wounding and that they promote cell dedifferentiation in Arabidopsis. Our data
show that WIND proteins are required to activate the local cytokinin response at 
the wound site.

© 2011 Landes Bioscience

PMCID: PMC3337183
PMID: 22112447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Plant. 2012 Mar;5(2):353-65. doi: 10.1093/mp/ssr087. Epub 2011 Nov 20.

The jasmonate-responsive AP2/ERF transcription factors AaERF1 and AaERF2
positively regulate artemisinin biosynthesis in Artemisia annua L.

Yu ZX(1), Li JX, Yang CQ, Hu WL, Wang LJ, Chen XY.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics and National Center for
Plant Gene Research, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200032,
China.

Plants of Artemisia annua produce artemisinin, a sesquiterpene lactone widely
used in malaria treatment. Amorpha-4,11-diene synthase (ADS), a sesquiterpene
synthase, and CYP71AV1, a P450 monooxygenase, are two key enzymes of the
artemisinin biosynthesis pathway. Accumulation of artemisinin can be induced by
the phytohormone jasmonate (JA). Here, we report the characterization of two
JA-responsive AP2 family transcription factors--AaERF1 and AaERF2--from A. annua 
L. Both genes were highly expressed in inflorescences and strongly induced by JA.
Yeast one-hybrid and electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed that they
were able to bind to the CRTDREHVCBF2 (CBF2) and RAV1AAT (RAA) motifs present in 
both ADS and CYP71AV1 promoters. Transient expression of either AaERF1 or AaERF2 
in tobacco induced the promoter activities of ADS or CYP71AV1, and the transgenic
A. annua plants overexpressing either transcription factor showed elevated
transcript levels of both ADS and CYP71AV1, resulting in increased accumulation
of artemisinin and artemisinic acid. By contrast, the contents of these two
metabolites were reduced in the RNAi transgenic lines in which expression of
AaERF1 or AaERF2 was suppressed. These results demonstrate that AaERF1 and AaERF2
are two positive regulators of artemisinin biosynthesis and are of great value in
genetic engineering of artemisinin production.

PMID: 22104293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Plant Cell Rep. 2012 Apr;31(4):697-711. doi: 10.1007/s00299-011-1188-6. Epub 2011
Nov 19.

Molecular characterization of peach PR genes and their induction kinetics in
response to bacterial infection and signaling molecules.

Sherif S(1), Paliyath G, Jayasankar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Agriculture, University of Guelph, 4890 Victoria Av. N,
P.O. Box 7000, Vineland Station, ON L0R 2E0, Canada.

'Venture' and 'BabyGold 5' are two peach cultivars with a demonstrated resistance
and susceptibility, respectively, to bacterial spot disease caused by Xanthomonas
campestris pv. pruni (Xcp). To explore the differences between these cultivars at
the molecular level, two PR1 (Pp-PR1a, Pp-PR1b) and three PR5 (Pp-TLP1, Pp-TLP2
and Pp-TLP3) genes were isolated from peach (Prunus persica L.) and investigated 
by in silico and in situ approaches. The analysis of gene expression by qRT-PCR
indicated that all PR genes, except Pp-PR1a, were induced to a significantly
higher degree in the resistant cultivar. In response to signaling molecules,
Pp-PR1a was induced chiefly by SA treatment, while other PR genes were induced
mainly by ethephon or MeJA treatments. The induction of the same set of PR genes 
in response to bacterial infection, MeJA or ethephon suggests the involvement of 
jasmonic acid (JA)/ethylene (ET)-signaling pathways in mediating resistance
against Xcp, which is consistent with the potential hemibiotrophic nature of this
bacterium. The identification of binding sites for ERF and MYC2 transcription
factors in the promoter of Pp-TLP1 and Pp-TLP2 genes further supported the role
of JA/ET pathways in the transcription regulation of these genes. The role of
stomata in defense against Xcp was also investigated by measuring stomatal
apertures in both 'Venture' and 'BabyGold 5' leaves after 1 and 3 HPI. While most
stomata closed in both cultivars within 1 HPI, stomata reopened again at 3 HPI
with a higher percentage recorded for 'BabyGold 5', suggesting a potential role
of stomata in the susceptibility of this cultivar.

© Springer-Verlag 2011

PMID: 22101723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Plant Physiol. 2012 Jan;158(1):363-75. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.189738. Epub 2011 Nov 
17.

Arabidopsis RGLG2, functioning as a RING E3 ligase, interacts with AtERF53 and
negatively regulates the plant drought stress response.

Cheng MC(1), Hsieh EJ, Chen JH, Chen HY, Lin TP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan.

Transcriptional activities of plants play important roles in responses to
environmental stresses. ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR53 (AtERF53) is a drought-induced
transcription factor that belongs to the AP2/ERF superfamily and has a highly
conserved AP2 domain. It can regulate drought-responsive gene expression by
binding to the GCC box and/or the dehydration-responsive element in the promoter 
of downstream genes. Overexpression of AtERF53 driven by the cauliflower mosaic
virus 35S promoter resulted in an unstable drought-tolerant phenotype in T2
transgenic Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants. Using a yeast two-hybrid
screen, we identified a RING domain ubiquitin E3 ligase, RGLG2, which interacts
with AtERF53 in the nucleus. The copine domain of RGLG2 exhibited the strongest
interacting activity. We also demonstrated that RGLG2 could move from the plasma 
membrane to the nucleus under stress treatment. Using an in vitro ubiquitination 
assay, RGLG2 and its closest sequelog, RGLG1, were shown to have E3 ligase
activity and mediated AtERF53 ubiquitination for proteasome degradation. The
rglg1rglg2 double mutant but not the rglg2 or rglg1 single mutant exhibited a
drought-tolerant phenotype when compared with wild-type plants. AtERF53-green
fluorescent proteins expressed in the rglg1rglg2 double mutants were stable. The 
35S:AtERF53-green fluorescent protein/rglg1rglg2 showed enhanced
AtERF53-regulated gene expression and had greater tolerance to drought stress
than the rglg1rglg2 double mutant. In conclusion, RGLG2 negatively regulates the 
drought stress response by mediating AtERF53 transcriptional activity in
Arabidopsis.

PMCID: PMC3252077
PMID: 22095047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Plant Mol Biol. 2012 Jan;78(1-2):171-83. doi: 10.1007/s11103-011-9855-0. Epub
2011 Nov 16.

MYB80, a regulator of tapetal and pollen development, is functionally conserved
in crops.

Phan HA(1), Li SF, Parish RW.

Author information: 
(1)Botany Department, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia.

The Arabidopsis AtMYB80 transcription factor (formerly AtMYB103) regulate genes
essential for tapetal and pollen development. One of these genes, coding for an
aspartic protease (UNDEAD), may control the timing of tapetal programmed cell
death (PCD). In crop plants such as rice and wheat, abiotic stresses lead to
abnormal tapetal development resulting in delayed PCD. Manipulation of AtMYB80
function has been used to develop a reversible male sterility system applicable
to hybrid crop production. MYB80 homologs were cloned from wheat, rice, canola
and cotton. The promoters of the homologs drove temporal and spatial expression
patterns of the GUS reporter gene in the tapetum and microspores of Arabidopsis
anthers identical to the AtMYB80 promoter. A short region is conserved in all
five MYB80 promoters. The MYB80 homolog genes, driven by the AtMYB80 or their
respective promoters, rescued the atmyb80 mutant, completely restoring male
fertility. The canola MYB80 was fused to the EAR (ERF-associated amphiphilic
repression) repressor and canola plants transgenic for the construct exhibited
premature tapetal degradation and subsequent pollen abortion. The five MYB80
homologs all shared a 44 amino acid sequence immediately adjacent to the R2R3
domain which appears to be necessary for MYB80 function.

PMID: 22086333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Exp Bot. 2012 Jan;63(2):973-82. doi: 10.1093/jxb/err325. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Solanum lycopersicum cytokinin response factor (SlCRF) genes: characterization of
CRF domain-containing ERF genes in tomato.

Shi X(1), Gupta S, Rashotte AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.

Cytokinin is an influential hormone in growth and developmental processes across 
many plant species. While several cytokinin-regulated genes have been well
characterized in Arabidopsis, few have been identified in tomato, Solanum
lycopersicum. Here a tomato family of 11 highly related cytokinin response factor
genes designated as SlCRF1-SlCRF11 (Solanum lycopersicum cytokinin response
factor) are identified and characterized. SlCRFs are AP2/ERF transcription
factors and generally orthologous to Arabidopsis CRF clade members (AtCRFs). Some
SlCRF genes lack a direct Arabidopsis orthologue and one SlCRF has a unique
protein domain arrangement not seen in any other CRF protein. Expression analysis
of SlCRF1-SlCRF11 revealed differential patterns and levels across plant tissues 
examined (leaf, stem, root and flower). Several SlCRFs show induction by
cytokinin to various degrees, similar to AtCRFs. Additionally it is shown that
some SlCRFs can be regulated by other factors, including NaCl, ethylene, methyl
jasmonate, and salicylic acid. Examination of SlCRF proteins in transient
Agrobacterium infiltration experiments indicates they can be nuclear localized in
planta. Using a bimolecular fluorescence complementation (split-yellow
fluorescent protein) system, it is also shown that SlCRF proteins can interact to
form homo- and heterodimers. Overall this work indicates that some SlCRFs
resemble previously identified CRFs in terms of structure, expression, and
cytokinin regulation. However, SlCRFs have novel CRF protein forms and responses 
to abiotic factors, suggesting they may have a diverse set of roles in stress and
hormone regulation in tomato.

PMCID: PMC3254692
PMID: 22068146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Integr Plant Biol. 2011 Dec;53(12):951-60. doi:
10.1111/j.1744-7909.2011.01087.x.

Ectopic expression of FaDREB2 enhances osmotic tolerance in paper mulberry.

Li MR(1), Li Y, Li HQ, Wu GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources Conservation and Sustainable Utilization,
South China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510650,
China.

Dehydration-responsive element binding (DREB) proteins are a subfamily of AP2/ERF
transcription factors that have been shown to improve tolerance to osmotic
stresses in plants. To improve the osmotic stress tolerance of paper mulberry
(Broussonetia papyrifera L. Vent), an economically important tree, we transformed
it with a plasmid carrying tall fescue (Festuca arundinacea Schreb) FaDREB2 under
the control of CaMV 35S. The ectopic expression of FaDREB2 did not cause growth
retardation, and the paper mulberry seedlings expressing FaDREB2 showed higher
salt and drought tolerance than wild-type plants (WT). After 13 d of withholding 
water, or 15 d in the presence of 250 mM NaCl, all the WT plants died, while the 
plants expressing FaDREB2 survived. The FaDREB2 transgenic plants had higher leaf
water and chlorophyll contents, accumulated more proline and soluble sugars, and 
had less membrane damage than the WT plants under high salt and water-deficient
conditions. Taken together, the results indicate the feasibility of improving
tolerance to multiple environmental stresses in paper mulberry seedlings via
genetic engineering, by introducing FaDREB2, which promotes the increased
accumulation of osmolytes (soluble sugars and proline), to counter osmotic
stresses caused by abiotic factors.

© 2011 Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22067051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Plant Mol Biol. 2011 Dec;77(6):591-607. doi: 10.1007/s11103-011-9841-6. Epub 2011
Nov 5.

Identification of transcriptome profiles and signaling pathways for the
allelochemical juglone in rice roots.

Chi WC(1), Fu SF, Huang TL, Chen YA, Chen CC, Huang HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan City 701, 
Taiwan.

Juglone (5-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone) is known allelochemical, but its molecular
mode of action is not well understood. We found that juglone induced reactive
oxygen species production and calcium accumulation. To gain more insight into
these cellular responses, we performed large-scale analysis of the rice
transcriptome during juglone stress. Exposure to juglone triggered changes in
transcript levels of genes related to cell growth, cell wall formation, chemical 
detoxification, abiotic stress response and epigenesis. The most predominant
transcription-factor families were AP2/ERF, HSF, NAC, C2H2, WRKY, MYB and GRAS.
Gene expression profiling of juglone-treated rice roots revealed upregulated
signaling and biosynthesis of abscisic acid and jasmonic acid and inactivation of
gibberellic acid. In addition, juglone upregulated the expression of two
calcium-dependent protein kinases (CDPKs), 6 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) genes and 1 MAPK gene and markedly increased the activities of a CDPK-like
kinase and MAPKs. Further characterization of these juglone-responsive genes may 
be helpful for better understanding the mechanisms of allelochemical tolerance in
plants.

PMID: 22065257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Plant Cell Rep. 2012 Feb;31(2):349-60. doi: 10.1007/s00299-011-1170-3. Epub 2011 
Oct 22.

An ethylene response factor (ERF5) promoting adaptation to drought and salt
tolerance in tomato.

Pan Y(1), Seymour GB, Lu C, Hu Z, Chen X, Chen G.

Author information: 
(1)College of Bioengineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, People's
Republic of China. yu.pan82@yahoo.com

A novel member of the AP2/ERF transcription factor family, SlERF5, was identified
from a tomato mature leaf cDNA library screen. The complete DNA sequence of
SlERF5 encodes a putative 244-amino acid DNA-binding protein which most likely
acts as a transcriptional regulator and is a member of the ethylene responsive
factor (ERF) superfamily. Analysis of the deduced SlERF5 protein sequence showed 
that it contained an ERF domain and belonged to the class III group of ERFs
proteins. Expression of SlERF5 was induced by abiotic stress, such as high
salinity, drought, flooding, wounding and cold temperatures. Over-expression of
SlERF5 in transgenic tomato plants resulted in high tolerance to drought and salt
stress and increased levels of relative water content compared with wild-type
plants. This study indicates that SlERF5 is mainly involved in the responses to
abiotic stress in tomato.

PMID: 22038370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Nature. 2011 Oct 23;479(7373):419-22. doi: 10.1038/nature10536.

Oxygen sensing in plants is mediated by an N-end rule pathway for protein
destabilization.

Licausi F(1), Kosmacz M, Weits DA, Giuntoli B, Giorgi FM, Voesenek LA, Perata P, 
van Dongen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Am Muehlenberg 1, 14476,
Potsdam-Golm, Germany. f.licausi@sssup.it

The majority of eukaryotic organisms rely on molecular oxygen for respiratory
energy production. When the supply of oxygen is compromised, a variety of
acclimation responses are activated to reduce the detrimental effects of energy
depletion. Various oxygen-sensing mechanisms have been described that are thought
to trigger these responses, but they each seem to be kingdom specific and no
sensing mechanism has been identified in plants until now. Here we show that one 
branch of the ubiquitin-dependent N-end rule pathway for protein degradation,
which is active in both mammals and plants, functions as an oxygen-sensing
mechanism in Arabidopsis thaliana. We identified a conserved amino-terminal amino
acid sequence of the ethylene response factor (ERF)-transcription factor RAP2.12 
to be dedicated to an oxygen-dependent sequence of post-translational
modifications, which ultimately lead to degradation of RAP2.12 under aerobic
conditions. When the oxygen concentration is low-as during flooding-RAP2.12 is
released from the plasma membrane and accumulates in the nucleus to activate gene
expression for hypoxia acclimation. Our discovery of an oxygen-sensing mechanism 
opens up new possibilities for improving flooding tolerance in crops.

© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

PMID: 22020282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2011 Aug;46(8):1008-14.

[Cloning and bioinformatic analysis of PqERF1 gene in Panax quinquefolius].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun YZ(1), Niu YY, Li Y, Zhu YJ, Luo HM, Chen SL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, China.

ERF family transcription factor (TF) represented ethylene-responsive protein
which harbored a conserved AP2 domain. After searching the plant transcription
factor database, a total of 75 unigenes was found which contained AP2 domain from
the transcriptome dataset of Panax quinquefolius L. One unique sequence of ERF
transcript, named as PqERF1, was cloned with entire open reading frame of 933
base pairs (bp). Protein prediction result indicated that the gene was localized 
in nucleus and had a conserved AP2 domain. PqERF1 gene could be induced by methyl
jasmonate (MeJA) which was consistent to the inducing profile of triterpene
ginsenosides. InterproScan prediction indicated that PqERF1 was probably a
pathogenesis-related gene. Sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis
demonstrated PqERF1 was with high identity and had relative close relationship to
the NtERF4 (Nicotiana tabacum), PhERF12 (Petunia x hybrida) and DcERF1 (Daucus
carota) which was related to plant defense, regulation of secondary metabolism
and the flower senescence respectively. Therefore, the gene was likely involved
in regulation of secondary metabolism, plant defense and physical processes which
would provide gene resource for further study on secondary metabolite synthesis
and molecular breeding of P. quinquefolius.

PMID: 22007529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Exp Bot. 2012 Jan;63(2):727-37. doi: 10.1093/jxb/err308. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

Insect oral secretions suppress wound-induced responses in Arabidopsis.

Consales F(1), Schweizer F, Erb M, Gouhier-Darimont C, Bodenhausen N, Bruessow F,
Sobhy I, Reymond P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Molecular Biology, University of Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland.

The induction of plant defences and their subsequent suppression by insects is
thought to be an important factor in the evolutionary arms race between plants
and herbivores. Although insect oral secretions (OS) contain elicitors that
trigger plant immunity, little is known about the suppressors of plant defences. 
The Arabidopsis thaliana transcriptome was analysed in response to wounding and
OS treatment. The expression of several wound-inducible genes was suppressed
after the application of OS from two lepidopteran herbivores, Pieris brassicae
and Spodoptera littoralis. This inhibition was correlated with enhanced S.
littoralis larval growth, pointing to an effective role of insect OS in
suppressing plant defences. Two genes, an ERF/AP2 transcription factor and a
proteinase inhibitor, were then studied in more detail. OS-induced suppression
lasted for at least 48 h, was independent of the jasmonate or salicylate
pathways, and was not due to known elicitors. Interestingly, insect OS attenuated
leaf water loss, suggesting that insects have evolved mechanisms to interfere
with the induction of water-stress-related defences.

PMCID: PMC3254683
PMID: 21994175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25216. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025216. Epub 2011 Sep 26.

Transcriptional activation of OsDERF1 in OsERF3 and OsAP2-39 negatively modulates
ethylene synthesis and drought tolerance in rice.

Wan L(1), Zhang J, Zhang H, Zhang Z, Quan R, Zhou S, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing, China.

The phytohormone ethylene is a key signaling molecule that regulates a variety of
developmental processes and stress responses in plants. Transcriptional
modulation is a pivotal process controlling ethylene synthesis, which further
triggers the expression of stress-related genes and plant adaptation to stresses;
however, it is unclear how this process is transcriptionally modulated in rice.
In the present research, we report the transcriptional regulation of a novel rice
ethylene response factor (ERF) in ethylene synthesis and drought tolerance.
Through analysis of transcriptional data, one of the drought-responsive ERF
genes, OsDERF1, was identified for its activation in response to drought,
ethylene and abscisic acid. Transgenic plants overexpressing OsDERF1 (OE) led to 
reduced tolerance to drought stress in rice at seedling stage, while knockdown of
OsDERF1 (RI) expression conferred enhanced tolerance at seedling and tillering
stages. This regulation was supported by negative modulation in osmotic
adjustment response. To elucidate the molecular basis of drought tolerance, we
identified the target genes of OsDERF1 using the Affymetrix GeneChip, including
the activation of cluster stress-related negative regulators such as ERF
repressors. Biochemical and molecular approaches showed that OsDERF1 at least
directly interacted with the GCC box in the promoters of ERF repressors OsERF3
and OsAP2-39. Further investigations showed that OE seedlings had reduced
expression (while RI lines showed enhanced expression) of ethylene synthesis
genes, thereby resulting in changes in ethylene production. Moreover,
overexpression of OsERF3/OsAP2-39 suppressed ethylene synthesis. In addition,
application of ACC recovered the drought-sensitive phenotype in the lines
overexpressing OsERF3, showing that ethylene production contributed to drought
response in rice. Thus our data reveal that a novel ERF transcriptional cascade
modulates drought response through controlling the ethylene synthesis, deepening 
our understanding of the regulation of ERF proteins in ethylene related drought
response.

PMCID: PMC3180291
PMID: 21966459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Plant Cell Physiol. 2011 Nov;52(11):1957-72. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcr128. Epub 2011
Sep 27.

HRE-type genes are regulated by growth-related changes in internal oxygen
concentrations during the normal development of potato (Solanum tuberosum)
tubers.

Licausi F(1), Giorgi FM, Schmälzlin E, Usadel B, Perata P, van Dongen JT,
Geigenberger P.

Author information: 
(1)Energy Metabolism Research Group, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant
Physiology, D-14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany. licausi@mpimp-golm.mpg.de

The occurrence of hypoxic conditions in plants not only represents a stress
condition but is also associated with the normal development and growth of many
organs, leading to adaptive changes in metabolism and growth to prevent internal 
anoxia. Internal oxygen concentrations decrease inside growing potato tubers, due
to their active metabolism and increased resistance to gas diffusion as tubers
grow. In the present work, we identified three hypoxia-responsive ERF (StHRE)
genes whose expression is regulated by the gradual decrease in oxygen tensions
that occur when potato tubers grow larger. Increasing the external oxygen
concentration counteracted the modification of StHRE expression during tuber
growth, supporting the idea that the actual oxygen levels inside the organs,
rather than development itself, are responsible for the regulation of StHRE
genes. We identified several sugar metabolism-related genes co-regulated with
StHRE genes during tuber development and possibly involved in starch
accumulation. All together, our data suggest a possible role for low oxygen in
the regulation of sugar metabolism in the potato tuber, similar to what happens
in storage tissues during seed development.

PMID: 21954444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Oct 14;414(1):135-41. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.09.039. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

AtERF71/HRE2 transcription factor mediates osmotic stress response as well as
hypoxia response in Arabidopsis.

Park HY(1), Seok HY, Woo DH, Lee SY, Tarte VN, Lee EH, Lee CH, Moon YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735,
Republic of Korea.

Various transcription factors are involved in the response to environmental
stresses in plants. In this study, we characterized AtERF71/HRE2, a member of the
Arabidopsis AP2/ERF family, as an important regulator of the osmotic and hypoxic 
stress responses in plants. Transcript level of AtERF71/HRE2 was highly increased
by anoxia, NaCl, mannitol, ABA, and MV treatments. aterf71/hre2 loss-of-function 
mutants displayed higher sensitivity to osmotic stress such as high salt and
mannitol, accumulating higher levels of ROS under high salt treatment. In
contrast, AtERF71/HRE2-overexpressing transgenic plants showed tolerance to salt 
and mannitol as well as flooding and MV stresses, exhibiting lower levels of ROS 
under high salt treatment. AtERF71/HRE2 protein was localized in the nucleus, and
the C-terminal region of AtERF71/HRE2 was required for transcription activation
activity. Taken together, our results suggest that AtERF71/HRE2 might function as
a transcription factor involved in the response to osmotic stress as well as
hypoxia.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21946064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2012 Jan;25(1):48-60. doi: 10.1094/MPMI-06-11-0165.

Ethylene-responsive element-binding factor 5, ERF5, is involved in chitin-induced
innate immunity response.

Son GH(1), Wan J, Kim HJ, Nguyen XC, Chung WS, Hong JC, Stacey G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.

Our recent work demonstrated that chitin treatment modulated the expression of
118 transcription factor (TF) genes in Arabidopsis. To investigate the potential 
roles of these TF in chitin signaling and plant defense, we initiated an
interaction study among these TF proteins, as well as two chitin-activated
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MPK3 and MPK6), using a yeast two-hybrid
system. This study revealed interactions among the following proteins: three
ethylene-responsive element-binding factors (ERF), five WRKY transcription
factors, one scarecrow-like (SCL), and the two MPK, in addition to many other
interactions, reflecting a complex TF interaction network. Most of these
interactions were subsequently validated by other methods, such as pull-down and 
in planta bimolecular fluorescence complementation assays. The key node ERF5 was 
shown to interact with multiple proteins in the network, such as ERF6, ERF8, and 
SCL13, as well as MPK3 and MPK6. Interestingly, ERF5 appeared to negatively
regulate chitin signaling and plant defense against the fungal pathogen
Alternaria brassicicola and positively regulate salicylic acid signaling and
plant defense against the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato
DC3000. Therefore, ERF5 may play an important role in plant innate immunity,
likely through coordinating chitin and other defense pathways in plants in
response to different pathogens.

PMID: 21936663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Poult Sci. 2011 Oct;90(10):2243-50. doi: 10.3382/ps.2011-01558.

Cellular immune responses, chemokine, and cytokine profiles in Turkey poults
following infection with the intestinal parasite Eimeria adenoeides.

Gadde U(1), Chapman HD, Rathinam T, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701,
USA.

Cellular immune responses, chemokine, and cytokine profiles were investigated in 
20-d-old turkey poults following an oral infection with 12.5 × 10(3) oocysts of
Eimeria adenoeides, a protozoan parasite of the genus Eimeria that develops in
the ceca. Large numbers of oocysts were produced in the feces of infected birds
from d 5 after infection followed by a rapid decline by d 7. Local immune
activities were characterized by observing the extent of leukocyte infiltration
in the ceca by histology, measuring subsets of the lymphocyte population by
immunohistochemistry, and determining the relative expression of cytokines by
real-time, reverse-transcription PCR. Inflammation, assessed by scoring the
extent of cellular infiltration of leukocytes in sections of ceca, was
significantly higher in infected poults compared with uninfected poults on d 4,
7, 9, and 11 following infection. The percent area occupied by CD4+ and CD8+
cells in the ceca was significantly greater on d 9 and 11 (CD4+) and d 11 (CD8+) 
in infected poults compared with uninfected controls. The relative expression of 
the chemokine CXCLi2 and the cytokines interleukin (IL) 1ß, interferon (IFN) <U+03B3>,
IL13, and IL10 was investigated in tissue samples taken from the ceca. Increased 
expression of CXCLi2 occurred on d 4 and 7. Increased expression of IL10 and IFN<U+03B3>
occurred on d 4 and of IL1ß and IL13 occurred on d 7 postinfection. The increased
leukocyte infiltration in the ceca, alterations in the lymphocyte subpopulations,
and changes in expression of chemokines and cytokines are an indication of the
cell-mediated immune mechanisms occurring in the host as a result of exposure to 
E. adenoeides.

PMID: 21934006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Plant Cell. 2011 Sep;23(9):3319-34. doi: 10.1105/tpc.111.090100. Epub 2011 Sep
16.

The transcription factor ABI4 Is required for the ascorbic acid-dependent
regulation of growth and regulation of jasmonate-dependent defense signaling
pathways in Arabidopsis.

Kerchev PI(1), Pellny TK, Vivancos PD, Kiddle G, Hedden P, Driscoll S, Vanacker
H, Verrier P, Hancock RD, Foyer CH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Plant Sciences, Faculty of Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 
9JT, UK.

Cellular redox homeostasis is a hub for signal integration. Interactions between 
redox metabolism and the ABSCISIC ACID-INSENSITIVE-4 (ABI4) transcription factor 
were characterized in the Arabidopsis thaliana vitamin c defective1 (vtc1) and
vtc2 mutants, which are defective in ascorbic acid synthesis and show a slow
growth phenotype together with enhanced abscisic acid (ABA) levels relative to
the wild type (Columbia-0). The 75% decrease in the leaf ascorbate pool in the
vtc2 mutants was not sufficient to adversely affect GA metabolism. The
transcriptome signatures of the abi4, vtc1, and vtc2 mutants showed significant
overlap, with a large number of transcription factors or signaling components
similarly repressed or induced. Moreover, lincomycin-dependent changes in LIGHT
HARVESTING CHLOROPHYLL A/B BINDING PROTEIN 1.1 expression were comparable in
these mutants, suggesting overlapping participation in chloroplast to nucleus
signaling. The slow growth phenotype of vtc2 was absent in the abi4 vtc2 double
mutant, as was the sugar-insensitive phenotype of the abi4 mutant. Octadecanoid
derivative-responsive AP2/ERF-domain transcription factor 47 (ORA47) and AP3 (an 
ABI5 binding factor) transcripts were enhanced in vtc2 but repressed in abi4
vtc2, suggesting that ABI4 and ascorbate modulate growth and defense gene
expression through jasmonate signaling. We conclude that low ascorbate triggers
ABA- and jasmonate-dependent signaling pathways that together regulate growth
through ABI4. Moreover, cellular redox homeostasis exerts a strong influence on
sugar-dependent growth regulation.

PMCID: PMC3203439
PMID: 21926335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Nephron Clin Pract. 2011;119 Suppl 2:c97-106. doi: 10.1159/000331755. Epub 2011
Aug 26.

UK Renal Registry 13th Annual Report (December 2010): Chapter 5: demography of
the UK paediatric renal replacement therapy population in 2009.

Sinha MD(1), Castledine C, van Schalkwyk D, Hussain F, Lewis M, Inward C.

Author information: 
(1)Evelina Childrens Hospital, London, UK.

AIMS: To describe the demographics of the paediatric RRT population under the age
of 16 years in the UK and to analyse changes in demography with time.
METHODS: Extraction and analysis of data from the UK Renal Registry (UKRR).
RESULTS: There were 751 children <16 years old with established renal failure
(ERF) in the UK in December 2009. The reported prevalence under the age of 16
years was 65 per million age related population (pmarp) and the reported
incidence 9.3 pmarp. The incidence and prevalence for South Asian patients was
much higher than that of the White and Black populations. Of the patients for
whom a primary renal diagnosis had been reported, renal dysplasia ± reflux was
the most common cause of ERF accounting for 34.0% of prevalent cases. There has
been growth in treatment numbers in all paediatric renal centres between 1995 and
2010. Whilst the rate of transplantation within 90 days of commencing RRT has
remained at around 25-30% of patients, the use of HD has increased by 4% at the
expense of PD.
CONCLUSIONS: The paediatric ERF population continued to expand with a slow
increase in both incidence and prevalence rates. The high incidence in patients
from ethnic minority groups will lead to a greater proportion of the population
being from these groups in time. To maintain the high proportion of engrafted
patients it will be necessary to encourage living donation in the ethnic minority
population.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21894043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Nephron Clin Pract. 2011;119 Suppl 2:c225-37. doi: 10.1159/000331780. Epub 2011
Aug 26.

UK Renal Registry 13th Annual Report (December 2010): Chapter 12: clinical,
haematological and biochemical parameters in patients receiving renal replacement
therapy in paediatric centres in the UK in 2009: national and centre-specific
analyses.

Lewis M(1), Castledine C, van Schalkwyk D, Sinha MD, Inward C.

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Childrens Hospital, Manchester, UK. Malcolm.lewis@cmmc.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: The British Association for Paediatric Nephrology Registry was
established fifteen years ago to analyse data related to renal replacement
therapy for children. The registry receives data from the 13 paediatric
nephrology centres in the UK. In 2008 the registry was relocated to the UK Renal 
Registry (UKRR).
AIM: To provide centre specific data so that individual centres can reflect on
the contribution that their data makes to the national picture and to determine
the extent to which their patient parameters meet nationally agreed audit
standards for the management of children with established renal failure.
METHOD: Data were submitted by either paper or electronic returns. Data were
analysed to calculate summary statistics and where applicable the percentage
achieving an audit standard. The standards used were those set out by the Renal
Association and the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence.
RESULTS: Data were received from all but one centre. Anthropometric data
confirmed that children with established renal failure (ERF) in the UK are short 
compared with their peers with no change in recent trends. In the UK as a whole, 
the control of blood pressure, anaemia and bone biochemistry is suboptimal.
CONCLUSIONS: Key features of this report are the provision of centre specific
data and comparison of data to audit standards. It is hoped that this information
will provide a basis for discussion and a stimulus to improve the care of
children with ERF.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21894035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Psychophysiology. 2011 Dec;48(12):1711-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2011.01273.x.
Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Mass univariate analysis of event-related brain potentials/fields I: a critical
tutorial review.

Groppe DM(1), Urbach TP, Kutas M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cognitive Science, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92093-0515, USA. dgroppe@cogsci.ucsd.edu

Event-related potentials (ERPs) and magnetic fields (ERFs) are typically analyzed
via ANOVAs on mean activity in a priori windows. Advances in computing power and 
statistics have produced an alternative, mass univariate analyses consisting of
thousands of statistical tests and powerful corrections for multiple comparisons.
Such analyses are most useful when one has little a priori knowledge of effect
locations or latencies, and for delineating effect boundaries. Mass univariate
analyses complement and, at times, obviate traditional analyses. Here we review
this approach as applied to ERP/ERF data and four methods for multiple comparison
correction: strong control of the familywise error rate (FWER) via permutation
tests, weak control of FWER via cluster-based permutation tests, false discovery 
rate control, and control of the generalized FWER. We end with recommendations
for their use and introduce free MATLAB software for their implementation.

Copyright © 2011 Society for Psychophysiological Research.

PMCID: PMC4060794
PMID: 21895683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Plant Physiol. 2011 Nov;157(3):1379-93. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.178343. Epub 2011 Aug
26.

Stress-responsive mitogen-activated protein kinases interact with the EAR motif
of a poplar zinc finger protein and mediate its degradation through the 26S
proteasome.

Hamel LP(1), Benchabane M, Nicole MC, Major IT, Morency MJ, Pelletier G, Beaudoin
N, Sheen J, Séguin A.

Author information: 
(1)Natural Resources Canada, Canadian Forest Service, Laurentian Forestry Centre,
Quebec, Quebec, Canada.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) contribute to the establishment of
plant disease resistance by regulating downstream signaling components, including
transcription factors. In this study, we identified MAPK-interacting proteins,
and among the newly discovered candidates was a Cys-2/His-2-type zinc finger
protein named PtiZFP1. This putative transcription factor belongs to a family of 
transcriptional repressors that rely on an ERF-associated amphiphilic repression 
(EAR) motif for their repression activity. Amino acids located within this
repression motif were also found to be essential for MAPK binding. Close
examination of the primary protein sequence revealed a functional bipartite MAPK 
docking site that partially overlaps with the EAR motif. Transient expression
assays in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) protoplasts suggest that MAPKs
promote PtiZFP1 degradation through the 26S proteasome. Since features of the
MAPK docking site are conserved among other EAR repressors, our study suggests a 
novel mode of defense mechanism regulation involving stress-responsive MAPKs and 
EAR repressors.

PMCID: PMC3252155
PMID: 21873571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Cardiol. 2011 Nov;58(3):232-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2011.06.011. Epub 2011 Aug 
27.

Physiological basis and clinical significance of left ventricular suction studied
using echo-dynamography.

Tanaka M(1), Sakamoto T, Sugawara S, Nakajima H, Kameyama T, Tabuchi H, Katahira 
Y, Ohtsuki S, Kanai H.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Tohoku Welfare Pension Hospital, Fukumuro 1-12-1,
Miyagino-ku, Sendai 983-0005, Japan. m.tanaka@jata-miyagi.org

BACKGROUND: The existence as well as the exact genesis of left ventricular
suction during rapid filling phase have been controversial. In the present study,
we aimed at resolution of this problem using noninvasive and sophisticated
ultrasonic methods. The clinical meaning was also documented.
METHODS: Ten healthy male volunteers were examined by 2D echocardiography and
echo-dynamography which enables us to obtain detailed instantaneous data of blood
flow and wall motion simultaneously from the wide range of the left ventricle.
The correlation of blood flow and wall motion was also studied.
RESULTS: Rapid ventricular filling was divided into 2 phases which had different 
physiology. The early half (early rapid filling: ERF) showed the effect which was
alike drawing a piston. This was proved by the shape of the velocity of inflow
and the basal muscle contraction which actively assisted extension of the relaxed
apical and central parts of the left ventricle, giving the negative pressure
which causes the ventricular suction. The later half (late rapid filling: LRF)
showed the turning of the fundamental flow and the squeezed basal part just like 
the sphincter in addition to the expansion of the apical and central portions of 
the left ventricle, and all of these cooperatively augmented the suction effect.
CONCLUSION: Ventricular suction does exist to help ventricular filling.
Simultaneous appearance of the contraction in the basal part and the relaxation
or extension in the apical part during the post-ejection transitional period was 
made to occur the suction in the LV. And it can be said that the suction appeared
in the late stage of systole as the one of the serial systolic phenomena.

Copyright Â© 2011 Japanese College of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 21873029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Feb;1819(2):86-96. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.08.004. 
Epub 2011 Aug 16.

AP2/ERF family transcription factors in plant abiotic stress responses.

Mizoi J(1), Shinozaki K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology, Graduate School of Agricultural and 
Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657,
Japan.

In terrestrial environments, temperature and water conditions are highly
variable, and extreme temperatures and water conditions affect the survival,
growth and reproduction of plants. To protect cells and sustain growth under such
conditions of abiotic stress, plants respond to unfavourable changes in their
environments in developmental, physiological and biochemical ways. These
responses require expression of stress-responsive genes, which are regulated by a
network of transcription factors. The AP2/ERF family is a large family of
plant-specific transcription factors that share a well-conserved DNA-binding
domain. This transcription factor family includes DRE-binding proteins (DREBs),
which activate the expression of abiotic stress-responsive genes via specific
binding to the dehydration-responsive element/C-repeat (DRE/CRT) cis-acting
element in their promoters. In this review, we discuss the functions of the
AP2/ERF-type transcription factors in plant abiotic stress responses, with
special emphasis on the regulations and functions of two major types of DREBs,
DREB1/CBF and DREB2. In addition, we summarise the involvement of other
AP2/ERF-type transcription factors in abiotic stress responses, which has
recently become clear. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Plant
gene regulation in response to abiotic stress.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21867785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2011 Aug;14(8):679-84. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2011.08.08.

[Sealing of airway fistulas for metallic covered z-type stents].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang H(1), Li D, Zhang N, Zou H, Luo L, Ma H, Zhou Y, Li J, Liang S.

Author information: 
(1)Minimal Invasive Tumor Therapy Center, Meitan General Hospital, Beijing
100028, China. wanghongwu2008@yahoo.cn

BACKGROUND: Treating airway fistulas, including esophagorespiratory fistulas
(ERFs), bronchopleural fistulas (BPFs), and tracheomediastinal fistulas (TMFs),
is difficult. The aim of this study is to evaluate the safety and clinical
efficacy of metallic covered Z-type stents (CZTS) for the treatment of airway
fistulas through bronchoscopy or fluroscopy.
METHODS: Thirty-eight patients with fistulas between the esophagus, mediastina,
and airways (32 ERFs, 5 BPFs, and 1 TMF) were retrospectively reviewed after
treatment with covered metallic esophageal and airway stents. The fistulas were
caused by esophageal (n=26), bronchogenic (n=11), and thyroid (n=1) carcinomas.
RESULTS: Forty-six fistulas were found in 38 patients. The fistula size ranged
from 0.5 cm to 7.0 cm. Forty airway covered metal stents (24 Y-type, 8 L-type,
and 8 I-type) and 24 esophageal metal stents were placed. Complete responses to
the sealing effects of fistulas were noted in 4.3% of all the fistulas, 60.9%
showed complete clinical responses, 23.9% showed partial responses, and 10.9%
showed no response. An effectivity rate of 89.1% was observed, and the median
survival duration of all patients was 5 months.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of CZTS appears to be safe and feasible for the palliative
treatment of ERFs, BPFs, and TMFs. Airway stent placement is recommended for
patients with ERF. In the event that airway stents fail, esophageal stents should
be given. Airway bifurcation stents were observed to be especially suitable for
the sealing of fistulas near the trachea carina.

PMID: 21859550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Genet Res (Camb). 2011 Oct;93(5):319-32. doi: 10.1017/S0016672311000218. Epub
2011 Aug 22.

Isolation and identification of an AP2/ERF factor that binds an allelic
cis-element of rice gene LRK6.

Wang Q(1), Qi W, Wang Y, Sun F, Qian X, Luo X, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Allelic expression of the rice yield-related gene, leucine-rich receptor-like
kinase 6 (LRK6), in the hybrid of 93-11 (Oryza sativa L. subsp. Indica var.
93-11) and Nipponbare (O. sativa L. subsp. Japonica var. Nipponbare) is
determined by allelic promoter cis-elements. Using deletion analysis of the LRK6 
promoter, we identified two distinct regions that might contribute to LRK6
expression. Sequence alignment revealed differences in these LRK6 promoter
regions in 93-11 and Nipponbare. One of the segments, named differential sequence
of LRK6 promoter 2 (DSLP2), contains potential transcription factor binding
sites. Using a yeast one-hybrid assay, we isolated an ethylene-responsive factor 
(ERF) protein that binds to DSLP2. Sequence analysis and a GCC-box assay showed
that the ERF gene, O. sativa ERF 3 (OsERF3), which belongs to ERF subfamily class
II, has a conserved ERF domain and an ERF-associated amphiphilic repression
repressor motif. We used an in vivo mutation assay to identify a new motif
(5'-TAA(A)GT-3') located in DSLP2, which interacts with OsERF3. These results
suggest that OsERF3, an AP2 (APETALA 2 Gene)/ERF transcription factor, binds the 
LRK6 promoter at this new motif, which might cause differential expression of
LRK6 in the 93-11/Nipponbare hybrid.

PMID: 21854687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Plant Physiol. 2011 Oct;157(2):854-65. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.179028. Epub 2011 Aug 
10.

An AP2 domain-containing gene, ESE1, targeted by the ethylene signaling component
EIN3 is important for the salt response in Arabidopsis.

Zhang L(1), Li Z, Quan R, Li G, Wang R, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100081, China.

Accumulating investigations reveal that ethylene signaling is involved in the
salt response in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), and it has been reported
that overexpression of a number of ethylene response factor (ERF) genes enhances 
salt tolerance; however, transcriptional regulation of the ethylene signal
component ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3) in the salt response has not been clearly 
defined. Consulting microarray data and transcriptional confirmations showed that
three of the ERF genes were ethylene and salt inducible, named ESE1 to ESE3.
Additionally, the expression of one of the ESE genes (ESE1) was suppressed in
ein2, ein3-1, eil1-3, and ein3 eil1 but enhanced in EIN3-overexpressing (EIN3ox) 
lines. Inhibitors of ethylene biosynthesis, aminoethoxyvinylglycine, and ethylene
action, AgNO3, reduced the expression of ESE1, while ethylene overproduction eto 
mutants enhanced the expression of ESE1, indicating that ESE1 is an
ethylene-modulated gene downstream of EIN3/EIL1. Further analyses with
biochemical and molecular approaches revealed that EIN3 physically binds to the
ESE1 promoter, demonstrating that ESE1 was one target of EIN3. ESE1 in turn binds
to promoters of salt-related genes, such as RD29A and COR15A. Moreover, either
EIN3ox or ESE1ox was sufficient to enhance transcript levels of salt-related
genes and salt tolerance. In addition, ESE1ox in ein3 enhanced the salt response 
during seed germination and seedling development, demonstrating that ESE1 is
genetically downstream of EIN3. Thus, the evidence in this report reveals that
the transcriptional complex of EIN3-ESE1 is a crucial event in the salt response,
thereby connecting the transcriptional regulation of EIN3 and the downstream ERF 
protein ESE1 in the salt response.

PMCID: PMC3192559
PMID: 21832142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Plant J. 2011 Nov;68(4):583-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04709.x. Epub 2011 
Aug 30.

An EAR-motif-containing ERF transcription factor affects herbivore-induced
signaling, defense and resistance in rice.

Lu J(1), Ju H, Zhou G, Zhu C, Erb M, Wang X, Wang P, Lou Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Rice Biology, Institute of Insect Science, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310029, China.

Ethylene responsive factors (ERFs) are a large family of plant-specific
transcription factors that are involved in the regulation of plant development
and stress responses. However, little to nothing is known about their role in
herbivore-induced defense. We discovered a nucleus-localized ERF gene in rice
(Oryza sativa), OsERF3, that was rapidly up-regulated in response to feeding by
the rice striped stem borer (SSB) Chilo suppressalis. Antisense and
over-expression of OsERF3 revealed that it positively affects transcript levels
of two mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and two WRKY genes as well as
concentrations of jasmonate (JA), salicylate (SA) and the activity of trypsin
protease inhibitors (TrypPIs). OsERF3 was also found to mediate the resistance of
rice to SSB. On the other hand, OsERF3 was slightly suppressed by the rice brown 
planthopper (BPH) Nilaparvata lugens (Stål) and increased susceptibility to this 
piercing sucking insect, possibly by suppressing H(2)O(2) biosynthesis. We
propose that OsERF3 affects early components of herbivore-induced defense
responses by suppressing MAPK repressors and modulating JA, SA, ethylene and
H(2)O(2) pathways as well as plant resistance. Our results also illustrate that
OsERF3 acts as a central switch that gears the plant's metabolism towards an
appropriate response to chewing or piercing/sucking insects.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21831212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Chem Theory Comput. 2011 Aug 9;7(8):2353-7. doi: 10.1021/ct200305n. Epub 2011
Jun 28.

Resolutions of the Coulomb Operator: V. The Long-Range Ewald Operator.

Limpanuparb T(1), Gill PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University , Canberra ACT
0200, Australia.

We show that the long-range Ewald operator can be resolved as erf(<U+03C9>r12)/r12 =
<U+2211>k<U+2009><U+03D5>k*(r1)<U+2009><U+03D5>k(r2), where <U+03D5>k is proportional to the product of a spherical Bessel 
function and a spherical harmonic. We demonstrate the use of this new resolution 
by calculating the long-range Coulomb energy of the nanodiamond crystallite
C84H64 and the long-range exchange energy of the graphene C96H24. The resolution 
appears particularly effective for long-range exchange calculations.

PMID: 26606610  [PubMed]


465. Phytopathology. 2011 Nov;101(11):1311-21. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-03-11-0087.

Resistance of Malus domestica fruit to Botrytis cinerea depends on endogenous
ethylene biosynthesis.

Akagi A(1), Dandekar AM, Stotz HU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA.

Erratum in
    Phytopathology. 2012 Jan;102(1):135.

The plant hormone ethylene regulates fruit ripening, other developmental
processes, and a subset of defense responses. Here, we show that
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid synthase (ACS)-silenced apple (Malus
domestica) fruit that express a sense construct of ACS were more susceptible to
Botrytis cinerea than untransformed apple, demonstrating that ethylene
strengthens fruit resistance to B. cinerea infection. Because ethylene response
factors (ERFs) are known to contribute to resistance against B. cinerea via the
ethylene-signaling pathway, we cloned four ERF cDNAs from fruit of M. domestica: 
MdERF3, -4, -5, and -6. Expression of all four MdERF mRNAs was ethylene dependent
and induced by wounding or by B. cinerea infection. B. cinerea infection
suppressed rapid induction of wound-related MdERF expression. MdERF3 was the only
mRNA induced by wounding and B. cinerea infection in ACS-suppressed apple fruit, 
although its induction was reduced compared with wild-type apple. Promoter
regions of all four MdERF genes were cloned and putative cis-elements were
identified in each promoter. Transient expression of MdERF3 in tobacco increased 
expression of the GCC-box containing gene chitinase 48.

PMID: 21809978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Apr;39(4):3713-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-1146-y. Epub 2011
Jul 15.

Characterization of HbEREBP1, a wound-responsive transcription factor gene in
laticifers of Hevea brasiliensis Muell. Arg.

Chen YY(1), Wang LF, Dai LJ, Yang SG, Tian WM.

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Agriculture Key Laboratory for Rubber Biology, Rubber Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Tropical Agricultural Sciences, Danzhou, Hainan,
571737, China.

AP2/ERF transcription factors play an important role in regulation of the
cross-talk between ethylene and jasmonate signaling pathways mediating defense
responses of plants to biotic and abiotic stresses. In this study, an AP2/ERF
transcription factor gene was isolated and characterized from laticifers of
rubber tree by using RACE and real time PCR. The full length cDNA, referred to as
HbEREBP1, was 1,095 bp in length and contained a 732 bp open reading frame
encoding a putative protein of 243 amino acid residues. The molecular mass of the
putative protein is 26.4 kDa with a pI of 9.46. The deduced amino acid sequence
had a specific domain of AP2 superfamily and an ethylene-responsive element
binding factor-associated amphiphilic repression motif, sharing 42.4, 39.1, and
38.0% identity with that of AtERF11, AtERF4, and AtERF8 in Arabidopsis,
respectively. HbEREBP1 expression was down-regulated by tapping and mechanical
wounding in the laticifers of adult trees. It was also down-regulated at early
stage while up-regulated at late stage upon treatment with exogenous ethephon or 
methyl jasmonate, which was reverse to the case of defense genes in laticifers of
epicormic shoots of rubber tree. Our results suggest that HbEREBP1 may be a
negative regulator of defense genes in laticifers.

PMID: 21761140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Plant Signal Behav. 2011 Aug;6(8):1244-6. doi: 10.4161/psb.6.8.16456. Epub 2011
Aug 1.

The role of Dornröschen-like in early floral organogenesis.

Chandler JW(1), Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, Cologne University, Cologne, Germany.

Positional signals that specify founder cells and determine where lateral organs 
initiate and how these signals are perceived by cells that transition to the
periphery of the meristem is a challenging problem. We recently showed that
expression of the AP2 ERF transcription factor Dornröschen-like (DRNL) marks all 
floral organ founder cells and pre-patterns lateral stamen and petal, or medial
stamen founder cells by two regions of expression that we propose represent
morphogenetic fields, that subsequently resolve into discrete foci. The
spatio-temporal expression pattern of DRNL allows speculation concerning
evolutionary aspects of plant developmental biology and the control of the floral
plant body. It further paves the way to use DRNL as a tool to address fundamental
questions of cell type specification.

PMCID: PMC3260735
PMID: 21758017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Plant Physiol. 2011 Sep;157(1):216-28. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.179945. Epub 2011 Jul 
13.

Rice ethylene-response AP2/ERF factor OsEATB restricts internode elongation by
down-regulating a gibberellin biosynthetic gene.

Qi W(1), Sun F, Wang Q, Chen M, Huang Y, Feng YQ, Luo X, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Plant height is a decisive factor in plant architecture. Rice (Oryza sativa)
plants have the potential for rapid internodal elongation, which determines plant
height. A large body of physiological research has shown that ethylene and
gibberellin are involved in this process. The APETALA2 (AP2)/Ethylene-Responsive 
Element Binding Factor (ERF) family of transcriptional factors is only present in
the plant kingdom. This family has various developmental and physiological
functions. A rice AP2/ERF gene, OsEATB (for ERF protein associated with tillering
and panicle branching) was cloned from indica rice variety 9311. Bioinformatic
analysis suggested that this ERF has a potential new function. Ectopic expression
of OsEATB showed that the cross talk between ethylene and gibberellin, which is
mediated by OsEATB, might underlie differences in rice internode elongation.
Analyses of gene expression demonstrated that OsEATB restricts ethylene-induced
enhancement of gibberellin responsiveness during the internode elongation process
by down-regulating the gibberellin biosynthetic gene, ent-kaurene synthase A.
Plant height is negatively correlated with tiller number, and higher yields are
typically obtained from dwarf crops. OsEATB reduces rice plant height and panicle
length at maturity, promoting the branching potential of both tillers and
spikelets. These are useful traits for breeding high-yielding crops.

PMCID: PMC3165871
PMID: 21753115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Plant J. 2011 Nov;68(3):560-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04704.x. Epub 2011
Aug 22.

High-throughput protoplast transactivation (PTA) system for the analysis of
Arabidopsis transcription factor function.

Wehner N(1), Hartmann L, Ehlert A, Böttner S, Oñate-Sánchez L, Dröge-Laser W.

Author information: 
(1)Julius-von-Sachs-Institut, Pharmazeutische Biologie,
Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Julius-von-Sachs-Platz 2, D-97082
Würzburg, Germany.

Genomic approaches have generated large Arabidopsis open reading frame (ORF)
collections. However, molecular tools are required to characterize this ORFeome
functionally. A high-throughput microtiter plate-based protoplast transactivation
(PTA) system has been established that can be used in a screening approach to
define which transcription factor (TF) regulates a given promoter in planta.
Using to this procedure, the transactivation properties of 96 TFs can be analyzed
rapidly, making use of promoter:Luciferase (LUC)-reporters and luciferase
imaging. Applying GATEWAY® technology, we have established a platform to assay
more than 700 Arabidopsis TFs. As a proof-of-principle, the ethylene response
factor (ERF) family has been studied to evaluate this system. Importantly,
distinct subsets of related ERF factors were found to activate specifically the
well described target promoters RD29A and PDF1.2 that are under control of DRE or
GCC box cis-elements, respectively. Furthermore, several applications of the PTA 
system have been demonstrated, such as analysis of transcriptional repressors,
salt-inducible gene expression or functional interaction of signaling molecules
like kinases and TFs. This novel molecular tool will improve functional studies
on transcriptional regulation in plants significantly.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21749507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Eksp Klin Gastroenterol. 2011;(3):54-9.

[Pulmonary disorders in patients with chronic inflammatory bowel disease].

[Article in Russian]

Mikhailova ZF, Levchenko SV, Karagodina IuIa, Barinov VV.

The article devoted to respiratory pathology (RP) in patients with UC and CD with
clinical-radiological and functional (a function of external respiration--ERF)
methods. The study included 220 patients with IBD (164--with UC and 56--with CD),
aged 18-76 years (average age 40.6 years). ERF was studied by spirograph and
recording flow-volume curve of forced expiration using pnevmotaograph "Eton-1"
(Russia), 11 patients underwent HDCT at on multislice computer tomograph Toshiba 
Aquilion-16 (Japan). The study found that RP was most often detected by pulmonary
function tests (44.1%), with a targeted detection of respiratory symptoms
(32.9%), especially during HDCT. Much less marked physical (8.6%) and
radiological (12.3%), signs of pulmonary disease, which indicates the low
sensitivity of standard X-ray study of the CO. Airflow obstruction in the
majority (78.3%) patients were represented mainly by obstruction of small
bronchus, while in 51.6% of patients with impaired respiratory functions had no
respiratory complaints, and 79.4% of patients had no radiographic signs of RP.

PMID: 21695953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Integr Plant Biol. 2011 Jul;53(7):570-85. doi:
10.1111/j.1744-7909.2011.01062.x.

Functions and application of the AP2/ERF transcription factor family in crop
improvement.

Xu ZS(1), Chen M, Li LC, Ma YZ.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Facility of Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement (NFCRI), 
Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, Institute 
of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agriculture Sciences (CAAS), Beijing 100081, 
China.

Plants have acquired sophisticated stress response systems to adapt to changing
environments. It is important to understand plants' stress response mechanisms in
the effort to improve crop productivity under stressful conditions. The AP2/ERF
transcription factors are known to regulate diverse processes of plant
development and stress responses. In this study, the molecular characteristics
and biological functions of AP2/ERFs in a variety of plant species were analyzed.
AP2/ERFs, especially those in DREB and ERF subfamilies, are ideal candidates for 
crop improvement because their overexpression enhances tolerances to drought,
salt, freezing, as well as resistances to multiple diseases in the transgenic
plants. The comprehensive analysis of physiological functions is useful in
elucidating the biological roles of AP2/ERF family genes in gene interaction,
pathway regulation, and defense response under stress environments, which should 
provide new opportunities for the crop tolerance engineering.

© 2011 Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 21676172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Int J Nephrol. 2011;2011:527137. doi: 10.4061/2011/527137. Epub 2011 May 15.

Nephronophthisis: a genetically diverse ciliopathy.

Simms RJ(1), Hynes AM, Eley L, Sayer JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, International Centre for Life, Newcastle
University, Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.

Nephronophthisis (NPHP) is an autosomal recessive cystic kidney disease and a
leading genetic cause of established renal failure (ERF) in children and young
adults. Early presenting symptoms in children with NPHP include polyuria,
nocturia, or secondary enuresis, pointing to a urinary concentrating defect.
Renal ultrasound typically shows normal kidney size with increased echogenicity
and corticomedullary cysts. Importantly, NPHP is associated with extra renal
manifestations in 10-15% of patients. The most frequent extrarenal association is
retinal degeneration, leading to blindness. Increasingly, molecular genetic
testing is being utilised to diagnose NPHP and avoid the need for a renal biopsy.
In this paper, we discuss the latest understanding in the molecular and cellular 
pathogenesis of NPHP. We suggest an appropriate clinical management plan and
screening programme for individuals with NPHP and their families.

PMCID: PMC3108105
PMID: 21660307  [PubMed]


473. Coll Antropol. 2011 Jan;35 Suppl 1:191-8.

Spatial and temporal measurements of eye movement in children with dyslexia.

Kraljevic JK(1), Palmovic M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Zagreb, Department of Speech and Language Pathology, Laboratory 
for Psycholinguistic Research, Zagreb, Croatia. jkuvac@erf.hr

This paper presents the first reading data in Croatian collected with an
eye-tracking device. The eye-tracking method allows for research into two crucial
levels underlying reading: the visual and the cognitive. The aim of this paper is
to show the differences in eye movements in children with dyslexia using the
principles of cognitive-control view. Despite the well-known definitions and vast
literature on dyslexia, the neural basis of dyslexia varies greatly on the
individual level. The three children studied in this paper were tested
behaviorally using set of language tests for language behavior assessment on all 
language levels: phonology, morphology, syntax, lexicon and pragmatics. Two
children had low scores on most language tests, and all three children had poor
reading and writing level. Each of the children had to read two texts silently
while their eye movements were recorded by means of an infrared eye-tracking
system. We analyzed the number, position, and duration of fixations and the
number and position of regressive (or back) saccades. Our results show intergroup
differences (between a typically developing child and the three children with
dyslexia), and intragroup differences (among all three children with dyslexia).
The great number of fixations, longer duration of fixations, and great number of 
regression saccades are the main features that differentiate the children with
dyslexia form the typically developing child. The only difference found between
language and visual subtypes of dyslexia was a shorter duration of fixations for 
the child with a visual processing disorder.

PMID: 21648333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Coll Antropol. 2011 Jan;35 Suppl 1:31-8.

Cognitive abilities and language comprehension in preschool children with
perinatal brain lesion.

Pavlisa JI(1), Simlesa S, Ljubesic M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Zagreb, Faculty of Education and Rehabilitation Sciences,
Developmental Neurolinguistic Lab, Zagreb, Croatia. jivsac@erf.hr

Perinatal brain lesion is a risk factor for development, making parents of such
children particularly worried about consequences it may have on the child's
cognitive and language development. Although literature findings on the outcome
of perinatal brain lesion are inconsistent, most of the studies have found a
positive general outcome, but also subtle deficits that affect the child's
academic success. Since language comprehension and cognitive abilities influence 
learning abilities at school, we wanted to know how six-year olds who were
selected based on pathological ultrasonographical findings (ischemic or
hemorrhagic brain lesion) would perform on subtests of Wechsler battery (WISC)
and language comprehension measures (Reynell Developmental Language Scale and
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test), compared with controls. The second issue we
investigated was whether in children who suffered a perinatal brain lesion
cognitive abilities predicted the level of language comprehension in the same way
as in children without perinatal brain lesion. The relation between cognitive and
linguistic abilities is still a controversial one, and a different relation would
mean that these two groups of children have different structure of abilities
probably due to perinatal brain lesion. Forty children who suffered a perinatal
brain lesion and forty age-matched children without perinatal risk factors were
examined. Our results showed that the groups differed more in linguistic than in 
cognitive variables. Also, the two groups showed different relation patterns
between cognitive abilities and language comprehension. Cognitive abilities were 
statistically significantly associated with language comprehension in children
who suffered a perinatal brain lesion, while this association was not
statistically significant within the control group. Since a number of
participants with perinatal brain lesion had language difficulties, it is
presumed that they rely on cognitive abilities in order to overcome and
compensate for language shortcomings.

PMID: 21648308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. BMC Res Notes. 2011 Jun 7;4:176. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-4-176.

Aintegumenta and Aintegumenta-Like6 regulate auxin-mediated flower development in
Arabidopsis.

Krizek BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept, of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC,
29208, USA. krizek@sc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Two related genes encoding AP2/ERF-type transcription factors,
AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) and AINTEGUMENTA-LIKE6 (AIL6), are important regulators of
floral growth and patterning in Arabidopsis. Evidence suggests that these genes
promote several aspects of flower development in response to auxin. To
investigate the interplay of ANT, AIL6 and auxin during floral development, I
have examined the phenotypic consequences of disrupting polar auxin transport in 
ant, ail6 and ant ail6 mutants by either genetic or chemical means.
RESULTS: Plants containing mutations in ANT or AIL6 alone or in both genes
together exhibit increased sensitivity to disruptions in polar auxin transport.
Both genes promote shoot growth, floral meristem initiation and floral meristem
patterning in combination with auxin transport. However, differences in the
responses of ant and ail6 single mutants to perturbations in auxin transport
suggest that these two genes also have non-overlapping activities in each of
these developmental processes.
CONCLUSIONS: The enhanced sensitivity of ant and ail6 mutants to alterations in
polar auxin transport suggests that these mutants have defects in some aspect of 
auxin physiology. The inability of ant ail6 double mutants to initiate flowers in
backgrounds disrupted for auxin transport confirm the proposed roles for these
two genes in floral meristem initiation.

PMCID: PMC3127960
PMID: 21645408  [PubMed]


476. Plant J. 2011 Oct;68(1):88-99. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04670.x. Epub 2011
Jul 21.

The ethylene response factor AtERF11 that is transcriptionally modulated by the
bZIP transcription factor HY5 is a crucial repressor for ethylene biosynthesis in
Arabidopsis.

Li Z(1), Zhang L, Yu Y, Quan R, Zhang Z, Zhang H, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100081, China.

The phytohormones abscisic acid (ABA) and ethylene are known to play multiple
roles in plant development and stress responses. Ethylene biosynthesis is
affected by several factors including drought, cold and the phytohormone auxin,
although the role of ABA is unclear. In this work ABA-responsive mutants were
screened and a bZIP transcription factor HY5 was identified as a negative
regulator of ethylene biosynthesis via modulation of the expression of the
ethylene biosynthesis genes ACS2 and ACS5. Members of the ethylene response
factor (ERF) family of transcriptional repressors in Arabidopsis have been shown 
to modulate ABA responses and three ERF members were found to carry putative
HY5-binding cis-acting elements. Analyses with biochemical and molecular
approaches revealed that HY5 specifically binds to the G-box region of the
AtERF11 promoter to activate its transcription. We further demonstrate that
AtERF11, which contains a repressor motif at its C-terminal, interacts with the
dehydration-responsive element in the ACS2/5 promoters, to repress its
expression, resulting in decreased ethylene biosynthesis. Moreover, an AtERF11
knockout mutant showed increased levels of ACS2/5 expression and ethylene
emission, while treatment with ABA greatly suppressed ACS5 transcripts but not
ACS2 expression and the ethylene content, indicating that AtERF11 is a key
negative regulator for ABA-mediated control of ethylene synthesis. In addition,
in ethylene over-producer mutants, ABA treatment was shown to suppress ACS5
transcripts and ethylene content, thereby affecting growth and development. Based
on these data, in this research we present a model suggesting that the
HY5-AtERF11 regulon is a key factor modulating ABA-regulated ethylene
biosynthesis.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21645149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Gene. 2011 Sep 1;483(1-2):36-42. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.05.010. Epub 2011 May
24.

A poplar DRE-binding protein gene, PeDREB2L, is involved in regulation of defense
response against abiotic stress.

Chen J(1), Xia X, Yin W.

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for Tree Breeding, Key Laboratory of Genetics 
and Breeding in Forest Trees and Ornamental Plants of Ministry of Education,
Beijing Forestry University, China.

Dehydration responsive element (DRE)-binding proteins comprise a family of
proteins that have important roles in abiotic stress processes. The present study
aimed at elucidating the molecular basis of the stress tolerance mechanism in
poplar. We isolated a gene, PeDREB2L, from the desert tree Populus euphratica
Oliva. PeDREB2L contains a conserved AP2/ERF domain, a nuclear localization
signal at the N-terminus and a serine-rich region at the C-terminus. PeDREB2L
binds specifically to DRE elements and is expressed ubiquitously in all tissues, 
including roots, stems, and leaves. Expression of PeDREB2L in leaves increased
under dehydration, salt, and abscisic acid stress treatments. Furthermore,
PeDREB2L-GFP ectopically expressed in Arabidopsis gave strong green fluorescent
protein signals in the nucleus of transgenic Arabidopsis under unstressed
conditions and resulted in an improved tolerance against drought and freezing
under stress conditions, while the Arabidopsis protein gene DREB2A-GFP used as a 
control only gave a weak fluorescent. We expected that the PeDREB2L might be
useful in improving abiotic stress tolerance in transgenic plants.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21640171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Jun;18(6):715-20. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2057. Epub 2011 May
29.

Structure of the no-go mRNA decay complex Dom34-Hbs1 bound to a stalled 80S
ribosome.

Becker T(1), Armache JP, Jarasch A, Anger AM, Villa E, Sieber H, Motaal BA,
Mielke T, Berninghausen O, Beckmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Center and Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich, Department of
Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany.
becker@lmb.uni-muenchen.de

No-go decay (NGD) is a mRNA quality-control mechanism in eukaryotic cells that
leads to degradation of mRNAs stalled during translational elongation. The key
factors triggering NGD are Dom34 and Hbs1. We used cryo-EM to visualize NGD
intermediates resulting from binding of the Dom34-Hbs1 complex to stalled
ribosomes. At subnanometer resolution, all domains of Dom34 and Hbs1 were
identified, allowing the docking of crystal structures and homology models.
Moreover, the close structural similarity of Dom34 and Hbs1 to eukaryotic release
factors (eRFs) enabled us to propose a model for the ribosome-bound eRF1-eRF3
complex. Collectively, our data provide structural insights into how stalled mRNA
is recognized on the ribosome and how the eRF complex can simultaneously
recognize stop codons and catalyze peptide release.

PMID: 21623367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Physiol Plant. 2011 Sep;143(1):41-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-3054.2011.01486.x. Epub 
2011 Jun 20.

The hypoxia responsive transcription factor genes ERF71/HRE2 and ERF73/HRE1 of
Arabidopsis are differentially regulated by ethylene.

Hess N(1), Klode M, Anders M, Sauter M.

Author information: 
(1)Entwicklungsbiologie und Physiologie der Pflanzen, Universität Kiel, Am
Botanischen Garten 5, 24118 Kiel, Germany.

The AR2/ERF transcription factor genes ERF71/HRE2 and ERF73/HRE1 were induced at 
hypoxic conditions in Arabidopsis thaliana roots. ERF73/HRE1 but not its related 
gene ERF71/HRE2 was furthermore regulated by ethylene. Treatment with 1 ppm
ethylene promoted ERF73/HRE1 expression fivefold. This induction did not occur in
the presence of the ethylene receptor inhibitor 1-methylcyclopropene. ERF73/HRE1 
expression positively regulated alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) activity, which was
analyzed as a marker enzyme for metabolic adaptation to hypoxic stress. The knock
out lines erf73/hre1-1 and erf73/hre1-2 showed lowered ADH activity; the
overexpressing lines ERF73/HRE1-ox1 and ERF73/HRE1-ox5 displayed elevated ADH
activity. Treatment of wild-type Arabidopsis with 5% O2 and 1 ppm ethylene
resulted in higher induction of ADH activity than that observed with 5% O2 or 1
ppm ethylene alone. ERF73/HRE1-ox1 and ERF73/HRE1-ox5 plants that were exposed to
5% O2 did not show enhanced ADH activity after treatment with ethylene,
indicating that the ethylene response with respect to ADH activity was saturated 
in the ERF73/HRE1ox lines. In contrast, erf73/hre1-1 and erf73/hre1-2 lines
displayed ethylene-dependent ADH activity pointing to redundant factor(s) that
can mediate ethylene regulation of ADH activity in the Arabidopsis root. Our data
show that ethylene regulates metabolic adaptation to low oxygen stress in the
Arabidopsis root through ERF73/ HRE1.

Copyright © Physiologia Plantarum 2011.

PMID: 21615413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Feb;39(2):1349-57. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-0869-0. Epub 2011
May 21.

Isolation and characterization of a gene encoding an ethylene responsive factor
protein from Ceratoides arborescens.

Dong J(1), Wang X, Wang K, Wang Z, Gao H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
2-Yuan-Ming-Yuan West Rd., Haidian District, Beijing 100193, People's Republic of
China.

Ethylene responsive factor (ERF) proteins play important roles in plant growth
and development and regulate biotic and abiotic stress responses. In this study, 
a full length mRNA encoding a novel ERF-type transcription factor namely
Ceratoides arborescens ERF protein (CeERF) was isolated from C. arborescens. The 
deduced amino acid of CeERF had a conserved APETALA2/ERF (AP2/ERF) domain which
specifically binds to cis-acting elements GCC box. Under normal conditions, the
expression level of CeERF was highest in leaves and lowest in roots. CeERF
expression was induced by 20% PEG in a time-dependent pattern and peaked at 8 h. 
CeERF also acts in salt- and hormones-induced stresses. Transient expression
analysis in onion epidermal cells indicated that CeERF protein localized to
nucleus. Overexpression of CeERF in transgenic tobacco plants resulted in higher 
tolerance to abiotic stresses than in control plants. These results suggested
that CeERF might play a role in abiotic stress signal transduction and that
overexpression of CeERF might serve as a feasible approach to enhance resistance 
in forage, even crop.

PMID: 21603850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Plant Cell Physiol. 2011 Jun;52(6):1117-30. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcr063. Epub 2011
May 16.

Tobacco MYC2 regulates jasmonate-inducible nicotine biosynthesis genes directly
and by way of the NIC2-locus ERF genes.

Shoji T(1), Hashimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, Ikoma, Nara, Japan.

In Arabidopsis, the MYC2-family basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
mediate transcriptional regulation of jasmonate-responsive genes, and their
transcriptional activities are suppressed by physical interactions with
jasmonate-ZIM domain (JAZ) proteins. Jasmonate-inducible nicotine formation in
Nicotiana plants has been shown to be suppressed by tobacco JAZ proteins, and be 
regulated by both MYC2-related and NIC2-locus ethylene response factor (ERF)
transcription factors. We here show that tobacco MYC2 (NtMYC2) recognizes the
G-box sequences, 5'-CAC(G/A)T(G/T)-3', found in the proximal promoter regions of 
several nicotine biosynthesis genes, including Putrescine N-Methyltransferase 2
(PMT2) and Quinolinate Phosphoribosyltransferase 2 (QPT2). Transient
transactivation assays using cultured tobacco cells showed that NtMYC2 and
NIC2-locus ERF189 additively activated the PMT2 and QPT2 promoters depending on
their cognate binding sites. RNA interference (RNAi) silencing of NtMYC2 in
tobacco hairy roots strongly decreased transcript levels of jasmonate-responsive 
structural genes, including those involved in nicotine biosynthesis, as well as
the NIC2-locus ERF genes. Conversely, ERF189 was not required for the expression 
of NtMYC2. NtMYC2, but not ERF189, interacted with tobacoo JAZs in a yeast
two-hybrid assay. These results indicate that NtMYC2 controls nicotine
biosynthesis genes in two combinatorial ways, by directly binding the G-box in
the target promoters and by up-regulating the NIC2-locus ERF genes.

PMID: 21576194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Tree Physiol. 2011 May;31(5):555-66. doi: 10.1093/treephys/tpr028. Epub 2011 May 
12.

Apple FLOWERING LOCUS T proteins interact with transcription factors implicated
in cell growth and organ development.

Mimida N(1), Kidou S, Iwanami H, Moriya S, Abe K, Voogd C, Varkonyi-Gasic E,
Kotoda N.

Author information: 
(1)Apple Breeding and Physiology Research Team, National Institute of Fruit Tree 
Science, Morioka 020-0123, Japan. mmd@iwate-u.ac.jp, koto@affrc.go.jp

Understanding the flowering process in apple (Malus × domestica Borkh.) is
essential for developing methods to shorten the breeding period and regulate
fruit yield. It is known that FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT) acts as a transmissible
floral inducer in the Arabidopsis flowering network system. To clarify the
molecular network of two apple FT orthologues, MdFT1 and MdFT2, we performed a
yeast two-hybrid screen to identify proteins that interact with MdFT1. We
identified several transcription factors, including two members of the TCP
(TEOSINTE BRANCHED1, CYCLOIDEA and PROLIFERATING CELL FACTORs) family, designated
MdTCP2 and MdTCP4, and an Arabidopsis thaliana VOZ1 (Vascular plant One Zinc
finger protein1)-like protein, designated MdVOZ1. MdTCP2 and MdVOZ1 also
interacted with MdFT2 in yeast. The expression domain of MdTCP2 and MdVOZ1
partially overlapped with that of MdFT1 and MdFT2, most strikingly in apple fruit
tissue, further suggesting a potential interaction in vivo. Constitutive
expression of MdTCP2, MdTCP4 and MdVOZ1 in Arabidopsis affected plant size, leaf 
morphology and the formation of leaf primordia on the adaxial side of cotyledons.
On the other hand, chimeric MdTCP2, MdTCP4 and MdVOZ1 repressors that included
the ethylene-responsive transcription factors (ERF)-associated amphiphilic
repression (EAR) domain motif influenced reproduction and inflorescence
architecture in transgenic Arabidopsis. These results suggest that MdFT1 and/or
MdFT2 might be involved in the regulation of cellular proliferation and the
formation of new tissues and that they might affect leaf and fruit development by
interacting with TCP- and VOZ-family proteins. DDBJ accession nos. AB531019
(MdTCP2a mRNA), AB531020 (MdTCP2b mRNA), AB531021 (MdTCP4a mRNA), AB531022
(MdTCP4b mRNA) and AB531023 (MdVOZ1a mRNA).

© The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21571725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Genomics. 2011 Jul;98(1):47-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2011.04.007. Epub 2011 Apr
30.

Transcriptome analysis reveals salt-stress-regulated biological processes and key
pathways in roots of cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.).

Yao D(1), Zhang X, Zhao X, Liu C, Wang C, Zhang Z, Zhang C, Wei Q, Wang Q, Yan H,
Li F, Su Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing, PR China.

High salinity is one of the main factors limiting cotton growth and productivity.
The genes that regulate salt stress in TM-1 upland cotton were monitored using
microarray and real-time PCR (RT-PCR) with samples taken from roots. Microarray
analysis showed that 1503 probe sets were up-regulated and 1490 probe sets were
down-regulated in plants exposed for 3h to 100mM NaCl, and RT-PCR analysis
validated 42 relevant/related genes. The distribution of enriched gene ontology
terms showed such important processes as the response to water stress and
pathways of hormone metabolism and signal transduction were induced by the NaCl
treatment. Some key regulatory gene families involved in abiotic and biotic
sources of stress such as WRKY, ERF, and JAZ were differentially expressed. Our
transcriptome analysis might provide some useful insights into salt-mediated
signal transduction pathways in cotton and offer a number of candidate genes as
potential markers of tolerance to salt stress.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21569837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Res Natl Inst Stand Technol. 2011 Jun 1;116(3):671-83.

Development of Multicolor Flow Cytometry Calibration Standards: Assignment of
Equivalent Reference Fluorophores (ERF) Unit.

Wang L(1), Gaigalas AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899.

A procedure is described for assigning the number of equivalent reference
fluorophores (ERF) values to microspheres labeled with a fluorophore designed to 
produce a fluorescence response in a given fluorescence channel of a multicolor
flow cytometer. A fluorimeter was calibrated by a series of solutions of the
reference fluorophores. The fluorimeter was used to obtain the microsphere
fluorescence intensity, and a multicolor flow cytometer was used to obtain the
microsphere concentration. The microsphere fluorescence intensity and the
concentration were used to obtain the value of ERF for each model microsphere
calibration standard. The procedure is described in detail only for microspheres 
with allophycocyanin (APC) immobilized on the surface. ERF values were also
determined for microsphere calibrators for three other fluorescence channels:
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC), phycoerythrin (PE), and Pacific Blue(PB). The 
four model microsphere calibrators provide a one point calibration for the four
channels of a flow cytometer. By using software controls and changing the
photomultiplier voltages, it is possible to obtain a multipoint calibration for
each fluorescence channel using each microsphere calibrator.

PMCID: PMC4550335
PMID: 26989591  [PubMed]


485. Plant J. 2011 Aug;67(3):472-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04610.x. Epub 2011 
May 31.

The auxin responsive AP2/ERF transcription factor CROWN ROOTLESS5 is involved in 
crown root initiation in rice through the induction of OsRR1, a type-A response
regulator of cytokinin signaling.

Kitomi Y(1), Ito H, Hobo T, Aya K, Kitano H, Inukai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Aichi 
464-8601, Japan Bioscience and Biotechnology Center, Nagoya University, Nagoya,
Aichi 464-8601, Japan.

Cytokinin is known to have negative effects on de novo auxin-induced root
formation. However, the regulatory mechanisms of root initiation by both
cytokinin and auxin are poorly understood. In this study, we characterized a rice
mutant, termed crown rootless5 (crl5), which produced fewer crown roots and
displayed impaired initiation of crown root primordia. The expression of CRL5,
which encodes a member of the large AP2/ERF transcription factor family protein, 
was observed in the stem region where crown root initiation occurs. Exogenous
auxin treatment induced CRL5 expression without de novo protein biosynthesis,
which also required the degradation of AUX/IAA proteins. A putative auxin
response element in the CRL5 promoter region specifically interacted with a rice 
ARF, demonstrating that CRL5 may be a direct target of an ARF, similar to
CRL1/ADVENTITIOUS ROOTLESS1 (ARL1) that also regulates crown root initiation. A
crl1 crl5 double mutant displayed an additive phenotype, indicating that these
two genes function in different genetic pathways for crown root initiation. In
addition, ProACT:CRL5/WT showed a cytokinin-resistant phenotype for crown root
initiation, and also up-regulated the expression of two negative regulators of
cytokinin signaling, OsRR1 and OsRR2, which were downregulated in crl5.
Transgenic plants that over-expressed OsRR1 under the control of the CRL5
promoter in a crl5 mutant background produced a higher number of crown roots than
the crl5 plant. Taken together, these results indicate that auxin-induced CRL5
promotes crown root initiation through repression of cytokinin signaling by
positively regulating type-A RR, OsRR1.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21481033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Plant Cell Rep. 2011 Aug;30(8):1383-91. doi: 10.1007/s00299-011-1068-0. Epub 2011
Apr 8.

Plant tolerance to drought and salinity: stress regulating transcription factors 
and their functional significance in the cellular transcriptional network.

Golldack D(1), Lüking I, Yang O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants, Faculty of Biology,
Bielefeld University, 33615, Bielefeld, Germany. dortje.golldack@uni-bielefeld.de

Understanding the responses of plants to the major environmental stressors
drought and salt is an important topic for the biotechnological application of
functional mechanisms of stress adaptation. Here, we review recent discoveries on
regulatory systems that link sensing and signaling of these environmental cues
focusing on the integrative function of transcription activators. Key components 
that control and modulate stress adaptive pathways include transcription factors 
(TFs) ranging from bZIP, AP2/ERF, and MYB proteins to general TFs. Recent studies
indicate that molecular dynamics as specific homodimerizations and
heterodimerizations as well as modular flexibility and posttranslational
modifications determine the functional specificity of TFs in environmental
adaptation. Function of central regulators as NAC, WRKY, and zinc finger proteins
may be modulated by mechanisms as small RNA (miRNA)-mediated posttranscriptional 
silencing and reactive oxygen species signaling. In addition to the key function 
of hub factors of stress tolerance within hierarchical regulatory networks,
epigenetic processes as DNA methylation and posttranslational modifications of
histones highly influence the efficiency of stress-induced gene expression.
Comprehensive elucidation of dynamic coordination of drought and salt responsive 
TFs in interacting pathways and their specific integration in the cellular
network of stress adaptation will provide new opportunities for the engineering
of plant tolerance to these environmental stressors.

PMID: 21476089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Biomed Opt. 2011 Mar;16(3):030502. doi: 10.1117/1.3552639.

Automated identification of epidermal keratinocytes in reflectance confocal
microscopy.

Gareau D.

Keratinocytes in skin epidermis, which have bright cytoplasmic contrast and dark 
nuclear contrast in reflectance confocal microscopy (RCM), were modeled with a
simple error function reflectance profile: erf(<U+2009>). Forty-two example
keratinocytes were identified as a training set which characterized the nuclear
size a = 8.6±2.8 µm and reflectance gradient b = 3.6±2.1 µm at the
nuclear/cytoplasmic boundary. These mean a and b parameters were used to create a
rotationally symmetric erf(<U+2009>) mask that approximated the mean keratinocyte image.
A computer vision algorithm used an erf(<U+2009>) mask to scan RCM images, identifying
the coordinates of keratinocytes. Applying the mask to the confocal data
identified the positions of keratinocytes in the epidermis. This simple model may
be used to noninvasively evaluate keratinocyte populations as a quantitative
morphometric diagnostic in skin cancer detection and evaluation of dermatological
cosmetics.

PMCID: PMC3077366
PMID: 21456857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2011 May;294(5):739-55. doi: 10.1002/ar.21369. Epub 2011 Mar 
29.

Plexiform lesions in the lungs of domestic fowl selected for susceptibility to
pulmonary arterial hypertension: incidence and histology.

Wideman RF(1), Hamal KR, Bayona MT, Lorenzoni AG, Cross D, Khajali F, Rhoads DD, 
Erf GF, Anthony NB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, USA.
rwideman@uark.edu

Plexiform lesions develop in the pulmonary arteries of humans suffering from
idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH). Plexogenic arteriopathy rarely
develops in existing animal models of IPAH. In this study, plexiform lesions
developed in the lungs of rapidly growing meat-type chickens (broiler chickens)
that had been genetically selected for susceptibility to IPAH. Plexiform lesions 
developed spontaneously in: 42% of females and 40% of males; 35% of right lungs, 
and 45% of left lungs; and, at 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, and 52 weeks of age the
plexiform lesion incidences averaged 52%, 50%, 51%, 40%, 36%, and 22%,
respectively. Plexiform lesions formed distal to branch points in muscular
interparabronchial pulmonary arteries exhibiting intimal proliferation.
Perivascular mononuclear cell infiltrates consistently surrounded the affected
arteries. Proliferating intimal cells fully or partially occluded the arterial
lumen adjacent to plexiform lesions. Broilers reared in clean stainless steel
cages exhibited a 50% lesion incidence that did not differ from the 64% incidence
in flock mates grown on dusty floor litter. Microparticles (30 µm diameter) were 
injected to determine if physical occlusion and focal inflammation within distal 
pulmonary arteries might initiate plexiform lesion development. Three months
postinjection no plexiform lesions were observed in the vicinity of persisting
microparticles. Broiler chickens selected for innate susceptibility to IPAH
represent a new animal model for investigating the mechanisms responsible for
spontaneous plexogenic arteriopathy.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21448992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Surg Today. 2011 Apr;41(4):560-2. doi: 10.1007/s00595-009-4298-9. Epub 2011 Mar
23.

Successful management of multiple esophagorespiratory fistulas using two types of
stent: report of a case.

Hamai Y(1), Hihara J, Emi M, Okita R, Shimizu K, Okada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and 
Medicine, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, 734-8551,
Japan.

We herein describe a 41-year-old man with esophageal cancer who developed three
esophagorespiratory fistulas (ERFs) that were successfully treated using one
esophageal and three airway stents. A self-expandable metallic stent (SEMS) was
initially inserted into the esophagus to close an ERF in the right bronchus.
However, two new ERFs developed in the trachea and the left main bronchus 3
months later because of pressure necrosis and penetration of the esophageal SEMS.
These secondary ERFs were subsequently closed using two silicone stents, together
with one SEMS in the airway. This experience suggests that appropriate stenting
can control multiple and large ERFs.

PMID: 21431494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Plant J. 2011 Jun;66(6):1053-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04566.x. Epub 2011
Apr 5.

APETALA2/ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR and basic helix-loop-helix tobacco
transcription factors cooperatively mediate jasmonate-elicited nicotine
biosynthesis.

De Boer K(1), Tilleman S, Pauwels L, Vanden Bossche R, De Sutter V, Vanderhaeghen
R, Hilson P, Hamill JD, Goossens A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Vic. 3800,
Australia.

Transcription factors of the plant-specific apetala2/ethylene response factor
(AP2/ERF) family control plant secondary metabolism, often as part of signalling 
cascades induced by jasmonate (JA) or other elicitors. Here, we functionally
characterized the JA-inducible tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) AP2/ERF factor ORC1,
one of the members of the NIC2-locus ERFs that control nicotine biosynthesis and 
a close homologue of ORCA3, a transcriptional activator of alkaloid biosynthesis 
in Catharanthus roseus. ORC1 positively regulated the transcription of several
structural genes coding for the enzymes involved in nicotine biosynthesis.
Accordingly, overexpression of ORC1 was sufficient to stimulate alkaloid
biosynthesis in tobacco plants and tree tobacco (Nicotiana glauca) root cultures.
In contrast to ORCA3 in C. roseus, which needs only the GCC motif in the
promoters of the alkaloid synthesis genes to induce their expression, ORC1
required the presence of both GCC-motif and G-box elements in the promoters of
the tobacco nicotine biosynthesis genes for maximum transactivation.
Correspondingly, combined application with the JA-inducible Nicotiana basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors that bind the G-box element in these promoters
enhanced ORC1 action. Conversely, overaccumulation of JAZ repressor proteins that
block bHLH activity reduced ORC1 functionality. Finally, the activity of both
ORC1 and bHLH proteins was post-translationally upregulated by a JA-modulated
phosphorylation cascade, in which a specific mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase, JA-factor stimulating MAPKK1 (JAM1), was identified. This study
highlights the complexity of the molecular machinery involved in the regulation
of tobacco alkaloid biosynthesis and provides mechanistic insights about its
transcriptional regulators.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21418355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Plant Res. 2011 Jul;124(4):509-25. doi: 10.1007/s10265-011-0412-3. Epub 2011
Mar 18.

ABA-mediated transcriptional regulation in response to osmotic stress in plants.

Fujita Y(1), Fujita M, Shinozaki K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Resources Division, Japan International Research Center for
Agricultural Sciences, 1-1 Ohwashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8686, Japan.

The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) plays a pivotal role in a variety of
developmental processes and adaptive stress responses to environmental stimuli in
plants. Cellular dehydration during the seed maturation and vegetative growth
stages induces an increase in endogenous ABA levels, which control many
dehydration-responsive genes. In Arabidopsis plants, ABA regulates nearly 10% of 
the protein-coding genes, a much higher percentage than other plant hormones.
Expression of the genes is mainly regulated by two different families of bZIP
transcription factors (TFs), ABI5 in the seeds and AREB/ABFs in the vegetative
stage, in an ABA-responsive-element (ABRE) dependent manner. The SnRK2-AREB/ABF
pathway governs the majority of ABA-mediated ABRE-dependent gene expression in
response to osmotic stress during the vegetative stage. In addition to osmotic
stress, the circadian clock and light conditions also appear to participate in
the regulation of ABA-mediated gene expression, likely conferring versatile
tolerance and repressing growth under stress conditions. Moreover, various other 
TFs belonging to several classes, including AP2/ERF, MYB, NAC, and HD-ZF, have
been reported to engage in ABA-mediated gene expression. This review mainly
focuses on the transcriptional regulation of ABA-mediated gene expression in
response to osmotic stress during the vegetative growth stage in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 21416314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Plant Cell Rep. 2011 Aug;30(8):1465-73. doi: 10.1007/s00299-011-1055-5. Epub 2011
Mar 17.

Differential expression of Phaseolus vulgaris genes induced during the
interaction with Rhizoctonia solani.

Guerrero-González ML(1), Rodríguez-Kessler M, Rodríguez-Guerra R,
González-Chavira M, Simpson J, Sanchez F, Jiménez-Bremont JF.

Author information: 
(1)División de Biología Molecular, Instituto Potosino de Investigación Científica
y Tecnológica, Camino a la Presa de San José 2055 AP 3-74 Tangamanga, CP 78216,
San Luís Potosí, México.

Common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is the most important grain legume for direct
human consumption; however, bean production is affected by several diseases such 
as Rhizoctonia root rot. Few bean cultivars have been identified that effectively
resist the attack of this fungus. Herein, we used the P. vulgaris Pv-2094
landrace, which is less susceptible to Rhizoctonia root rot, for the construction
of a suppressive subtractive hybridization cDNA library in order to isolate plant
defense-related genes. Total RNAs obtained after 8 and 16 h from inoculated and
non-inoculated roots with R. solani Kühn, were used as the source of the "tester"
and the "driver" samples, respectively. A total of 136 unigenes were obtained and
classified into 12 functional categories. Six unigenes were selected to analyze
for differential expression by qRT-PCR, including a receptor-like kinase
(PvRK20-1), an acid phosphatase associated to defense (PA), a pathogenesis
related protein (PR1), an ethylene responsive factor (ERF), a polygalacturonase
inhibitor protein (PGIP), and an alpha-dioxygenase (a-DOX). These genes were
found to be differentially expressed in a time-dependent manner in bean roots
during the interaction with R. solani. Data generated from this study will
contribute to the understanding of the molecular mechanisms associated with plant
defense against root rot in common bean.

PMID: 21416283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Plant J. 2011 Jul;67(1):61-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04575.x. Epub 2011
Apr 26.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor CrMYC2 controls the
jasmonate-responsive expression of the ORCA genes that regulate alkaloid
biosynthesis in Catharanthus roseus.

Zhang H(1), Hedhili S, Montiel G, Zhang Y, Chatel G, Pré M, Gantet P, Memelink J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Sylvius Laboratory, PO Box 9505, 2300
RA Leiden, the Netherlands.

Jasmonates are plant signalling molecules that play key roles in defence against 
insects and certain pathogens, among others by controlling the biosynthesis of
protective secondary metabolites. In Catharanthus roseus, the AP2/ERF-domain
transcription factor ORCA3 controls the jasmonate-responsive expression of
several genes encoding enzymes involved in terpenoid indole alkaloid
biosynthesis. ORCA3 gene expression is itself induced by jasmonate. The ORCA3
promoter contains an autonomous jasmonate-responsive element (JRE) composed of a 
quantitative sequence responsible for the high level of expression and a
qualitative sequence that acts as an on/off switch in response to
methyl-jasmonate (MeJA). Here, we identify the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor CrMYC2 as the major activator of MeJA-responsive ORCA3 gene 
expression. The CrMYC2 gene is an immediate-early jasmonate-responsive gene.
CrMYC2 binds to the qualitative sequence in the ORCA3 JRE in vitro, and
transactivates reporter gene expression via this sequence in transient assays.
Knock-down of the CrMYC2 expression level via RNA interference caused a strong
reduction in the level of MeJA-responsive ORCA3 mRNA accumulation. In addition,
MeJA-responsive expression of the related transcription factor gene ORCA2 was
significantly reduced. Our results show that MeJA-responsive expression of
alkaloid biosynthesis genes in C. roseus is controlled by a transcription factor 
cascade consisting of the bHLH protein CrMYC2 regulating ORCA gene expression,
and the AP2/ERF-domain transcription factors ORCA2 and ORCA3, which in turn
regulate a subset of alkaloid biosynthesis genes.

© 2011 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21401746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Plant Physiol. 2011 May;156(1):213-27. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.174268. Epub 2011 Mar 
11.

Tomato RAV transcription factor is a pivotal modulator involved in the
AP2/EREBP-mediated defense pathway.

Li CW(1), Su RC, Cheng CP, Sanjaya, You SJ, Hsieh TH, Chao TC, Chan MT.

Author information: 
(1)Academia Sinica Biotechnology Center in Southern Taiwan, Tainan 741, Taiwan.

Ralstonia solanacearum is the causal agent of bacterial wilt (BW), one of the
most important bacterial diseases worldwide. We used cDNA microarray to survey
the gene expression profile in transgenic tomato (Solanum lycopersicum)
overexpressing Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) CBF1 (AtCBF1), which confers
tolerance to BW. The disease-resistant phenotype is correlated with constitutive 
expression of the Related-to-ABI3/VP1 (RAV) transcription factor,
ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) family genes, and several pathogenesis-related
(PR) genes. Using a transient assay system, we show that tomato RAV2 (SlRAV2) can
transactivate the reporter gene driven by the SlERF5 promoter. Virus-induced gene
silencing of SlERF5 and SlRAV2 in AtCBF1 transgenic and BW-resistant cultivar
Hawaii 7996 plants gave rise to plants with enhanced susceptibility to BW.
Constitutive overexpression of SlRAV2 in transgenic tomato plants induced the
expression of SlERF5 and PR5 genes and increased BW tolerance, while knockdown of
expression of SlRAV2 inhibited SlERF5 and PR5 gene expression under pathogen
infection and significantly decreased BW tolerance. In addition, transgenic
tomato overexpressing SlERF5 also accumulated higher levels of PR5 transcripts
and displayed better tolerance to pathogen than wild-type plants. From these
results, we conclude that SlERFs may act as intermediate transcription factors
between AtCBF1 and PR genes via SlRAV in tomato, which results in enhanced
tolerance to BW.

PMCID: PMC3091068
PMID: 21398258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Plant Physiol. 2011 May;156(1):202-12. doi: 10.1104/pp.111.172486. Epub 2011 Mar 
10.

The AP2/ERF transcription factor AtERF73/HRE1 modulates ethylene responses during
hypoxia in Arabidopsis.

Yang CY(1), Hsu FC, Li JP, Wang NN, Shih MC.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115,
Taiwan.

A number of APETALA2 (AP2)/ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR (ERF) genes have been shown
to function in abiotic and biotic stress responses, and these genes are often
induced by multiple stresses. We report here the characterization of an AP2/ERF
gene in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) that is specifically induced during
hypoxia. We show that under normoxic conditions, the expression of AtERF73/HRE1
can be induced by exogenous addition of 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid and
that a combination of hypoxia and 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid results
in hyperinduction of AtERF73/HRE1 expression. In addition, hypoxic induction of
AtERF73/HRE1 is reduced but not completely abolished in ethylene-insensitive
mutants and in the presence of inhibitors of ethylene biosynthesis and responses.
These results suggest that, in addition to ethylene, an ethylene-independent
signal is also required to mediate hypoxic induction of AtERF73/HRE1. To assess
the role of AtERF73/HRE1, we generated three independent RNA interference (RNAi) 
knockdown lines of AtERF73/HRE1. Under normoxic conditions, the AtERF73/HRE1-RNAi
seedlings displayed increased ethylene sensitivity and exaggerated triple
responses, indicating that AtERF73/HRE1 might play a negative regulatory role in 
modulating ethylene responses. Gas chromatography analyses showed that the
production of ethylene was similar between wild-type and RNAi lines under
hypoxia. Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analyses
showed that hypoxia-inducible genes could be affected by AtERF73/HRE1-RNAi lines 
in two different ways: hypoxic induction of glycolytic and fermentative genes was
reduced, whereas induction of a number of peroxidase and cytochrome P450 genes
was increased. Taken together, our results show that AtERF73/HRE1 is involved in 
modulating ethylene responses under both normoxia and hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC3091062
PMID: 21398256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Curr Biol. 2011 Mar 22;21(6):508-14. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.02.020.

The AP2/ERF transcription factor WIND1 controls cell dedifferentiation in
Arabidopsis.

Iwase A(1), Mitsuda N, Koyama T, Hiratsu K, Kojima M, Arai T, Inoue Y, Seki M,
Sakakibara H, Sugimoto K, Ohme-Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Bioproduction Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba 305-8562, Japan.

Many multicellular organisms have remarkable capability to regenerate new organs 
after wounding. As a first step of organ regeneration, adult somatic cells often 
dedifferentiate to reacquire cell proliferation potential, but mechanisms
underlying this process remain unknown in plants. Here we show that an AP2/ERF
transcription factor, WOUND INDUCED DEDIFFERENTIATION 1 (WIND1), is involved in
the control of cell dedifferentiation in Arabidopsis. WIND1 is rapidly induced at
the wound site, and it promotes cell dedifferentiation and subsequent cell
proliferation to form a mass of pluripotent cells termed callus. We further
demonstrate that ectopic overexpression of WIND1 is sufficient to establish and
maintain the dedifferentiated status of somatic cells without exogenous auxin and
cytokinin, two plant hormones that are normally required for cell
dedifferentiation. In vivo imaging of a synthetic cytokinin reporter reveals that
wounding upregulates the B-type ARABIDOPSIS RESPONSE REGULATOR (ARR)-mediated
cytokinin response and that WIND1 acts via the ARR-dependent signaling pathway to
promote cell dedifferentiation. This study provides novel molecular insights into
how plants control cell dedifferentiation in response to wounding.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21396822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2010 Sep;45(9):1188-93.

[Cloning and polymorphism analysis of SmERF in Salvia miltiorrhiza].

[Article in Chinese]

Cui GH(1), Feng H, Li WY, Wang WY, Huang LQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy of Chinese Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100700, China.

The transcription factor of ethylene responsive factor binding protein (ERF) is
belonged to AP2/ERF superfamily, which is known to be unique in plants. AP2/ERF
proteins have important functions in the transcriptional regulation of a variety 
of biological processes related to growth and development, as well as various
responses to environmental stimuli. An ERF gene from Salvia miltiorrhiza is
cloned and divided into ERF gene family group VII of Arabidopsis and Rice. It
contains a MCGGAI (I/L) motif referred to as CMVII-1 and a single intron in the
5'-flanking region of the AP2/ERF domain. Sequence analysis reveals that the
region of second extron has abundant polymorphism sites. There are 21 single
nucleotide polymorphism sites (SNPs) in the 264 bp region, among them, 14 SNPs
are synonymous substitutions and 7 SNPs are non-synonymous substitutions. Though 
analysis of 181 samples from Shandong, Shaanxi and Sichuan Provinces, it reveals 
that each production area has its own special genotypes, 5 SNPs show significant 
difference. Cluster based on UPGMA method reveals that different populations from
specific province have clustered together. It shows that SmERF gene will be a
candidate molecular marker for the identification of Salvia miltiorrhiza from
different areas.

PMID: 21351578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Planta. 2011 Jun;233(6):1265-76. doi: 10.1007/s00425-011-1382-3. Epub 2011 Feb
22.

Overexpression of HARDY, an AP2/ERF gene from Arabidopsis, improves drought and
salt tolerance by reducing transpiration and sodium uptake in transgenic
Trifolium alexandrinum L.

Abogadallah GM(1), Nada RM, Malinowski R, Quick P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, Mansoura University, Damietta
Branch, New Damietta 34517, Egypt. gabogadallah@mans.edu.eg

Trifolium alexandrinum L. was transformed with the Arabidopsis HARDY gene that
belongs to the stress-related AP2/ERF (APETALA2/ethylene responsive element
binding factors) superfamily of transcription factors. The fresh weights of the
transgenic lines L2 and L3 were improved by 42 and 55% under drought stress and
by 38 and 95% under salt stress compared to the wild type, respectively. The dry 
weights were similarly improved. Overexpression of HARDY improved the
instantaneous water use efficiency (WUE) under drought stress by reducing
transpiration (E) and under salt stress by improving photosynthesis (A), through 
reducing Na+ accumulation in leaves, and reducing E. However, HARDY improved the 
growth of drought-stressed transgenic plants as compared to the wild type by
delaying water depletion from soil and preventing rapid decline in A. L2 and L3
had thicker stems and in case of L3, more xylem rows per vascular bundle, which
may have made L3 more resistant to lodging in the field. Field performance of L2 
and L3 under combined drought and salt stress was significantly better than that 
of the wild type in terms of fresh and dry weights (40%, 46% and 31%, 40%,
respectively). The results provide further evidence for the efficiency of
overexpression of a single gene in improving tolerance to abiotic stress under
field conditions.

PMID: 21340699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2011 Mar;13(2):343-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1438-8677.2010.00375.x.

LeERF-1, a novel AP2/ERF family gene within the B3 subcluster, is down-regulated 
by light signals in Lithospermum erythrorhizon.

Zhang W(1), Zou A, Miao J, Yin Y, Tian R, Pang Y, Yang R, Qi J, Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)NJU-NFU Institute of Plant Molecular Biology, State Key Laboratory of
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, China.

We previously showed that ethylene might be involved in the process of shikonin
biosynthesis regulated by light signals. Here, we cloned a full-length cDNA of
LeERF-1, a putative ethylene response factor gene, from Lithospermum
erythrorhizon using the RACE (rapid amplification of cDNA ends) method.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that LeERF-1 was classified in the B3 subfamily,
together with ERF1 and ORA59 of Arabidopsis. Heterologous expression of LeERF-1
in Arabidopsis showed that LeERF-1:eGFP fusion protein was precisely localised to
the nucleus, implying that it might function as a transcription factor. Detailed 
expression analysis with real-time PCR showed that LeERF-1 was significantly
down-regulated by white, blue and red light, although the inhibitory effect of
red light was relatively weak compared to other light conditions. Tissue-specific
expression analysis also indicated that LeERF-1 was dominantly expressed in the
roots, which grow in soil in darkness. These patterns are all consistent with the
effects of different light signals on regulating formation of shikonin and its
derivatives, indicating that LeERF-1 might be a crucial positive regulator, like 
other B3 subfamily proteins (such as ORCA3 and ORA59), in regulating biosynthesis
of secondary metabolites.

© 2010 German Botanical Society and The Royal Botanical Society of the
Netherlands.

PMID: 21309981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Plant Cell Physiol. 2011 Mar;52(3):578-87. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcr016. Epub 2011 Feb
8.

The jasmonate-responsive element from the ORCA3 promoter from Catharanthus roseus
is active in Arabidopsis and is controlled by the transcription factor AtMYC2.

Montiel G(1), Zarei A, Körbes AP, Memelink J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology Leiden, Sylvius Laboratory, Sylviusweg 72, Leiden
University, PO Box 9505, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands.

Jasmonates are plant signaling molecules that play key roles in protection
against certain pathogens and against insects by switching on the expression of
genes encoding defense proteins including enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of
toxic secondary metabolites. In Catharanthus roseus, the ethylene response factor
(ERF) transcription factor ORCA3 controls the jasmonate-responsive activation of 
terpenoid indole alkaloid biosynthetic genes. ORCA3 gene expression is itself
induced by jasmonate. Its promoter contains an autonomous jasmonate-responsive
element (JRE). Here we describe the jasmonate-responsive activity of the JRE from
the ORCA3 promoter in Arabidopsis thaliana. We found that it interacts in vitro
and in vivo with the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor AtMYC2. Analysis
of JRE-mediated reporter gene expression in an atmyc2-1 mutant background showed 
that the activity was strictly dependent on AtMYC2.

© The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Japanese
Society of Plant Physiologists.

PMID: 21306988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Plant Cell Rep. 2011 Jun;30(6):1107-15. doi: 10.1007/s00299-011-1018-x. Epub 2011
Feb 9.

Efficient sweet pepper transformation mediated by the BABY BOOM transcription
factor.

Heidmann I(1), de Lange B, Lambalk J, Angenent GC, Boutilier K.

Author information: 
(1)Enza Zaden Research and Development B.V, P.O. Box 7, 1600 AA Enkhuizen, The
Netherlands.

Pepper (Capsicum L.) is a nutritionally and economically important crop that is
cultivated throughout the world as a vegetable, condiment, and food additive.
Genetic transformation using Agrobacterium tumefaciens (agrobacterium) is a
powerful biotechnology tool that could be used in pepper to develop
community-based functional genomics resources and to introduce important
agronomic traits. However, pepper is considered to be highly recalcitrant for
agrobacterium-mediated transformation, and current transformation protocols are
either inefficient, cumbersome or highly genotype dependent. The main bottleneck 
in pepper transformation is the inability to generate cells that are competent
for both regeneration and transformation. Here, we report that ectopic expression
of the Brassica napus BABY BOOM AP2/ERF transcription factor overcomes this
bottleneck and can be used to efficiently regenerate transgenic plants from
otherwise recalcitrant sweet pepper (C. annuum) varieties. Transient activation
of BABY BOOM in the progeny plants induced prolific cell regeneration and was
used to produce a large number of somatic embryos that could be converted readily
to seedlings. The data highlight the utility of combining biotechnology and
classical plant tissue culture approaches to develop an efficient transformation 
and regeneration system for a highly recalcitrant vegetable crop.

PMCID: PMC3092944
PMID: 21305301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2011 Mar;49(3):346-51. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2011.01.016. 
Epub 2011 Jan 21.

The drought response displayed by a DRE-binding protein from Triticum
dicoccoides.

Lucas S(1), Durmaz E, Akpinar BA, Budak H.

Author information: 
(1)Sabanci University, Biological Sciences and Bioengineering Program, Tuzla,
Istanbul, Turkey.

Drought is one of the major causes of dramatic yield loss in crop plants.
Knowledge of how to alleviate this loss is still limited due to the complexity of
both the stress condition and plant responses. Wild emmer wheat (Triticum
turgidum ssp. dicoccoides) is a potential source of important drought-resistance 
genes for its cultivated relatives. The gene for an emmer DRE-binding protein,
TdicDRF1, was cloned and shown to be drought-responsive with orthologs in other
plants. This is the first report of the cloning of TdicDRF1, and its expression
was further characterized by RT-PCR in both drought-sensitive and
drought-resistant accessions of Triticum dicoccoides. Analysis of the AP2/ERF
DNA-binding domain of TdicDRF1 as a GST-fusion protein and its binding to DRE by 
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) indicate functional differences
between wheat DREBs and those characterized in Arabidopsis thaliana. DREB
expression increased in drought-stressed roots, correlating with the RT-PCR
results, but not in leaf, showing that tissue-specific regulation occurs at the
protein level. Hence, the DREB-DRE interaction undergoes subtle multi-level
regulation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21296583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proteins. 2011 Apr;79(4):1230-9. doi: 10.1002/prot.22958. Epub 2011 Jan 25.

Prediction of RNA-binding residues in proteins from primary sequence using an
enriched random forest model with a novel hybrid feature.

Ma X(1), Guo J, Wu J, Liu H, Yu J, Xie J, Sun X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, 
People's Republic of China.

The identification of RNA-binding residues in proteins is important in several
areas such as protein function, posttranscriptional regulation and drug design.
We have developed PRBR (Prediction of RNA Binding Residues), a novel method for
identifying RNA-binding residues from amino acid sequences. Our method combines a
hybrid feature with the enriched random forest (ERF) algorithm. The hybrid
feature is composed of predicted secondary structure information and three novel 
features: evolutionary information combined with conservation information of the 
physicochemical properties of amino acids and the information about dependency of
amino acids with regards to polarity-charge and hydrophobicity in the protein
sequences. Our results demonstrate that the PRBR model achieves 0.5637 Matthew's 
correlation coefficient (MCC) and 88.63% overall accuracy (ACC) with 53.70%
sensitivity (SE) and 96.97% specificity (SP). By comparing the performance of
each feature we found that all three novel features contribute to the improved
predictions. Area under the curve (AUC) statistics from receiver operating
characteristic curve analysis was compared between PRBR model and other models.
The results show that PRBR achieves the highest AUC value (0.8675) which
represents that PRBR attains excellent performance on predicting the RNA-binding 
residues in proteins. The PRBR web-server implementation is freely available at
http://www.cbi.seu.edu.cn/PRBR/.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21268114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Plant Mol Biol. 2011 Mar;75(4-5):321-31. doi: 10.1007/s11103-010-9728-y. Epub
2011 Jan 19.

Two GCC boxes and AP2/ERF-domain transcription factor ORA59 in
jasmonate/ethylene-mediated activation of the PDF1.2 promoter in Arabidopsis.

Zarei A(1), Körbes AP, Younessi P, Montiel G, Champion A, Memelink J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Sylvius Laboratory, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9505,
2300 RA, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Plant defense against microbial pathogens depends on the action of several
endogenously produced hormones, including jasmonic acid (JA) and ethylene (ET).
In defense against necrotrophic pathogens, the JA and ET signaling pathways
synergize to activate a specific set of defense genes including PLANT DEFENSIN1.2
(PDF1.2). The APETALA2/Ethylene Response Factor (AP2/ERF)-domain transcription
factor ORA59 acts as the integrator of the JA and ET signaling pathways and is
the key regulator of JA- and ET-responsive PDF1.2 expression. The present study
was aimed at the identification of elements in the PDF1.2 promoter conferring the
synergistic response to JA/ET and interacting with ORA59. We show that the PDF1.2
promoter was activated synergistically by JA and the ET-releasing agent ethephon 
due to the activity of two GCC boxes. ORA59 bound in vitro to these GCC boxes and
trans-activated the PDF1.2 promoter in transient assays via these two boxes.
Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation technique we were able to show that ORA59
bound the PDF1.2 promoter in vivo. Finally, we show that a tetramer of a single
GCC box conferred JA/ethephon-responsive expression, demonstrating that the JA
and ET signaling pathways converge to a single type of GCC box. Therefore ORA59
and two functionally equivalent GCC box binding sites form the module that
enables the PDF1.2 gene to respond synergistically to simultaneous activation of 
the JA and ET signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3044237
PMID: 21246258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Plant Cell. 2011 Jan;23(1):412-27. doi: 10.1105/tpc.110.080325. Epub 2011 Jan 14.

The submergence tolerance regulator SUB1A mediates crosstalk between submergence 
and drought tolerance in rice.

Fukao T(1), Yeung E, Bailey-Serres J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, Center for Plant Cell Biology,
University of California, Riverside, California 92521, USA.

Submergence and drought are major constraints to rice (Oryza sativa) production
in rain-fed farmlands, both of which can occur sequentially during a single crop 
cycle. SUB1A, an ERF transcription factor found in limited rice accessions,
dampens ethylene production and gibberellic acid responsiveness during
submergence, economizing carbohydrate reserves and significantly prolonging
endurance. Here, we evaluated the functional role of SUB1A in acclimation to
dehydration. Comparative analysis of genotypes with and without SUB1A revealed
that SUB1A enhanced recovery from drought at the vegetative stage through
reduction of leaf water loss and lipid peroxidation and increased expression of
genes associated with acclimation to dehydration. Overexpression of SUB1A
augmented ABA responsiveness, thereby activating stress-inducible gene
expression. Paradoxically, vegetative tissue undergoes dehydration upon
desubmergence even though the soil contains sufficient water, indicating that
leaf desiccation occurs in the natural progression of a flooding event.
Desubmergence caused the upregulation of gene transcripts associated with
acclimation to dehydration, with higher induction in SUB1A genotypes. SUB1A also 
restrained accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in aerial tissue during 
drought and desubmergence. Consistently, SUB1A increased the abundance of
transcripts encoding ROS scavenging enzymes, resulting in enhanced tolerance to
oxidative stress. Therefore, in addition to providing robust submergence
tolerance, SUB1A improves survival of rapid dehydration following desubmergence
and water deficit during drought.

PMCID: PMC3051255
PMID: 21239643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 22;5(12):e15773. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015773.

Detection and functional characterization of a 215 amino acid N-terminal
extension in the Xanthomonas type III effector XopD.

Canonne J(1), Marino D, Noël LD, Arechaga I, Pichereaux C, Rossignol M, Roby D,
Rivas S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire des Interactions Plantes Micro-organismes, UMR CNRS-INRA 2594/441,
Castanet Tolosan, France.

During evolution, pathogens have developed a variety of strategies to suppress
plant-triggered immunity and promote successful infection. In Gram-negative
phytopathogenic bacteria, the so-called type III protein secretion system works
as a molecular syringe to inject type III effectors (T3Es) into plant cells. The 
XopD T3E from the strain 85-10 of Xanthomonas campestris pathovar vesicatoria
(Xcv) delays the onset of symptom development and alters basal defence responses 
to promote pathogen growth in infected tomato leaves. XopD was previously
described as a modular protein that contains (i) an N-terminal DNA-binding domain
(DBD), (ii) two tandemly repeated EAR (ERF-associated amphiphillic repression)
motifs involved in transcriptional repression, and (iii) a C-terminal cysteine
protease domain, involved in release of SUMO (small ubiquitin-like modifier) from
SUMO-modified proteins. Here, we show that the XopD protein that is produced and 
secreted by Xcv presents an additional N-terminal extension of 215 amino acids.
Closer analysis of this newly identified N-terminal domain shows a low complexity
region rich in lysine, alanine and glutamic acid residues (KAE-rich) with high
propensity to form coiled-coil structures that confers to XopD the ability to
form dimers when expressed in E. coli. The full length XopD protein identified in
this study (XopD(1-760)) displays stronger repression of the XopD plant target
promoter PR1, as compared to the XopD version annotated in the public databases
(XopD(216-760)). Furthermore, the N-terminal extension of XopD, which is absent
in XopD(216-760), is essential for XopD type III-dependent secretion and,
therefore, for complementation of an Xcv mutant strain deleted from XopD in its
ability to delay symptom development in tomato susceptible cultivars. The
identification of the complete sequence of XopD opens new perspectives for future
studies on the XopD protein and its virulence-associated functions in planta.

PMCID: PMC3008746
PMID: 21203472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2011 Jan 1;3:1-10.

Biomarker discovery and identification from non-small cell lung cancer sera.

Du J(1), Yang SY, Lin XL, Shang WL, Zhang W, Huo SF, Bu LN, Zhang W, Zhou B, Nan 
YD, Zheng HD, Liu YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital of Medical
School, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.

Currently, serum biomarkers might usually be thought not to be used for early
detection of lung cancer by some researchers. In this study, we used a highly
optimized ClinProt-matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of flight
mass spectrometer (MALDI-TOF-MS) to screen non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) 
markers in serum. A training set of spectra derived from 45 NSCLC patients, 24
patients with benign lung diseases (BLDs) and 21 healthy individuals, was used to
develop a proteomic pattern that discriminated cancer from non-cancer
effectively. A test set, including 74 cases (29 NSCLC patients and 45 controls), 
was used to validate this pattern. After cross-validation, the classifier showed 
sensitivity and specificity, 86.20% and 80.00%, respectively. Remarkably, 100% of
early stage serum samples could be correctly classified as lung cancer.
Furthermore, the differential peptides of 1865Da and 4209Da were identified as
element of component 3 and eukaryotic peptide chain release factor GTP-binding
subunit ERF, respectively. The patterns we described and peptides we identified
may have clinical utility as surrogate markers for detection and classification
of NSCLC.

PMID: 21196279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Front Plant Sci. 2011 Sep 26;2:47. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2011.00047. eCollection
2011.

Rewiring of the Jasmonate Signaling Pathway in Arabidopsis during Insect
Herbivory.

Verhage A(1), Vlaardingerbroek I, Raaymakers C, Van Dam NM, Dicke M, Van Wees SC,
Pieterse CM.

Author information: 
(1)Plant-Microbe Interactions, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht
University Utrecht, Netherlands.

Plant defenses against insect herbivores and necrotrophic pathogens are
differentially regulated by different branches of the jasmonic acid (JA)
signaling pathway. In Arabidopsis, the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper
transcription factor (TF) MYC2 and the APETALA2/ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR
(AP2/ERF) domain TF ORA59 antagonistically control these distinct branches of the
JA pathway. Feeding by larvae of the specialist insect herbivore Pieris rapae
activated MYC2 transcription and stimulated expression of the MYC2-branch marker 
gene VSP2, while it suppressed transcription of ORA59 and the ERF-branch marker
gene PDF1.2. Mutant jin1 and jar1-1 plants, which are impaired in the MYC2-branch
of the JA pathway, displayed a strongly enhanced expression of both ORA59 and
PDF1.2 upon herbivory, indicating that in wild-type plants the MYC2-branch is
prioritized over the ERF-branch during insect feeding. Weight gain of P. rapae
larvae in a no-choice setup was not significantly affected, but in a two-choice
setup the larvae consistently preferred jin1 and jar1-1 plants, in which the
ERF-branch was activated, over wild-type Col-0 plants, in which the MYC2-branch
was induced. In MYC2- and ORA59-impaired jin1-1/RNAi-ORA59 plants this preference
was lost, while in ORA59-overexpressing 35S:ORA59 plants it was gained,
suggesting that the herbivores were stimulated to feed from plants that expressed
the ERF-branch rather than that they were deterred by plants that expressed the
MYC2-branch. The feeding preference of the P. rapae larvae could not be linked to
changes in glucosinolate levels. Interestingly, application of larval oral
secretion into wounded leaf tissue stimulated the ERF-branch of the JA pathway,
suggesting that compounds in the oral secretion have the potential to manipulate 
the plant response toward the caterpillar-preferred ERF-regulated branch of the
JA response. Our results suggest that by activating the MYC2-branch of the JA
pathway, plants prevent stimulation of the ERF-branch by the herbivore, thereby
becoming less attractive to the attacker.

PMCID: PMC3355780
PMID: 22645537  [PubMed]


9. BMC Genomics. 2010 Dec 20;11:719. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-719.

Genomic and transcriptomic analysis of the AP2/ERF superfamily in Vitis vinifera.

Licausi F(1), Giorgi FM, Zenoni S, Osti F, Pezzotti M, Perata P.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Lab, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Pisa, Italy. f.licausi@sssup.it

BACKGROUND: The AP2/ERF protein family contains transcription factors that play a
crucial role in plant growth and development and in response to biotic and
abiotic stress conditions in plants. Grapevine (Vitis vinifera) is the only woody
crop whose genome has been fully sequenced. So far, no detailed expression
profile of AP2/ERF-like genes is available for grapevine.
RESULTS: An exhaustive search for AP2/ERF genes was carried out on the Vitis
vinifera genome and their expression profile was analyzed by Real-Time
quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) in different vegetative and reproductive tissues and
under two different ripening stages.One hundred and forty nine sequences,
containing at least one ERF domain, were identified. Specific clusters within the
AP2 and ERF families showed conserved expression patterns reminiscent of other
species and grapevine specific trends related to berry ripening. Moreover,
putative targets of group IX ERFs were identified by co-expression and protein
similarity comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: The grapevine genome contains an amount of AP2/ERF genes comparable 
to that of other dicot species analyzed so far. We observed an increase in the
size of specific groups within the ERF family, probably due to recent duplication
events. Expression analyses in different aerial tissues display common features
previously described in other plant systems and introduce possible new roles for 
members of some ERF groups during fruit ripening. The presented analysis of
AP2/ERF genes in grapevine provides the bases for studying the molecular
regulation of berry development and the ripening process.

PMCID: PMC3022922
PMID: 21171999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Plant Cell Physiol. 2011 Feb;52(2):344-60. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcq196. Epub 2010 Dec
17.

Gene structures, classification and expression models of the AP2/EREBP
transcription factor family in rice.

Sharoni AM(1), Nuruzzaman M, Satoh K, Shimizu T, Kondoh H, Sasaya T, Choi IR,
Omura T, Kikuchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Genome Research Unit, Division of Genome and Biodiversity Research,
National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences (NIAS), Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8602 
Japan.

We identified 163 AP2/EREBP (APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element-binding
protein) genes in rice. We analyzed gene structures, phylogenies, domain
duplication, genome localizations and expression profiles. Conserved amino acid
residues and phylogeny construction using the AP2/ERF conserved domain sequence
suggest that in rice the OsAP2/EREBP gene family can be classified broadly into
four subfamilies [AP2, RAV (related to ABI3/VP1), DREB (dehydration-responsive
element-binding protein) and ERF (ethylene-responsive factor)]. The chromosomal
localizations of the OsAP2/EREBP genes indicated 20 segmental duplication events 
involving 40 genes; 58 redundant OsAP2/EREBP genes were involved in tandem
duplication events. There were fewer introns after segmental duplication. We
investigated expression profiles of this gene family under biotic stresses
[infection with rice viruses such as rice stripe virus (RSV), rice tungro
spherical virus (RTSV) and rice dwarf virus (RDV, three virus strains S, O and
D84)], and various abiotic stresses. Symptoms of virus infection were more severe
in RSV infection than in RTSV and RDV infection. Responses to biotic stresses are
novel findings and these stresses enhance the ability to identify the best
candidate genes for further functional analysis. The genes of subgroup B-5 were
not induced under abiotic treatments whereas they were activated by the three RDV
strains. None of the genes of subgroups A-3 were differentially expressed by any 
of the biotic stresses. Our 44K and 22K microarray results suggest that 53 and 52
non-redundant genes in this family were up-regulated in response to biotic and
abiotic stresses, respectively. We further examined the stress responsiveness of 
most genes by reverse transcription-PCR. The study results should be useful in
selecting candidate genes from specific subgroups for functional analysis.

PMID: 21169347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. BMC Plant Biol. 2010 Dec 16;10:277. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-277.

Isolation and functional characterization of CE1 binding proteins.

Lee SJ(1), Park JH, Lee MH, Yu JH, Kim SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Kumho Life Science Laboratory,
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Chonnam National University, Gwangju
500-757, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Abscisic acid (ABA) is a plant hormone that controls seed
germination, protective responses to various abiotic stresses and seed
maturation. The ABA-dependent processes entail changes in gene expression.
Numerous genes are regulated by ABA, and promoter analyses of the genes revealed 
that cis-elements sharing the ACGTGGC consensus sequence are ubiquitous among
ABA-regulated gene promoters. The importance of the core sequence, which is
generally known as ABA response element (ABRE), has been demonstrated by various 
experiments, and its cognate transcription factors known as ABFs/AREBs have been 
identified. Although necessary, ABRE alone is not sufficient, and another
cis-element known as "coupling element (CE)" is required for full range
ABA-regulation of gene expression. Several CEs are known. However, despite their 
importance, the cognate transcription factors mediating ABA response via CEs have
not been reported to date. Here, we report the isolation of transcription factors
that bind one of the coupling elements, CE1.
RESULTS: To isolate CE1 binding proteins, we carried out yeast one-hybrid
screens. Reporter genes containing a trimer of the CE1 element were prepared and 
introduced into a yeast strain. The yeast was transformed with library DNA that
represents RNA isolated from ABA-treated Arabidopsis seedlings. From the screen
of 3.6 million yeast transformants, we isolated 78 positive clones. Analysis of
the clones revealed that a group of AP2/ERF domain proteins binds the CE1
element. We investigated their expression patterns and analyzed their
overexpression lines to investigate the in vivo functions of the CE element
binding factors (CEBFs). Here, we show that one of the CEBFs, AtERF13, confers
ABA hypersensitivity in Arabidopsis, whereas two other CEBFs enhance sugar
sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that a group of AP2/ERF superfamily proteins
interacts with CE1. Several CEBFs are known to mediate defense or abiotic stress 
response, but the physiological functions of other CEBFs remain to be determined.
Our in vivo functional analysis of several CEBFs suggests that they are likely to
be involved in ABA and/or sugar response. Together with previous results reported
by others, our current data raise an interesting possibility that the coupling
element CE1 may function not only as an ABRE but also as an element mediating
biotic and abiotic stress responses.

PMCID: PMC3016407
PMID: 21162722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 29;5(11):e15025. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015025.

Morphological bases of suppressive and facilitative spatial summation in the
striate cortex of the cat.

Song XM(1), Wang Y, Zhu Z, Li CY.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institutes of Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China.

In V1 of cats and monkeys, activity of neurons evoked by stimuli within the
receptive field can be modulated by stimuli in the extra-receptive field (ERF).
This modulating effect can be suppressive (S-ERF) or facilitatory (F-ERF) and
plays different roles in visual information processing. Little is known about the
cellular bases underlying the different types of ERF modulating effects. Here, we
focus on the morphological differences between the S-ERF and F-ERF neurons.
Single unit activities were recorded from V1 of the cat. The ERF properties of
each neuron were assessed by area-response functions using sinusoidal grating
stimuli. On completion of the functional tests, the cells were injected
intracellularly with biocytin. The labeled cells were reconstructed and
morphologically characterized in terms of the ERF modulation effects. We show
that the vast majority of S-ERF neurons and F-ERF neurons are pyramidal cells and
that the two types of cells clearly differ in the size of the soma, in complexity
of dendrite branching, in spine size and density, and in the range of
innervations of the axon collaterals. We propose that different pyramidal cell
phenotypes reflect a high degree of specificity of neuronal connections
associated with different types of spatial modulation.

PMCID: PMC2994074
PMID: 21151335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Plant J. 2010 Dec;64(6):936-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04384.x. Epub 2010 
Nov 17.

A tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) APETALA2/ERF gene, SlAP2a, is a negative
regulator of fruit ripening.

Chung MY(1), Vrebalov J, Alba R, Lee J, McQuinn R, Chung JD, Klein P, Giovannoni 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research, Tower Road, Cornell University
Campus, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

The transition of fleshy fruit maturation to ripening is regulated by exogenous
and endogenous signals that coordinate the transition of the fruit to a final
state of attractiveness to seed dispersing organisms. Tomato is a model for
biology and genetics regulating specific ripening pathways including ethylene,
carotenoids and cell wall metabolism in addition to upstream signaling and
transcriptional regulators. Ripening-associated transcription factors described
to date including the RIN-MADS, CLEAR NON-RIPENING, TAGL1 and LeHB-1 genes all
encode positive regulators of ripening phenomena. Here we describe an APETALA2
transcription factor (SlAP2a) identified through transcriptional profiling of
fruit maturation that is induced during, and which negatively regulates, tomato
fruit ripening. RNAi repression of SlAP2a results in fruits that over-produce
ethylene, ripen early and modify carotenoid accumulation profiles by altering
carotenoid pathway flux. These results suggest that SlAP2a functions during
normal tomato fruit ripening as a modulator of ripening activity and acts to
balance the activities of positive ripening regulators.

© 2010 The Authors. The Plant Journal © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21143675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Transgenic Res. 2011 Aug;20(4):857-66. doi: 10.1007/s11248-010-9463-9. Epub 2010 
Dec 7.

Overexpression of ethylene response factor TERF2 confers cold tolerance in rice
seedlings.

Tian Y(1), Zhang H, Pan X, Chen X, Zhang Z, Lu X, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
100081, Beijing, China.

Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is a warm-season plant exposed to various stresses. Low
temperature is an important factor limiting extension of rice cultivation areas
and productivity. Previously, we have demonstrated that tomato ERF protein TERF2 
enhances freezing tolerance of transgenic tobacco and tomato plants. Herein, we
report that overexpression of TERF2 enhances transgenic rice tolerance to cold
without affecting growth or agronomic traits. Physiological assays revealed that 
TERF2 could not only increase accumulation of osmotic substances and chlorophyll,
but also reduce reactive oxygen species (ROS) and malondialdehyde (MDA) content
and decrease electrolyte leakage in rice under cold stress. Further analysis of
gene expression showed that TERF2 could activate expression of cold-related
genes, including OsMyb, OsICE1, OsCDPK7, OsSODB, OsFer1, OsTrx23, and OsLti6, in 
transgenic rice plants under natural condition or cold stress. Thus, our findings
demonstrated that TERF2 modulated expression of stress-related genes and a series
of physiological adjustments under cold stress, indicating that TERF2 might have 
important regulatory roles in response to abiotic stress in rice and possess
potential utility in improving crop cold tolerance.

PMID: 21136294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Apr;38(4):2801-11. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0425-3. Epub 2010
Dec 2.

CkDREB gene in Caragana korshinskii is involved in the regulation of stress
response to multiple abiotic stresses as an AP2/EREBP transcription factor.

Wang X(1), Chen X, Liu Y, Gao H, Wang Z, Sun G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science,
2-Yuan-Ming-Yuan West Rd., Haidian District, Beijing, 100193, People's Republic
of China.

Using RACE method, a DREB-like gene-CkDREB, which contains a conserved AP2/ERF
domain, was isolated from Caragana korshinskii. Full length of CkDREB cDNA was
1743 bp, including an ORF of 1038 bp and encoding a polypeptide of 345 amino
acids. CkDREB protein shared high identification with other homologs from other
plants. The KR-rich motif at the N-terminal region played an essential role in
nuclear localization of CkDREB. Yeast one-hybrid experiments testified that
CkDREB possess specific DRE element-binding activity and transcriptional
activation. A variety of abiotic stress, including high salt, dehydration, low
temperature all significantly induced the expression of CkDREB gene. Exogenous
phytohormone ABA also slightly up-regulated the mRNA accumulation of CkDREB.
Overexpression of CkDREB in transgenic tobacco plants resulted in enhanced
tolerance to high salinity and osmotic stresses and induction of downstream
target genes under normal conditions. These results suggested that CkDREB may
play an essential role as a DREB transcription factor in regulation of
stress-responsive signaling in C. korshinskii.

PMID: 21127996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Eur J Popul. 2010 Nov;26(4):459-481. Epub 2010 Oct 28.

Overcoming the Problems of Inconsistent International Migration data: A New
Method Applied to Flows in Europe.

de Beer J, Raymer J, van der Erf R, van Wissen L.

Due to differences in definitions and measurement methods, cross-country
comparisons of international migration patterns are difficult and confusing.
Emigration numbers reported by sending countries tend to differ from the
corresponding immigration numbers reported by receiving countries. In this paper,
a methodology is presented to achieve harmonised estimates of migration flows
benchmarked to a specific definition of duration. This methodology accounts for
both differences in definitions and the effects of measurement error due to, for 
example, under reporting and sampling fluctuations. More specifically, the
differences between the two sets of reported data are overcome by estimating a
set of adjustment factors for each country's immigration and emigration data. The
adjusted data take into account any special cases where the origin-destination
patterns do not match the overall patterns. The new method for harmonising
migration flows that we present is based on earlier efforts by Poulain (European 
Journal of Population, 9(4): 353-381 1993, Working Paper 12, joint ECE-Eurostat
Work Session on Migration Statistics, Geneva, Switzerland 1999) and is
illustrated for movements between 19 European countries from 2002 to 2007. The
results represent a reliable and consistent set of international migration flows 
that can be used for understanding recent changes in migration patterns, as
inputs into population projections and for developing evidence-based migration
policies.

PMCID: PMC2967706
PMID: 21124647  [PubMed]


17. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;699:53-65. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61737-950-5_3.

Quantitative fluorescence measurements with multicolor flow cytometry.

Wang L(1), Gaigalas AK, Yan M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

Multicolor flow cytometer assays are routinely used in clinical laboratories for 
immunophenotyping, -monitoring disease and treatment, and determining prognostic 
factors. However, existing methods for quantitative measurements have not yet
produced satisfactory results. This chapter details a procedure for quantifying
surface and intracellular protein biomarkers by calibrating the output of a
multicolor flow cytometer in units of antibodies bound per cell (ABC). The
procedure includes the following critical steps (a) quality control (QC) of the
multicolor flow cytometer, (b) fluorescence calibration using hard dyed
microspheres assigned with fluorescence intensity values in equivalent number of 
reference fluorophores (ERF), (c) compensation for correction of fluorescence
spillover, and (d) application of a biological reference standard for translating
the ERF scale to the ABC scale. The chapter also points out current efforts for
implementing quantification of biomarkers in a manner which is independent of
instrument platforms and reagent differences.

PMID: 21116978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Aug;38(6):3921-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0508-1. Epub 2010
Nov 30.

Isolation and characterization of an AP2/ERF-RAV transcription factor
BnaRAV-1-HY15 in Brassica napus L. HuYou15.

Zhuang J(1), Sun CC, Zhou XR, Xiong AS, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Crop Breeding and Cultivation Research Institute, Shanghai Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai, 201106, China.

Transcriptional regulation is thought to be important for stress tolerance and
response of transcription factors. RAV subfamily transcription factor contains an
AP2- and B3-DNA binding domain, which belongs to the AP2/ERF family. It encodes
transcriptional regulators with a variety of functions involved in the
developmental and physiological processes in plants. Here, a RAV-like gene,
BnaRAV-1-HY15, was isolated from Brassica napus L. cv HuYou15. Sequence homology 
analysis revealed that the BnaRAV-1-HY15 factor belongs to the RAV subfamily of
the AP2/ERF family, and it shares high identity with the AtRAV2 of Arabidopsis.
Sequence and three-dimensional structural analyses revealed that BnaRAV-1-HY15
contains two distinct DNA-binding domains, one AP2 domain together with one B3
domain. The AP2 domain composed of 54 amino acids and present in N-terminal
region. In addition to AP2 domain, 117 amino acids show significant sequence
similarity to the B3 domain present in C-terminal region. Semi-quantitative
RT-PCR analysis indicated that the BnaRAV-1-HY15 gene is induced by cold, NaCl
and PEG treatments. Under ABA stress, the expression of BnaRAV-1-HY15 gene was
not detected. The gene expression was also not traceable from the tissues of pod,
bud, petal, leaf, stem and root of normally grown B. napus L. HuYou15 plant at
the period of flowering and seed development.

PMID: 21116861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2011 Jan;22(1):84-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jvir.2010.10.003. Epub 
2010 Nov 24.

Esophagorespiratory fistula without stricture: palliative treatment with a barbed
covered metallic stent in the central airway.

Kim JH(1), Shin JH, Song HY, Choi CM, Shim TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiology, Asan Medical
Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: To compare the clinical safety and efficacy of airway placement of
barbed and nonbarbed metallic stents in the treatment of esophagorespiratory
fistula (ERF) without stricture.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The authors prospectively evaluated the clinical results
of 10 patients who underwent fluoroscopically guided placement of barbed, fully
covered, retrievable metallic stents in the trachea or main bronchus for
treatment of ERF without stricture in the esophagus and central airway between
2007 and 2009. The authors compared these outcomes with retrospectively evaluated
clinical outcomes in seven patients who underwent airway placement of nonbarbed, 
fully covered, metallic stents for treatment of ERF without stricture between
1998 and 2001. Study end points included stent migration and clinical success,
defined as effective closure of the fistula with improved aspiration symptoms, or
improvement of dyspnea, within 7 days after stent placement.
RESULTS: Clinical success was observed in nine of ten (90%) of patients who
received barbed stents, compared with two of seven (29%) who were treated with
nonbarbed stents (P = .035). Stent migration within 5 days occurred in zero of
ten and five of seven (57%) patients, respectively (P = .015).
CONCLUSIONS: Placement of barbed, covered metallic stents in the central airway
is safe and effective for closure of ERF without strictures. The barbed design is
effective in preventing stent migration.

Copyright © 2011 SIR. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21106392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2011 Jun;60(1 Suppl):S1-34. doi:
10.1016/j.yrtph.2010.10.002. Epub 2010 Nov 19.

A review of mammalian carcinogenicity study design and potential effects of
alternate test procedures on the safety evaluation of food ingredients.

Hayes AW(1), Dayan AD, Hall WC, Kodell RL, Williams GM, Waddell WD, Slesinski RS,
Kruger CL.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard School of Public Health, 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
awallacehayes@comcast.net

Extensive experience in conducting long term cancer bioassays has been gained
over the past 50 years of animal testing on drugs, pesticides, industrial
chemicals, food additives and consumer products. Testing protocols for the
conduct of carcinogenicity studies in rodents have been developed in Guidelines
promulgated by regulatory agencies, including the US EPA (Environmental
Protection Agency), the US FDA (Food and Drug Administration), the OECD
(Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) for the EU member states
and the MAFF (Ministries of Agriculture, Forestries and Fisheries) and MHW
(Ministry of Health and Welfare) in Japan. The basis of critical elements of the 
study design that lead to an accepted identification of the carcinogenic hazard
of substances in food and beverages is the focus of this review. The approaches
used by entities well-known for carcinogenicity testing and/or guideline
development are discussed. Particular focus is placed on comparison of testing
programs used by the US National Toxicology Program (NTP) and advocated in OECD
guidelines to the testing programs of the European Ramazzini Foundation (ERF), an
organization with numerous published carcinogenicity studies. This focus allows
for a good comparison of differences in approaches to carcinogenicity testing and
allows for a critical consideration of elements important to appropriate
carcinogenicity study designs and practices. OECD protocols serve as good
standard models for carcinogenicity testing protocol design. Additionally, the
detailed design of any protocol should include attention to the rationale for
inclusion of particular elements, including the impact of those elements on study
interpretations. Appropriate interpretation of study results is dependent on
rigorous evaluation of the study design and conduct, including differences from
standard practices. Important considerations are differences in the strain of
animal used, diet and housing practices, rigorousness of test procedures, dose
selection, histopathology procedures, application of historical control data,
statistical evaluations and whether statistical extrapolations are supported by, 
or are beyond the limits of, the data generated. Without due consideration, there
can be result conflicting data interpretations and uncertainty about the
relevance of a study's results to human risk. This paper discusses the critical
elements of rodent (rat) carcinogenicity studies, particularly with respect to
the study of food ingredients. It also highlights study practices and procedures 
that can detract from the appropriate evaluation of human relevance of results,
indicating the importance of adherence to international consensus protocols, such
as those detailed by OECD.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21094668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. New Phytol. 2011 May;190(3):550-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03562.x. Epub
2010 Nov 22.

Regulation of the molecular response to oxygen limitations in plants.

Licausi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Energy Metabolism Research
Group, Potsdam-Golm, Germany. licausi@mpimp-golm.mpg.de

The oxygen availability to plant tissues can vary strongly in time and space. To 
endure short- or long-term oxygen deprivation, plants evolved a series of
metabolic and morphological adaptations that have been extensively studied.
However, our knowledge of the molecular regulation of these processes is not as
well understood. In this review, the recent findings on the molecular effectors
that regulate the response of higher plants to oxygen deficiency are discussed.
Although no direct oxygen sensor has been discovered in plants so far, mechanisms
that perceive low-oxygen derived signals have been reported, involving different 
sets of transcription factors (TFs). The ERF (Ethylene Responsive Factor) family 
especially appears to play a crucial role in the determination of survival to
reduced oxygen availability in Arabidopsis and rice. This class of TFs displays a
broad range of targets, being involved in both the metabolic reprogramming and
the morphological adaptations exploited by plants when subjected to low-oxygen
conditions.

© 2010 The Author. New Phytologist © 2010 New Phytologist Trust.

PMID: 21091695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. BMC Plant Biol. 2010 Nov 4;10:237. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-237.

High level transgenic expression of soybean (Glycine max) GmERF and Gmubi gene
promoters isolated by a novel promoter analysis pipeline.

Hernandez-Garcia CM(1), Bouchard RA, Rushton PJ, Jones ML, Chen X, Timko MP,
Finer JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture and Crop Science, OARDC/The Ohio State University, 
1680 Madison Ave,, Wooster, OH 44691, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although numerous factors can influence gene expression, promoters
are perhaps the most important component of the regulatory control process.
Promoter regions are often defined as a region upstream of the transcriptional
start. They contain regulatory elements that interact with regulatory proteins to
modulate gene expression. Most genes possess their own unique promoter and large 
numbers of promoters are therefore available for study. Unfortunately, relatively
few promoters have been isolated and characterized; particularly from soybean
(Glycine max).
RESULTS: In this research, a bioinformatics approach was first performed to
identify members of the Gmubi (G.max ubiquitin) and the GmERF (G. max Ethylene
Response Factor) gene families of soybean. Ten Gmubi and ten GmERF promoters from
selected genes were cloned upstream of the gfp gene and successfully
characterized using rapid validation tools developed for both transient and
stable expression. Quantification of promoter strength using transient expression
in lima bean (Phaseolus lunatus) cotyledonary tissue and stable expression in
soybean hairy roots showed that the intensity of gfp gene expression was mostly
conserved across the two expression systems. Seven of the ten Gmubi promoters
yielded from 2- to 7-fold higher expression than a standard CaMV35S promoter
while four of the ten GmERF promoters showed from 1.5- to 2.2-times higher GFP
levels compared to the CaMV35S promoter. Quantification of GFP expression in
stably-transformed hairy roots of soybean was variable among roots derived from
different transformation events but consistent among secondary roots, derived
from the same primary transformation events. Molecular analysis of hairy root
events revealed a direct relationship between copy number and expression
intensity; higher copy number events displayed higher GFP expression.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we present expression intensity data on 20 novel
soybean promoters from two different gene families, ubiquitin and ERF. We also
demonstrate the utility of lima bean cotyledons and soybean hairy roots for rapid
promoter analyses and provide novel insights towards the utilization of these
expression systems. The soybean promoters characterized here will be useful for
production of transgenic soybean plants for both basic research and commercial
plant improvement.

PMCID: PMC3095320
PMID: 21050446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genes Genet Syst. 2010;85(3):157-66.

Isolation and characterization of GoDREB encoding an ERF-type protein in forage
legume Galegae orientalis.

Wang X(1), Chen X, Wang Z, Nikolay D, Vladimir C, Gao H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Haidian
District, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

ERF is a unique transcription factor in higher plants with AP2-like DNA-binding
domains. An ERF-like gene was isolated from Galegae orientalis, termed GoDREB.
Sequence alignment showed that it shares high identity with other ERF family
members in AP2 domain. Transient expression analysis indicated that GoDREB
protein is localized in the nucleus. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis results showed 
that GoDREB is induced by a variety of abiotic stress, such as cold, dehydration,
and high-salinity. Exogenous hormones, such as methyl jasmonate acid and
salicylic acid, also up-regulate the expression of GoDREB. However, ABA did not
induce the mRNA accumulation of GoDREB. These results implied that the GoDREB
might play a role in these two hormones-dependent but not be involved in the
ABA-dependent stress signaling pathway. Overexpression of GoDREB in transgenic
tobacco plants resulted in higher tolerance to high salinity, osmotic and
low-temperature stresses. These results suggest that GoDREB may play an essential
role as an ERF transcription factor in regulation of stress-responsive signaling 
in G. orientalis.

PMID: 21041975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 1;70(21):8822-31. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0638. Epub
2010 Oct 26.

EGFR promotes lung tumorigenesis by activating miR-7 through a Ras/ERK/Myc
pathway that targets the Ets2 transcriptional repressor ERF.

Chou YT(1), Lin HH, Lien YC, Wang YH, Hong CF, Kao YR, Lin SC, Chang YC, Lin SY, 
Chen SJ, Chen HC, Yeh SD, Wu CW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences and NRPGM Core Facilities for Proteomics and 
Glycomcis and Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

MicroRNAs (miRNA) mediate distinct gene regulatory pathways triggered by
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation, which occurs commonly in lung
cancers with poor prognosis. In this study, we report the discovery and
mechanistic characterization of the miRNA miR-7 as an oncogenic "oncomiR" and its
role as a key mediator of EGFR signaling in lung cancer cells. EGFR activation or
ectopic expression of Ras as well as c-Myc stimulated miR-7 expression in an
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-dependent manner, suggesting that
EGFR induces miR-7 expression through a Ras/ERK/Myc pathway. In support of this
likelihood, c-Myc bound to the miR-7 promoter and enhanced its activity. Ectopic 
miR-7 promoted cell growth and tumor formation in lung cancer cells,
significantly increasing the mortality of nude mice hosts, which were
orthotopically implanted with lung cancers. Quantitative proteomic analysis
revealed that miR-7 decreased levels of the Ets2 transcriptional repression
factor ERF, the coding sequence of which was found to contain a miR-7
complementary sequence. Indeed, ectopic miR-7 inhibited production of ERF
messages with a wild-type but not a silently mutated coding sequence, and ectopic
miR-7 rescued growth arrest produced by wild-type but not mutated ERF. Together, 
these results identified that ERF is a direct target of miR-7 in lung cancer. Our
findings suggest that miR-7 may act as an important modulator of EGFR-mediated
oncogenesis, with potential applications as a novel prognostic biomarker and
therapeutic target in lung cancer.

©2010 AACR.

PMID: 20978205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Int Breastfeed J. 2010 Oct 26;5:13. doi: 10.1186/1746-4358-5-13.

Gendered perceptions on infant feeding in Eastern Uganda: continued need for
exclusive breastfeeding support.

Engebretsen IM(1), Moland KM, Nankunda J, Karamagi CA, Tylleskär T, Tumwine JK.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for International Health, University of Bergen, Norway.
ingunn.engebretsen@cih.uib.no.

BACKGROUND: In resource-poor settings, HIV positive mothers are recommended to
choose between 'Exclusive breastfeeding' (EBF) or 'Exclusive replacement feeding'
(ERF). Acceptability, Feasibility, Affordability, Sustainability and Safety
(AFASS) has been the World Health Organization (WHO)'s a priori criteria for ERF 
the last ten years. 'AFASS' has become a mere acronym among many workers in the
field of prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HIV, PMTCT. Thereby,
non-breastfeeding has been suggested irrespective of social norms. EBF for the
first half of infancy is associated with huge health benefits for children in
areas where infant mortality is high. But, even if EBF has been recommended for a
decade, few mothers are practicing it. We set out to understand fathers' and
mothers' infant feeding perceptions and the degree to which EBF and ERF were
'AFASS.'
METHODS: Eight focus groups with 81 informants provided information for inductive
content analysis. Four groups were held by men among men and four groups by women
among women in Mbale District, Eastern Uganda.
RESULTS: Two study questions emerged: How are the different feeding options
understood and accepted? And, what are men's and women's responsibilities related
to infant feeding? A mother's commitment to breastfeed and the husband's
commitment to provide for the family came out strongly. Not breastfeeding a
newborn was seen as dangerous and as unacceptable, except in cases of maternal
illness. Men argued that not breastfeeding could entail sanctions by kin or in
court. But, in general, both men and women regarded EBF as 'not enough' or even
'harmful.' Among men, not giving supplements to breast milk was associated with
poverty and men's failure as providers. Women emphasised lack of time,
exhaustion, poverty and hunger as factors for limited breast milk production.
Although women had attended antenatal teaching they expressed a need to know
more. Most men felt left out from health education.
CONCLUSION: Breastfeeding was the expected way to feed the baby, but even with
existing knowledge among mothers, EBF was generally perceived as impossible. ERF 
was overall negatively sanctioned. Greater culture-sensitivity in programs
promoting safer infant feeding in general and in HIV-contexts in particular is
urgently needed, and male involvement is imperative.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The study was part of formative studies for the ongoing study
PROMISE EBF registered at http://clinicaltrials.gov (NCT00397150).

PMCID: PMC2987848
PMID: 20977712  [PubMed]


26. J Integr Plant Biol. 2010 Nov;52(11):1016-26. doi:
10.1111/j.1744-7909.2010.00982.x.

Genome-wide analysis of WOX gene family in rice, sorghum, maize, Arabidopsis and 
poplar.

Zhang X(1), Zong J, Liu J, Yin J, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China.

WUSCHEL-related homeobox (WOX) genes form a large gene family specifically
expressed in plants. They are known to play important roles in regulating the
development of plant tissues and organs by determining cell fate. Recent
available whole genome sequences allow us to do more comprehensive phylogenetic
analysis of the WOX genes in plants. In the present study, we identified 11 and
21 WOXs from sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) and maize (Zea mays), respectively. The 72
WOX genes from rice (Oryza sativa), sorghum, maize, Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis
thaliana) and poplar (Populus trichocarpa) were grouped into three well supported
clades with nine subgroups according to the amino acid sequences of their
homodomains. Their phylogenetic relationship was also supported by the
observation of the motifs outside the homodomain. We observed the variation of
duplication events among the nine sub-groups between monocots and eudicots, for
instance, more gene duplication events of WOXs within subgroup A for monocots,
while, less for dicots in this subgroup. Furthermore, we observed the conserved
intron/exon structural patterns of WOX genes in rice, sorghum and Arabidopsis. In
addition, WUS (Wuschel)-box and EAR (the ERF-associated amphiphilic
repression)-like motif were observed to be conserved among several WOX subgroups 
in these five plants. Comparative analysis of expression patterns of WOX genes in
rice and Arabidopsis suggest that the WOX genes play conserved and various roles 
in plants. This work provides insights into the evolution of the WOX gene family 
and is useful for future research.

© 2010 Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 20977659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Exp Bot. 2011 Jan;62(2):825-40. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erq324. Epub 2010 Oct 25.

Identification and expression analysis of ERF transcription factor genes in
petunia during flower senescence and in response to hormone treatments.

Liu J(1), Li J, Wang H, Fu Z, Liu J, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou
510642, China.

Ethylene-responsive element-binding factor (ERF) genes constitute one of the
largest transcription factor gene families in plants. In Arabidopsis and rice,
only a few ERF genes have been characterized so far. Flower senescence is
associated with increased ethylene production in many flowers. However, the
characterization of ERF genes in flower senescence has not been reported. In this
study, 13 ERF cDNAs were cloned from petunia. Based on the sequence
characterization, these PhERFs could be classified into four of the 12 known ERF 
families. Their predicted amino acid sequences exhibited similarities to ERFs
from other plant species. Expression analyses of PhERF mRNAs were performed in
corollas and gynoecia of petunia flower. The 13 PhERF genes displayed
differential expression patterns and levels during natural flower senescence.
Exogenous ethylene accelerates the transcription of the various PhERF genes, and 
silver thiosulphate (STS) decreased the transcription of several PhERF genes in
corollas and gynoecia. PhERF genes of group VII showed a strong association with 
the rise in ethylene production in both petals and gynoecia, and might be
associated particularly with flower senescence in petunia. The effect of sugar,
methyl jasmonate, and the plant hormones abscisic acid, salicylic acid, and
6-benzyladenine in regulating the different PhERF transcripts was investigated.
Functional nuclear localization signal analyses of two PhERF proteins (PhERF2 and
PhERF3) were carried out using fluorescence microscopy. These results supported a
role for petunia PhERF genes in transcriptional regulation of petunia flower
senescence processes.

PMCID: PMC3003824
PMID: 20974735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Plant Cell. 2010 Oct;22(10):3390-409. doi: 10.1105/tpc.110.078543. Epub 2010 Oct 
19.

Clustered transcription factor genes regulate nicotine biosynthesis in tobacco.

Shoji T(1), Kajikawa M, Hashimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology, Ikoma, Nara, Japan.

Tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) synthesizes nicotine and related pyridine alkaloids
in the root, and their synthesis increases upon herbivory on the leaf via a
jasmonate-mediated signaling cascade. Regulatory NIC loci that positively
regulate nicotine biosynthesis have been genetically identified, and their mutant
alleles have been used to breed low-nicotine tobacco varieties. Here, we report
that the NIC2 locus, originally called locus B, comprises clustered transcription
factor genes of an ethylene response factor (ERF) subfamily; in the nic2 mutant, 
at least seven ERF genes are deleted altogether. Overexpression, suppression, and
dominant repression experiments using transgenic tobacco roots showed both
functional redundancy and divergence among the NIC2-locus ERF genes. These
transcription factors recognized a GCC-box element in the promoter of a nicotine 
pathway gene and specifically activated all known structural genes in the
pathway. The NIC2-locus ERF genes are expressed in the root and upregulated by
jasmonate with kinetics that are distinct among the members. Thus, gene
duplication events generated a cluster of highly homologous transcription factor 
genes with transcriptional and functional diversity. The NIC2-locus ERFs are
close homologs of ORCA3, a jasmonate-responsive transcriptional activator of
indole alkaloid biosynthesis in Catharanthus roseus, indicating that the
NIC2/ORCA3 ERF subfamily was recruited independently to regulate
jasmonate-inducible secondary metabolism in distinct plant lineages.

PMCID: PMC2990138
PMID: 20959558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2011 Jan;36(1):26-51. doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.157. Epub
2010 Oct 6.

How human electrophysiology informs psychopharmacology: from bottom-up driven
processing to top-down control.

Kenemans JL(1), Kähkönen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology and Human Psychopharmacology, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. j.l.kenemans@uu.nl

This review surveys human event-related brain potential (ERP) and event-related
magnetic field (ERF) approaches to psychopharmacology and psychopathology, and
the way in which they complement behavioral studies and other neuroimaging
modalities. The major paradigms involving ERP/ERF are P50 suppression,
loudness-dependent auditory evoked potential (LDAEP), mismatch negativity (MMN), 
P300, mental chronometry, inhibitory control, and conflict processing (eg,
error-related negativity (ERN)). Together these paradigms cover a range of more
bottom-up driven to more top-down controlled processes. A number of relationships
between the major neurotransmitter systems and electrocortical mechanisms are
highlighted. These include the role of dopamine in conflict processing, and
perceptual processing vs motor preparation; the role of serotonin in P50
suppression, LDAEP, and MMN; glutamate/NMDA and MMN; and the role of
acetylcholine in P300 generation and memory-related processes. A preliminary
taxonomy for these relationships is provided, which should be helpful in attuning
possible new treatments or new applications of existing treatments to various
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3055493
PMID: 20927044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Genet Genomics. 2010 Dec;284(6):455-75. doi: 10.1007/s00438-010-0580-1. Epub 
2010 Oct 5.

Identification, phylogeny, and transcript profiling of ERF family genes during
development and abiotic stress treatments in tomato.

Sharma MK(1), Kumar R, Solanke AU, Sharma R, Tyagi AK, Sharma AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Molecular Biology, University of Delhi (South Campus), New
Delhi 110021, India.

Ethylene responsive transcription factors have been shown to be intimately
connected to plant development, defense responses and stress signaling pathways
and in order to use them for plant improvement, we need to have better
understanding of these proteins. In this study, 85 ERF genes have been identified
from tomato using raw EST data in various public repositories. Phylogenetic
analysis with tomato ERF domains revealed their distribution in all the groups,
previously identified in model systems. MEME motif analysis resulted in
identification of conserved domains, characteristic to member of each clade, in
addition to ERF domain. Expression analysis during vegetative and reproductive
stages of development using QPCR and tomato GeneChip arrays, revealed their
tissue-specific/preferential accumulation. In total, 57 genes were found to be
differentially expressed during temporal stages of tomato fruit development. The 
expression analysis of 23 ERF family genes representing each clade in response to
seven abiotic stress treatments revealed their differential expression in
response to more than one abiotic stress treatments. Results suggest that ERF
genes play diverse roles in plant's life and comprehensive data generated will be
helpful in conducting functional genomics studies to understand their precise
role during plant development and stress response.

PMID: 20922546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2010 Sep;13(9):898-902. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2010.09.11.

[Argon plasma coagulation combined with covered stent placement for management of
tracheobronchial stenoses/occlusions as well as esophagorespiratory fistulas].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang H(1), Luo L, Zhou Y, Ma H, Li J, Zou H, Li D, Zhang N.

Author information: 
(1)Minimal Invasive Tumor Therapy Center, Meitan General Hospital, Beijing
100028, China. wanghongwu2008@yahoo.cn

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: It is a complex problem and difficult treatment for
tracheobronchial stenoses/occlusions involving in carina. The aim of this study
is to investigate the feasibility and efficiency of argon plasma coagulation
(APC) and bifurcated covered Z-type stents (CZTS) placement for the treatment of 
tracheobronchus stenoses and esophagorespiratory fistula (ERF).
METHODS: Thirty-two cases with airway disorders were retrospectively reviewed for
the treatment of APC and CZTS placement. Under the bronchoscopic guidance, APC
was first given in patients with airway stenoses, then CZTS was placed under the 
fluoroscopic and flexible bronchoscopic guidance either with airway stenoses or
ERF.
RESULTS: APC was first given in 19 patients with airway stenoses. Airway
structures were significantly improved after APC procedure (57.4%-72.1% before
APC vs 12.8%-25.8% after APC). Thirty-two CZTS were technically successfully
placed in 30 out of 32 cases involving in carinal bifurcation. After APC and
stent placement, short breath index was significantly reduced and karnofsky
physical score (KPS) increased obviously. The endobronchial defects were
successfully palliated with bifurcated CZTS placed under fluoroscopy and flexible
bronchoscopy in 12 out of 13 patients with ERFs. There is no bleeding
introprocedure. Mucous retention was very common in all types of the stents less 
than 2 weeks after stenting, which required debridement by bronchoscopy and could
be prevented by normal saline solution nebulizations. Granuloma developed at the 
ends of stents after 1 month of stenting which all of them were treated
successfully with APC and CO2 cryosurgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Utilization of APC and retrieval bifurcated CZTS placement is a
simple and safe protocol for the management of airway complex stenoses involving 
the tracheal carina and ERF.

PMID: 20840820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Curr Opin Plant Biol. 2010 Oct;13(5):489-94. doi: 10.1016/j.pbi.2010.08.002. Epub
2010 Aug 31.

Life in the balance: a signaling network controlling survival of flooding.

Bailey-Serres J(1), Voesenek LA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Plant Cell Biology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, 
USA. serres@ucr.edu

Recent reports on responses to flooding, submergence, and low-oxygen stress have 
connected components in an essential regulatory network that underlies plasticity
in growth and metabolism essential for the survival of distinct flooding regimes.
Here, we discuss growth under severe oxygen-limited conditions (anaerobic growth)
and less oxygen-deficient underwater conditions (ethylene-driven underwater
growth). Low-oxygen stress causes an energy and carbohydrate crisis that must be 
controlled through regulated consumption of carbohydrates and energy reserves. In
rice (Oryza sativa L.), low-oxygen stress, energy homeostasis and growth are
connected by a calcineurin B-like interacting binding kinase (CIPK) in seeds
germinated under water. In shoots, two opposing adaptive strategies to
submergence, elongation (escape) and inhibition of elongation (quiescence), are
controlled by related ethylene response factor (ERF) DNA binding proteins that
act downstream of ethylene and modulate gibberellin-mediated shoot growth.
Increased resolution of the flooding signaling network will require more precise 
investigation of the interactions between oxygen tension and cellular energy
status in regulation of anaerobic metabolism and ethylene-driven growth, both
essential to survival in variable flooding environments.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20813578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Plant Cell Environ. 2010 Dec;33(12):2209-30. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-3040.2010.02221.x. Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Supra-optimal expression of the cold-regulated OsMyb4 transcription factor in
transgenic rice changes the complexity of transcriptional network with major
effects on stress tolerance and panicle development.

Park MR(1), Yun KY, Mohanty B, Herath V, Xu F, Wijaya E, Bajic VB, Yun SJ, De Los
Reyes BG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology and Ecology, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469, USA.

The R2R3-type OsMyb4 transcription factor of rice has been shown to play a role
in the regulation of osmotic adjustment in heterologous overexpression studies.
However, the exact composition and organization of its underlying transcriptional
network has not been established to be a robust tool for stress tolerance
enhancement by regulon engineering. OsMyb4 network was dissected based on
commonalities between the global chilling stress transcriptome and the
transcriptome configured by OsMyb4 overexpression. OsMyb4 controls a hierarchical
network comprised of several regulatory sub-clusters associated with cellular
defense and rescue, metabolism and development. It regulates target genes either 
directly or indirectly through intermediary MYB, ERF, bZIP, NAC, ARF and
CCAAT-HAP transcription factors. Regulatory sub-clusters have different
combinations of MYB-like, GCC-box-like, ERD1-box-like, ABRE-like, G-box-like,
as1/ocs/TGA-like, AuxRE-like, gibberellic acid response element (GARE)-like and
JAre-like cis-elements. Cold-dependent network activity enhanced cellular
antioxidant capacity through radical scavenging mechanisms and increased
activities of phenylpropanoid and isoprenoid metabolic processes involving
various abscisic acid (ABA), jasmonic acid (JA), salicylic acid (SA), ethylene
and reactive oxygen species (ROS) responsive genes. OsMyb4 network is independent
of drought response element binding protein/C-repeat binding factor (DREB/CBF)
and its sub-regulons operate with possible co-regulators including nuclear
factor-Y. Because of its upstream position in the network hierarchy, OsMyb4
functions quantitatively and pleiotrophically. Supra-optimal expression causes
misexpression of alternative targets with costly trade-offs to panicle
development.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20807373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mol Cells. 2010 Sep;30(3):271-7. doi: 10.1007/s10059-010-0114-z. Epub 2010 Aug
23.

Overexpression of the ethylene-responsive factor gene BrERF4 from Brassica rapa
increases tolerance to salt and drought in Arabidopsis plants.

Seo YJ(1), Park JB, Cho YJ, Jung C, Seo HS, Park SK, Nahm BH, Song JT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Applied Biosciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, 702-701, 
Korea.

Ethylene-responsive factors (ERFs), within a subgroup of the AP2/ERF
transcription factor family, are involved in diverse plant reactions to biotic or
abiotic stresses. Here, we report that overexpression of an ERF gene from
Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis (BrERF4) led to improved tolerance to salt and
drought stresses in Arabidopsis. It also significantly affected the growth and
development of transgenic plants. We detected that salt-induced expressions of a 
transcriptional repressor gene, AtERF4, and some Ser/Thr protein phosphatase2C
genes, ABI1, ABI2 and AtPP2CA, were suppressed in BrERF4-overexpressing
Arabidopsis plants. Furthermore, BrERF4 was induced by treatment with ethylene or
methyljasmonate, but not by abscisic acid or NaCl in B. rapa. These results
suggest that BrERF4 is activated through a network of different signaling
pathways in response to salinity and drought.

PMID: 20803085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. BMB Rep. 2010 Aug;43(8):567-72.

Optimizing the binding activity of the AP2/ERF transcription factor with the GCC 
box element from Brassica napus by directed evolution.

Jin XF(1), Zhu B, Peng RH, Jiang HH, Chen JM, Zhuang J, Zhang J, Yao QH, Xiong
AS.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Shanghai 201106, China.

In this study, we cloned the ERF-B3 subfamily transcription factor gene
BnaERF-B3-hy15 from Brassica napus L. Huyou15. This 600 bp gene encodes a 199
amino acid classic ethylene responsive factor (ERF), which shown no binding or
very weak binding GCC box-binding activity by the yeast one-hybrid assay. We used
gene shuffling and the yeast one-hybrid system to obtain three mutated sequences 
that can bind to the GCC box. Sequence analysis indicated that two residues,
Gly156 in the AP2 domain and Phe62 at the N-terminal domain were mutated to
arginine and serine, respectively. Changes of Gly156 to arginine and Phe62 to
serine increased the GCCbinding activity of BnaERF-B3-hy15 and the alter of
Gly156 to arginine changed the AP2-domain structure of BnaERF-B3- hy15.

PMID: 20797320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2011 Jan;46(1):40-52. doi: 10.3109/00365521.2010.513062.
Epub 2010 Aug 24.

New prebiotics from rice bran ameliorate inflammation in murine colitis models
through the modulation of intestinal homeostasis and the mucosal immune system.

Komiyama Y(1), Andoh A, Fujiwara D, Ohmae H, Araki Y, Fujiyama Y, Mitsuyama K,
Kanauchi O.

Author information: 
(1)Kirin Holdings Co., Central Labs for Frontier Technology, 1-13-5 Fukuura
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Enzyme-treated rice fiber (ERF) is a recently developed prebiotic
product made from rice bran by heat-resistant amylase, protease and hemicellulase
treatment. Although the detailed mechanism of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is
still unclear, the role of the resident luminal bacteria and its interaction on
the mucosal barrier seem to be an important factor in the development of IBD and 
its chronicity. With the objective of manipulating the intestinal microbiota in
IBD, this study was carried out to evaluate the effects of ERF on IBD with using 
experimental colitis models.
METHODS: Three colitis models were used and they were induced by the oral
administration of dextran sodium sulfate in male Sprague-Dawley rats or BALB/c
mice and transferring CD4+ CD45RB(high) T cells to female SCID mice, sequentially
their CD4+ T cells were retransferred to new SCID mice. The evaluation included
the measurement of body weight, spleen weight, colon length, histological
examination, serum and mucosal cytokine (tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a), an 
interferon-gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>), interleukin-12 p70 (IL-12p70), IL-1ß, IL-6, IL-4)
analysis, mucosal serotonin (5HT), and organic acid production and a microbiota
analysis of the cecal contents. The characteristics of T cell surface markers
including CD4, CD69, CD45RB of spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) were also 
analyzed. In addition, the effects of ERF on the change in the induction of
dendritic cells (DCs) were evaluated.
RESULTS: The preventive effect of ERF on colitis was significantly superior to
that of raw material rice bran or control group. An overexpression of
inflammatory cytokine production was attenuated by ERF treatment, which was
accompanied with a decrease in both the colonic mucosal damage and 5HT
production. Furthermore, ERF significantly attenuated the T cell activation
(CD4+CD69+) of spleen and MLN, and this characteristic was inherited by the
retransferred mice. ERF significantly suppressed the growth of Clostiridium, and 
increased short-chain fatty acids (acetate, propionate and butyrate) content in
colitis. The relatively hydrophilic fraction of ERF (ethanol-methanol soluble
fraction) is therefore considered to have a potent ability to attenuate the
induction of DCs.
CONCLUSION: A new prebiotic, ERF, reduced inflammation by modulating the colonic 
environment and regulating immune cell differentiation. Although a more detailed 
study is required, this study showed the promising anti-inflammatory effects of
an adjunctive prebiotic treatment for IBD.

PMID: 20735154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Plant Physiol. 2011 Mar 1;168(4):375-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2010.07.006. Epub
2010 Aug 21.

Functional characterization of three ethylene response factor genes from
Bupleurum kaoi indicates that BkERFs mediate resistance to Botrytis cinerea.

Liu WY(1), Chiou SJ, Ko CY, Lin TY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology & Department of Life
Science, National Tsing Hua University, No. 101 Sec. 2 Kuang Fu Road, Hsinchu,
Taiwan.

Three novel ethylene response factor (ERF) genes, BkERF1, BkERF2.1 and BkERF2.2, 
were isolated from a medicinal plant, Bupleurum kaoi. The deduced BkERFs contain 
a canonical nuclear localization signal and an ERF/AP2 DNA binding domain. RNA
gel blot analysis revealed that BkERF1 and BkERF2.1 were ubiquitously expressed
at low levels in all parts of mature plants, and that BkERF2.2 was expressed at
moderate levels in vegetative tissues. Exogenous application of methyl jasmonate 
induced BkERF1/2.1/2.2 transcripts. BkERF2.2 transcript levels were slightly
increased by addition of ethephon and salicylic acid. BkERFs were localized in
the plant nucleus and functioned as transcriptional activators. In B. kaoi cells 
overexpressing BKERFs, inoculation with Botrytis cinerea increased expression of 
some defense genes which are associated with enhanced disease resistance.
Similarly, overexpression of BkERFs in transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana resulted
in elevated mRNA levels of the defense gene PDF1.2, and in enhanced resistance to
B. cinerea. Collectively, these results provide evidence that BkERFs mediate the 
expression of defense-related genes in plants.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20728241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2010 Oct;88(3):737-50. doi: 10.1007/s00253-010-2822-x.
Epub 2010 Aug 17.

Transcriptional response of the catharanthine biosynthesis pathway to methyl
jasmonate/nitric oxide elicitation in Catharanthus roseus hairy root culture.

Zhou ML(1), Zhu XM, Shao JR, Wu YM, Tang YX.

Author information: 
(1)The School of Life Science, Sichuan Agricultural University, Ya'an, Sichuan
625014, People's Republic of China.

Jasmonates and nitric oxide (NO) play important roles in the regulation of the
signaling network leading to the biosynthesis of plant secondary metabolites. In 
this work, we explore the effect of constitutive overexpression of CrORCA3
(octadecanoid-responsive Catharanthus AP2/ERF domain), methyl jasmonate (MeJA),
and sodium nitroprusside (SNP) on the differentiated tissue of Catharanthus
roseus hairy roots. The changes in catharanthine concentration and in the levels 
of mRNA transcripts of pathway genes and regulators were tracked for 192 h. ORCA3
overexpression led to a slight decrease of the accumulation of catharanthine,
while MeJA treatment caused a large increase in the levels of transcripts of
pathway genes and the catharanthine concentration. SNP treatment alone or SNP in 
combination with MeJA treatment caused a dramatic decrease of the cathanranthine 
concentration, while at the same time the levels of transcripts of zinc
finger-binding proteins genes (ZCTs) increased. The latter treatment also caused 
a decrease of the levels of transcripts of type-I protein prenyltransferase gene 
(PGGT-I). This response of transcriptional repressors and pathway genes may
explain the antagonistic effects of NO and MeJA on catharanthine biosynthesis in 
C. roseus hairy roots.

PMID: 20714717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Plant Physiol. 2010 Oct;154(2):861-73. doi: 10.1104/pp.110.163949. Epub 2010 Aug 
16.

The B-3 ethylene response factor MtERF1-1 mediates resistance to a subset of root
pathogens in Medicago truncatula without adversely affecting symbiosis with
rhizobia.

Anderson JP(1), Lichtenzveig J, Gleason C, Oliver RP, Singh KB.

Author information: 
(1)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Division of
Plant Industry, Floreat, Western Australia, Australia.

The fungal necrotrophic pathogen Rhizoctonia solani is a significant constraint
to a range of crops as diverse as cereals, canola, and legumes. Despite
wide-ranging germplasm screens in many of these crops, no strong genetic
resistance has been identified, suggesting that alternative strategies to improve
resistance are required. In this study, we characterize moderate resistance to R.
solani anastomosis group 8 identified in Medicago truncatula. The activity of the
ethylene- and jasmonate-responsive GCC box promoter element was associated with
moderate resistance, as was the induction of the B-3 subgroup of ethylene
response transcription factors (ERFs). Genes of the B-1 subgroup showed no
significant response to R. solani infection. Overexpression of a B-3 ERF,
MtERF1-1, in Medicago roots increased resistance to R. solani as well as an
oomycete root pathogen, Phytophthora medicaginis, but not root knot nematode.
These results indicate that targeting specific regulators of ethylene defense may
enhance resistance to an important subset of root pathogens. We also demonstrate 
that overexpression of MtERF1-1 enhances disease resistance without apparent
impact on nodulation in the A17 background, while overexpression in sickle
reduced the hypernodulation phenotype. This suggests that under normal regulation
of nodulation, enhanced resistance to root diseases can be uncoupled from
symbiotic plant-microbe interactions in the same tissue and that ethylene/ERF
regulation of nodule number is distinct from the defenses regulated by B-3 ERFs. 
Furthermore, unlike the stunted phenotype previously described for Arabidopsis
(Arabidopsis thaliana) ubiquitously overexpressing B-3 ERFs, overexpression of
MtERF1-1 in M. truncatula roots did not show adverse effects on plant
development.

PMCID: PMC2949043
PMID: 20713618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Planta. 2010 Oct;232(5):1075-86. doi: 10.1007/s00425-010-1235-5. Epub 2010 Aug
10.

Ectopic expression of an EAR motif deletion mutant of SlERF3 enhances tolerance
to salt stress and Ralstonia solanacearum in tomato.

Pan IC(1), Li CW, Su RC, Cheng CP, Lin CS, Chan MT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

Ethylene-responsive transcription factors (ERFs) bind specifically to cis-acting 
DNA regulatory elements such as GCC boxes and play an important role in the
regulation of defense- and stress-related genes in plants. In contrast to other
ERFs, class II ERFs contain an ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) domain
and act as GCC-mediated transcriptional repressors. In this study, SlERF3, a
class II ERF was isolated from tomato and characterized. To examine whether the
EAR motif of class II ERF proteins participates in ERF-mediated functions in
plants, the EAR domain was deleted to generate SlERF3<U+0394>RD. We show that SlERF3<U+0394>RD 
protein retains the character of a transcription factor and becomes a
GCC-mediated transcriptional activator. Constitutive expression of full-length
SlERF3 in tomato severely suppressed growth and, as a result, no transgenic
plants were obtained. However, no apparent effects on growth and development of
SlERF3<U+0394>RD transgenic plants were observed. Overexpression of SlERF3<U+0394>RD in
transgenic tomato induced expression of pathogenesis-related protein genes such
as PR1, PR2 and PR5, and enhanced tolerance to Ralstonia solanacearum.
Furthermore, transgenic Arabidopsis and tomatoes constitutively expressing
SlERF3<U+0394>RD exhibited reduced levels of membrane lipid peroxidation and enhanced
tolerance to salt stress. In comparison with wild-type plants grown under stress 
conditions, transgenic SlERF3<U+0394>RD tomatoes produced more flowers, fruits, and
seeds. This study illustrates a gene-enhancing tolerance to both biotic and
abiotic stresses in transgenic plants with the deletion of a repressor domain.
Our findings suggest that class II ERF proteins may find important use in crop
improvement or genetic engineering to increase stress tolerance in plants.

PMID: 20697739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2010 Nov;51(11):1227-34. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-7610.2010.02289.x.

Social involvement of children with autism spectrum disorders in elementary
school classrooms.

Rotheram-Fuller E(1), Kasari C, Chamberlain B, Locke J.

Author information: 
(1)Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA. erf@temple.edu

BACKGROUND: Children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are increasingly
included in general education classrooms in an effort to improve their social
involvement.
METHODS: Seventy-nine children with ASD and 79 randomly selected, gender-matched 
peers (88.6% male) in 75 early (K-1), middle (2nd-3rd), and late (4th-5th)
elementary classrooms across 30 schools completed social network surveys
examining each child's reciprocal friendships, peer rejection, acceptance, and
social involvement.
RESULTS: Across grade levels, peers less frequently reciprocated friendships with
children with ASD than students in the matched sample. While children with ASD
were not more likely to be rejected by peers, they were less accepted and had
fewer reciprocal friendships than matched peers at each grade level. Although
48.1% of children with ASD were involved in the social networks of their
classrooms, children with ASD were more likely to be isolated or peripheral to
social relationships within the classroom across all grade levels, and this
difference is even more dramatic in later elementary grades.
CONCLUSIONS: In inclusive classrooms, children with ASD are only involved in
peers' social relationships about half of the time, and appear to be even less
connected with increasing grade level. Promoting children with ASD's skills in
popular activities to share with peers in early childhood may be a key preventive
intervention to protect social relationships in late elementary school grades.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry © 2010 Association
for Child and Adolescent Mental Health.

PMCID: PMC2970745
PMID: 20673234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Pharm Biol. 2010 Jun;48(6):703-7. doi: 10.3109/13880200903264418.

Hypoglycemic and antioxidant effects of Rheum franzenbachii extract in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.

Chen ZQ(1), Wang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Food Nutrition and Safety of Ministry of Education, College 
of Food Engineering and Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science &
Technology, Tianjin, PR China. tedvchen@yahoo.com.cn

The hypoglycemic and antioxidant effects of ethanol extract from the roots and
rhizomes of Rheum franzenbachii Münt. (Polygonaceae) were evaluated in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Effects of repeated oral administration of 
ethanol extract (125, 250, and 500 mg/kg body weight) on the plasma glucose level
(PGL), oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), malondialdehyde (MDA), reduced
glutathione (GSH), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and catalase (CAT) in diabetic
rats were examined. It was found that administration of ethanol extract (125,
250, and 500 mg/kg) produced a significant fall in PGL, AUC, and MDA, while
elevating the GSH levels and SOD and CAT activities in diabetic rats. The dose of
500 mg/kg was identified as the most effective dose, with a decrease of 65.8 and 
44.0% in PGL and MDA, and elevation of 72.6, 75.0, and 51.5% in GSH level and SOD
and CAT activities, respectively, after 14 days of ERF administration in diabetic
rats. Moreover, the OGTT studies showed a maximum reduction in PGL and AUC. From 
the active extract of Rheum franzenbachii, two stilbenes, desoxyrhapontigenin (1)
and desoxyrhaponticin (2), were isolated as major constituents. The present study
concludes that the ethanol extract of roots and rhizomes from Rheum franzenbachii
had significant hypoglycemic and antioxidant effects.

PMID: 20645745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Planta. 2010 Aug;232(3):765-74. doi: 10.1007/s00425-010-1208-8. Epub 2010 Jun 24.

Expression of ethylene response factor JERF1 in rice improves tolerance to
drought.

Zhang Z(1), Li F, Li D, Zhang H, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100081, China.

Ethylene response factor (ERF) proteins regulate a variety of stress responses in
plant. JERF1, a tomato ERF protein, can be induced by abscisic acid (ABA).
Overexpression of JERF1 enhanced the tolerance of transgenic tobacco to high salt
concentration, osmotic stress, and low temperature by regulating the expression
of stress-responsive genes by binding to DRE/CRT and GCC-box cis-elements. In
this research, we further report that overexpression of JERF1 significantly
enhanced drought tolerance of transgenic rice. The overexpression activated the
expression of stress-responsive genes and increased the synthesis of the osmolyte
proline by regulating the expression of OsP5CS, encoding the proline biosynthesis
key enzyme deltal-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase. JERF1 also activated the
expression of two ABA biosynthesis key enzyme genes, OsABA2 and Os03g0810800, and
increased the synthesis of ABA in rice. Analysis of cis-elements of
JERF1-targeted genes pointed to the existence of DRE/CRT and/or GCC box in their 
promoters, indicating that JERF1 could activate the expression of related genes
in rice by binding to these cis-elements. Unlike some other ERF proteins,
constructive overexpression of JERF1 did not change the growth and development of
transgenic rice, which makes JEFR1 a potentially useful source in breeding for
greater tolerance to abiotic stress.

PMID: 20574667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Psychiatry. 2011 Jul;16(7):773-83. doi: 10.1038/mp.2010.65. Epub 2010 Jun 22.

Genetic risk profiles for depression and anxiety in adult and elderly cohorts.

Demirkan A(1), Penninx BW, Hek K, Wray NR, Amin N, Aulchenko YS, van Dyck R, de
Geus EJ, Hofman A, Uitterlinden AG, Hottenga JJ, Nolen WA, Oostra BA, Sullivan
PF, Willemsen G, Zitman FG, Tiemeier H, Janssens AC, Boomsma DI, van Duijn CM,
Middeldorp CM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology Unit of the Departments of Epidemiology and Clinical
Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The first generation of genome-wide association studies (GWA studies) for
psychiatric disorders has led to new insights regarding the genetic architecture 
of these disorders. We now start to realize that a larger number of genes, each
with a small contribution, are likely to explain the heritability of psychiatric 
diseases. The contribution of a large number of genes to complex traits can be
analyzed with genome-wide profiling. In a discovery sample, a genetic risk
profile for depression was defined based on a GWA study of 1738 adult cases and
1802 controls. The genetic risk scores were tested in two population-based
samples of elderly participants. The genetic risk profiles were evaluated for
depression and anxiety in the Rotterdam Study cohort and the Erasmus Rucphen
Family (ERF) study. The genetic risk scores were significantly associated with
different measures of depression and explained up to ~0.7% of the variance in
depression in Rotterdam Study and up to ~1% in ERF study. The genetic score for
depression was also significantly associated with anxiety explaining up to 2.1%
in Rotterdam study. These findings suggest the presence of many genetic loci of
small effect that influence both depression and anxiety. Remarkably, the
predictive value of these profiles was as large in the sample of elderly
participants as in the middle-aged samples.

PMCID: PMC3142964
PMID: 20567237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Feb;38(2):1329-40. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0234-8. Epub 2010
Jun 19.

Unraveling new genes associated with seed development and metabolism in Bixa
orellana L. by expressed sequence tag (EST) analysis.

Soares VL(1), Rodrigues SM, de Oliveira TM, de Queiroz TO, Lima LS, Hora-Júnior
BT, Gramacho KP, Micheli F, Cascardo JC, Otoni WC, Gesteira AS, Costa MG.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Estadual de Santa Cruz,
Ilhéus, BA, Brazil.

The tropical tree Bixa orellana L. produces a range of secondary metabolites
which biochemical and molecular biosynthesis basis are not well understood. In
this work we have characterized a set of ESTs from a non-normalized cDNA library 
of B. orellana seeds to obtain information about the main developmental and
metabolic processes taking place in developing seeds and their associated genes. 
After sequencing a set of randomly selected clones, most of the sequences were
assigned with putative functions based on similarity, GO annotations and protein 
domains. The most abundant transcripts encoded proteins associated with cell wall
(prolyl 4-hydroxylase), fatty acid (acyl carrier protein), and hormone/flavonoid 
(2OG-Fe oxygenase) synthesis, germination (MADS FLC-like protein) and embryo
development (AP2/ERF transcription factor) regulation, photosynthesis
(chlorophyll a-b binding protein), cell elongation (MAP65-1a), and stress
responses (metallothionein- and thaumatin-like proteins). Enzymes were assigned
to 16 different metabolic pathways related to both primary and secondary
metabolisms. Characterization of two candidate genes of the bixin biosynthetic
pathway, BoCCD and BoOMT, showed that they belong, respectively, to the
carotenoid-cleavage dioxygenase 4 (CCD4) and caffeic acid O-methyltransferase
(COMT) families, and are up-regulated during seed development. It indicates their
involvement in the synthesis of this commercially important carotenoid pigment in
seeds of B. orellana. Most of the genes identified here are the first
representatives of their gene families in B. orellana.

PMID: 20563648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Integr Plant Biol. 2010 May;52(5):485-95. doi:
10.1111/j.1744-7909.2010.00914.x.

Molecular characterization of three ethylene responsive element binding factor
genes from cotton.

Jin LG(1), Li H, Liu JY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and MOE Laboratory of Protein Science,
Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China.

Ethylene-responsive factors (ERFs) are important regulators of plant gene
expression. In this study, three novel ERF genes, GhERF2, GhERF3 and GhERF6, were
isolated from cotton (Gossypium hirstum) using rapid amplification of cDNA
ends-polymerase chain reaction. Transient expression analysis using GhERF-green
fluorescent protein fusions showed that these three proteins were targeted to the
nucleus. Fusion proteins consisting of GhERF2, GhERF3 or GhERF6 coupled to the
GAL4 DNA binding domain strongly activated transcription in yeast. Furthermore,
GhERF6 was shown to be able to bind specifically to GCC boxes using a particle
bombardment assay in tobacco cells. Semi-quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction revealed that GhERF2 and GhERF3 are
constitutively expressed in all organs, while GhERF6 is only constitutively
expressed in vegetative organs. When plants were treated with ethylene, abscisic 
acid, salt, cold and drought, the transcripts of GhERF2, GhERF3 and GhERF6 were
rapidly induced to high levels. Promoter analysis also indicated that the 5'
upstream regions of the three genes possess elements induced by these
physiological and environmental factors. Collectively, our data suggest that
GhERF2, GhERF3 and GhERF6 might function as positive trans-acting factors in the 
plant responses to ethylene, abscisic acid and other stresses and provide useful 
clues for further research into the mechanism of them in regulating cotton
multiple stress responses.

PMID: 20537044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Plant Signal Behav. 2010 Aug;5(8):932-6. Epub 2010 Aug 1.

Do ethylene response factorS9 and -14 repress PR gene expression in the
interaction between Piriformospora indica and Arabidopsis?

Camehl I(1), Oelmüller R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Plant Physiology, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Jena,
Germany.

The plant hormone ethylene (ET) plays a crucial role in the signalling network
when plants have to respond to biotic stresses. We investigate the beneficial
interaction between the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana and the endophytic
fungus Piriformospora indica. Recently, we showed that ET signalling and ETHYLENE
RESPONSE FACTOR (ERF)1 are important to balance beneficial and nonbeneficial
traits in this symbiosis. 147 ERF genes in Arabidopsis encode transcriptional
regulators with a variety of functions involved in development, physiological
processes as well as plant/microbe interactions. In the beneficial symbiosis
between Arabidopsis and P. indica, overexpression of ERF1 activates defence
responses, strongly reduces root colonization and thus abolishes the benefits for
the plants. Here we show that additional transcription factors of the ERF family,
the ERF DOMAIN PROTEIN9 (ERF9) and the ETHYLENE-RESPONSIVE ELEMENT BINDING
FACTOR14 (ERF14) are involved in the interaction between the two symbionts and
are required for growth promotion of the host plant. Expression of these genes is
upregulated in colonized wild-type roots. Insertional inactivation of ERF9 and
ERF14 diminishes the P. indica-induced growth promotion and activates the
expression of the PATHOGENESIS-RELATED (PR)-1 and PR-2 genes. We propose that
ERF9 and ERF14 repress PR gene expression in colonized Arabidopsis roots and thus
contribute to the establishment of a beneficial interaction.

PMCID: PMC3115165
PMID: 20505369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Klin Khir. 2010 Jan;(1):28-31.

[Estimation of the main indices of external respiration in patients with
mediastinal compression syndrome, caused by mediastinal tumors].

[Article in Russian]

Krasnoiaruzhskii AG.

The results of estimation of the external respiration function (ERF) in 334
patients, treated in 1992-2007 in the clinic for mediastinal compression
syndrome, caused by mediastinal tumors (MT), are adduced. There were delineated
the main trends of investigation of the pulmonary ventilation capacity in
patients with tracheobronchial obstruction, caused by MT. The concept of optimal 
estimation of ERF in such patients was formulated. The ERF indices estimation
permits to determine the ways of operation security enhancement as well as
prognosis conduction and prophylaxis of intra- and postoperative complications
occurrence.

PMID: 20474091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Plant Physiol. 2010 Jul;153(3):1280-92. doi: 10.1104/pp.110.157081. Epub 2010 May
10.

Kiwifruit EIL and ERF genes involved in regulating fruit ripening.

Yin XR(1), Allan AC, Chen KS, Ferguson IB.

Author information: 
(1)New Zealand Institute for Plant and Food Research, Auckland, New Zealand.

Kiwifruit (Actinidia deliciosa) is a climacteric fruit sensitive to low
concentrations of ethylene. To investigate the transcriptional mechanisms
underlying kiwifruit ethylene response, transcription factors encoding four
EIN3-Like (EILs) and 14 Ethylene Response Factors (ERFs) were cloned from
kiwifruit. Expression of these transcription factors was examined during fruit
development. The expression of transcripts of most AdERFs was higher during early
fruit development, with the exception of AdERF3, which increased with maturity.
Several AdERFs were apparently down-regulated by ethylene, as they were affected 
by the ethylene inhibitor 1-methylcyclopropene and by antisense suppression of
ACO (for 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid oxidase) in the fruit. In
contrast, AdEILs were constitutively expressed during fruit development and
ripening. The transcription factors AdEIL2 and AdEIL3 activated transcription of 
the ripening-related genes AdACO1 and AdXET5 (xyloglucan endotransglycosylase
gene) and, when overexpressed in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana), stimulated
ethylene production. The potential repressor AdERF9 suppressed this promoter
activity. These results support a role for kiwifruit EILs and ERFs in
transcriptional regulation of ripening-related genes and in the regulation of
kiwifruit fruit-ripening processes.

PMCID: PMC2899921
PMID: 20457803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Nephron Clin Pract. 2010;115 Suppl 1:c289-308. doi: 10.1159/000301238. Epub 2010 
Mar 31.

UK Renal Registry 12th Annual Report (December 2009): chapter 15: clinical,
haematological and biochemical parameters in patients receiving renal replacement
therapy in paediatric centres in the UK in 2008: national and centre-specific
analyses.

Hussain F(1), Castledine C, van Schalkwyk D, Sinha MD, Lewis M, Inward C.

Author information: 
(1)Nottingham University Hospital, Nottingham, UK. farida.hussain@nuh.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: The British Association for Paediatric Nephrology Registry was
established thirteen years ago to analyse data related to renal replacement
therapy for children. The registry receives data from the 13 paediatric
nephrology centres in the UK. In 2008 the registry was relocated to the UK Renal 
Registry (UKRR).
AIM: To provide centre specific data so that individual centres can reflect on
the contribution that their data makes to the national picture and to determine
the extent to which their patient parameters meet nationally agreed audit
standards for the management of children with established renal failure.
METHOD: Data were submitted to the UKRR for analysis electronically via renal IT 
systems from 5 centres and on paper-based returns from the remaining centres.
Data were analysed to calculate summary statistics and where applicable the
percentage achieving an audit standard. The standards used were those set out by 
the Renal Association and the National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence.
RESULTS: Data were received from all but one centre. Anthropometric data
confirmed that children with ERF in the UK are short compared with their peers
with no change in recent trends. In the UK as a whole, the control of blood
pressure, anaemia and bone biochemistry is suboptimal, but for some parameters
these appear to be better in the 2008 cohort than in the 1999-2008 cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: Key features of this report are the provision of centre specific
data and comparison of data to audit standards. It is hoped that this information
will provide a basis for discussion and a stimulus to improve the care of
children with ERF.

(c) 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20413953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nephron Clin Pract. 2010;115 Suppl 1:c279-88. doi: 10.1159/000301237. Epub 2010
Mar 31.

UK Renal Registry 12th Annual Report (December 2009): chapter 14: demography of
the UK paediatric renal replacement therapy population in 2008.

Lewis MA(1), Shaw J, Sinha MD, Adalat S, Hussain F, Castledine C, van Schalkwyk
D, Inward C.

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Childrens Hospital, Manchester, UK. malcolm.lewis@nhs.net

AIMS: To describe the demographics of the paediatric RRT population in the UK and
analyse changes in demographics with time.
METHODS: Extraction and analysis of data from the UK Paediatric Renal Registry
and the UK Renal Registry (UKRR).
RESULTS: The UK paediatric established renal failure (ERF) population in December
2008 was 905 patients. The prevalence under the age of 16 years was 56 per
million age related population (pmarp) and the incidence 7.4 pmarp. The incidence
and prevalence for South Asian patients was much higher than that of the White
and Black populations. Renal dysplasia was the most common cause of ERF
accounting for 33% of prevalent cases. Diseases with autosomal recessive
inheritance were a common cause of ERF in all ethnic groups, 23.5% of prevalent
and 18% of incident cases. Whilst the incidence and prevalence of diseases with
autosomal recessive inheritance in the South Asian population was 3 times that of
the white population, this was not the sole reason for the increased proportion
of South Asian patients with ERF, as diseases with no defined inheritance were
twice as common in this ethnic group than in White patients. Prevalent mortality 
stood at 9.4%. Most deaths were in patients presenting with ERF early in life and
mortality varied markedly according to the aetiology of ERF. The proportion with 
new grafts from living donors has steadily risen to 54%. Children from ethnic
minority groups were less likely to have an allograft and living donation was
less frequent in this population. For those on dialysis, 56% were receiving
peritoneal dialysis. This was the main treatment modality for patients under 4
years of age.
CONCLUSIONS: The paediatric ERF population continued to expand slowly. Incidence 
and prevalence rates were stable and similar to other developed nations. The high
incidence in patients from ethnic minority groups will lead to a greater
proportion of the population being from these groups in time. To maintain the
high proportion of engrafted patients it will be necessary to encourage living
donation in the ethnic minority population. Case note analysis of the factors
involved in mortality would be valuable.

(c) 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20413952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nephron Clin Pract. 2010;115 Suppl 1:c261-70. doi: 10.1159/000301235. Epub 2010
Mar 31.

UK Renal Registry 12th Annual Report (December 2009): chapter 12: epidemiology of
methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteraemia amongst patients
receiving dialysis for established renal failure in England in 2008: a joint
report from the UK Renal Registry and the Health Protection Agency.

Fluck R(1), Wilson J, Tomson CR.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Derby Hospital, Derby, UK. richard.fluck@nhs.net

BACKGROUND: From April 2007, all centres providing renal replacement therapy in
England were asked to provide additional data on patients with Methicillin
Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) bacteraemia using a secure web based
system established to capture data for the mandatory surveillance of MRSA
bacteremia.
RESULTS: From April 2008 until March 2009 171 discrete episodes of MRSA
bacteraemia were identified from the Health Protection Agency database as being
potentially associated with patients in established renal failure (ERF) requiring
dialysis. Of 171 records, 18 records were rejected by renal centres as not being 
associated with patients on dialysis or as being duplicates of other records.
Following data validation by centres, 139 patients had vascular access documented
(no episodes of bacteraemia were recorded amongst patients receiving peritoneal
dialysis). Of these patients, 30.2% were utilising an arteriovenous fistula or
graft and 69.8% were dialysing on a nontunnelled or tunnelled venous catheter.
Two of the patients on arteriovenous fistulae had used venous catheters in the
prior 28 days. Eleven patients had more than one episode in the year and
accounted for 30 (20%) of the episodes of MRSA bacteraemia. Overall there was a
reduction of 22% in episodes from the previous year. The median centre-specific
rate of MRSA bacteraemia was 0.64 (range 0-3.49) episodes per 100 haemodialysis
patients per year, and 0.55 (range 0-2.89) episodes per 100 dialysis
(haemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis combined) patients per year.
CONCLUSIONS: The rate of MRSA bacteraemia in patients requiring long term
dialysis continues to fall within the prevalent dialysis population in England,
but there is still marked variation in centrespecific rates.

(c) 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20413950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. BMC Plant Biol. 2010 Apr 26;10:74. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-74.

The CRF domain defines cytokinin response factor proteins in plants.

Rashotte AM(1), Goertzen LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849-5407,
USA. rashotte@auburn.edu

BACKGROUND: Cytokinin Response Factors (CRFs) are a small subset of AP2/ERF
transcription factor genes shown in Arabidopsis to regulate leaf development as
part of the cytokinin signal transduction pathway. This study examines the
phylogenetic distribution of CRF genes in other plant species, and attempts to
identify the extent of sequence conservation and potential gene function among
all CRF genes.
RESULTS: We identified CRF genes in representatives of all major land plant
lineages, including numerous flowering plant taxa in addition to the model
systems in which ERF genes have been catalogued. Comparative analysis across this
broader sampling has identified strongly conserved amino acid motifs other than
the AP2/ERF domain for all CRF proteins as well as signature sequences unique to 
specific clades of CRF genes. One of these motifs, here designated as the CRF
domain, is conserved in and unique to CRF proteins distinguishing them from
related genes. We show that this novel domain of approximately 65 amino acids is 
found in CRF proteins from all groups of land plants and only in CRF genes.
Phylogenetic analyses suggest that the evolution of CRF genes has included
numerous duplication events. In this phylogenetic context we examine protein
evolution including the gain and loss of accessory domains, correlate these
molecular evolutionary events with experimental data on cytokinin regulation and 
speculate on the function and evolution of the CRF domain within AP2/ERF
transcription factor proteins. We also tested a prediction drawn from the
phylogenetic analyses that four CRF domain containing genes from Tomato,
previously unexamined for cytokinin response, are transcriptionally inducible by 
cytokinin, supporting the link between CRF genes, CRF-specific domains and
cytokinin regulation.
CONCLUSION: CRF genes can be identified in all lineages of land plants, as a
distinct subset of AP2/ERF proteins containing a specific and unique CRF domain. 
The CRF domain can be used to identify previously unclassified predicted genes or
genes identified only as members of the AP2/ERF protein family. CRF domain
presence and phylogenetic relatedness to known Arabidopsis CRF genes predicts
gene function to some extent.

PMCID: PMC3095348
PMID: 20420680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Feb;38(2):745-53. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0162-7. Epub 2010
Apr 21.

Discovery and expression profile analysis of AP2/ERF family genes from Triticum
aestivum.

Zhuang J(1), Chen JM, Yao QH, Xiong F, Sun CC, Zhou XR, Zhang J, Xiong AS.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai, 201106, China.

Throughout its development, common wheat, Triticum aestivum responds to different
kinds of adverse abiotic and biotic stress by expressing specific genes that
allow it to adapt to these stresses. In this process, genes in the AP2/ERF family
encode transcriptional regulators involved in diverse developmental and
physiological processes play critical roles. Here, we established an extensive
picture of the AP2/ERF family genes in wheat. From 960, 174 ESTs of T. aestivum, 
117 putative AP2/ERF family genes were identified by in silico analysis based on 
the presence of the conserved AP2/ERF domain amino acid sequence of Arabidopsis
thaliana. Based on the model species A. thaliana, the AP2/ERF TFs from T.
aestivum were classified into five subfamilies with the following number of
members: DREB (57), ERF (47), AP2 (9), RAV (3) and Soloist (1). Using the
available EST information as a source of expression data, the putative AP2/ERF
family genes from T. aestivum were detected in nine kinds of tissues. Transcripts
of the genes were shown to be most abundant in leaves, followed by roots and
seeds, and the least abundant in stem. Most of the T. aestivum AP2/ERF family
genes showed some tissue specificity.

PMID: 20407836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Pediatr Urol. 2011 Feb;7(1):48-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jpurol.2010.01.018. Epub 2010
Apr 15.

The challenge of maintaining dialysis lines in the under twos.

Paul A(1), Fraser N, Manoharan S, Williams AR, Shenoy MU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Urology, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK. dranupaul@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Hemodialysis (HD) and peritoneal dialysis (PD) are essential
adjuncts in the management of children with established renal failure (ERF), but 
complications are common, particularly in the younger age groups. We reviewed
catheter life and catheter-related complications in children who began chronic
dialysis before the age of 2 years.
METHOD: From the case notes of the children, born between 1990 and 2008, the data
gathered included etiology of ERF, age at first dialysis catheter, complications,
catheter life, and number of PD and HD.
RESULTS: Ninety lines were inserted (40 PD and 50 HD) in 22 children with ERF.
Eleven children were aged <6 months when commencing dialysis, six of whom were
neonates. PD, the preferred modality, was offered to all but two children. Four
children were managed with PD alone. One child died of overwhelming sepsis
secondary to PD peritonitis. Average catheter life for HD was 3 months and PD 9.1
months. Luminal blockage and infection were the commonest reasons for change of
HD catheters. Peritonitis was the commonest factor leading to PD removal.
CONCLUSIONS: Children younger than 2 years can be dialyzed successfully by HD or 
PD but complications are frequent, leading to >2 catheters in the majority.
Chronic dialysis in the very young is achievable and useful, but a high incidence
of catheter changes must be anticipated.

Copyright © 2010 Journal of Pediatric Urology Company. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 20399143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Ter Arkh. 2010;82(1):24-7.

[The clinical efficiency and safety of iodide-bromine balneotherapy in patients
with coronary heart disease concurrent with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease].

[Article in Russian]

Zunnunov ZR.

AIM: to evaluate the efficiency of iodide-bromine balneotherapy (IBB) in patients
with coronary heart disease (CHD) concurrent with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Sixty-six patients with CHD, Functional Class HII stable
angina on exertion concurrent with mild and moderate COPD were examined. Group 1 
included 36 patients with CHD concurrent with mild and moderate COPD (a study
group); Group 2 consisted of 30 patients (a control group). The groups were
matched for age, gender, and concomitant abnormality. The patients from both
groups undergone a complex clinical and instrumental study (clinical and
biochemical study, echocardiography, 24-hour ECG monitoring, EchoCG, external
respiration function (ERF) test. In both groups, CHD and COPD were treated by the
generally accepted standards, Group I patients were additionally given IBB at a
water temperature of 37 degrees C; the concentration of iodine and bromine was
10-15 and 30-40 m/I, respectively; the duration was 10-15 min for 2 consecutive
days, followed by a rest day or every second day; the course comprised 10-12
sessions.
RESULTS: After the course of IBB, there were significant reductions in the number
of anginal attacks and the dose of nitrates weekly, the number of episodes of
supraventricular and ventricular premature contractions, producing no impact on
the cardiac conduction system. The duration of silent myocardial ischemia and the
degree of ST-segment depression significantly reduced. No significant changes
were obtained in the control group. ERF examination confirmed the safety of IBB
used in patients with CHD and COPD.
CONCLUSION: IBB has a beneficial antiischemic activity in patients with CHD
concurrent with COPD, without producing a negative impact on ERF.

PMID: 20364695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Plant Biotechnol J. 2010 May 1;8(4):476-88. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-7652.2009.00492.x. Epub 2010 Mar 11.

Overexpression of an ERF transcription factor TSRF1 improves rice drought
tolerance.

Quan R(1), Hu S, Zhang Z, Zhang H, Zhang Z, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100081, China.

One of the major limitations in rice production is a shortage of water.
Conventional breeding as well as emerging genetic engineering methods may be used
to improve plant stress tolerance. Some transcription factors regulating stress
responsive genes have become important target genes for improving plant drought
tolerance. Previously, we have shown that a tomato ethylene response factor (ERF)
protein TSRF1 that binds to GCC box in the promoters of pathogenesis-related
genes positively regulates pathogen resistance in tomato and tobacco, but
negatively regulates osmotic response in tobacco. Here, we further report the
ability of TSRF1 to regulate osmotic and drought responses in monocot rice. TSRF1
improves the osmotic and drought tolerance of rice seedlings without growth
retardation, as determined by physiological analyses of root and leaf growth,
leaf water loss and survival rate under stress. In addition, the amounts of
proline and soluble sugars in transgenic rice lines increase by 30%-60% compared 
to those in wild-type plants. Moreover, TSRF1 activates the expression of a
putative rice abscisic acid (ABA) synthesis gene SDR, resulting in enhanced ABA
sensitivity in transgenic rice. TSRF1 also increases the expression of MYB, MYC
and proline synthesis and photosynthesis-related genes, probably by binding to
dehydration responsive element and GCC boxes in promoters of the target genes.
These results demonstrate that TSRF1 enhances the osmotic and drought tolerance
of rice by modulating the increase in stress responsive gene expression.

PMID: 20233336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. BMC Plant Biol. 2010 Mar 16;10:47. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-47.

The Arabidopsis EAR-motif-containing protein RAP2.1 functions as an active
transcriptional repressor to keep stress responses under tight control.

Dong CJ(1), Liu JY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and MOE Laboratory of Protein Science, School 
of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Plants respond to abiotic stress through complex regulation of
transcription, including both transcriptional activation and repression.
Dehydration-responsive-element binding protein (DREB)-type transcription factors 
are well known to play important roles in adaptation to abiotic stress. The
mechanisms by which DREB-type transcription factors activate stress-induced gene 
expression have been relatively well studied. However, little is known about how 
DREB-type transcriptional repressors modulate plant stress responses. In this
study, we report the functional analysis of RAP2.1, a DREB-type transcriptional
repressor.
RESULTS: RAP2.1 possesses an APETALA2 (AP2) domain that binds to
dehydration-responsive elements (DREs) and an ERF-associated amphiphilic
repression (EAR) motif, as the repression domain located at the C-terminus of the
protein. Expression of RAP2.1 is strongly induced by drought and cold stress via 
an ABA-independent pathway. Arabidopsis plants overexpressing RAP2.1 show
enhanced sensitivity to cold and drought stresses, while rap2.1-1 and rap2.1-2
T-DNA insertion alleles result in reduced sensitivity to these stresses. The
reduced stress sensitivity of the plant containing the rap2.1 allele can be
genetically complemented by the expression of RAP2.1, but not by the expression
of EAR-motif-mutated RAP2.1. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
analysis has identified Responsive to desiccation/Cold-regulated (RD/COR) genes
as downstream targets of RAP2.1 in vivo. Stress-induced expression of the RD/COR 
genes is repressed by overexpression of RAP2.1 and is increased in plants
expressing the rap2.1 allele. In addition, RAP2.1 can negatively regulate its own
expression by binding to DREs present in its own promoter. Our data suggest that 
RAP2.1 acts as a negative transcriptional regulator in defence responses to cold 
and drought stress in Arabidopsis.
CONCLUSIONS: A hypothetical model for the role of RAP2.1 in modulating plant
responses to cold and drought is proposed in this study. It appears that RAP2.1
acts as a negative "subregulon" of DREB-type activators and is involved in the
precise regulation of expression of stress-related genes, acting to keep stress
responses under tight control.

PMCID: PMC2848764
PMID: 20230648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Funct Integr Genomics. 2010 May;10(2):215-26. doi: 10.1007/s10142-009-0157-4.
Epub 2010 Mar 12.

Overexpression of TaPIEP1, a pathogen-induced ERF gene of wheat, confers
host-enhanced resistance to fungal pathogen Bipolaris sorokiniana.

Dong N(1), Liu X, Lu Y, Du L, Xu H, Liu H, Xin Z, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)The National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, Key
Laboratory of Crop Genetic and Breeding of Agriculture Ministry, Institute of
Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100081, People's
Republic of China.

Bipolaris sorokiniana is an economically important phytopathogen of wheat and
other cereal species. In this paper, a novel pathogen-induced ethylene-responsive
factor (ERF) gene of wheat, TaPIEP1, was isolated and characterized. The
transcript of TaPIEP1 was significantly and rapidly induced by treatments with B.
sorokiniana, and with ethylene (ET), jasmonate (JA), and abscisic acid. Molecular
and biochemical assays demonstrated that TaPIEP1 is a new ERF transcription
activator belonging to B-3c subgroup of the ERF family. Transgenic wheat lines
overexpressing TaPIEP1 were generated by biolistic bombardment and molecular
screening. Compared with the host wheat Yangmai12, six stable transgenic wheat
lines overexpressing TaPIEP1 that exhibited significantly increased resistance to
B. sorokiniana were identified by molecular detection in the T(0)-T(4)
generations and by disease resistance tests. The degree of the enhanced
resistance was correlated with an accumulation of the transcript level of
TaPIEP1. Furthermore, the transcript levels of certain defense-related genes in
the ET/JA pathways were markedly increased in the transgenic wheat plants with
enhanced resistance. These results reveal that TaPIEP1 overexpression in wheat
could obviously improve resistance to B. sorokiniana via activation of some
defense genes, and TaPIEP1 gene may be useful in improving crop resistance to the
pathogen.

PMID: 20225092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Int J Mol Med. 2010 Apr;25(4):547-55.

Preventive effects of enzyme-treated rice fiber in a restraint stress-induced
irritable bowel syndrome model.

Kanauchi O(1), Mitsuyama K, Komiyama Y, Yagi M, Andoh A, Sata M.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratories for Frontier Technology, Kirin Holdings Co. Ltd.,
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 236-0004, Japan. kanauchio@kirin.co.jp

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common health issue that is characterized by 
abdominal pain, abnormal bowel movements, altered visceral perception, and
abnormal metabolism of 5-hydroxy triptamine (serotonin; 5HT). The use of
prebiotics or probiotics treatment for IBS has become increasingly important as
an adjunct to pharmaceutical options. The aim of this study was to determine the 
efficacy of enzyme-treated rice fiber (ERF) on an IBS model. We obtained a new
prebiotic from defatted rice bran that was developed as an insoluble dietary
fiber through amylase and hemicellulase treatment followed by removal of the
soluble fraction. Containing approximately 70% hemicellulose, ERF is utilized by 
lactobacilli and subsequently converted to butyrate using Eubacterium limosum. We
employed a restraint stress IBS model which involved the continuous application
of stress for 4 h per day for 3 days. Polycarbophil Ca (PC) (500 mg/kg body
weight) was used as a positive control and ERF was added to the diet at 4% in
diet. During restraint stress, ERF significantly attenuated urgent fecal
excretion, colonic mucosal 5HT secretion, and hyperalgesthesia compared with the 
control. ERF also significantly increased cecal butyrate production as well as
total organic acid content. PC was only effective in regard to preventing
increases in 5HT levels. Furthermore, there were no significant levels of
pro-inflammatory markers CINC-1 and TNF-alpha among the groups. Although more
detailed studies are needed, the ERF prebiotic demonstrated potency in
attenuating major symptoms of IBS.

PMID: 20198303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jul;38(12):3952-62. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq096. Epub 2010
Mar 1.

Detection of novel recombinases in bacteriophage genomes unveils Rad52, Rad51 and
Gp2.5 remote homologs.

Lopes A(1), Amarir-Bouhram J, Faure G, Petit MA, Guerois R.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, iBiTecS, F-91191 Gif sur Yvette, France.

Homologous recombination is a key in contributing to bacteriophages genome
repair, circularization and replication. No less than six kinds of recombinase
genes have been reported so far in bacteriophage genomes, two (UvsX and Gp2.5)
from virulent, and four (Sak, Red beta, Erf and Sak4) from temperate phages.
Using profile-profile comparisons, structure-based modelling and gene-context
analyses, we provide new views on the global landscape of recombinases in 465
bacteriophages. We show that Sak, Red beta and Erf belong to a common large
superfamily adopting a shortcut Rad52-like fold. Remote homologs of Sak4 are
predicted to adopt a shortcut Rad51/RecA fold and are discovered widespread among
phage genomes. Unexpectedly, within temperate phages, gene-context analyses also 
pinpointed the presence of distant Gp2.5 homologs, believed to be restricted to
virulent phages. All in all, three major superfamilies of phage recombinases
emerged either related to Rad52-like, Rad51-like or Gp2.5-like proteins. For two 
newly detected recombinases belonging to the Sak4 and Gp2.5 families, we provide 
experimental evidence of their recombination activity in vivo. Temperate versus
virulent lifestyle together with the importance of genome mosaicism is discussed 
in the light of these novel recombinases. Screening for these recombinases in
genomes can be performed at http://biodev.extra.cea.fr/virfam.

PMCID: PMC2896510
PMID: 20194117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Gene. 2010 Jun 1;457(1-2):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2010.02.011. Epub 2010 Feb
26.

The Arabidopsis AP2/ERF transcription factor RAP2.6 participates in ABA, salt and
osmotic stress responses.

Zhu Q(1), Zhang J, Gao X, Tong J, Xiao L, Li W, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 300 Fenglin Road, Shanghai 200032, China.

AP2/ERF proteins play crucial roles in various biological processes. RAP2.6, an
Arabidopsis AP2/ERF family member, has been reported to function in plant
response to biotic stress, but whether it also functions in plant response to
abiotic stress is not known. In this work, we demonstrate that in wild-type
Arabidopsis, the expression of RAP2.6 is responsive to abscisic acid (ABA) and
different stress conditions such as high salt, osmotic stress, and cold.
Trans-activating ability tests in yeast demonstrate that RAP2.6 could act as a
transactivator. RAP2.6 is able to bind to the GCC and CE1 cis-elements, as
confirmed by both electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and yeast
one-hybrid assay. Experiments with RAP2.6-YFP fusion protein indicated that
RAP2.6 is nuclear localized. Overexpression of RAP2.6 conferred hypersensitivity 
to exogenous ABA and abiotic stresses during seed germination and early seedling 
growth in Arabidopsis. The ABA content in RAP2.6 overexpressor lines decreased
after being treated with salt. Furthermore, transcripts of AtABI4 and some stress
inducible genes increased, and loss of ABI4 function rescues the hypersensitive
phenotype of RAP2.6 overexpression lines under ABA and stress treatment. These
results suggest that RAP2.6 participates in abiotic stress, possibly through the 
ABA-dependent pathway.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20193749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Korean J Radiol. 2010 Mar-Apr;11(2):133-40. doi: 10.3348/kjr.2010.11.2.133. Epub 
2010 Feb 22.

Interventional management of esophagorespiratory fistula.

Shin JH(1), Kim JH, Song HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Research Institute of Radiology, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul 138-736, Korea.

An esophagorespiratory fistula (ERF) is an often fatal consequence of esophageal 
or bronchogenic carcinomas. The preferred treatment is placement of esophageal
and/or airway stents. Stent placement must be performed as quickly as possible
since patients with ERFs are at a high risk for aspiration pneumonia. In this
review, choice of stents and stenting area, fistula reopening and its management,
and the long-term outcome in the interventional management of malignant ERFs are 
considered. Lastly, a review of esophagopulmonary fistulas will also be provided.

PMCID: PMC2827775
PMID: 20191059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Plant Mol Biol. 2010 Jun;73(3):241-9. doi: 10.1007/s11103-010-9609-4. Epub 2010
Feb 5.

Enhanced tolerance to freezing in tobacco and tomato overexpressing transcription
factor TERF2/LeERF2 is modulated by ethylene biosynthesis.

Zhang Z(1), Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing, China.

Increasing numbers of investigations indicate that ethylene response factor (ERF)
proteins play important roles in plant stress responses via interacting with GCC 
box and/dehydration-responsive element/C-repeat to modulate expression of
downstream genes, but the detailed regulatory mechanism is not well elucidated.
Revealing the modulation pathway of ERF proteins in response to stresses is
vital. Previously, we showed that tomato ERF protein TERF2/LeERF2 is ethylene
inducible, and ethylene production is suppressed in antisense TERF2/LeERF2
tomatoes, suggesting that TERF2/LeERF2 functions as a positive regulator in
ethylene biosynthesis. In this paper, we report that regulation of TERF2/LeERF2
in ethylene biosynthesis is associated with enhanced freezing tolerance of
tobacco and tomato. Analysis of gene expression showed that cold slowly induces
expression of TERF2/LeERF2 in tomato, implying that TERF2/LeERF2 may be involved 
in cold response through ethylene modulation. To test the hypothesis, we first
observed that overexpressing TERF2/LeERF2 tobaccos not only enhances freezing
tolerance via activating expression of cold-related genes, but also significantly
reduces electrolyte leakage. In addition, with treatment of ethylene biosynthesis
inhibitor or ethylene receptor antagonist, we then showed that blockage of
ethylene biosynthesis or the ethylene signaling pathway decreases freezing
tolerance of overexpressing TERF2/LeERF2 tobaccos. Moreover, the results from
tomatoes showed that overexpressing TERF2/LeERF2 tomatoes enhances while
antisense TERF2/LeERF2 transgenic lines decreases freezing tolerance, and
application of ethylene precursor 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid restored 
freezing tolerance of antisense lines. Therefore our results establish that
TERF2/LeERF2 enhances freezing tolerance of plants through ethylene biosynthesis 
and the ethylene signaling pathway.

PMID: 20135196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Exp Parasitol. 2010 Sep;126(1):42-4. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2010.01.020. Epub
2010 Feb 1.

Free-living amoebae isolated from water-hyacinth root (Eichhornia crassipes).

Ramirez E(1), Robles E, Martinez B.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Conservation and Improvement Project, FES Iztacala, National
Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico. erf@servidor.unam.mx

Free-living amoebae are widely distributed in aquatic environments and their
hygienic, medical and ecological relationships to man are increasingly important.
The purpose of this study was to isolate free-living amoebae from water-hyacinth 
root (Eichhornia crassipes) and the water of an urban lake in Mexico City. Five
grams of wet root were seeded on non-nutritive agar with Enterobacter aerogenes
(NNE). Water samples were concentrated by centrifugation at 1200g for 15min and
the pellet was seeded on NNE. Of the 16 isolated genera, 10 were detected in both
habitats. The most frequent were Vannella in root and Acanthamoeba and Naegleria 
in water. The total number of isolates and genera isolated from root was higher
than that isolated from water. The differences between root and water are
probably due to the morphological characteristics of water-hyacinth root, which
provides a large habitat and refuge area for many organisms.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20117108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Plant J. 2010 Apr;62(2):302-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04149.x. Epub 2010 
Jan 22.

HRE1 and HRE2, two hypoxia-inducible ethylene response factors, affect anaerobic 
responses in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Licausi F(1), van Dongen JT, Giuntoli B, Novi G, Santaniello A, Geigenberger P,
Perata P.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Lab, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Piazza Martiri della Libertà 33, 56127 
Pisa, Italy.

Plants often experience challenging hypoxic conditions imposed by soil
waterlogging or complete flooding. In rice, Sub1A, a flooding-induced ethylene
responsive factor (ERF) plays a crucial role in submergence tolerance. In this
study, we examined two Arabidopsis Hypoxia Responsive ERF genes (HRE1 and HRE2), 
belonging to the same ERF group as Sub1A. Transgenic Arabidopsis plants, which
over-expressed HRE1, showed an improved tolerance of anoxia, whereas a
double-knockout mutant hre1hre2 was more susceptible than the wild type. HRE1
over-expressing plants showed an increased activity in the fermentative enzymes
pyruvate decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase together with increased ethanol 
production under hypoxia, but not in normoxia. Whole-genome microarray analyses
suggested that an over-expression of HRE1, but not HRE2, increased the induction 
of most anaerobic genes under hypoxia. Real-time quantitative (q)PCR analyses
confirmed a positive effect of HRE1 over-expression on several anaerobic genes,
whereas the double-knockout mutant hre1hre2 showed a decreased expression in the 
same genes after 4 h of hypoxia. Single-knockout mutants did not show significant
differences from the wild type. We found that the regulation of HRE1 and HRE2 by 
low oxygen relies on different mechanisms, since HRE1 requires protein synthesis 
to be induced while HRE2 does not. HRE2 is likely to be regulated
post-transcriptionally by mRNA stabilization. We propose that HRE1 and HRE2 play 
a partially redundant role in low oxygen signalling in Arabidopsis thaliana, thus
improving the tolerance of the plant to the stress by enhancing anaerobic gene
expression and ethanolic fermentation.

PMID: 20113439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Plant Physiol. 2010 Mar;152(3):1674-92. doi: 10.1104/pp.109.152157. Epub 2010 Jan
27.

The submergence tolerance regulator Sub1A mediates stress-responsive expression
of AP2/ERF transcription factors.

Jung KH(1), Seo YS, Walia H, Cao P, Fukao T, Canlas PE, Amonpant F, Bailey-Serres
J, Ronald PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis, California
95616, USA.

We previously characterized the rice (Oryza sativa) Submergence1 (Sub1) locus
encoding three ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) transcriptional regulators.
Genotypes carrying the Sub1A-1 allele are tolerant of prolonged submergence. To
elucidate the mechanism of Sub1A-1-mediated tolerance, we performed transcriptome
analyses comparing the temporal submergence response of Sub1A-1-containing
tolerant M202(Sub1) with the intolerant isoline M202 lacking this gene. We
identified 898 genes displaying Sub1A-1-dependent regulation. Integration of the 
expression data with publicly available metabolic pathway data identified
submergence tolerance-associated pathways governing anaerobic respiration,
hormone responses, and antioxidant systems. Of particular interest were a set of 
APETALA2 (AP2)/ERF family transcriptional regulators that are associated with the
Sub1A-1-mediated response upon submergence. Visualization of expression patterns 
of the AP2/ERF superfamily members in a phylogenetic context resolved 12
submergence-regulated AP2/ERFs into three putative functional groups: (1)
anaerobic respiration and cytokinin-mediated delay in senescence via ethylene
accumulation during submergence (three ERFs); (2) negative regulation of
ethylene-dependent gene expression (five ERFs); and (3) negative regulation of
gibberellin-mediated shoot elongation (four ERFs). These results confirm that the
presence of Sub1A-1 impacts multiple pathways of response to submergence.

PMCID: PMC2832257
PMID: 20107022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. BMC Plant Biol. 2010 Jan 25;10:16. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-16.

Transcriptional regulatory network triggered by oxidative signals configures the 
early response mechanisms of japonica rice to chilling stress.

Yun KY(1), Park MR, Mohanty B, Herath V, Xu F, Mauleon R, Wijaya E, Bajic VB,
Bruskiewich R, de Los Reyes BG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology and Ecology, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469, USA.

BACKGROUND: The transcriptional regulatory network involved in low temperature
response leading to acclimation has been established in Arabidopsis. In japonica 
rice, which can only withstand transient exposure to milder cold stress (10
degrees C), an oxidative-mediated network has been proposed to play a key role in
configuring early responses and short-term defenses. The components, hierarchical
organization and physiological consequences of this network were further
dissected by a systems-level approach.
RESULTS: Regulatory clusters responding directly to oxidative signals were
prominent during the initial 6 to 12 hours at 10 degrees C. Early events mirrored
a typical oxidative response based on striking similarities of the transcriptome 
to disease, elicitor and wounding induced processes. Targets of
oxidative-mediated mechanisms are likely regulated by several classes of bZIP
factors acting on as1/ocs/TGA-like element enriched clusters, ERF factors acting 
on GCC-box/JAre-like element enriched clusters and R2R3-MYB factors acting on
MYB2-like element enriched clusters.Temporal induction of several H2O2-induced
bZIP, ERF and MYB genes coincided with the transient H2O2 spikes within the
initial 6 to 12 hours. Oxidative-independent responses involve DREB/CBF, RAP2 and
RAV1 factors acting on DRE/CRT/rav1-like enriched clusters and bZIP factors
acting on ABRE-like enriched clusters. Oxidative-mediated clusters were activated
earlier than ABA-mediated clusters.
CONCLUSION: Genome-wide, physiological and whole-plant level analyses established
a holistic view of chilling stress response mechanism of japonica rice. Early
response regulatory network triggered by oxidative signals is critical for
prolonged survival under sub-optimal temperature. Integration of stress and
developmental responses leads to modulated growth and vigor maintenance
contributing to a delay of plastic injuries.

PMCID: PMC2826336
PMID: 20100339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Transgenic Res. 2010 Oct;19(5):809-18. doi: 10.1007/s11248-009-9357-x. Epub 2010 
Jan 20.

Functional analyses of ethylene response factor JERF3 with the aim of improving
tolerance to drought and osmotic stress in transgenic rice.

Zhang H(1), Liu W, Wan L, Li F, Dai L, Li D, Zhang Z, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
100081, Beijing, China.

Ethylene response factor (ERF) proteins play important roles in regulating plant 
stress response and development. Our previous studies have shown that JERF3
activates the expression of oxidative stress responsive genes in transgenic
tobacco and enhances tolerance to salt, drought, and freezing, indicating that
JERF3 is a very important transcriptional regulator in dicot plants. In the study
reported here, we further addressed the regulatory function of JERF3 in a
monocot, rice, by generating transgenic rice plants overexpressing JERF3 and
comparing these with non-transgenic rice plants for physiological and molecular
alterations and tolerance to drought and osmotic stresses. Growth and development
under normal growth conditions were the same in both the transgenic and
non-transgenic rice. Interestingly, the JERF3 transgenic plants exhibited better 
stress tolerance, whereas the non-transgenic rice seedlings showed serious stress
symptoms and ultimately died after the drought and osmotic treatments.
Biochemical analysis revealed that the contents of soluble sugars and proline
were significantly increased in transgenic rice compared with non-transgenic
plants under dehydration conditions. In addition, overexpression of JERF3 in rice
led to the up-regulated expression of two OsP5CS genes in response to drought
treatment compared with their expression in non-transgenic plants. JERF3 also
activated the expression of stress-responsive genes, including WCOR413-like,
OsEnol, and OsSPDS2, in transgenic rice under normal growth conditions. These
data suggest that JERF3 plays important roles in transgenic rice and that it is
likely to be beneficial in engineering crop plants with improved tolerance to
drought and osmotic stresses.

PMID: 20087656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 12;107(2):900-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0908821107.
Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Modulations in oscillatory activity with amplitude asymmetry can produce
cognitively relevant event-related responses.

van Dijk H(1), van der Werf J, Mazaheri A, Medendorp WP, Jensen O.

Author information: 
(1)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University
Nijmegen, NL-6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
hanneke.vandijk@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

Event-related responses and oscillatory activity are typically regarded as
manifestations of different neural processes. Recent work has nevertheless
revealed a mechanism by which slow event-related responses are created as a
direct consequence of modulations in brain oscillations with nonsinusoidal
properties. It remains unknown if this mechanism applies to cognitively relevant 
event-related responses. Here, we investigated whether sustained event-related
fields (ERFs) measured during working memory maintenance can be explained by
modulations in oscillatory power. In particular, we focused on contralateral
delayed activity (CDA) typically observed in working memory tasks in which
hemifield specific attention is manipulated. Using magnetoencephalography, we
observed sustained posterior ERFs following the presentation of the memory
target. These ERFs were systematically lateralized with respect to the hemisphere
in which the target was presented. A strikingly similar pattern emerged for
modulations in alpha (9-13 Hz) power. The alpha power and ERF lateralization were
strongly correlated over subjects. Based on a mechanistic argument pertaining to 
the nonsinusoidal properties of the alpha activity, we conclude that the ERFs
modulated by working memory are likely to be directly produced by the modulations
in oscillatory alpha activity. Given that posterior alpha activity typically
reflects disengagement, we conclude that the CDA is not attributable to an
additive process reflecting memory maintenance per se but, rather, is a
consequence of how attentional resources are allocated.

PMCID: PMC2818898
PMID: 20080773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2009 Oct;34(20):2564-6.

[Functional genomics of Salvia militiorrhiza IV--analysis of ethylene responsive 
element binding protein gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu B(1), Huang L, Cui G, Mao Y, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chinese Materia Medical, China Academy of Chinese Medicinal
Sciences, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the ethylene responsive element binding protein genes of
Salvia miltiorrhiza through bioinformatics and characterization of its tissue
expression in regenerated plantlets.
METHOD: The ethylene responsive element binding protein genes were obtained by
cDNA microarray analyze. BLAST was used for alignment, ORF finder software was
used to find open reading frame, Prosite database was used to analyze the
protein. Semi-quantitative RT- PCR method was used to detect the gene expression 
level.
RESULT: One ethylene responsive element binding protein was obtained, named as
SmERF. SmERF had an open reading frame of 699 bp with 5'-URT 87 bp and 3'-URT 166
bp. The putative protein SmERF contains a highly conserved ERF/AP2 domain.
Semiquantitative RT- PCR illustrated that SmERF was expressed in all tissues such
as root, stem and leaf in regenerated shoots, while the expression level was
higher in root than in stem and leaf.
CONCLUSION: It was the first time to obtain ERF gene in S. miltiorrhiza and set a
good foundation for its further functional study.

PMID: 20069892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2010 Jul;267(7):1123-7. doi:
10.1007/s00405-009-1198-y. Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Self-expanding metal stents in palliation of malignant dysphagia: outcome of 124 
Egyptian patients.

Elsharkawy AA(1), El-Geidie AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Mansoura University Hospital, Mansoura
University, Mansoura, Egypt. Assersharkawy@yahoo.com

Most cases of esophageal carcinoma are inoperable at presentation. Currently, the
best method for palliation of malignant dysphagia, with or without
esophago-respiratory fistula, is an insertion of esophageal self-expanding metal 
stents (SEMS) across the malignant esophageal stricture. Herein we present our
experience in the use of SEMS in palliation of patients with malignant dysphagia 
and/or ERF. The study included 124 patients (79 males and 45 females) with
advanced esophageal malignancy. The mean age was 54 (43-87) years. Nine patients 
had malignant ERF. All patients were subjected to SEMS insertion under both
endoscopic and fluoroscopic guidance. SEMS insertion was successful in all
patients. Nine patients had two stents. Median dysphagia score improved from 3.5 
to 1.2. ERF was sealed in eight out of the nine patients. Complications related
to stent implementation were reported in 41 patients. In conclusion, insertion of
the SEMS is a reliable, effective, simple and safe method for palliation of
malignant dysphagia with or without ERF.

PMID: 20069308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 1;5(1):e8541. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008541.

Association between type 2 diabetes loci and measures of fatness.

Pecioska S(1), Zillikens MC, Henneman P, Snijders PJ, Oostra BA, van Duijn CM,
Aulchenko YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and Clinical Genetics, Erasmus
Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a metabolic disorder characterized by
disturbances of carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism and insulin resistance. 
The majority of T2D patients are obese and obesity by itself may be a cause of
insulin resistance. Our aim was to evaluate whether the recently identified T2D
risk alleles are associated with human measures of fatness as characterized with 
Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry (DEXA).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Genotypes and phenotypes of approximately 3,000
participants from cross-sectional ERF study were analyzed. Nine single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in CDKN2AB, CDKAL1, FTO, HHEX, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, PPARG,
SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 were genotyped. We used linear regression to study association
between individual SNPs and the combined allelic risk score with body mass index 
(BMI), fat mass index (FMI), fat percentage (FAT), waist circumference (WC) and
waist to hip ratio (WHR). Significant association was observed between rs8050136 
(FTO) and BMI (p = 0.003), FMI (p = 0.007) and WC (p = 0.03); fat percentage was 
borderline significant (p = 0.053). No other SNPs alone or combined in a risk
score demonstrated significant association to the measures of fatness.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: From the recently identified T2D risk variants only the
risk variant of the FTO gene (rs8050136) showed statistically significant
association with BMI, FMI, and WC.

PMCID: PMC2796390
PMID: 20049090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2010 Mar;30(3):143-54. doi: 10.1089/jir.2009.0040.

Efficient plant-based production of chicken interleukin-12 yields a strong
immunostimulatory cytokine.

Medrano G(1), Dolan MC, Stephens NT, McMickle A, Erf G, Radin D, Cramer CL.

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Biosciences Institute, Arkansas State University, Jonesboro, Arkansas
72467, USA.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12), an important immunomodulator for cell-mediated immunity, 
shows significant potential as a vaccine adjuvant and anticancer therapeutic in
mammals. Therapeutic strategies to develop mammalian IL-12 as a vaccine
adjuvant/immunomodulator for promoting cellular immunity and establishing a
Th1-biased immune response further support the potential value of ChIL-12.
Transgenic plants show promise as scalable bioproduction platforms for
challenging biopharmaceutical proteins. We have expressed, characterized, and
purified biologically active ChIL-12 in plants using a rapid
Agrobacterium-mediated tobacco plant-based transient expression system. To ensure
the stoichiometric expression and assembly of p35 and p40, we expressed a
single-chain version of chicken IL-12 (ChIL-12). A histidine 6x tag was used for 
identity and purification of ChIL-12(His) protein. Our results demonstrated
precise cleavage of the endogenous chicken p40 signal peptide in plants as well
as addition of N-linked glycans. Biological activity was confirmed in vitro by
interferon-gamma secretion of ChIL-12-treated chicken splenocytes. In addition,
splenocytes treated with ChIL-12 expressed with or without the His tag
demonstrated comparable ChIFN-gamma induction. These studies indicate that
plant-based platforms for bioproduction of complex pharmaceutical proteins
produce functional ChIL-12 and provide key advantages in safety, scale, and
cost-effective platform for veterinary vaccine and therapeutic applications.

PMID: 20038202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 May-Jun;1799(5-6):454-62. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.11.017. Epub 2009 Nov 27.

DNA binding by the Arabidopsis CBF1 transcription factor requires the
PKKP/RAGRxKFxETRHP signature sequence.

Canella D(1), Gilmour SJ, Kuhn LA, Thomashow MF.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

The CBF/DREB1 transcriptional activators are key regulators of plant freezing
tolerance. They are members of the AP2/ERF multi-gene family, which in
Arabidopsis comprises about 145 members. Common to these proteins is the AP2/ERF 
DNA-binding domain, a 60-amino-acid fold composed of a three-stranded beta-sheet 
followed by a C-terminal alpha-helix. A feature that distinguishes the CBF
proteins from the other AP2/ERF proteins is the presence of "signature
sequences," PKKP/RAGRxKFxETRHP (abbreviated PKKPAGR) and DSAWR, which are located
immediately upstream and downstream, respectively, of the AP2/ERF DNA-binding
domain. The signature sequences are highly conserved in CBF proteins from diverse
plant species suggesting that they have an important functional role. Here we
show that the PKKPAGR sequence of AtCBF1 is essential for its transcriptional
activity. Deletion of the sequence or mutations within it greatly impaired the
ability of CBF1 to induce expression of its target genes. This impairment was not
due to the mutations eliminating CBF1 localization to the nucleus or preventing
protein accumulation. Rather, we show that this loss of function was due to the
mutations greatly impairing the ability of the CBF1 protein to bind to its DNA
recognition sequence, the CRT/DRE element. These results establish that the
ability of the CBF proteins to bind to the CRT/DRE element requires amino acids
that extend beyond the AP2/ERF DNA-binding domain and raise the possibility that 
the PKKPAGR sequence contributes to determining the DNA-binding specificity of
the CBF proteins.

PMID: 19948259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Plant J. 2010 Feb;61(4):570-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.04081.x. Epub 2009
Nov 19.

Detection of protein-protein interactions in plants using the transrepressive
activity of the EAR motif repression domain.

Matsui K(1), Ohme-Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Genome-based Biofactory, National Institute of Advanced 
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba 305-8562, Japan.

The activities of many regulatory factors involve interactions with other
proteins. We demonstrate here that the ERF-associated amphiphilic repression
(EAR) motif repression domain (SRDX) can convert a transcriptional complex into a
repressor via transrepression that is mediated by protein-protein interactions
and show that transrepressive activity of SRDX can be used to detect such
protein-protein interactions. When we fused a protein that interacts with a
transcription factor with SRDX and co-expressed the product with the
transcription factor in plant cells, the expression of genes that are targets of 
the transcription factor was suppressed by transrepression. We demonstrated the
transrepressive activity of SRDX using FOS and JUN as a model system and used two
MADS box plant proteins, PISTILLATA and APETALA3, which are known to form
heterodimers. Furthermore, the transgenic plants that expressed TTG1, which is a 
WD40 protein and interacts with bHLH transcription factors, fused to SRDX
exhibited a phenotype similar to ttg1 mutants by transrepression and the regions 
of TTG1 required for interaction to the bHLH protein were detected using our
system. We also used this system to analyse a protein factor that might be
incorporated into a transcriptional complex and identified an Arabidopsis WD40
protein PWP2 (AtPWP2) interacting with AtTBP1 through comparison of phenotypes
induced by 35S:AtPWP2-SRDX with that induced by the chimeric repressor. Our
results indicate that the transrepression mediated by SRDX can be used to detect 
and confirm protein-protein interactions in plants and should be useful in
identifying factors that form transcriptional protein complexes.

PMID: 19929880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Med Oncol. 2010 Dec;27(4):1234-8. doi: 10.1007/s12032-009-9364-z. Epub 2009 Nov
19.

Clinical implications of esophagorespiratory fistulae in patients with esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (SCCA).

Choi MK(1), Park YH, Hong JY, Park HC, Ahn YC, Kim K, Shim YM, Kang WK, Park K,
Im YH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 50 Irwon-dong, Gangnam-gu,
Seoul, 135-710, South Korea.

In this retrospective study, we investigated the incidence of esophagorespiratory
fistula (ERF) in esophageal squamous cell carcinomas, clinical characteristics
and outcomes of esophageal cancer patient with ERF, and effective therapeutic
options. From 1998 to 2007, 1,095 patients with squamous cell carcinomas of the
esophagus were treated at Samsung Medical Center. A comprehensive retrospective
review of all these patients with clinical data of ERF was performed. The
incidence of ERF in patients with esophageal cancer was 4.7% (52/1095). Comparing
with the patients without ERF, the patients with ERF presented with a more
advanced stage of disease, more frequent involvement of upper-mid thoracic
esophagus, a longer segment of the tumor, and more initial airway involvement.
The median time from the diagnosis of esophageal cancer to the development of a
fistula was 7.9 months. ERF could be divided into three different categories
according to the causes; (1) ERF associated with complication of the cancer
progression (65.4%), (2) ERF related with treatments (28.8%), (3) ERF with mixed 
causes (5.8%). Four patients (8%) received radiation therapy, and nine patients
(17%) underwent surgery to treat the ERF. Many of the patients with ERF were
palliated with esophageal stent (40%) and/or gastrostomy (38%). The median
survival time after diagnosis of the ERF was 8.0 weeks. An ERF resulting from
esophageal cancer entails a poor prognosis in spite of supportive and/or
definitive treatment. More comprehensive approach to improve the course of ERF
and active supportive care, which can prevent complication from leakage, should
be developed.

PMID: 19924573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Jan;298(1):R235-42. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00451.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

Differential expression of vasoactive mediators in microparticle-challenged lungs
of chickens that differ in susceptibility to pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Hamal KR(1), Wideman RF, Anthony NB, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Poultry Science, Univ. of Arkansas, POSC-420, 1260 W. Maple,
Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA. khamal@uark.edu

Pulmonary hypertension syndrome (PHS; ascites) in fast growing meat-type chickens
(broilers) is characterized by the onset of idiopathic pulmonary arterial
hypertension (IPAH) leading to right-sided congestive heart failure and terminal 
ascites. Intravenous microparticle (MP) injection is a tool used by poultry
geneticists to screen for the broilers that are resistant (RES) or susceptible
(SUS) to IPAH in a breeding population. MPs occlude pulmonary arterioles and
initiate focal inflammation, causing local tissues and responding leukocytes to
release vasoactive mediators such as serotonin (5-HT), endothelin-1 (ET-1), and
nitric oxide (NO). RT-PCR was used to examine the differences between RES and SUS
broilers in terms of gene expression of ET-1, ET receptor types A and B (ET(A)
and ET(B)), the serotonin transporter (SERT), serotonin receptors (5-HT(1A),
5-HT(2A), 5-HT(1B), 5-HT(2B)), endothelial NO synthase (eNOS), and inducible NOS 
(iNOS) in the lungs of these broilers before (0 h) and after (2, 6, 12, 24, and
48 h) MP injection. In SUS broilers MP injection elicited higher (P < 0.05)
pulmonary expression of 5-HT(1A), 5-HT(2B), and ET-1, which promote
vasoconstriction and proliferation of pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells
(PASMC). In RES broilers the MP injection elicited higher expression of eNOS,
iNOS, and ET(B), which promote vasodilation and inhibit PASMC proliferation.
These observations support the hypothesis that the resistance of broiler chickens
to IPAH may be due to the higher expression of vasoactive mediators that favor
enhanced vasodilation and attenuated vasoconstriction during MP injection
challenges to the pulmonary vasculature.

PMID: 19907003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2009 Sep-Oct;43(5):789-94.

[Classification of the arabidopsis ERF gene family based on Bayesian analysis].

[Article in Russian]

Goremykin V, Moser C.

ERF proteins are essential transcriptional regulators of different cellular
functions such as response to biotic and abiotic stresses, metabolism and
development. They belong to the AP2/ERF gene superfamily of transcription factors
and are characterized by the presence of a conserved AP2/ERF DNA binding domain
in their sequence. A detailed phylogeny based classification of the ERF genes is 
important because it gives insights into the function of the different members
and sub-groups of the family. We check here the classification of the Arabidopsis
thaliana ERF protein family based on the NJ tree built from the protein distance 
matrix proposed by Nakano and collaborators, employing Bayesian Inference (BI)
with the substitution model fitted to the coding sequences of the conserved
DNA-binding AP2/ERF domain. We expanded the dataset used by Nakano et al. for
phylogeny reconstruction by including the so called VI-like and X-like groups.
Our analysis could not confirm the close affinity of these groups to the groups
VI and X, suggested in the original analysis so we propose to treat them as new
groups XI and XII. Groups VI and IX suggested by Nakano et al. could also not be 
confirmed, as they appeared as paraphyletic assemblages in our analysis. All
other groups suggested by Nakano et al, appeared as monophyla also in our BI
tree. Our findings will contribute to the functional characterization of the
genes belonging to the ERF family.

PMID: 19899626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2009 Dec;23(12):883-95. doi: 10.1007/s10822-009-9306-z.
Epub 2009 Nov 5.

Cardio-vascular safety beyond hERG: in silico modelling of a guinea pig right
atrium assay.

Fenu LA(1), Teisman A, De Buck SS, Sinha VK, Gilissen RA, Nijsen MJ, Mackie CE,
Sanderson WE.

Author information: 
(1)RED/EU, Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Beerse,
Belgium. luca.fenu@gmail.com

As chemists can easily produce large numbers of new potential drug candidates,
there is growing demand for high capacity models that can help in driving the
chemistry towards efficacious and safe candidates before progressing towards more
complex models. Traditionally, the cardiovascular (CV) safety domain plays an
important role in this process, as many preclinical CV biomarkers seem to have
high prognostic value for the clinical outcome. Throughout the industry,
traditional ion channel binding data are generated to drive the early selection
process. Although this assay can generate data at high capacity, it has the
disadvantage of producing high numbers of false negatives. Therefore, our company
applies the isolated guinea pig right atrium (GPRA) assay early-on in discovery. 
This functional multi-channel/multi-receptor model seems much more predictive in 
identifying potential CV liabilities. Unfortunately however, its capacity is
limited, and there is no room for full automation. We assessed the correlation
between ion channel binding and the GPRA's Rate of Contraction (RC), Contractile 
Force (CF), and effective refractory frequency (ERF) measures assay using over
six thousand different data points. Furthermore, the existing experimental
knowledge base was used to develop a set of in silico classification models
attempting to mimic the GPRA inhibitory activity. The Naïve Bayesian classifier
was used to built several models, using the ion channel binding data or in silico
computed properties and structural fingerprints as descriptors. The models were
validated on an independent and diverse test set of 200 reference compounds.
Performances were assessed on the bases of their overall accuracy, sensitivity
and specificity in detecting both active and inactive molecules. Our data show
that all in silico models are highly predictive of actual GPRA data, at a level
equivalent or superior to the ion channel binding assays. Furthermore, the models
were interpreted in terms of the descriptors used to highlight the undesirable
areas in the explored chemical space, specifically regions of low polarity, high 
lipophilicity and high molecular weight. In conclusion, we developed a predictive
in silico model of a complex physiological assay based on a large and high
quality set of experimental data. This model allows high throughput in silico
safety screening based on chemical structure within a given chemical space.

PMID: 19890608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. FEBS J. 2009 Dec;276(23):7177-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07428.x. Epub
2009 Oct 29.

Four divergent Arabidopsis ethylene-responsive element-binding factor domains
bind to a target DNA motif with a universal CG step core recognition and
different flanking bases preference.

Yang S(1), Wang S, Liu X, Yu Y, Yue L, Wang X, Hao D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of the Ministry of
Education, Jilin University, Changchun, China.

The Arabidopsis ethylene-responsive element-binding factor (AtERF) family of
transcription factors has approximately 120 members, all of which possess a
highly conserved ERF domain. AtERF1, AtERF4, AtEBP and CBF1 are members from
different phylogenetic subgroups within the family. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay analyses revealed that the ERF domains of these four proteins were
capable of binding specifically to either GCC or dehydration-responsive element
(DRE) motifs. In vitro and in vivo binding assays of the four AtERFs with the DRE
motif showed that the recognition of the CG step was indispensable in all four of
the specific binding reactions, implying that there may be a universal binding
characteristic of various ERF domains binding to a given consensus (e.g. the DRE 
motif). In addition, the core DNA-binding motifs preferred by the four AtERFs
were identified, and all of these motifs contained a conserved CG step core.
Thus, conserved recognition of the CG step may be the foundation of the formation
of the stable complex by the ERF domain with the DRE motif, which is probably
determined by the highly conserved residues presented in the DNA contact surface 
among the whole AtERF family members. The different preferences at flanking bases
of individual ERF domains, which appear to be attributed to the subfamily- or
subgroup-specific residues, may be essential discrimination of the target binding
motif from various similar sequences by divergent AtERF domains.

PMID: 19878300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Nov;34(5):515-20. doi: 10.1002/uog.7336.

Measurement of compensatory hyperplasia of the contralateral kidney: usefulness
for differential diagnosis of fetal unilateral empty renal fossa.

Cho JY(1), Moon MH, Lee YH, Kim KW, Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea. radjycho@radiol.snu.ac.kr

OBJECTIVE: To assess the usefulness of sonographic evaluation of compensatory
hyperplasia of the contralateral kidney for the differential diagnosis of fetal
unilateral empty renal fossa (ERF).
METHODS: We retrospectively measured the ratio of the anteroposterior (AP) and
transverse (TR) diameters of the contralateral kidney in 24 fetuses with
unilateral ERF including 12 cases of unilateral renal agenesis, six cases of a
unilateral pelvic kidney and six cases of a unilateral ectopic multicystic
dysplastic kidney (MCDK). For the normal reference value, we calculated the AP : 
TR diameter ratios of both kidneys in 20 normal fetuses in the second and third
trimesters. We calculated the accuracy of the AP : TR ratio to detect
contralateral compensatory hyperplasia.
RESULTS: The median (range) AP : TR diameter ratios of the normal kidneys were
0.84 (0.72-0.89) in the second trimester and 0.81 (0.65-0.89) in the third
trimester. All cases of unilateral renal agenesis and ectopic MCDK showed the
presence of compensatory hyperplasia, while no case of renal ectopy was seen with
compensatory hyperplasia. The median (range) ratios for unilateral renal agenesis
and ectopic MCDK were 1.0 (0.95-1.02) and 1.1 (1-1.25) in the second and third
trimesters, respectively. The median ratios for a unilateral pelvic kidney were
0.8 (0.74-0.85) and 0.77 (0.74-0.84) in the second and third trimesters,
respectively. Using 0.9 as the discriminating value, the sensitivity,
specificity, and accuracy of the AP : TR diameter ratio for the prenatal
diagnosis of compensatory renal hyperplasia was 100%.
CONCLUSION: Sonographic evaluation of compensatory hyperplasia of the
contralateral kidney may be useful for the differential diagnosis of a fetal
unilateral ERF. Prospective studies are warranted.

PMID: 19852048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech. 2009 Oct;19(5):364-7. doi:
10.1097/SLE.0b013e3181ba796d.

Palliative management of esophagorespiratory fistula in esophageal malignancy.

Turkyilmaz A(1), Aydin Y, Eroglu A, Bilen Y, Karaoglanoglu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Medical Faculty, Ataturk University, Erzurum, 
Turkey. atilat@atauni.edu.tr

INTRODUCTION: Esophagorespiratory fistula (ERF) is a complication of an
esophageal malignancy that has serious effects on the mortality of a patient,
whose survival is limited to weeks. Sealing of fistula and recovery of swallowing
has greater importance than treating underlying primary malignancy. In this
study, we aimed to present our clinic experience in patients with ERF and to
discuss the findings together with the literature.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Between January 2003 and December 2008, 326 patients with 
malignant esophageal disorder were admitted to our clinic, and ERF detected in 18
(5.5%) patients. There were 10 men and 8 women with a mean age of 54.7+/-11.9
years (range: 34 to 75 y). Metastases in the lung and liver were detected in 4
and 2 patients, respectively. Empyema was found in 3 of the ERF patients.
Pneumonic infiltration was detected via radiologic evaluation in 7 (38.9%) of the
18 patients. Two patients did not accept any intervention. A feeding gastrostomy 
tube was placed in 2 other patients. Fluoroscopy-guided Ultraflex esophageal
stent placement was applied to the remaining 14 patients. Eleven (78.6%) patients
underwent stent placements during generalized anesthesia via rigid esophagoscopy,
and the remaining 3 (21.4%)patients via flexible esophagoscopy with sedation.
RESULTS: One of the patients who did not accept intervention died after 2 weeks, 
and the other died 6 weeks after admission. One of the patients who received a
feeding gastrostomy tube died 17 weeks after admission, and the other was still
alive after a month, when this article was written. Closure of the ERF was seen
in all 14 patients who underwent palliative covered self-expandable metallic
stent placement in the esophagus. No complications occurred in the stent-placed
patients either during or after the procedure. Dyspeptic complaints and pain were
treated successfully with medical therapy in 6 and 5 patients, respectively.
Symptoms of aspiration disappeared after stent placement. No reopened fistulae
were observed during follow-up. Thirteen of the 14 stent-replaced patients died
during follow-up. The mean survival rate for these 13 patients was 11.2 weeks
(range: 1 to 49 wk). The mean length of hospital stay after stent placement in
the 14 patients was 3.7 days (1 to 15 d).
DISCUSSION: Covered self-expandable metallic stent placement in malign ERF
patients is a technically simple and safer method for fistula closure and seems
to be the most effective method that is easily available.

PMID: 19851261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. FEBS J. 2009 Nov;276(22):6624-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07373.x. Epub
2009 Oct 16.

Arabidopsis thaliana BTB/ POZ-MATH proteins interact with members of the ERF/AP2 
transcription factor family.

Weber H(1), Hellmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164, USA.

In Arabidopsis thaliana, the BTB/POZ-MATH (BPM) proteins comprise a small family 
of six members. They have been described previously to use their broad complex,
tram track, bric-a-brac/POX virus and zinc finger (BTB/POZ) domain to assemble
with CUL3a and CUL3b and potentially to serve as substrate adaptors to
cullin-based E3-ligases in plants. In this article, we show that BPMs can also
assemble with members of the ethylene response factor/Apetala2 transcription
factor family, and that this is mediated by their meprin and TRAF (tumor necrosis
factor receptor-associated factor) homology (MATH) domain. In addition, we
provide a detailed description of BPM gene expression patterns in different
tissues and on abiotic stress treatments, as well as their subcellular
localization. This work connects, for the first time, BPM proteins with ethylene 
response factor/Apetala2 family members, which is likely to represent a novel
regulatory mechanism of transcriptional control.

PMID: 19843165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Poult Sci. 2009 Nov;88(11):2346-52. doi: 10.3382/ps.2009-00320.

Acquisition of immunity to the protozoan parasite Eimeria adenoeides in turkey
poults and the peripheral blood leukocyte response to a primary infection.

Gadde U(1), Chapman HD, Rathinam TR, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA.

A primary infection of 12.5 x 10(3) oocysts of Eimeria adenoeides , given to
20-d-old turkey poults, resulted in depression of weight gain, and the production
of large numbers of oocysts in the feces, compared with uninfected controls.
Poults were raised under conditions to prevent possible reinfection to determine 
the ability of the primary infection to confer protective immunity against a
challenge infection of 5 x 10(4) oocysts given at 34 d of age. Using weight gain 
and oocyst production after challenge as criteria for protection, the results
indicated that immunity had developed. The concentration and proportions among
white blood cell (WBC) populations in peripheral blood were determined at
different times after the primary infection. The WBC concentration of infected
poults was elevated on d 7 and 11, primarily due to elevated levels of
lymphocytes and monocytes on d 7 and eosinophils on d 11. There were no
differences in heterophil and basophil concentrations between infected and
uninfected poults at any of the time points examined. With the exception of
increased percentages of eosinophils on d 11, infection was not associated with
alterations in the proportions among WBC populations. Comparison of CD4+ and CD8+
defined lymphocyte subpopulations in the blood of infected versus uninfected
poults revealed higher concentrations of CD4+ lymphocytes on d 11, lower
concentrations of CD8+ cells on d 4, and higher concentrations of CD8+ cells on d
11 of infection, as well as elevated ratios of CD4+:CD8+ lymphocytes in infected 
birds on d 4 and 11. These alterations in WBC profiles after primary E.
adenoeides infection in turkey poults suggest initiation of both innate and
adaptive cellular immune activities designed to effectively cope with a
parasitic, intracellular pathogen.

PMID: 19834085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Feb;37(2):1125-35. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9885-8.

Overexpression of PgDREB2A transcription factor enhances abiotic stress tolerance
and activates downstream stress-responsive genes.

Agarwal P(1), Agarwal PK, Joshi AJ, Sopory SK, Reddy MK.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali
Road, New Delhi, 110 067, India. Parinita.a@rediffmail.com

The DREB transcription factors comprise conserved ERF/AP2 DNA-binding domain,
bind specifically to DRE/CRT motif and regulate abiotic stress mediated gene
expression. In this study we show that PgDREB2A from Pennisetum glaucum is a
powerful transcription factor to engineer multiple stress tolerance in tobacco
plants. The PgDREB2A protein lacks any potential PEST sequence, which is known to
act as a signal peptide for protein degradation. Therefore, the transgenic
tobacco plants were raised using full-length cDNA without modification. The
transgenics exhibited enhanced tolerance to both hyperionic and hyperosmotic
stresses. At lower concentration of NaCl and mannitol, seed germination and
seedling growth was similar in WT and transgenic, however at higher concentration
germination in WT decreased significantly. D15 and D46 lines showed 4-fold higher
germination percent at 200 mM NaCl. At 400 mM mannitol seed germination in WT was
completely arrested, whereas in transgenic line it was more than 50%. Seedlings
of D15 and D46 lines showed better growth like leaf area, root number, root
length and fresh weight compared to wild type for both the stresses. The
quantitative Real time PCR of transgenic showed higher expression of downstream
genes NtERD10B, HSP70-3, Hsp18p, PLC3, AP2 domain TF, THT1, LTP1 and heat shock
(NtHSF2) and pathogen-regulated (NtERF5) factors with different stress
treatments.

PMID: 19826914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Feb;37(2):1137-42. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9886-7.

Isolation and functional characterization of DgZFP: a gene encoding a
Cys2/His2-type zinc finger protein in chrysanthemum.

Liu QL(1), Xu KD, Ma N, Zeng L, Zhao LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ornamental Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, China
Agricultural University, 2 Yuanmingyuan West Road, Haidian District, Beijing,
100193, People's Republic of China. qinglinliu@126.com

A Cys2/His2-type zinc finger protein gene, DgZFP, was isolated from chrysanthemum
by rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) approach. The DgZFP encodes a protein 
of 211 amino acids residues with a calculated molecular mass of 22.9 kDa and
theoretical isoelectric point is 8.59. DgZFP contains two Cys2/His2-type zinc
finger motifs, one nuclear localization domain, one Leu-rich domain, and one
ethylene-responsive element-binding factor (ERF)-associated amphiphilic
repression (EAR) domain. The transcript of DgZFP was enriched in flowers than in 
roots, stems, and leaves of the adult chrysanthemum plants. The gene expression
was strongly induced by NaCl, drought and cold treatment, and weakly by ABA
treatment in the seedlings. Subcellular localization revealed that DgZFP was
localized preferentially distributed to nucleus. Overexpression of DgZFP improved
salt tolerance and resulted in growth suppression in transgenic tobacco. We
argued that DgZFP is a new member of the Cys2/His2-type zinc finger protein
genes, and it maybe function as a regulator in response to salt stress in plants.

PMID: 19821150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Clin Drug Investig. 2009;29(11):713-9. doi: 10.2165/11319410-000000000-00000.

Pharmacokinetics and antihypertensive effects of candesartan cilexetil in
patients undergoing haemodialysis: an open-label, single-centre study.

Schulz EG(1), Bahri S, Schettler V, Popov AF, Hermann M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Nephrology Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany. eg.schulz@goedia.de

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: In patients with endstage renal failure (ERF),
activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system plays an important role in
the onset and maintenance of arterial hypertension. This study aimed to elucidate
the antihypertensive effect, pharmacokinetics and safety of candesartan cilexetil
in patients with ERF undergoing haemodialysis.
METHODS: In 14 anuric hypertensive patients undergoing haemodialysis (mean+/- SD 
24-hour systolic [SBP]/diastolic [DBP] blood pressure [BP] 142.9 +/- 11.1/75.0
+/- 10.1 mmHg), 24-hour BP measurements on the second interdialysis day per week 
were performed at baseline and at weeks 4, 12 and 24. All patients started
antihypertensive treatment with candesartan cilexetil 4 mg once daily immediately
before the start of haemodialysis. Subsequently, the dose was titrated upward to 
8 mg once daily until the patient's mean ambulatory BP measurement (ABPM) values 
were <130/80 mmHg. Plasma candesartan pharmacokinetics were investigated on days 
7 and 14 after starting candesartan cilexetil treatment and after each titration 
step.
RESULTS: After 6 months all patients demonstrated well controlled BP (ABPM mean
+/- SD SBP 129.6 +/- 21.7/DBP 69.4 +/- 10.4 mmHg) and a significantly reduced
pulse pressure (from a mean +/- SD 67.9 +/- 13.7 mmHg at baseline to a mean +/-
SD 60.2 +/- 14.7 mmHg at 6 months), without any adverse events. Candesartan
plasma concentrations increased over 3 hours followed by a continuous decline.
Plasma concentrations remained stable after 7 and 14 days, independent of dosing.
However, administration of candesartan cilexetil 8 mg (five patients) resulted in
plasma concentrations about 1.4 times higher than those for candesartan cilexetil
4 mg.
CONCLUSION: In this study with small number of patients with ERF undergoing
haemodialysis, candesartan cilexetil was effective in lowering BP and pulse
pressure without accumulation or associated adverse effects such as elevated
potassium or symptomatic hypotension.

PMID: 19813774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Poult Sci. 2009 Oct;88(10):2069-74. doi: 10.3382/ps.2009-00076.

Serum ovotransferrin as a biomarker of inflammatory diseases in chickens.

Rath NC(1), Anthony NB, Kannan L, Huff WE, Huff GR, Chapman HD, Erf GF, Wakenell 
P.

Author information: 
(1)Poultry Production and Product Safety Research Unit, Agricultural Research
Service, USDA, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA. narayan.rath@ars.usda.gov

Infectious and metabolic disorders are common in poultry and cause stress, poor
performance, and mortality that results in considerable economic loss.
Identifying the nature of stress in chickens will assist the development of
appropriate measures to improve health and welfare. Acute phase proteins are
hepatic proteins, the blood concentrations of which change significantly in the
event of many health problems including inflammation and physical injuries. Thus,
acute phase proteins are used as nonspecific diagnostic markers for various
health disorders. Our previous studies showed that serum ovotransferrin (OVT) is 
an acute phase protein in chickens. Therefore, in the present study, we
investigated whether OVT concentration can be a marker of physiological stress
using sera from chickens with different infectious and metabolic disorders. A
competitive enzyme immunoassay was developed to measure serum OVT concentrations.
The results show that with experimentally induced pulmonary hypertension syndrome
and tibial dyschondroplasia, there were no significant changes in OVT levels
compared with matched controls. In contrast, when chickens were infected with
microbes such as the bacterium Escherichia coli, or protozoan parasites such as
Eimeria maxima and Eimeria tenella, there was a significant increase in the
levels of OVT in the serum. Chickens with spontaneous autoimmune vitiligo also
showed a significant increase in blood OVT levels. These studies suggest that
blood OVT concentration is modulated under inflammatory and microbial stress and 
can therefore be used as a diagnostic marker of infection and inflammation in
chickens.

PMID: 19762858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. BMC Genomics. 2009 Sep 16;10:436. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-436.

Heterologous oligonucleotide microarrays for transcriptomics in a non-model
species; a proof-of-concept study of drought stress in Musa.

Davey MW(1), Graham NS, Vanholme B, Swennen R, May ST, Keulemans J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Fruit Breeding and Biotechnology, Department of Biosystems,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Box 2747, Willem De Croylaan 42, B-3001,
Heverlee, Leuven, Belgium. mark.davey@biw.kuleuven.be

BACKGROUND: 'Systems-wide' approaches such as microarray RNA-profiling are
ideally suited to the study of the complex overlapping responses of plants to
biotic and abiotic stresses. However, commercial microarrays are only available
for a limited number of plant species and development costs are so substantial as
to be prohibitive for most research groups. Here we evaluate the use of
cross-hybridisation to Affymetrix oligonucleotide GeneChip(R) microarrays to
profile the response of the banana (Musa spp.) leaf transcriptome to drought
stress using a genomic DNA (gDNA)-based probe-selection strategy to improve the
efficiency of detection of differentially expressed Musa transcripts.
RESULTS: Following cross-hybridisation of Musa gDNA to the Rice GeneChip(R)
Genome Array, ~33,700 gene-specific probe-sets had a sufficiently high degree of 
homology to be retained for transcriptomic analyses. In a proof-of-concept
approach, pooled RNA representing a single biological replicate of control and
drought stressed leaves of the Musa cultivar 'Cachaco' were hybridised to the
Affymetrix Rice Genome Array. A total of 2,910 Musa gene homologues with a
>2-fold difference in expression levels were subsequently identified. These
drought-responsive transcripts included many functional classes associated with
plant biotic and abiotic stress responses, as well as a range of regulatory genes
known to be involved in coordinating abiotic stress responses. This latter group 
included members of the ERF, DREB, MYB, bZIP and bHLH transcription factor
families. Fifty-two of these drought-sensitive Musa transcripts were homologous
to genes underlying QTLs for drought and cold tolerance in rice, including in 2
instances QTLs associated with a single underlying gene. The list of
drought-responsive transcripts also included genes identified in
publicly-available comparative transcriptomics experiments.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that despite the general paucity of
nucleotide sequence data in Musa and only distant phylogenetic relations to rice,
gDNA probe-based cross-hybridisation to the Rice GeneChip(R) is a highly
promising strategy to study complex biological responses and illustrates the
potential of such strategies for gene discovery in non-model species.

PMCID: PMC2761422
PMID: 19758430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Diabetes. 2009 Dec;58(12):2828-34. doi: 10.2337/db09-0536. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

SIRT1 genetic variation is related to BMI and risk of obesity.

Zillikens MC(1), van Meurs JB, Rivadeneira F, Amin N, Hofman A, Oostra BA,
Sijbrands EJ, Witteman JC, Pols HA, van Duijn CM, Uitterlinden AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands. m.c.zillikens@erasmusmc.nl

OBJECTIVE: SIRT1 has pleiotropic metabolic functions. We investigated whether
SIRT1 genetic variation is associated with obesity.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In 6,251 elderly subjects from the prospective,
population-based Rotterdam Study, three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
the SIRT1 gene were studied in relation to BMI and risk of obesity (BMI > or =30 
kg/m(2)) and prospectively with BMI change after 6.4 years of follow-up. We used 
cross-sectional data from 2,347 participants from the Erasmus Rucphen Family
(ERF) study for replication.
RESULTS: Minor alleles of rs7895833 (G = 20.2%) and rs1467568 (A = 36.8%) were
associated with lower BMI in the Rotterdam Study (P = 0.02 and 0.04) and in the
replication cohort ERF study (P = 0.03 and 0.008) and in both studies combined (P
= 0.002 for both SNPs), with a 0.2-0.4 kg/m(2) decrease in BMI per allele copy.
Carriers of these alleles had 13-18% decreased risk of obesity (for rs7895833 in 
the Rotterdam Study: odds ratio 0.79 [95% CI 0.67-0.94], P = 0.007; in the ERF
study: 0.93 [0.73-1.19], P = 0.37; and in the studies combined 0.87 [0.77-0.97], 
P = 0.02; for rs1467568 in the Rotterdam Study: 0.80 [0.68-0.94], P = 0.007; in
the ERF study: 0.85 [0.72-0.99], P = 0.04; and in the studies combined: 0.82
[0.73-0.92], P = 0.0009). In the Rotterdam Study, the two variants were also
associated with a lower BMI increase during 6.4 years of follow-up (P = 0.01 and 
0.08).
CONCLUSIONS: Two common variants in SIRT1 are associated with lower BMI in two
independent Dutch populations. Carriers of these variants have 13-18% decreased
risk of obesity and gain less weight over time. The availability of SIRT1
stimulators makes these findings relevant in light of the growing obesity
epidemic.

PMCID: PMC2780870
PMID: 19741164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Plant Signal Behav. 2008 Jul;3(7):498-500.

The transcription factor MtSERF1 may function as a nexus between stress and
development in somatic embryogenesis in Medicago truncatula.

Mantiri FR, Kurdyukov S, Chen SK, Rose RJ.

In Medicago truncatula high rates of somatic embryo formation can be induced in
the Jemalong genotype 2HA by application of the hormones auxin and cytokinin.
Biosynthesis of the stress-related hormone ethylene is also necessary for somatic
embryogenesis (SE) and is most likely a response to wounding and the presence of 
auxin in the medium. We have demonstrated that expression of a gene designated Mt
SOMATIC EMBRYO RELATED FACTOR 1 (MtSERF1) induced by ethylene, in the presence of
auxin plus cytokinin, is essential for SE. The promoter region of this
transcription factor, a member of the ERF sub-family of the AP2/ERF super family,
contains putative binding sites relating to auxin and cytokinin in addition to
ethylene. An additional finding was the presence of WUSCHEL (WUS) binding sites
in the MtSERF1 promoter region, which is discussed. Here we also discuss the
Medicago data in the context of embryogenesis studies in Arabidopsis and suggest 
that MtSERF1 has a key developmental role, possibly in conjunction with WUS, in
regulating downstream genes required for the initiation of SE.

PMCID: PMC2634442
PMID: 19704498  [PubMed]


93. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Jun;37(5):2485-92. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9763-4. Epub 2009
Aug 23.

Analysis of Brassica rapa ESTs: gene discovery and expression patterns of AP2/ERF
family genes.

Zhuang J(1), Xiong AS, Peng RH, Gao F, Zhu B, Zhang J, Fu XY, Jin XF, Chen JM,
Zhang Z, Qiao YS, Yao QH.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 201106 Shanghai, China.

Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa subsp. pekinensis) is among the most important
vegetables and is widely cultivated in world. Genes in the AP2/ERF family encode 
transcriptional regulators that serve a variety of functions in the plants.
Expressed sequence tags (ESTs) are created by partially sequencing randomly
isolated gene transcripts and have proved valuable in molecular biology. Starting
from the database with 142 947 ESTs of B. rapa, 62 putative AP2/ERF family genes 
were identified by in silico cloning using the conserved AP2/ERF domain amino
acid sequence of Arabidopsis thaliana as a probe. Based on the number of AP2/ERF 
domains and functions of the genes, the AP2/ERF transcription factors from B.
rapa were classified into four subfamilies (DREB, ERF, AP2 and RAV). Using
large-scale available EST information as a source of expression data for digital 
expression profiling, differentially detected genes were identified among diverse
plant tissues. Roots contained the largest number of transcripts of the AP2/ERF
family genes, followed by leaves and seeds. Only a few of the 62 AP2/ERF family
genes were detected in all tissues: most were detected only in some tissues but
not in others. The maximum detected was that of BraERF-B2-5, and it was recorded 
from seed tissue.

PMID: 19701799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2010 Feb 15;133(2-4):250-5. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.07.011. Epub 2009 Jul 30.

Differential gene expression of proinflammatory chemokines and cytokines in lungs
of ascites-resistant and -susceptible broiler chickens following intravenous
cellulose microparticle injection.

Hamal KR(1), Wideman RF, Anthony NB, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701,
USA.

Intravenous injection of microparticles (MPs) is a tool to reveal susceptibility 
to pulmonary hypertension (PH) syndrome (PHS, ascites) in broilers. After
injection MPs get lodged in pulmonary arterioles and cause localized
inflammation. To examine the expression of chemokines/cytokines during the
MP-induced pulmonary inflammatory response, lungs were collected from 4-week-old 
broilers (6/line/time point) from the PHS-resistant (RES) and -susceptible (SUS) 
broilers before (0h) and after (2, 6, 12, 24, and 48h) MP injection and analyzed 
using quantitative RT-PCR. In both lines, expression of interleukin-1beta
(IL-1beta), IL-6, IL-8, and K60 increased from 0 to 6h, reached peak levels at 6 
and 12h, and decreased thereafter, whereas IL-4 and interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) 
expression remained elevated past 12h. Lungs from the RES line broilers had
higher expression (P<0.05) of IL-1beta and IL-6 at 2, 6, and 12h; higher IL-8 at 
6 and 12h; higher K60 at 6, 12, and 24h; higher IL-4 at 12, 24, and 48h and
higher IFN-gamma expression at 6 and 48h post-MP injection than SUS line
broilers. Higher expression of chemokines/cytokines in RES compared to SUS line
lungs may explain the ability of RES line broilers to effectively counteract the 
MP-induced PH and resolve the vascular occlusion.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19698998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Ren Care. 2009 Sep;35(3):151-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-6686.2009.00107.x.

Management of co-morbid diseases in a patient with established renal failure.

Chamney M(1), Pugh-Clarke K, Kafkia T.

Author information: 
(1)City University, London, UK. m.chamney@city.ac.uk

This follows on from an article relating to chronic kidney disease (CKD) and
co-morbidities. Not only do these co-morbid diseases cause problems to patients
with CKD, they continue to impact upon them when they develop established renal
failure (ERF). Various co-morbid conditions can affect the patient including
diabetes, hypertension, anaemia and cardiovascular issues. As nephrology nurses
we play a fundamental role in patient education, monitoring and management of
these factors.

PMID: 19689698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Psychophysiology. 2010 Jan 1;47(1):66-122. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2009.00856.x.
Epub 2009 Jul 21.

Mismatch negativity (MMN), the deviance-elicited auditory deflection, explained.

May PJ(1), Tiitinen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Computational Science, Helsinki
University of Technology, Espoo, Finland. patrick.may@tkk.fi

The current review constitutes the first comprehensive look at the possibility
that the mismatch negativity (MMN, the deflection of the auditory ERP/ERF
elicited by stimulus change) might be generated by so-called fresh-afferent
neuronal activity. This possibility has been repeatedly ruled out for the past 30
years, with the prevailing theoretical accounts relying on a memory-based
explanation instead. We propose that the MMN is, in essence, a latency- and
amplitude-modulated expression of the auditory N1 response, generated by
fresh-afferent activity of cortical neurons that are under nonuniform levels of
adaptation.

PMID: 19686538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Front Hum Neurosci. 2009 Jun 30;3:10. doi: 10.3389/neuro.09.010.2009. eCollection
2009.

Effects of attention on what is known and what is not: MEG evidence for
functionally discrete memory circuits.

Garagnani M(1), Shtyrov Y, Pulvermüller F.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Cambridge, UK.
Max.Garagnani@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk

Recent results obtained with a neural-network model of the language cortex
suggest that the memory circuits developing for words are both distributed and
functionally discrete. This model makes testable predictions about brain
responses to words and pseudowords under variable availability of attentional
resources. In particular, due to their strong internal connections, the
action-perception circuits for words that the network spontaneously developed
exhibit functionally discrete activation dynamics, which are only marginally
affected by attentional variations. At the same time, network responses to
unfamiliar items - pseudowords - that have not been previously learned (and,
therefore, lack corresponding memory representations) exhibit (and predict)
strong attention dependence, explained by the different amounts of attentional
resources available and, therefore, different degrees of competition between
multiple memory circuits partially activated by items lacking lexical traces. We 
tested these predictions in a novel magnetoencephalography experiment and
presented subjects with familiar words and matched unfamiliar pseudowords during 
attention demanding tasks and under distraction. The magnetic mismatch negativity
(MMN) response to words showed relative immunity to attention variations, whereas
the MMN to pseudowords exhibited profound variability: when subjects attended the
stimuli, the brain response to pseudowords was larger than that to words (as
typically observed in the N400); when attention was withdrawn, the opposite
pattern emerged, with the response to pseudowords reduced below the response to
words. Main cortical sources of these activations were localized to
superior-temporal cortex. These results confirm the model's predictions and
provide evidence in support of the hypothesis that words are represented in the
brain as action-perception circuits that are both discrete and distributed.

PMCID: PMC2715270
PMID: 19680433  [PubMed]


98. Kardiologiia. 2009;49(7-8):38-41.

[Efficacy of therapy with bisoprolol and ivabradine in patients with ischemic
heart disease combined with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease assessment of
parameters of 24-hour ECG monitoring].

[Article in Russian]

Grigor'eva NIu.

Effect of therapy with 1-adrenoblocker bisoprolol and inhibitor of If channels
ivabradine on parameters of 24-hour ECG monitoring (24hECGM) was studied in 64
patients with ischemic heart disease (stable angina) and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). At the first stage all patients received bisoprolol.
Parameters of external respiration function (ERF) and 24h ECG were registered
before and after 4 months of bisoprolol administration. At stage 2 indications
were determined for inclusion of ivabradine in the treatment scheme. At the
background of therapy with bisoprolol we obtained significant lowering of heart
rate (HR) both during day and night, as well as significant diminution of
magnitude and duration of ischemic ST depression. In 44% of patients target HR
range was not achieved. This conditioned the necessity to administer ivabradine. 
Therapy of patients with stable angina and concomitant COPD should begin with
cardioselective -adrenoblockers (bisoprolol). Incorporation of inhibitor of If
channels ivabradine in the treatment scheme is indicated if during treatment with
-adrenoblockers average 24 hour HR according to data of 24hECGM exceeds 70
beats/min and deterioration of bronchial conductance according to ERF data
occurs.

PMID: 19656105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2009 Sep;22(9):1104-15. doi: 10.1094/MPMI-22-9-1104.

Disease-specific expression of host genes during downy mildew infection of
Arabidopsis.

Huibers RP(1), de Jong M, Dekter RW, Van den Ackerveken G.

Author information: 
(1)Plant-Microbe Interactions, Department of Biology, Utrecht University,
Padualaan, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Here, we report on the identification of Arabidopsis genes that are induced
during compatible but not during incompatible interactions with the downy mildew 
pathogen Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis. This set of so-called compatible
specific (CS) genes contrasts with the large group of defense-associated genes
that is differentially expressed during both compatible and incompatible
interactions. From the 17 identified CS genes, 6 belong to the ethylene response 
factor (ERF) family of transcription factor genes, suggesting that these ERF have
a role during compatibility. The majority of CS genes are differentially
regulated in response to various forms of abiotic stress. In silico analysis of
the CS genes revealed an over-representation of dehydration-responsive
element/C-repeat binding factor (DREB1A/CBF3) binding sites and EveningElement
motifs in their promoter regions. The CS-ERF are closely related to the CBF
transcription factors and could potentially bind the DREB1A/CBF3 promoter
elements in the CS genes. Transcript levels of CS genes peak at 2 to 3 days
postinoculation, when pathogen growth is highest, and decline at later stages of 
infection. The induction of several CS genes was found to be isolate specific.
This suggests that the identified CS genes could be the direct or indirect
targets of downy mildew effector proteins that promote disease susceptibility.

PMID: 19656045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Exp Bot. 2009;60(13):3781-96. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erp214. Epub 2009 Jul 14.

Overexpression of the soybean GmERF3 gene, an AP2/ERF type transcription factor
for increased tolerances to salt, drought, and diseases in transgenic tobacco.

Zhang G(1), Chen M, Li L, Xu Z, Chen X, Guo J, Ma Y.

Author information: 
(1)The National Key Facility for Crop Genetic Resources and Genetic Improvement, 
Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing,
China.

A new member of the AP2/ERF transcription factor family, GmERF3, was isolated
from soybean. Sequence analysis showed that GmERF3 contained an AP2/ERF domain of
58 amino acids and two putative nuclear localization signal (NLS) domains. It
belonged to a group IV protein in the ERF (ethylene response factor) subfamily as
typified by a conserved N-terminal motif [MCGGAI(I/L)]. Expression of GmERF3 was 
induced by treatments with high salinity, drought, abscisic acid (ABA), salicylic
acid (SA), jasmonic acid (JA), ethylene (ET), and soybean mosaic virus (SMV),
whereas there was no significant GmERF3 mRNA accumulation under cold stress
treatment. GmERF3 could bind to the GCC box and DRE/CRT element, and was targeted
to the nucleus when transiently expressed in onion epidermal cells. The GmERF3
protein fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain to activate transcription of
reporter genes in yeast. Ectopic expression of the GmERF3 gene in transgenic
tobacco plants induced the expression of some PR genes and enhanced resistance
against infection by Ralstonia solanacearum, Alternaria alternata, and tobacco
mosaic virus (TMV), and gave tolerance to high salinity and dehydration stresses.
Furthermore, overexpression of GmERF3 in transgenic tobacco led to higher levels 
of free proline and soluble carbohydrates compared to wild-type plants under
drought conditions. The overall results suggested that GmERF3 as an AP2/ERF
transcription factor may play dual roles in response to biotic and abiotic
stresses in plants.

PMCID: PMC2736888
PMID: 19602544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Feb;37(2):809-18. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9616-1. Epub 2009
Jul 14.

Isolation and characterization of a novel EAR-motif-containing gene GmERF4 from
soybean (Glycine max L.).

Zhang G(1), Chen M, Chen X, Xu Z, Li L, Guo J, Ma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China,
230026, Hefei, China.

Transcriptional repressors are emerging as central regulators of development and 
stress responses in different organisms. The ERF-associated amphiphilic
repression (EAR) motif was identified as essential for transcriptional
repression. To gain a better understanding of this type of protein, we reported
here a novel GmERF4 protein from soybean. Sequence alignment showed that GmERF4
contains one AP2/ERF domain, two putative nuclear localization signal regions and
one EAR motif. The GmERF4 protein was preferentially localized to the nucleus of 
onion epidermis cells and bound specifically to the GCC box and DRE/CRT element
in vitro. Furthermore, the expression of GmERF4 was induced by ethylene, JA, SA, 
cold, salt, drought, and soybean mosaic virus, and repressed by ABA. Constitutive
expression of GmERF4 in transgenic tobacco plants increased tolerance to salt and
drought stresses compared with wild-type plants, but did not exhibit detectable
resistance against bacterial infection.

PMID: 19597961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Epidemiol Prev. 2009 Jul-Oct;33(4-5 Suppl 2):57-67.

[The role of scientific research in the identification of occupational
carcinogenic agents: the contribution of the Cesare Maltoni Cancer research
center of the European Ramazzini Foundation].

[Article in Italian]

Soffritti M(1), Chiozzotto D, Belpoggi F.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di ricerca sul cancro Cesare Maltoni, Fondazione europea di oncologia e
scienze ambientali, Bologna, Italia. crcdir@ramazzini.it

Nowadays tumours represent one of the major problems of public health, both for
their epidemiological dimension as for the causes that are at their origin,
represented by three important factors: people ageing, general and occupational
environmental pollution, including incongruous individual behaviour, and
individual genetic susceptibility. The strategies followed till today in order to
check tumours have privileged the role of therapeutic interventions: the results 
achieved show the great limits. On the contrary, current scientific experiences
indicate the need to re-orientate present strategies, developing prevention
programmes for the identification of carcinogenic risks (primary prevention), and
early diagnosis of preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions (secondary prevention).
In this review we discuss the importance of primary prevention in tumour control 
and specifically we present: - the role of long-term carcinogenic bioassays on
rodents (rats and mice) in order to identify and predict the carcinogenic risks
and then the great value that these studies have for public health; - the two
major programmes of carcinogenic bioassays: the National Toxicological Program
(NTP) of the US government, and the one performed by the European Ramazzini
Foundation (ERF), in Italy; - the importance of observing the experimental
animals until spontaneous death in order to improve the sensitivity and
specificity of the assays, a way of working followed by ERF from the beginning.

PMID: 20124643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2009 Sep;24(9):2615-7. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfp275. Epub
2009 Jun 27.

Progress with the European Society for Paediatric Nephrology (ESPN)/ERA-EDTA
Registry for children with established renal failure (ERF).

Tizard EJ, Verrina E, van Stralen KJ, Jager KJ.

PMCID: PMC2727913
PMID: 19561347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nephron Clin Pract. 2009;111 Suppl 1:c257-67. doi: 10.1159/000210002. Epub 2009
Mar 26.

UK Renal Registry 11th Annual Report (December 2008): Chapter 13 Demography of
the UK paediatric renal replacement therapy population.

Lewis MA(1), Shaw J, Sinha M, Adalat S, Hussain F, Inward C.

Author information: 
(1)Manchester Childrens Hospital, Manchester, UK. malewis@doctors.org.uk

AIMS: To describe the demographics of the paediatric RRT population in the UK and
analyse changes in demographics with time.
METHODS: Extraction and analysis of data from the UK paediatric Renal Registry.
RESULTS: The UK paediatric established renal failure (ERF) population in April
2008 was 875 patients. The prevalence under the age of 16 years was 55 per
million age related population (pmp) and the incidence 7.92 pmp. The incidence
and prevalence for South Asian and Other ethnic groups were 3 times that of the
White and Black populations. Renal dysplasia was the most common cause of ERF
accounting for 33% of prevalent cases. Diseases with autosomal recessive
inheritance were more common in patients from ethnic minority groups. The
spectrum of diseases seen has changed over a generation. Overall 5 year survival 
for children with ERF was 91.8%. Five year survival of infants starting dialysis 
was just 62%. Transplanted patients accounted for 74% of the current population. 
The proportion with grafts from living donors has steadily risen to 34%. Children
from ethnic minority groups were less likely to have an allograft and living
donation was less frequent in this population. For those on dialysis, 57% were
receiving peritoneal dialysis. This was the main treatment modality for patients 
under 4 years of age.
CONCLUSIONS: The paediatric ERF population continued to expand slowly. Incidence 
and prevalence rates were stable and similar to other developed nations. The high
incidence in patients from ethnic minority groups will lead to a greater
proportion of the population being from these groups in time. To maintain the
high proportion of engrafted patients it will be necessary to encourage living
donation in the ethnic minority population. The spectrum of diseases seen has
already changed over a generation with the treatment of young children with
diseases such as congenital nephrosis. The incidence of cystinosis causing ERF
was reduced, probably reflecting better early treatment.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19542701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Plant J. 2009 Oct;60(2):268-79. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03951.x. Epub 2009 
Jun 22.

Unequally redundant RCD1 and SRO1 mediate stress and developmental responses and 
interact with transcription factors.

Jaspers P(1), Blomster T, Brosché M, Salojärvi J, Ahlfors R, Vainonen JP, Reddy
RA, Immink R, Angenent G, Turck F, Overmyer K, Kangasjärvi J.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biology, Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Viikki
Biocenter, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Comment in
    Plant Signal Behav. 2010 Jan;5(1):78-80.

RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH1 (RCD1) is an important regulator of stress and
hormonal and developmental responses in Arabidopsis thaliana. Together with its
closest homolog, SIMILAR TO RCD-ONE1 (SRO1), it is the only Arabidopsis protein
containing the WWE domain, which is known to mediate protein-protein interactions
in other organisms. Additionally, these two proteins contain the core catalytic
region of poly-ADP-ribose transferases and a conserved C-terminal domain. Tissue 
and subcellular localization data indicate that RCD1 and SRO1 have partially
overlapping functions in plant development. In contrast mutant data indicate that
rcd1 has defects in plant development, whereas sro1 displays normal development. 
However, the rcd1 sro1 double mutant has severe growth defects, indicating that
RCD1 and SRO1 exemplify an important genetic principle - unequal genetic
redundancy. A large pair-wise interaction test against the REGIA transcription
factor collection revealed that RCD1 interacts with a large number of
transcription factors belonging to several protein families, such as AP2/ERF, NAC
and basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH), and that SRO1 interacts with a smaller subset 
of these. Full genome array analysis indicated that in many cases targets of
these transcription factors have altered expression in the rcd1 but not the sro1 
mutant. Taken together RCD1 and SRO1 are required for proper plant development.

PMID: 19548978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Plant Physiol. 2009 Aug;150(4):1916-29. doi: 10.1104/pp.109.141119. Epub 2009 Jun
19.

AINTEGUMENTA and AINTEGUMENTA-LIKE6 act redundantly to regulate Arabidopsis
floral growth and patterning.

Krizek B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia,
South Carolina 29208, USA. krizek@sc.edu

An Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) flower consists of four types of organs
arranged in a stereotypical pattern. This complex floral structure is elaborated 
from a small number of floral meristem cells partitioned from the shoot apical
meristem during reproductive development. The positioning of floral primordia
within the periphery of the shoot apical meristem depends on transport of the
phytohormone auxin with floral anlagen arising at sites of auxin maxima. An early
marker of lateral organ fate is the AP2/ERF-type transcription factor
AINTEGUMENTA (ANT), which has been proposed to act downstream of auxin in
organogenic growth. Here, I show that the related, AINTEGUMENTA-LIKE6
(AIL6)/PLETHORA3 gene acts redundantly with ANT during flower development. ant
ail6 double mutants show defects in floral organ positioning, identity, and
growth. These floral defects are correlated with changes in the expression levels
and patterns of two floral organ identity genes, APETALA3 and AGAMOUS. ant ail6
flowers also display altered expression of an auxin-responsive reporter,
suggesting that auxin accumulation and/or responses are not normal. Furthermore, 
I show that ANT expression in incipient and young floral primordia depends on
auxin transport within the inflorescence meristem. These results show that ANT
and AIL6 are important regulators of floral growth and patterning and that they
may act downstream of auxin in these processes.

PMCID: PMC2719149
PMID: 19542297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Mol Recognit. 2009 Nov-Dec;22(6):474-9. doi: 10.1002/jmr.965.

Molecular dynamics simulations reveal the disparity in specific recognition of
GCC-box by AtERFs transcription factors super family in Arabidopsis.

Wang S(1), Yang S, Yin Y, Xi J, Li S, Hao D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab for Molecular Enzymology and Engineering of the Ministry of Education,
Jilin University, Changchun, 130023, P.R. China.

Arabidopsis ethylene responsive element binding factors (AtERFs) form a
transcription factor super family. While the functions of most AtERFs are
unknown, a number of AtERFs appear to be involved in regulation of stress-related
genes through their DNA binding domains (DBD), namely ERF domains, which
recognize a consensus motif GCC-box at the regulatory region. In this study,
molecular dynamics simulations were performed on the four ERF domain-GCC-box
complexes, AtERF1, AtERF4, AtEBP and CFBF1, to determine disparity in specific
binding to the GCC-box by the AtERFs. Our results suggested that three amino acid
residues Arg29, Glu39 and Arg41, played a vital role in direct readout of DNA.
The position of the consensus sequence GCCGCC has an intrinsic disparity on
binding with ERF domains. The third C, fourth G and the last C in the GCC motif
was compulsory for recognition by ERF domains. Our results provide structural
evidence for a sequence-dependent recognition mechanism for AtERFs.

PMID: 19533627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Plant Pathol. 2009 Jul;10(4):471-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1364-3703.2009.00549.x.

Molecular diversity and gene expression of cotton ERF transcription factors
reveal that group IXa members are responsive to jasmonate, ethylene and
Xanthomonas.

Champion A(1), Hebrard E, Parra B, Bournaud C, Marmey P, Tranchant C, Nicole M.

Author information: 
(1)IRD, Université Mixte de Recherche RPB 'Résistance des Plantes aux
Bioagresseurs' CIRAD, Université Montpellier II, France. champion@mpl.ird.fr

Several ethylene-response factor (ERF) transcription factors are believed to play
a crucial role in the activation of plant defence responses, but little is known 
about the relationships between the diversity of this family and the functions of
groups or individual ERFs in this process. In this study, 200 ERF genes from the 
unigene cotton database were identified. Conserved amino acid residues and
phylogeny reconstruction using the AP2 conserved domain suggest that the
classification into 10 major groups used for Arabidopsis and rice is applicable
to the cotton ERF family. Based on in silico studies, we predict that group IX
ERF genes in cotton are involved in jasmonate (JA), ethylene (ET) and pathogen
responses. To test this hypothesis, we analysed the transcript profiles of the
group IXa subfamily in the regulation of specific resistance to Xanthomonas
campestris pathovar malvacearum. The expression of four members of group IXa was 
induced on challenge with X. campestris pv. malvacearum. Furthermore, the
expression of several ERF genes of group IXa was induced synergistically by JA in
combination with ET, suggesting that the encoded ERF proteins may play key roles 
in the integration of both signals to activate JA- and ET-dependent responses.

PMID: 19523101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Brain Res. 2009 Aug 4;1283:73-83. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.05.093. Epub 2009 
Jun 6.

Magnetoencephalographic correlates of processes supporting long-term memory
judgments.

Bridson NC(1), Muthukumaraswamy SD, Singh KD, Wilding EL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff University Brain Research Imaging Centre, School of Psychology,
Cardiff, CF10 3AT Wales, UK.

The sensitivity of event-related fields (ERFs) to memory retrieval processes is
not well determined. This stands in sharp contrast to event-related potential
(ERP) studies, as ERPs have been employed widely to address questions about the
functional architecture supporting memory retrieval. Despite their success in
this endeavour, however, the sensitivity of ERPs to one retrieval
process-familiarity-is somewhat limited. This experiment was designed to
determine the sensitivity of ERFs to familiarity, and thus to examine the
functional leverage that is available to investigate item familiarity via
magnetic means of indexing retrieval processing in real-time. The analyses of the
ERF data focused on old/new effects, which are differences between the neural
activities associated with old (previously studied) and new test items that
attract correct memory judgments. The ERFs showed a level of sensitivity to
changes in item familiarity superior to that reported previously in very similar 
studies where ERPs were acquired. Moreover, analyses of the ERF data revealed
four functionally distinct old/new effects. These findings provide strong
incentives for employing ERFs in subsequent studies of human memory retrieval
processing operations.

PMID: 19505445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2009 Oct 15;131(3-4):200-10. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.04.010. Epub 2009 Apr 19.

Altered monocyte and macrophage numbers in blood and organs of chickens injected 
i.v. with lipopolysaccharide.

Bowen OT(1), Dienglewicz RL, Wideman RF, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Division of
Agriculture, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a Gram-negative bacteria cell wall component that
activates monocytes and macrophages to produce nitric oxide (NO) from inducible
nitric oxide synthase. Nitric oxide production in the plasma of chickens peaks
5-6-h post-i.v. LPS injection reflecting iNOS activation. To determine monocyte
responsiveness after an i.v. LPS injection, a time course study was conducted
examining the concentrations among peripheral blood leukocytes post-i.v. LPS
injection in male and female chickens, the proportions among peripheral
mononuclear leukocyte (PBMC; containing lymphocytes, thrombocytes, and monocytes)
populations isolated from the blood samples collected at various times post-i.v. 
LPS treatment, and the ability of monocytes to produce NO with and without
further LPS stimulation in vitro using the PBMC NO production assay.
Additionally, monocyte extravasation activity was determined by analyzing
macrophage proportions after the i.v. LPS injection in spleen, lung, and liver
tissues. Blood was collected from male and female chickens at 0 h (pre-LPS
injection control) and at 1, 3, 6, 24, and 48 h post-LPS injection, and
additionally, at 72 h from female chickens. Tissues were collected 0, 1, 6, and
48 h post-i.v. LPS injection from male chickens. Monocyte concentrations dropped 
substantially by 1h in both males and females. In males, monocyte concentrations 
returned to control concentrations by 6h and increased at 24- and 48-h post-LPS
injection, whereas in females, monocyte concentrations recovered more slowly,
returning to near control concentrations by 24-48-h and increasing above control 
levels by 72 h. Lipopolysaccharide stimulated NO production by PBMC cultures
established from blood samples obtained at various times post-LPS injection in
vivo followed the same pattern as monocyte concentrations in the blood. Hence, NO
concentrations within PBMC cultures were dependent upon the number of monocytes
that were in the PBMC cultures isolated at different times post-i.v. LPS
injection. Furthermore, macrophage proportions in spleen tissues responded
similarly to monocyte concentrations in the blood, decreased in lung tissue, and 
varied widely in liver tissue throughout 48 h after an LPS injection. Monocytes
and other leukocytes may attach to the endothelium post-i.v. LPS injection
preventing the monocytes from entering the needle during blood collection
resulting in what seems to be leukopenia in blood and in PBMC cultures
attenuating NO production in PBMC cultures. Furthermore, monocyte differentiation
and recruitment from the bone marrow is a likely contributor to the
reconstitution and rise of monocyte concentrations in blood samples post-i.v. LPS
injection.

PMID: 19477023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2009 Apr 11;153(15):698-703.

[Estimation of kidney function in a nursing home].

[Article in Dutch]

Vergeer WJ(1), Achterberg WP, Wiltink EH, Geers AB, de Vet HC.

Author information: 
(1)Stichting Zorgspectrum, locatie Het Houtens Erf, Houten.
w.vergeer@zorgspectrum.nl

Comment on
    Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2009 Apr 11;153(15):706-9.

PMID: 19452770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Oct;50(10):4576-80. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-3181.
Epub 2009 May 6.

Association of cognitive functioning with retinal nerve fiber layer thickness.

van Koolwijk LM(1), Despriet DD, Van Duijn CM, Oostra BA, van Swieten JC, de
Koning I, Klaver CC, Lemij HG.

Author information: 
(1)Glaucoma Service, The Rotterdam Eye Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
l.vankoolwijk@oogziekenhuis.nl

PURPOSE: The brain areas that are responsible for cognitive functioning have the 
same embryonic origin as the retina. The association between cognitive
functioning and retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness was assessed in a
large, population-based sample.
METHODS: Neuropsychological and ophthalmic examinations were performed in 1485
healthy individuals (mean age, 46 years; range, 18-85) from the Erasmus Rucphen
Family (ERF) study, a study in a genetic isolate from the Netherlands. Different 
domains of cognitive functioning were assessed with the Dutch Adult Reading Test,
the Rey Auditory Verbal Memory Test, semantic fluency, the Trail-Making Test, the
Stroop Color-Word Test, and Block Design. RNFL thickness was measured with
scanning laser polarimetry. The association between cognitive test scores and
peripapillary RNFL thickness was studied with linear regression analyses,
adjusting for age, sex, level of inbreeding, and refractive error.
RESULTS: After adjustment for confounders, a better cognitive performance was
significantly associated with a thicker RNFL in all tests (P < 0.03) except for
the Stroop Color-Word Test (P = 0.15). RNFL thickness explained up to 2.8% (R(2) 
= 0.028) of the total variance in cognitive test scores. The association
diminished in age groups beyond 40 years.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study shows that cognitive functioning is associated
with RNFL thickness in healthy young individuals. The lack of association in
older individuals suggests that loss of neurons in the cerebrum and retina is not
concomitant and may have different origins.

PMID: 19420335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Integr Neurosci. 2009 Mar;8(1):77-93.

Receptive field sizes of direction-selective units in the fish tectum.

Damjanovic I(1), Maximova E, Maximov V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Bolshoi Karetny 19, 127994 Moscow, Russia. damjanov@iitp.ru

Responses of direction-selective (DS) ganglion cells (GCs) were recorded
extracellularly from their axon terminals in the superficial layer of tectum
opticum (TO) of immobilized cyprinid fish Carassius gibelio (Bloch, 1782).
Excitatory receptive field (ERF) sizes of six types of DS GCs (ON and OFF cells, 
each of three distinct preferred directions) were evaluated on the basis of four 
different methods. In Method 1, the ERF width was calculated as a product of
duration of spike train, generated in response to contrast edge moving across the
ERF in preferred direction, and the velocity of the stimulus movement. The
duration of spike train was estimated either as an interval between the first and
the last spikes, or on the basis of the width of bell-shaped post-stimulus
histogram of spike response according to its standard deviation. More precise
size and position of the ERF can be outlined with edges moving in many different 
directions. So, in Method 2 diameter of the ERF was calculated on the basis of a 
mean distance of position of spike appearance from the center of ERF. Method 3 - 
ERF tracing by small contrast spot moving on several parallel tracks allowed
estimation of the ERF width by number of spikes along each track and the ERF
length by the duration of spike train. When tracing in two mutually orthogonal
projections, the method also permitted calculation of the value of the temporal
delay in the network from the same experiment. Canonical method (Method 4) used
the ERF mapping with contrast spots flickering sequentially in different places
of stimulation area. The length, width and orientation of the ERF were evaluated 
according to the two-dimensional equivalent of the standard deviation for this
data set. All applied methods gave consistent estimates of ERF sizes - mean
values of ERF sizes for all four procedures ranged between 4 degrees and 4.8
degrees . These angle values corresponded to retinal area of approximately 300
mum. Small ERFs of the fish DS GCs measured in the current study, indicate that
the fish DS units should be classified as "fast" DS units, and are most likely
involved in the detection of small objects moving in the surrounding environment.

PMID: 19412981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Int J Mol Sci. 2008 Dec;9(12):2601-13. doi: 10.3390/ijms9122601. Epub 2008 Dec
11.

Tobacco OPBP1 enhances salt tolerance and disease resistance of transgenic rice.

Chen X(1), Guo Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China. 
chenxj@cau.edu.cn

Osmotin promoter binding protein 1 (OPBP1), an AP2/ERF transcription factor of
tobacco, has been demonstrated to function in disease resistance and salt
tolerance in tobacco. To increase stress tolerant capability of rice, we
generated rice plants with an OPBP1 overexpressing construct. Salinity shock
treatment with 250 mM NaCl indicated that most of the OPBP1 transgenic plants can
survive, whereas the control seedlings cannot. Similar recovery was found by
using the seedlings grown in 200 mM NaCl for two weeks. The OPBP1 transgenic and 
control plants were also studied for oxidative stress tolerance by treatment with
paraquat, showing the transgenic lines were damaged less in comparison with the
control plants. Further, the OPBP1 overexpression lines exhibited enhanced
resistance to infections of Magnaporthe oryzae and Rhizoctonia solani pathogens. 
Gene expressing analysis showed increase in mRNA accumulation of several stress
related genes. These results suggest that expression of OPBP1 gene increase the
detoxification capability of rice.

PMCID: PMC2635653
PMID: 19330095  [PubMed]


115. Plant Cell Physiol. 2009 May;50(5):970-5. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcp048. Epub 2009 Mar 
26.

A novel group of transcriptional repressors in Arabidopsis.

Ikeda M(1), Ohme-Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Genome-based Biofactory, National Institute of Advanced 
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Central 4, Tsukuba 305-8562, Japan.

We showed previously that the ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif
is a plant-specific repression domain that contains the conserved amino acid
sequence LXLXL. In this report, we describe the identification of a novel
repression domain, L/VR/KLFGVXM/V/L, which is different from known EAR motifs, in
B3 DNA-binding domain transcription factors in Arabidopsis. Database analysis
revealed that 29 Arabidopsis transcription factors, which included members of the
RAV, ARF, Hsf and MYB families, contain the R/KLFGV conserved motif found in the 
novel repression domain. We demonstrated that factors that contain the R/KLFGV
motif, namely, RAV1, RAV2, HsfB1 and HsfB2b, exhibited the repressive activity.

PMID: 19324928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Plant Physiol. 2009 May;150(1):308-19. doi: 10.1104/pp.108.131979. Epub 2009 Mar 
13.

Suppression of a phospholipase D gene, OsPLDbeta1, activates defense responses
and increases disease resistance in rice.

Yamaguchi T(1), Kuroda M, Yamakawa H, Ashizawa T, Hirayae K, Kurimoto L, Shinya
T, Shibuya N.

Author information: 
(1)National Agricultural Research Center, Joetsu, Niigata 943-0193, Japan.
tkyama@affrc.go.jp

Phospholipase D (PLD) plays an important role in plants, including responses to
abiotic as well as biotic stresses. A survey of the rice (Oryza sativa) genome
database indicated the presence of 17 PLD genes in the genome, among which
OsPLDalpha1, OsPLDalpha5, and OsPLDbeta1 were highly expressed in most tissues
studied. To examine the physiological function of PLD in rice, we made knockdown 
plants for each PLD isoform by introducing gene-specific RNA interference
constructs. One of them, OsPLDbeta1-knockdown plants, showed the accumulation of 
reactive oxygen species in the absence of pathogen infection. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and DNA microarray analyses revealed that
the knockdown of OsPLDbeta1 resulted in the up-/down-regulation of more than
1,400 genes, including the induction of defense-related genes such as
pathogenesis-related protein genes and WRKY/ERF family transcription factor
genes. Hypersensitive response-like cell death and phytoalexin production were
also observed at a later phase of growth in the OsPLDbeta1-knockdown plants.
These results indicated that the OsPLDbeta1-knockdown plants spontaneously
activated the defense responses in the absence of pathogen infection.
Furthermore, the OsPLDbeta1-knockdown plants exhibited increased resistance to
the infection of major pathogens of rice, Pyricularia grisea and Xanthomonas
oryzae pv oryzae. These results suggested that OsPLDbeta1 functions as a negative
regulator of defense responses and disease resistance in rice.

PMCID: PMC2675732
PMID: 19286937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Plant Physiol. 2009 May;150(1):365-77. doi: 10.1104/pp.109.135830. Epub 2009 Mar 
4.

Transcriptional regulation of the ethylene response factor LeERF2 in the
expression of ethylene biosynthesis genes controls ethylene production in tomato 
and tobacco.

Zhang Z(1), Zhang H, Quan R, Wang XC, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100081, China.

Fine-tuning of ethylene production plays an important role in developmental
processes and in plant responses to stress, but very little is known about the
regulation of ethylene response factor (ERF) proteins in ethylene biosynthesis
genes and ethylene production. Identifying cis-acting elements and transcription 
factors that play a role in this process, therefore, is important. Previously, a 
tomato (Solanum lycopersicum [f. sp. Lycopersicon esculentum]) ERF protein,
LeERF2, an allele of TERF2, was reported to confer ethylene triple response on
plants. This paper reports the transcriptional modulation of LeERF2/TERF2 in
ethylene biosynthesis in tomato and tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum). Using
overexpressing and antisense LeERF2/TERF2 transgenic tomato, we found that
LeERF2/TERF2 is an important regulator in the expression of ethylene biosynthesis
genes and the production of ethylene. Expression analysis revealed that
LeERF2/TERF2 is ethylene inducible, and ethylene production stimulated by
ethylene was suppressed in antisense LeERF2/TERF2 transgenic tomato, indicating
LeERF2/TERF2 to be a positive regulator in the feedback loop of ethylene
induction. Further research showed that LeERF2/TERF2 conservatively modulates
ethylene biosynthesis in tobacco and that such regulation in tobacco is
associated with the elongation of the hypocotyl and insensitivity to abscisic
acid and glucose during germination and seedling development. The effects on
ethylene synthesis were similar to those of another ERF protein, TERF1, because
TERF1 and LeERF2/TERF2 have overlapping roles in the transcriptional regulation
of ethylene biosynthesis in tobacco. Biochemical analysis showed that
LeERF2/TERF2 interacted with GCC box in the promoter of NtACS3 and with
dehydration-responsive element in the promoter of LeACO3, resulting in
transcriptional activation of the genes for ethylene biosynthesis in tomato and
tobacco, which is a novel regulatory function of ERF proteins in plant ethylene
biosynthesis.

PMCID: PMC2675746
PMID: 19261734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Klin Med (Mosk). 2009;87(1):40-5.

[Assessment of external breathing parameters and cardiovascular function in
patients with constitutive exogenous obesity and reduced body weight].

[Article in Russian]

Merzlikina NL, Romantsova TI, Roik OV, Lobanova NA, Drapkina OM, Ivashkin VT.

The study was designed to evaluate external respiratory function (ERF) and
cardiovascular function based on AP measurements, results of 24 hour AP
monitoring, treadmill test, and ECG during weight loss therapy in patients with
excess body mass. A total of 93 patients with grade 2-3 obesity were examined
including 41 (39.8%) with type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM). Group 1 consisted of
patients with constitutive exogenous obesity, group 2 of patients with
constitutive exogenous obesity and DM, group 3 was used as control. Follow-up
studies were conducted after 6 and 12 months. Patients of groups 1 and 2 showed
positive dynamics of hemodynamic characteristics related to the loss of weight
including significant reduction of heart rate, systolic and diastolic indices of 
hypertonic loading, specific peripheral vascular resistance, and left ventricular
mass. Simultaneously, cardiac index and ERF increased while vital lung capacity, 
forced vital capacity, and forced respiratory volume in the first second returned
to normal values. It is concluded that reduction of body weight has positive
effect on ERF dynamics and hemodynamic characteristics in patients with
constitutive exogenous obesity.

PMID: 19256259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Plant Cell. 2009 Feb;21(2):545-57. doi: 10.1105/tpc.108.064501. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

GRAS proteins form a DNA binding complex to induce gene expression during
nodulation signaling in Medicago truncatula.

Hirsch S(1), Kim J, Muñoz A, Heckmann AB, Downie JA, Oldroyd GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Disease and Stress Biology, John Ines Centre, Norwich NR4 7UH,
United Kingdom.

The symbiotic association of legumes with rhizobia involves bacterially derived
Nod factor, which is sufficient to activate the formation of nodules on the roots
of the host plant. Perception of Nod factor by root hair cells induces calcium
oscillations that are a component of the Nod factor signal transduction pathway. 
Perception of the calcium oscillations is a function of a calcium- and
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase, and this activates nodulation gene
expression via two GRAS domain transcriptional regulators, Nodulation Signaling
Pathway1 (NSP1) and NSP2, and an ERF transcription factor required for
nodulation. Here, we show that NSP1 and NSP2 form a complex that is associated
with the promoters of early nodulin genes. We show that NSP1 binds directly to
ENOD promoters through the novel cis-element AATTT. While NSP1 shows direct
binding to the ENOD11 promoter in vitro, this association in vivo requires NSP2. 
The NSP1-NSP2 association with the ENOD11 promoter is enhanced following Nod
factor elicitation. Mutations in the domain of NSP2 responsible for its
interaction with NSP1 highlight the significance of the NSP1-NSP2 heteropolymer
for nodulation signaling. Our work reveals direct binding of a GRAS protein
complex to DNA and highlights the importance of the NSP1-NSP2 complex for
efficient nodulation in the model legume Medicago truncatula.

PMCID: PMC2660633
PMID: 19252081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2009 Jan 17;153(3):75-9.

[Neuropsychiatric disorders. Multidisciplinary diagnosis and treatment].

[Article in Dutch]

Luykx JJ(1), Wolters FJ, Vulink NC, van der Erf M, Wokke JH, Kahn RS.

Author information: 
(1)Afd. Psychiatrie, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, Universitair
Medisch Centrum Utrecht, Utrecht. j.luykx@umcutrecht.nl

Comment in
    Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2009 Jan 17;153(3):63-8.

PMID: 19235342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Exp Bot. 2009;60(3):907-22. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ern354. Epub 2009 Feb 12.

Molecular characterization of seven genes encoding ethylene-responsive
transcriptional factors during plum fruit development and ripening.

El-Sharkawy I(1), Sherif S, Mila I, Bouzayen M, Jayasankar S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Guelph, Department of Plant Agriculture, 4890 Victoria Av. N.,
PO Box 7000 Vineland Station, ON, L0R 2E0 Canada.

Seven ERF cDNAs were cloned from two Japanese plum (Prunus salicina L.)
cultivars, 'Early Golden' (EG) and 'Shiro' (SH). Based on the sequence
characterization, these Ps-ERFs could be classified into three of the four known 
ERF families. Their predicted amino acid sequences exhibited similarities to ERFs
from other plant species. Functional nuclear localization signal analyses of two 
Ps-ERF proteins (Ps-ERF1a and -1b) were carried out using confocal microscopy.
Expression analyses of Ps-ERF mRNAs were studied in the two plum cultivars in
order to determine the role of this gene family in fruit development and
ripening. The seven Ps-ERFs displayed differential expression pattern and levels 
throughout the various stages of flower and fruit development. The diversity in
Ps-ERFs accumulation was largely due to the differences in their responses to the
levels of ethylene production. However, other plant hormones such as cytokinin
and auxin, which accumulate strongly throughout the various developmental stages,
also influence the Ps-ERFs expression. The effect of the plant hormones,
gibberellin, cytokinin, auxin, and ethylene in regulating the different Ps-ERF
transcripts was investigated. A model was proposed in which the role played by
the plant hormone auxin is as important as that of ethylene in initiating and
determining the date and rate of ripening in Japanese plums.

PMCID: PMC2652048
PMID: 19213809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Tree Physiol. 2009 Feb;29(2):273-9. doi: 10.1093/treephys/tpn025. Epub 2008 Dec
30.

Expression of jasmonic ethylene responsive factor gene in transgenic poplar tree 
leads to increased salt tolerance.

Li Y(1), Su X, Zhang B, Huang Q, Zhang X, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry and Key Laboratory for
Cultivation and Silviculture of Forest Trees, State Forestry Administration,
Beijing 100091, China.

The stress resistance of plants can be enhanced by regulating the expression of
multiple downstream genes associated with stress resistance. We used the
Agrobacterium method to transfer the tomato jasmonic ethylene responsive factors 
(JERFs) gene that encodes the ethylene response factor (ERF) like transcription
factor to the genome of a hybrid poplar (Populus alba x Populus berolinensis).
Eighteen resistant plants were obtained, of which 13 were identified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), reverse transcriptase PCR and Southern blot
analyses as having incorporated the JERFs gene and able to express it at the
transcriptional level. Salinity tests were conducted in a greenhouse with 0, 100,
200 and 300 mM NaCl. In the absence of NaCl, the transgenic plants were
significantly taller than the control plants, but no statistically significant
differences in the concentrations of proline and chlorophyll were observed. With 
increasing salinity, the extent of damage was significantly less in transgenic
plants than that in control plants, and the reductions in height, basal diameter 
and biomass were less in transgenic plants than those in control plants. At 200
and 300 mM NaCl concentrations, transgenic plants were 128.9% and 98.8% taller,
respectively, and had 199.8% and 113.0% more dry biomass, respectively, than
control plants. The saline-induced reduction in leaf water content and increase
in root/crown ratio were less in transgenic plants than in control plants. Foliar
proline concentration increased more in response to salt treatment in transgenic 
plants than in control plants. Foliar Na(+) concentration was higher in
transgenic plants than in control plants. In the coastal area in Panjin of
Liaoning where the total soil salt concentration is 0.3%, a salt tolerance trial 
of transgenic plants indicated that 3-year-old transgenic plants were 14.5% and
33.6% taller than the control plants at two field sites. The transgenic plants at
the two field sites were growing vigorously, had dark green leaves and showed no 
symptoms of salt damage, implying that the JERFs gene enhanced their salt
tolerance.

PMID: 19203952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Integr Plant Biol. 2009 Feb;51(2):184-93. doi:
10.1111/j.1744-7909.2008.00794.x.

Ethylene response factor TERF1 enhances glucose sensitivity in tobacco through
activating the expression of sugar-related genes.

Li A(1), Zhang Z, Wang XC, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094, China.

Ethylene response factor (ERF) proteins are important plant-specific
transcription factors. Increasing evidence shows that ERF proteins regulate plant
pathogen resistance, abiotic stress response and plant development through
interaction with different stress responsive pathways. Previously, we revealed
that overexpression of TERF1 in tobacco activates a cluster gene expression
through interacting with GCC box and dehydration responsive element (DRE),
resulting in enhanced sensitivity to abscisic acid (ABA) and tolerance to
drought, and dark green leaves of mature plants, indicating that TERF1
participates in the integration of ethylene and osmotic responses. Here we
further report that overexpression of TERF1 confers sugar response in tobacco.
Analysis of the novel isolated tomato TERF1 promoter provides information
indicating that there are many cis-acting elements, including sugar responsive
elements (SURE) and W box, suggesting that TERF1 might be sugar inducible. This
prediction is confirmed by results of reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction amplification, indicating that transcripts of TERF1 are accumulated in
tomato seedlings after application of glucose. Further investigation indicates
that the expression of TERF1 in tobacco enhances sensitivity to glucose during
seed germination, root and seedling development, showing a decrease of the fresh 
weight and root elongation under glucose treatment. Detailed investigations
provide evidence that TERF1 interacts with the sugar responsive cis-acting
element SURE and activates the expression of sugar response genes, establishing
the transcriptional regulation of TERF1 in sugar response. Therefore, our results
deepen our understanding of the glucose response mediated by the ERF protein
TERF1 in tobacco.

PMID: 19200157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Hum Brain Mapp. 2009 Aug;30(8):2477-86. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20685.

Random fields--union intersection tests for detecting functional connectivity in 
EEG/MEG imaging.

Carbonell F(1), Worsley KJ, Trujillo-Barreto NJ, Sotero RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
felix@math.mcgill.ca

Electrophysiological (EEG/MEG) imaging challenges statistics by providing two
views of the same underlying spatio-temporal brain activity: a topographic view
(EEG/MEG) and tomographic view (EEG/MEG source reconstructions). It is a common
practice that statistical parametric mapping (SPM) for these two situations is
developed separately. In particular, assessing statistical significance of
functional connectivity is a major challenge in these types of studies. This work
introduces statistical tests for assessing simultaneously the significance of
spatio-temporal correlation structure between ERP/ERF components as well as that 
of their generating sources. We introduce a greatest root statistic as the
multivariate test statistic for detecting functional connectivity between two
sets of EEG/MEG measurements at a given time instant. We use some new results in 
random field theory to solve the multiple comparisons problem resulting from the 
correlated test statistics at each time instant. In general, our approach using
the union-intersection (UI) principle provides a framework for hypothesis testing
about any linear combination of sensor data, which allows the analysis of the
correlation structure of both topographic and tomographic views. The performance 
of the proposed method is illustrated with real ERP data obtained from a face
recognition experiment.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19184994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2008;2008:3438-42. doi:
10.1109/IEMBS.2008.4649945.

A hybrid ultrasonic motor and electrorheological fluid clutch actuator for
force-feedback in MRI/fMRI.

Chapuis D(1), Gassert R, Burdet E, Bleuler H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Systémes Robotiques, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 
Switzerland. dominique.chapuis@epfl.ch

This paper presents a safe, electrically powered MR-compatible actuator with a
large range of output impedance, which can be used at the entry of the scanner
bore. This actuator is composed of an ultrasonic motor (USM) and a
torque-controlled electrorheological fluid clutch which modulates the output
torque of the USM. This paper describes the developments on the
electrorheological fluid (ERF) clutch and its high voltage driver. The
performances of the ERF brake constituting the clutch are evaluated, and its
torque range is adapted using an epicyclic differential. The transmissible torque
of the ERF clutch, i.e., the maximum system output torque, is 94.4 mNm and its
drag torque is 2.6 mNm. The MR compatibility of the complete hybrid actuator is
shown in extensive tests including subtraction of images and comparison of
signal-to-noise ratios in powered and unpowered conditions. This novel
MR-compatible actuator may be used to study the neural control of the hand.

PMID: 19163448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Poult Sci. 2009 Feb;88(2):303-8. doi: 10.3382/ps.2008-00379.

Cellular component of lavage fluid from broilers with normal versus
aerosol-primed airways.

Lorenzoni AG(1), Erf GF, Rath NC, Wideman RF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)University of Arkansas, Department of Poultry Science, Fayetteville 72701,
USA. alorenzo@uark.edu

Previously, we reported that intratracheal administration of lipopolysaccharide
elicited pulmonary hypertension (PH) in broilers reared under commercial
conditions and in broilers reared in environmental chambers and pretreated with
aerosolized red food colorant # 3 and propylene glycol (Red#3+PG), but not in
control broilers reared in environmental chambers. The objective of the present
experiment was to determine possible changes in the number or proportion of
airway leukocytes that could contribute to the magnitude of the PH responses
elicited in broilers. Birds were aerosolized for 40 min with a saturated mixture 
of Red#3+PG. After 24 h, a blood sample was taken, the broilers were killed, and 
a pulmonary lavage process was conducted in each bird. Leukocyte concentration
(white blood cells/microL) and differential leukocyte counts (%) were measured in
blood and lavage fluid. Leukocyte concentration in blood did not differ between
groups, but the percentage of blood lymphocytes was lower in broilers from the
Red#3+PG group compared with birds from the control group (52.4+/-2.9 and
56.9+/-2.9%, respectively). Cells recovered from the lavage fluid from both
groups were primarily heterophils. The concentration of leukocytes was greater in
the lavage fluid of broilers from the Red#3+PG group compared with broilers from 
the control group (763.2+/-158.7 and 402.9+/-62.6 white blood cells/microL,
respectively), but the proportions among leukocytes were not different between
the 2 groups. We propose that the increased concentration of leukocytes present
within the airways was one of the components that enabled broilers pre-treated
with aerosolized Red#3+PG to exhibit PH responses to intratracheal
lipopolysaccharide.

PMID: 19151344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Clin Radiol. 2009 Feb;64(2):133-41. doi: 10.1016/j.crad.2008.08.001. Epub 2008
Sep 24.

Management of airway involvement of oesophageal cancer using covered retrievable 
nitinol stents.

Lee KE(1), Shin JH, Song HY, Kim SB, Kim KR, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical
Center, Seoul, Korea.

AIM: To assess the efficacy and safety of covered retrievable nitinol stents in
oesophageal cancer patients with airway involvement.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Under fluoroscopic guidance, covered retrievable nitinol
airway stents were placed in 23 oesophageal cancer patients with airway stricture
and/or oesophagorespiratory fistula (ERF) over a long period of 12 years. Six
patients only had aspiration by ERF and three patients had both airway stricture 
and asymptomatic ERF. Technical aspects, dyspnoea improvement, and/or resolution 
of ERF symptoms, complications, reinterventions, and survival data were
evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 27 airway stents (14 tracheal, 11 bronchial, and two hinged) 
were placed successfully in 23 patients with airway stricture or ERF. Dyspnoea
score decreased significantly after stent placement (p<0.001). ERF were sealed
off in all nine patients. Complications included stent migration or expectoration
(n=4), haemoptysis (n=2), sputum retention (n=7), and tumour overgrowth (n=1).
All three migrated stents were easily removed. Twenty-one patients died, with the
median survival period of 76 days (range 2-197 days).
CONCLUSION: Placement of covered retrievable expandable nitinol stents was safe
and effective for the palliative treatment of airway strictures and/or ERF, with 
a reasonable range of complications, in patients with advanced oesophageal
cancer.

PMID: 19103342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Poult Sci. 2009 Jan;88(1):72-85. doi: 10.3382/ps.2008-00314.

Broiler pulmonary hypertensive responses during lipopolysaccharide-induced
tolerance and cyclooxygenase inhibition.

Wideman RF(1), Bowen OT, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701,
USA. rwideman@uark.edu

Bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS, endotoxin) triggers pulmonary hypertension
(PH) characterized by an increase in pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) that
reaches a peak value within 20 to 25 min and then gradually subsides within 60
min. As the PAP subsides PH cannot be reinitiated, signifying the onset of a
period of tolerance (refractoriness) to repeated LPS exposure. The present study 
was conducted to determine the duration of this tolerance, and to evaluate key
mediators thought to contribute to LPS-mediated PH in broilers. Tolerance was
shown to persist for 4 to 5 d after the initial exposure to LPS. In tolerant
broilers supramaximal i.v. injections of LPS did not reinitiate PH, nor was a
significant modulatory role for nitric oxide demonstrated. The pulmonary
vasculature of tolerant broilers remains responsive to the thromboxane A(2)
(TxA(2)) mimetic U44069, 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin), and constitutive 
nitric oxide. Meclofenamate successfully blocked the conversion of arachidonic
acid to vasoconstrictive eicosanoids such as TxA(2); nevertheless, meclofenamate 
failed to inhibit PH in response to LPS. Therefore, TxA(2) does not appear to be 
the primary vasoconstrictor involved in the PH response to LPS and neither does
5-HT. Broilers emerging from tolerance 5 d after the initial exposure to LPS
exhibited interindividual variation in their PH responsiveness to a second LPS
injection, ranging from zero response (individuals that remain fully tolerant) to
large increases in PAP (post-tolerant individuals). Tolerance might be an
important compensatory or protective mechanism for broilers whose pulmonary
vascular capacity is marginally adequate under optimal conditions, and whose
respiratory systems are chronically challenged with LPS in commercial production 
facilities. The key vasoconstrictors responsible for the PH elicited by LPS
remain to be determined.

PMID: 19096060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Plant Cell. 2008 Oct;20(10):2696-713. doi: 10.1105/tpc.108.059857. Epub 2008 Oct 
31.

EFD Is an ERF transcription factor involved in the control of nodule number and
differentiation in Medicago truncatula.

Vernié T(1), Moreau S, de Billy F, Plet J, Combier JP, Rogers C, Oldroyd G,
Frugier F, Niebel A, Gamas P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire des Interactions Plantes Micro-Organismes, Unité Mixte de
Recherche, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-Institut National de la
Recherche Agronomique 2594/441, F- 31320 Castanet Tolosan, France.

Mechanisms regulating legume root nodule development are still poorly understood,
and very few regulatory genes have been cloned and characterized. Here, we
describe EFD (for ethylene response factor required for nodule differentiation), 
a gene that is upregulated during nodulation in Medicago truncatula. The EFD
transcription factor belongs to the ethylene response factor (ERF) group V, which
contains ERN1, 2, and 3, three ERFs involved in Nod factor signaling. The role of
EFD in the regulation of nodulation was examined through the characterization of 
a null deletion mutant (efd-1), RNA interference, and overexpression studies.
These studies revealed that EFD is a negative regulator of root nodulation and
infection by Rhizobium and that EFD is required for the formation of functional
nitrogen-fixing nodules. EFD appears to be involved in the plant and bacteroid
differentiation processes taking place beneath the nodule meristem. We also
showed that EFD activated Mt RR4, a cytokinin primary response gene that encodes 
a type-A response regulator. We propose that EFD induction of Mt RR4 leads to the
inhibition of cytokinin signaling, with two consequences: the suppression of new 
nodule initiation and the activation of differentiation as cells leave the nodule
meristem. Our work thus reveals a key regulator linking early and late stages of 
nodulation and suggests that the regulation of the cytokinin pathway is important
both for nodule initiation and development.

PMCID: PMC2590733
PMID: 18978033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Exp Bot. 2008;59(15):4195-204. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ern259. Epub 2008 Oct 26.

Overexpression of TiERF1 enhances resistance to sharp eyespot in transgenic
wheat.

Chen L(1), Zhang Z, Liang H, Liu H, Du L, Xu H, Xin Z.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement,
Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing
100081, PR China.

Wheat sharp eyespot, primarily caused by a soil-borne fungus Rhizoctonia
cerealis, has become one of the most serious diseases of wheat in China. In this 
study, an ethylene response factor (ERF) gene from a wheat relative Thinopyrum
intermedium, TiERF1, was characterized further, transgenic wheat lines expressing
TiERF1 were developed, and the resistance of the transgenic wheat lines against
R. cerealis was investigated. Southern blotting analysis indicated that at least 
two copies of the TiERF1 gene exist in the T. intermedium genome. Yeast
one-hybrid assay indicated that the activation domain of TiERF1 is essential for 
activating the transcript of the reporter gene with the GCC-box cis-element. The 
TiERF1 gene was introduced into a Chinese wheat cultivar, Yangmai12, by biolistic
bombardment. Results of PCR and Southern blotting analyses indicated that TiERF1 
was successfully integrated into the genome of the transgenic wheat, where it can
be passed down from the T0 to T4 generations. Quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR analysis demonstrated that TiERF1 could be overexpressed in the
stable transgenic plants, in which the expression levels of wheat
pathogenesis-related (PR) genes primarily in the ethylene-dependent signal
pathway, such as a chitinase gene and a beta-1,3-glucanase gene, were increased
dramatically. Disease tests indicated that the overexpression of TiERF1 conferred
enhanced resistance to sharp eyespot in the transgenic wheat lines compared with 
the wild-type and silenced TiERF1 plants. These results suggested that the
overexpression of TiERF1 enhances resistance to sharp eyespot in transgenic wheat
lines by activating PR genes primarily in the ethylene-dependent pathway.

PMCID: PMC2639029
PMID: 18953072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Plant Physiol. 2008 Dec;148(4):1953-63. doi: 10.1104/pp.108.126813. Epub 2008 Oct
22.

Transcriptional modulation of ethylene response factor protein JERF3 in the
oxidative stress response enhances tolerance of tobacco seedlings to salt,
drought, and freezing.

Wu L(1), Zhang Z, Zhang H, Wang XC, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100081, China.

Abiotic stresses such as drought, cold, and salinity affect normal growth and
development in plants. The production and accumulation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) cause oxidative stress under these abiotic conditions. Recent research has 
elucidated the significant role of ethylene response factor (ERF) proteins in
plant adaptation to abiotic stresses. Our earlier functional analysis of an ERF
protein, JERF3, indicated that JERF3-expressing tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum)
adapts better to salinity in vitro. This article extends that study by showing
that transcriptional regulation of JERF3 in the oxidative stress response
modulates the increased tolerance to abiotic stresses. First, we confirm that
JERF3-expressing tobacco enhances adaptation to drought, freezing, and osmotic
stress during germination and seedling development. Then we demonstrate that
JERF3-expressing tobacco imparts not only higher expression of osmotic stress
genes compared to wild-type tobacco, but also the activation of photosynthetic
carbon assimilation/metabolism and oxidative genes. More importantly, this
regulation of the expression of oxidative genes subsequently enhances the
activities of superoxide dismutase but reduces the content of ROS in tobacco
under drought, cold, salt, and abscisic acid treatments. This indicates that
JERF3 also modulates the abiotic stress response via the regulation of the
oxidative stress response. Further assays indicate that JERF3 activates the
expression of reporter genes driven by the osmotic-responsive GCC box, DRE, and
CE1 and by oxidative-responsive as-1 in transient assays, suggesting the
transcriptional activation of JERF3 in the expression of genes involved in
response to oxidative and osmotic stress. Our results therefore establish that
JERF3 activates the expression of such genes through transcription, resulting in 
decreased accumulation of ROS and, in turn, enhanced adaptation to drought,
freezing, and salt in tobacco.

PMCID: PMC2593663
PMID: 18945933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Am Surg. 2008 Oct;74(10):921-4.

Long-term outcome of endorectal advancement flap for complex anorectal fistulae.

Abbas MA(1), Lemus-Rangel R, Hamadani A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Kaiser Permanente,
Los Angeles, California 90027, USA. maher.a.abbas@kp.org

The purpose of this study was to determine the long-term outcome of endorectal
advancement flap (ERF) for complex anorectal fistulae. A total of 38 ERF were
performed in 36 patients (2003-2007). Mean age was 45 years. The most common
fistula type was transsphincteric. Eighty-one per cent of patients had prior
surgical interventions. Primary closure rate was 83 per cent. Of the six initial 
failures, four were noted in patients operated for recurrent rectovaginal
fistula. Postoperative complications occurred in seven patients (19%). During a
mean follow-up of 27 months, recurrent disease was noted in five patients (14%). 
All recurrences were noted in patients with left sided fistulae. At last
follow-up, all patients had healed their fistula except for two. We conclude that
ERF closed most complex anorectal fistulae with an acceptable complication rate
and low recurrence rate. Recurrent rectovaginal fistula was associated with a
lower closure rate.

PMID: 18942614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Oct 28;105(43):16814-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0807821105. Epub 2008 Oct 20.

Submergence tolerance conferred by Sub1A is mediated by SLR1 and SLRL1
restriction of gibberellin responses in rice.

Fukao T(1), Bailey-Serres J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, Center for Plant Cell Biology,
University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

Submergence-tolerant rice maintains viability during complete submergence by
limiting underwater elongation until floodwaters recede. Acclimation responses to
submergence are coordinated by the submergence-inducible Sub1A, which encodes an 
ethylene-responsive factor-type transcription factor (ERF). Sub1A is limited to
tolerant genotypes and sufficient to confer submergence tolerance to intolerant
accessions. Here we evaluated the role of Sub1A in the integration of ethylene,
abscisic acid (ABA), and gibberellin (GA) signaling during submergence. The
submergence-stimulated decrease in ABA content was Sub1A-independent, whereas
GA-mediated underwater elongation was significantly restricted by Sub1A.
Transgenics that ectopically express Sub1A displayed classical GA-insensitive
phenotypes, leading to the hypothesis that Sub1A limits the response to GA.
Notably Sub1A increased the accumulation of the GA signaling repressors Slender
Rice-1 (SLR1) and SLR1 Like-1 (SLRL1) and concomitantly diminished GA-inducible
gene expression under submerged conditions. In the Sub1A overexpression line,
SLR1 protein levels declined under prolonged submergence but were accompanied by 
an increase in accumulation of SLRL1, which lacks the DELLA domain. In the
presence of Sub1A, the increase in these GA signaling repressors and decrease in 
GA responsiveness were stimulated by ethylene, which promotes Sub1A expression.
Conversely, ethylene promoted GA responsiveness and shoot elongation in
submergence-intolerant lines. Together, these results demonstrate that Sub1A
limits ethylene-promoted GA responsiveness during submergence by augmenting
accumulation of the GA signaling repressors SLR1 and SLRL1.

PMCID: PMC2575502
PMID: 18936491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Exp Bot. 2008;59(15):4095-107. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ern248. Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Phylogeny, gene structures, and expression patterns of the ERF gene family in
soybean (Glycine max L.).

Zhang G(1), Chen M, Chen X, Xu Z, Guan S, Li LC, Li A, Guo J, Mao L, Ma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 
230026, China.

Members of the ERF transcription factor family play important roles in regulating
gene expression in response to biotic and abiotic stresses. In soybean (Glycine
max L.), however, only a few ERF genes have been studied so far. In this study,
98 unigenes that contained a complete AP2/ERF domain were identified from 63,676 
unique sequences in the DFCI Soybean Gene Index database. The phylogeny, gene
structures, and putative conserved motifs in soybean ERF proteins were analysed, 
and compared with those of Arabidopsis and rice. The members of the soybean ERF
family were divided into 12 subgroups, similar to the case for Arabidopsis.
AP2/ERF domains were conserved among soybean, Arabidopsis, and rice. Outside the 
AP2/ERF domain, many soybean-specific conserved motifs were detected. Expression 
analysis showed that nine unigenes belonging to six ERF family subgroups were
induced by both biotic/abiotic stresses and hormone treatment, suggesting that
they were involved in cross-talk between biotic and abiotic stress-responsive
signalling pathways. Overexpression of two full-length genes from two different
subgroups enhanced the tolerances to drought, salt stresses, and/or pathogen
infection of the tobacco plants. These results will be useful for elucidating ERF
gene-associated stress response signalling pathways in soybean.

PMCID: PMC2639015
PMID: 18832187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Ann Bot. 2009 Jan;103(2):143-50. doi: 10.1093/aob/mcn172. Epub 2008 Sep 29.

Evolutionary analysis of the Sub1 gene cluster that confers submergence tolerance
to domesticated rice.

Fukao T(1), Harris T, Bailey-Serres J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, Center for Plant Cell Biology,
University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Tolerance of complete submergence is recognized in a small
number of accessions of domesticated Asian rice (Oryza sativa) and can be
conferred by the Sub1A-1 gene of the polygenic Submergence-1 (Sub1) locus. In all
O. sativa varieties, the Sub1 locus encodes the ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) 
genes Sub1B and Sub1C. A third paralogous ERF gene, Sub1A, is limited to a subset
of indica accessions. It is thought that O. sativa was domesticated from the gene
pools of the wild perennial species O. rufipogon Griff. and/or the annual species
O. nivara Sharma et Shastry. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
orthologues of the Sub1 locus in the closest relatives of O. sativa to provide
insight into the origin of the gene and allelic variation of the Sub1 locus.
METHODS: Orthologues of the Sub1 genes were isolated from O. rufipogon and O.
nivara by use of oligonucleotide primers corresponding to the most highly
conserved regions of the Sub1 genes of domesticated rice. The phylogenetic
relatedness of Sub1 genes of O. sativa and its wild relatives was evaluated.
KEY RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Both O. rufipogon and O. nivara possess two Sub1
gene orthologues with strong sequence identity to the Sub1B and Sub1C alleles of 
cultivated rice. The phylogeny of the Sub1 genes of the domesticated and wild
rice suggests that Sub1A arose from duplication of Sub1B. Variation in Sub1B
alleles is correlated with the absence or presence of Sub1A. Together, the
results indicate that genetic variation at the Sub1 locus is due to gene
duplication and divergence that have occurred both prior to and after rice
domestication.

PMCID: PMC2707309
PMID: 18824474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Plant Cell Rep. 2009 Jan;28(1):83-93. doi: 10.1007/s00299-008-0610-1. Epub 2008
Sep 24.

Proteins prenylated by type I protein geranylgeranyltransferase act positively on
the jasmonate signalling pathway triggering the biosynthesis of monoterpene
indole alkaloids in Catharanthus roseus.

Courdavault V(1), Burlat V, St-Pierre B, Giglioli-Guivarc'h N.

Author information: 
(1)Université François-Rabelais de Tours, UFR Sciences et Techniques, Parc de
Grandmont, 37200, Tours, France.

In Catharanthus roseus, the first step of monoterpenoid indole alkaloids (MIA)
biosynthesis results from the condensation of the indole precursor tryptamine
with the terpenoid precursor secologanin. Secologanin biosynthesis requires two
successive biosynthetic pathways, the plastidial methyl-D: -erythritol
4-phosphate (MEP) pathway and the monoterpene secoiridoid pathway. In C. roseus
cell culture, the expression of several genes encoding enzymes of these two
pathways is dramatically down-regulated by auxin, while strongly enhanced by
cytokinin and methyl-jasmonate. Furthermore, our previous studies have shown that
protein prenylation events are also involved in the transcriptional activation of
some of these genes. In the present work, we investigate the involvement of
protein prenylation in the jasmonate signalling pathway leading to MIA
biosynthesis. Inhibition of protein prenyltransferase down-regulates the
methyl-jasmonate-induced expression of MEP and monoterpene secoiridoid pathway
genes and thus abolishes MIA biosynthesis. Jointly, it also inhibits the
methyl-jasmonate-induced expression of the AP2/ERF transcription factor ORCA3
that acts as a central regulator of MIA biosynthesis. Finally, a specific
silencing of protein prenyltransferases mediated by RNA interference in C. roseus
cells shows that inhibition of type I protein geranylgeranyltransferase (PGGT-I) 
down-regulates the methyl-jasmonate-induced expression of ORCA3, suggesting that 
PGGT-I prenylated proteins are part of the early steps of jasmonate signalling
leading to MIA biosynthesis.

PMID: 18813931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Brain Res. 2008 Nov 13;1240:132-42. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.08.061. Epub
2008 Sep 3.

Neural correlates of immediate and delayed word recognition memory: an MEG study.

Kim MS(1), Kim JS, Chung CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Sungshin Women's University, Seoul, Korea.

We investigated the neural correlates of immediate and delayed word recognition
memory using whole head magnetoencephalography (MEG). Event-related potential
(ERP) and event-related field (ERF) were simultaneously recorded from 10 subjects
while performing a continuous recognition memory task. Subjects were required to 
determine whether the word was "new" (never before presented) or "old" (presented
previously). Old items were presented either immediately or delayed with five
intervening words, and the words presented only once were referred to as new
words. The grand average ERP waveform showed that immediate repetition was
associated with early P300 and absence of N400, while delayed repetition and new 
word were associated with late P300 and presence of N400. Three ERF components
were observed for immediate repetition, while four components were observed for
delayed repetition and new word conditions. M1 and M2 were observed across all
stimulus-presentation conditions. M3 with medial temporal generators was observed
only in delayed repetition and new word conditions. M4 was observed earlier in
the immediate repetition than in the delayed repetition and new-word conditions. 
For M4 generators, cingulate gyrus activations were observed for all
stimulus-presentation conditions. In addition, activations in the medial temporal
areas were observed for both repetition conditions. These results suggest that
immediate and delayed recognition memory have similar neural networks except for 
the additional involvement of medial temporal areas in delayed recognition
memory. The functional roles of M3 and M4 peaks were discussed in terms of
functional significance of N400 and early/late P300 ERP peaks, which correspond
to M3 and M4, respectively.

PMID: 18804457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Genet Genomics. 2008 Dec;280(6):497-508. doi: 10.1007/s00438-008-0382-x. Epub
2008 Sep 18.

Characterization of the TaAIDFa gene encoding a CRT/DRE-binding factor responsive
to drought, high-salt, and cold stress in wheat.

Xu ZS(1), Ni ZY, Liu L, Nie LN, Li LC, Chen M, Ma YZ.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Facility of Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement ,
Ministry of Agriculture, 100081, Beijing, China.

Dehydration responsive element-binding factors (DBFs) belong to the AP2/ERF
superfamily and play vital regulatory roles in abiotic stress responses in
plants. In this study, we isolated three novel homologs of the DBF gene family in
wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) by screening a drought-induced cDNA library and
designated them as TaAIDFs (T. aestivum abiotic stress-induced DBFs). Compared to
TaAIDFb and TaAIDFc, TaAIDFa lacks a short Ser/Thr-rich region, a putative
phosphorylation site, following the AP2/ERF domain. The TaAIDFa gene, located on 
chromosome 3BS, is interrupted by a single intron at the 17th Arg (R) in the
N-terminal domain. The N-terminal region of the TaAIDFa protein modulates nuclear
localization. The TaAIDFa protein is capable of binding to CRT/DRE elements in
vitro and in vivo, and of trans-activating reporter gene expression in yeast
cells. The TaAIDFa promoter, with various stress-related cis-acting elements,
drives expression of the GUS reporter gene in wheat calli under stress
conditions. This was further confirmed by responses of TaAIDFa transcripts to
drought, salinity, low-temperature, and exogenous ABA. Furthermore,
overexpression of TaAIDFa activated CRT/DRE-containing genes under normal growth 
conditions, and improved drought and osmotic stress tolerances in transgenic
Arabidopsis plants. These results suggested that TaAIDFa encodes a CRT/DRE
element-binding factor that might be involved in multiple abiotic stress signal
transduction pathways.

PMID: 18800227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Immunology. 2009 May;127(1):83-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2008.02926.x.

Genomic expression analysis by single-cell mRNA differential display of quiescent
CD8 T cells from tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes obtained from in vivo liver
tumours.

Zhang W(1), Ding J, Qu Y, Hu H, Lin M, Datta A, Larson A, Liu GE, Li B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106-4935, USA.

We performed a genomic study combining single-cell mRNA differential display and 
RNA subtractive hybridization to elucidate CD8 T-cell quiescence/ignorance. By
comparing actively maintained quiescent CD8 T cells from liver tumour
tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) with quiescent T cells at the single-cell 
level, we identified differentially expressed candidate genes by high-throughput 
screening and comparative analysis of expressed sequence tags (ESTs). While genes
for the T-cell receptor, tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor, TNF-related
apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) and perforin were down-regulated, key genes
such as Tob, transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta, lung Krüpple-like factor
(LKLF), Sno-A, Ski, Myc, Ets-2 repressor factor (ERF) and RE1-silencing
transcription factor (REST/NRSF) complex were highly expressed in the quiescent
TIL CD8 cells. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) further confirmed these 
results. A regulation model is proposed for actively maintained quiescence in CD8
T cells, including three components: up-regulation of the TGF-beta pathway, a
shift in the MYC web and inhibition of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC2678184
PMID: 18778280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Plant Cell Rep. 2008 Nov;27(11):1787-95. doi: 10.1007/s00299-008-0602-1. Epub
2008 Sep 6.

Expression of TERF1 in rice regulates expression of stress-responsive genes and
enhances tolerance to drought and high-salinity.

Gao S(1), Zhang H, Tian Y, Li F, Zhang Z, Lu X, Chen X, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing, China.

Drought and high-salinity are the important constraints that severely affect
plant development and crop yield worldwide. It has been established that ethylene
response factor (ERF) proteins play important regulatory roles in plant response 
to abiotic and biotic stresses. Our previous researches have revealed that
transgenic tobacco over-expressing TERF1 (encoding a tomato ERF protein) showed
enhanced tolerance to abiotic stress. Here, we further investigate the function
of TERF1 in transgenic rice. Compared with the wild-type plants, overexpression
of TERF1 resulted in an increased tolerance to drought and high-salt in
transgenic rice. And the enhanced tolerance may be associated with the
accumulation of proline and the decrease of water loss. Furthermore, TERF1 can
effectively regulate the expression of stress-related functional genes Lip5,
Wcor413-l, OsPrx and OsABA2, as well as regulatory genes OsCDPK7, OsCDPK13 and
OsCDPK19 under normal growth conditions. Our analyses of cis-acting elements show
that there exist DRE/CRT and/or GCC-box existing in TERF1 targeted gene
promoters. Our results revealed that ectopic expression of TERF1 in rice caused a
series of molecular and physiological alterations and resulted in the transgenic 
rice with enhanced tolerance to abiotic stress, indicating that TERF1 might have 
similar regulatory roles in response to abiotic stress in tobacco and rice.

PMID: 18777179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2008 Dec;46(12):1045-50. doi:
10.1016/j.plaphy.2008.07.007. Epub 2008 Jul 25.

The Arabidopsis transcription factor ESR1 induces in vitro shoot regeneration
through transcriptional activation.

Matsuo N(1), Banno H.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biology Research Center, Chubu University, Kasugai, Aichi 487-8501,
Japan.

The Arabidopsis Enhancer of Shoot Regeneration 1 (ESR1) gene regulates initiation
of in vitro shoot regeneration. In this study, we investigated the
transcription-modulating potential of ESR1. ESR1 induced reporter gene expression
when overexpressed transiently in Arabidopsis leaf cells. Experiments using a
fusion protein with the GAL4 DNA-binding domain located a transactivating domain 
of ESR1 within the C-terminal region. A nuclear localization signal was also
located within the AP2/ERF domain. These results demonstrated that ESR1 functions
as a transcriptional activator. Furthermore, we examined whether transcriptional 
modulation by ESR1 affects the in vitro shoot regeneration efficiency.
Overexpression of ESR1 fused with the VP16 transactivating domain enhanced in
vitro shoot regeneration as well as overexpressed wild-type ESR1 did, while
overexpression of ESR1 fused with a strong repression domain, SRDX, inhibited
shoot regeneration. These results suggest that ESR1 induces shoot regeneration
through its transactivating ability.

PMID: 18771931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Br J Community Nurs. 2008 May;13(5):213-4, 216-8.

An overview of chronic kidney disease management and CAPD in the home.

Jain N(1), Simoyi P.

Author information: 
(1)A Better Life Through Education and Empowerment (ABLE) Project, Kidney
Research, UK. neerjajain@kidneyresearchuk.org

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a common, harmful, but treatable long term
condition. An overview of CKD is provided in this article. Kidney Research UK,
www.kidneyresearchuk.org a national charity dedicated to research, has developed 
the A Better Life through Education and empowerment (ABLE) programme which seeks 
to research and raise awareness o the issues among 'at risk' groups as well as
among relevant health professionals. Part Two of the renal NSF suggests many
actions that can be taken in primary care to prevent CKD. In the event of
Established Renal Failure (ERF), there are a number of treatment options
available including continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD), described
here. Kidney Research UK's Patient DVD module two (complimentary copy attached to
this issue) provides more detail using case studies. The DVD offers practical
help, support and guidance on how to overcome some of the challenges.

PMID: 18771184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2008 Dec;46(12):1051-61. doi:
10.1016/j.plaphy.2008.07.003. Epub 2008 Jul 19.

AtERF38 (At2g35700), an AP2/ERF family transcription factor gene from Arabidopsis
thaliana, is expressed in specific cell types of roots, stems and seeds that
undergo suberization.

Lasserre E(1), Jobet E, Llauro C, Delseny M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Génome et Dévelopement des Plantes, Université de Perpignan, CNRS,
IRD; 52 avenue P. Alduy 66860 Perpignan, France. lasserre@univ-perp.fr

An inverse genetic approach was used to gain insight into the role of
AP2/ERF-type transcription factors genes during plant development in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Here we show that the expression pattern of AtERF38, which is, among
the organs tested, more intensively expressed in mature siliques and floral
stems, is closely associated with tissues that undergo secondary cell wall
modifications. Firstly, public microarray data sets analysis indicates that
AtERF38 is coregulated with several genes involved in secondary wall thickening. 
Secondly, this was experimentally confirmed in different types of cells
expressing a Pro(AtERF38)::GUS fusion: histochemical analysis revealed strong and
specific GUS activity in outer integument cells of mature seeds, endodermal cells
of the roots in the primary developmental stage and some sclerified cells of
mature inflorescence stems. All of these cells are known or shown here to be
characterized by a reinforced wall. The latter, which have not been well
characterized to date in Arabidopsis and may be suberized, could benefit of the
use of AtERF38 as a specific marker. We were not able to detect any phenotype in 
an insertion line in which ectopic expression of AtERF38 is caused by the
insertion of a T-DNA in its promoter. Nevertheless, AtERF28 may be considered as 
a candidate regulator of secondary wall metabolism in particular cell types that 
are not reinforced by the typical deposition of lignin and cellulose, but that
have at least in common accumulation of suberin-like lipid polyesters in their
walls.

PMID: 18723362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Plant Cell. 2008 Jul;20(7):1915-29. doi: 10.1105/tpc.108.058529. Epub 2008 Jul
29.

XopD SUMO protease affects host transcription, promotes pathogen growth, and
delays symptom development in xanthomonas-infected tomato leaves.

Kim JG(1), Taylor KW, Hotson A, Keegan M, Schmelz EA, Mudgett MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Plant Cell. 2008 Jul;20(7):1731.

We demonstrate that XopD, a type III effector from Xanthomonas campestris
pathovar vesicatoria (Xcv), suppresses symptom production during the late stages 
of infection in susceptible tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) leaves. XopD-dependent 
delay of tissue degeneration correlates with reduced chlorophyll loss, reduced
salicylic acid levels, and changes in the mRNA abundance of senescence- and
defense-associated genes despite high pathogen titers. Subsequent
structure-function analyses led to the discovery that XopD is a DNA binding
protein that alters host transcription. XopD contains a putative helix-loop-helix
domain required for DNA binding and two conserved ERF-associated amphiphilic
motifs required to repress salicylic acid- and jasmonic acid-induced gene
transcription in planta. Taken together, these data reveal that XopD is a unique 
virulence factor in Xcv that alters host transcription, promotes pathogen
multiplication, and delays the onset of leaf chlorosis and necrosis.

PMCID: PMC2518228
PMID: 18664616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Plant Mol Biol. 2008 Oct;68(3):225-37. doi: 10.1007/s11103-008-9364-y. Epub 2008 
Jul 29.

BABY BOOM target genes provide diverse entry points into cell proliferation and
cell growth pathways.

Passarinho P(1), Ketelaar T, Xing M, van Arkel J, Maliepaard C, Hendriks MW,
Joosen R, Lammers M, Herdies L, den Boer B, van der Geest L, Boutilier K.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Research International, P.O. Box 16, 6700 AA Wageningen, The
Netherlands.

Ectopic expression of the Brassica napus BABY BOOM (BBM) AP2/ERF transcription
factor is sufficient to induce spontaneous cell proliferation leading primarily
to somatic embryogenesis, but also to organogenesis and callus formation. We used
DNA microarray analysis in combination with a post-translationally regulated
BBM:GR protein and cycloheximide to identify target genes that are directly
activated by BBM expression in Arabidopsis seedlings. We show that BBM activated 
the expression of a largely uncharacterized set of genes encoding proteins with
potential roles in transcription, cellular signaling, cell wall biosynthesis and 
targeted protein turnover. A number of the target genes have been shown to be
expressed in meristems or to be involved in cell wall modifications associated
with dividing/growing cells. One of the BBM target genes encodes an ADF/cofilin
protein, ACTIN DEPOLYMERIZING FACTOR9 (ADF9). The consequences of BBM:GR
activation on the actin cytoskeleton were followed using the GFP:FIMBRIN ACTIN
BINDING DOMAIN2 (GFP:FABD) actin marker. Dexamethasone-mediated BBM:GR activation
induced dramatic changes in actin organization resulting in the formation of
dense actin networks with high turnover rates, a phenotype that is consistent
with cells that are rapidly undergoing cytoplasmic reorganization. Together the
data suggest that the BBM transcription factor activates a complex network of
developmental pathways associated with cell proliferation and growth.

PMID: 18663586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Planta. 2008 Sep;228(4):701-8. doi: 10.1007/s00425-008-0782-5. Epub 2008 Jul 19.

Ectopic expression of pepper CaPF1 in potato enhances multiple stresses tolerance
and delays initiation of in vitro tuberization.

Youm JW(1), Jeon JH, Choi D, Yi SY, Joung H, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Genome Research Center, KRIBB, 111 Gwahangno, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon,
305-806 South Korea.

Ethylene-responsive factors (ERFs) are plant-specific transcription factors, many
of which have been linked to plant defense responses. However, little is known
about the functional significance of ERF genes in potato plants compared to the
model plant species Arabidopsis. We show here that overexpression of CaPF1, an
ERF/AP2-type pepper transcription factor gene, effectively increased tolerance to
freezing, heat, heavy metal, and oxidative stress in potatoes. Interestingly,
CaPF1 was involved in tuber formation in potato plants. The time course of
microtuber formation was significantly retarded in potato plants that
overexpressed CaPF1 compared with wild-type potato plants. Overall, the results
of the present study indicate that the pepper transcription factor gene, CaPF1,
is involved in promotion of multiple stress tolerance and retardation of in vitro
tuberization in potato plants.

PMID: 18642026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Fen Zi Xi Bao Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2008 Jun;41(3):192-206.

[Cloning and bioinformatic analyzing of transcription factor AP2/ERF-B3 subfamily
genes from Brassica napus L. Huyou 15].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhuang J(1), Zhou XR, Sun CC, Guan BC, Peng RH, Qiao YS, Zhang Z, Xiong AS, Yao
QH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095,
China.

AP2/ERF is a large family of transcription factors in plant. Genes in the AP2/ERF
family encode transcriptional regulators with a variety of functions involved in 
the developmental and physiological processes in plants. Two AP2/ERF family
transcriptional regulators (BnaERFB3-1 and BnaERFB3-2) were isolated from B.
napus by in silico cloning method using the conserved domain amino acid sequence 
of A. thaliana AP2/ERF-B3 subfamily as probe. Based on the sequences of
BnaERFB3-1 and BnaERFB3-2, we isolated the BnaERFB3-1-Hy15 gene and
BnaERFB3-2-Hy15 gene from winter and spring type B. napus L. cv Huyou15 by RT-PCR
and PCR using cDNA and DNA as template. DNA sequencing and analyzing indicated
that there was only one amino acid residue difference between BnaERFB3-1 and
BnaERFB3-1-Hy15, BnaERFB3-2 and BnaERFB3-2-Hy15, respectively. No intron
localized on the two genes from Huyou15. Then, deduced amino acid sequence,
composition, hydrophobicty and hydrophilicity, physical and chemical
characterization, phylogenetic tree, conserved domain sequences, function domain,
molecular modeling, and folding state were predicted and analyzed.
BnaERFB3-1-Hy15 and BnaERFB3-2-Hy15 were hydrophilic protein. The two proteins
and AtERF5 have similar three-dimension structure. The disordered residues of
protein BnaERFB3-1-Hy15 and BnaERFB3-2-Hy15 were higher than that of AtERF5.
BnaERFB3-1 was mainly expressed in seed, while BnaERFB3-2 was mainly expressed in
root. Moreover, those genes were successfully constructed into the recombinant
plasmids of plant expression vector and yeast expression vector, which
established a base for transformation of oilseed and studies of those genes
function in abiotic stresses of B. napus.

PMID: 18630598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Exp Bot. 2008;59(11):3111-20. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ern165. Epub 2008 Jul 7.

A novel activator-type ERF of Thinopyrum intermedium, TiERF1, positively
regulates defence responses.

Liang H(1), Lu Y, Liu H, Wang F, Xin Z, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement,
Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing
100081, PR China.

Thinopyrum intermedium is resistant to many different pathogens. To understand
the roles of ethylene response factors (ERFs) in defence responses, the first
member of the ERF family in T. intermedium, TiERF1, was characterized and
functionally analysed in this study. The TiERF1 gene encodes a putative protein
of 292 amino acids, belonging to the B3 subgroup of the ERF transcription factor 
family. Biochemical assays demonstrated that the TiERF1 protein is capable of
binding to the GCC box, a cis-element present in the promoters of
pathogenesis-related (PR) genes, and possessing transactivation activity, as well
as localizing to the nucleus. The transcript of TiERF1 in T. intermedium is
rapidly induced by infection with Rhizoctonia cerealis, Fusarium graminearum, or 
Blumeria graminis, and ethylene, jasmonic acid, and salicylic acid treatments.
More importantly, the ectopic expression of TiERF1 in tobacco activated the
transcript of the PR genes of tobacco with a GCC box cis-element, and ACO and ACS
genes key to ethylene synthesis, and in turn improved the resistance level to
Alternaria alternata and tobacco mosaic virus, as well as causing some phenotypic
changes associated with ethylene response in the transgenic tobacco plants. Taken
together, TiERF1 protein as an ERF transcription activator positively regulates
defence responses via the activation of some defence-related genes.

PMCID: PMC2504348
PMID: 18611911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Eur J Neurosci. 2008 Jun;27(12):3329-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06286.x.

Selective attention to sound location or pitch studied with event-related brain
potentials and magnetic fields.

Degerman A(1), Rinne T, Särkkä AK, Salmi J, Alho K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Helsinki, Finland.
alexander.degerman@helsinki.fi

Event-related brain potentials (ERPs) and magnetic fields (ERFs) were used to
compare brain activity associated with selective attention to sound location or
pitch in humans. Sixteen healthy adults participated in the ERP experiment, and
11 adults in the ERF experiment. In different conditions, the participants
focused their attention on a designated sound location or pitch, or pictures
presented on a screen, in order to detect target sounds or pictures among the
attended stimuli. In the Attend Location condition, the location of sounds varied
randomly (left or right), while their pitch (high or low) was kept constant. In
the Attend Pitch condition, sounds of varying pitch (high or low) were presented 
at a constant location (left or right). Consistent with previous ERP results,
selective attention to either sound feature produced a negative difference (Nd)
between ERPs to attended and unattended sounds. In addition, ERPs showed a more
posterior scalp distribution for the location-related Nd than for the
pitch-related Nd, suggesting partially different generators for these Nds. The
ERF source analyses found no source distribution differences between the
pitch-related Ndm (the magnetic counterpart of the Nd) and location-related Ndm
in the superior temporal cortex (STC), where the main sources of the Ndm effects 
are thought to be located. Thus, the ERP scalp distribution differences between
the location-related and pitch-related Nd effects may have been caused by
activity of areas outside the STC, perhaps in the inferior parietal regions.

PMID: 18598270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Planta. 2008 Oct;228(5):777-87. doi: 10.1007/s00425-008-0779-0. Epub 2008 Jul 3.

Expression of the ethylene response factor gene TSRF1 enhances abscisic acid
responses during seedling development in tobacco.

Zhang H(1), Yang Y, Zhang Z, Chen J, Wang XC, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100081, China.

Ethylene response factor (ERF) proteins function as multiple regulators in the
interaction of different stress-responsive pathways. During investigating the
interaction of ethylene and abscisic acid (ABA) pathways, several GCC-box-binding
repressors of ERF proteins have been reported to repress both ethylene- and
ABA-related responses, but it is unclear how GCC-box-binding activator ERF
proteins are involved in this interaction. Previously, we isolated an ERF protein
tomato stress-responsive factor 1 (TSRF1) from tomato by yeast one hybrid, and
showed that TSRF1 as a transcriptional activator physically interacts with GCC
box, and activates the expression of GCC box-containing genes and enhances
resistance to pathogens, while ABA treatment alters the binding ability of TSRF1 
with this element and decreases resistance to pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum.
Here, we further report that TSRF1 is able to interact with a GCC box-like
sequence (indicated as CE1/GCC in this paper) containing the core sequence of
ZmABI4-binding-CE1-like element, and regulates ABA responses. Overexpression of
TSRF1 in tobacco enhances ABA sensitivity during germination, cotyledon expansion
and root elongation. Biochemical and molecular analyses demonstrate that TSRF1
interacts with CE1/GCC. Importantly, ABA treatment enhances the interaction of
TSRF1 with the ABA-responsive element and subsequently increasing the expression 
of ABA-responsive or CE1/GCC-containing genes. In addition, TSRF1 also promotes
the expression of senescence-associated genes and tobacco seedling senescence in 
response to ABA. These results show that TSRF1, a GCC-box-binding activator in
plant pathogen resistance, positively regulates ABA-related plant developmental
processes.

PMID: 18597110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Plant Res. 2008 Sep;121(5):499-508. doi: 10.1007/s10265-008-0170-z. Epub 2008
Jun 27.

Upregulation of the promoter activity of the carrot (Daucus carota) phenylalanine
ammonia-lyase gene (DcPAL3) is caused by new members of the transcriptional
regulatory proteins, DcERF1 and DcERF2, which bind to the GCC-box homolog and act
as an activator to the DcPAL3 promoter.

Kimura S(1), Chikagawa Y, Kato M, Maeda K, Ozeki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Technology, Tokyo University of
Agriculture and Technology, 2-24-16 Naka-cho, Koganei, Tokyo, 184-8588, Japan.

The phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) gene, DcPAL3, was expressed during the
synthesis of anthocyanin in suspension-cultured cells of carrot (Daucus carota). 
There were two putative cis-elements in the DcPAL3 promoter region: the box-L and
GCC-box homologs. Both of these are committed to the upregulation of promoter
activity. Although box-L is known as the conserved cis-element present in the
promoter region of most PAL genes of many plant species targeted by the R2R3-MYB 
protein, among PAL genes, the GCC-box homolog is unique to the promoter region of
the DcPAL3 gene. We have isolated two proteins belonging to the
ethylene-responsive element-binding factor (ERF) family, DcERF1 and DcERF2, from 
two different cDNA libraries prepared from anthocyanin-synthesizing cells of
different cultured cell lines of carrot. The methodology employed was yeast
one-hybrid screening with the GCC-box homolog as a bait. Both DcERF1 and DcERF2
bound to the GCC-box homolog sequence in vitro. Transient expression analysis
showed that, in carrot protoplasts, DcERF1 was able bind to the GCC-box homolog
and act as an activator of the DcPAL3 promoter. In contrast, DcERF2 itself had no
ability to activate DcPAL3 promoter activity, possibly because transiently
expressed DcERF2 may not be exported into the nucleus. These results suggest that
DcERF1 and DcERF2 may function in different ways in committing to the
upregulation of the DcPAL3 promoter activity in anthocyanin-synthesizing cells of
carrot.

PMID: 18584290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Med Genet. 2008 Sep;45(9):572-7. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.058388. Epub 2008 Jun
11.

Prevalence and heritability of the metabolic syndrome and its individual
components in a Dutch isolate: the Erasmus Rucphen Family study.

Henneman P(1), Aulchenko YS, Frants RR, van Dijk KW, Oostra BA, van Duijn CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is defined by a combination of
abnormalities that are all individual risk factors for the development of type 2 
diabetes and/or cardiovascular disease. The aetiology of MetS includes both an
environmental and genetic component. We studied the prevalence and heritability
of MetS and its individual components Dutch genetic isolate.
METHODS: The Erasmus Rucphen Family study (ERF) consists of some 3000
genealogically documented individuals from a Dutch genetic isolate. Data on waist
circumference (WC), blood pressure (BP), high density lipoprotein cholesterol
(HDL-C), triglycerides (TG) and fasting plasma glucose values (FPG) are
available. MetS was defined according to the International Diabetes Federation
(IDF) (2003) and National Cholesterol Education program Adult Panel III (NCEP
ATPIII) criteria. Variance component analysis was applied to extended family data
to test for evidence of heritability.
RESULTS: The prevalence of MetS in the ERF cohort ranged from 23-37% depending on
MetS definition and gender considered. Low HDL-C and high WC are the main
contributors to MetS. The heritability of MetS corrected for sibship effect was
10.6% (p = 0.01) according to IDF and 13.2% (p = 0.07) according to NCEP ATPIII
criteria. In addition, the heritability of individual components of MetS were
analysed and found to range from 21.9-42.9%. The highest heritability was found
for HDL-C (42.9%, p<0.0001) and WC (37.8%, p<0.0001). In addition, WC, systolic
BP, HDL-C and TG showed low to moderate genetic correlation (RhoG) between
genders, whereas FPG and diastolic BP showed absolute genetic correlation between
genders.
CONCLUSION: Although the prevalence of MetS was high, the heritability of MetS in
the ERF population was found to be moderate. The high heritability of the
individual components of MetS indicates that the genetic dissection of MetS
should be approached from its individual components.

PMID: 18550697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2008 Jun;13(3):118-24.

Demography of renal disease in childhood.

Lewis MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Central Manchester and Manchester
Children's University Hospitals NHS Trust, Pendlebury, Manchester, UK.
malcolm.lewis@cmmc.nhs.uk

The demography of renal failure in childhood is examined through an analysis of
the UK Renal Registry data on patients in established renal failure (ERF) and
studies of chronic kidney disease populations. The predominant cause is renal
dysplasia and related conditions. Congenital obstructive uropathy is the third
largest group overall and the second in early childhood. Males predominate in
both these groups. Antenatal diagnoses are frequently not made despite routine
scanning. Those children, who present to nephrology after the age of 3 months
without an antenatal diagnosis, progress to ERF later than those diagnosed
antenatally. Discrepancies exist between the demography of antenatal diagnoses
and those seen postnatally. This is likely to represent the limitations of
antenatal ultrasound as a diagnostic screening tool.

PMID: 18543418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Plant J. 2008 Sep;55(6):954-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2008.03565.x. Epub 2008 
Jun 4.

AtMYBL2, a protein with a single MYB domain, acts as a negative regulator of
anthocyanin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis.

Matsui K(1), Umemura Y, Ohme-Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Genome-based Biofactory, National Institute of Advanced 
Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Japan.

SUMMARY: In Arabidopsis, MYB transcription factors regulate flavonoid
biosynthesis via the formation of protein complexes with a basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factor and a WD40 repeat protein. Several R3-type single-MYB
proteins (R3-MYB), such as CPC and TRY, act as negative regulators of the
development of epidermal cells. However, such regulators of flavonoid
biosynthesis have not yet been reported, to our knowledge. We show here that an
R3-MYB protein, AtMYBL2, acts as a transcriptional repressor and negatively
regulates the biosynthesis of anthocyanin in Arabidopsis. In an AtMYBL2 knockout 
line (mybl2), the expression of the DFR and TT8 genes was enhanced and resulted
in the ectopic accumulation of anthocyanin, while ectopic expression of AtMYBL2
or of a chimeric repressor that is a dominant negative form of AtMYBL2 suppressed
the expression of DFR and TT8, and the biosynthesis of anthocyanin. The
expression of AtMYBL2 was detected in various tissues but not in those in which
anthocyanin accumulated or TT8 was expressed. The minimal repression domain of
AtMYBL2 was found to be the six amino acids (TLLLFR) at the carboxyl terminus,
and TLLLFR appears to be a novel repression motif that is different from the
ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif. The defective phenotype of
mybl2 mutants was complemented by 35S:AtMYBL2 but enhanced by a truncated form of
AtMYBL2 from which the repression domain had been deleted. AtMYBL2 bound directly
to TT8 protein and this complex suppressed the expression of DFR and TT8. The
repression activity of AtMYBL2 appears to play a critical role in the regulation 
of anthocyanin biosynthesis.

PMID: 18532977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Exp Bot. 2008;59(10):2781-91. doi: 10.1093/jxb/ern136. Epub 2008 May 29.

Transcriptome profiling of ripening nectarine (Prunus persica L. Batsch) fruit
treated with 1-MCP.

Ziliotto F(1), Begheldo M, Rasori A, Bonghi C, Tonutti P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Agronomy and Crop Science, University of Padova,
Viale dell' Università 16, I-35025 Legnaro, Padova, Italy.

A large-scale transcriptome analysis has been conducted using microPEACH1.0
microarray on nectarine (Prunus persica L. Batsch) fruit treated with
1-methylcyclopropene (1-MCP). 1-MCP maintained flesh firmness but did not block
ethylene biosynthesis. Compared with samples at harvest, only nine genes appeared
to be differentially expressed when fruit were sampled immediately after
treatment, while a total of 90 targets were up- or down-regulated in untreated
fruit. The effect of 1-MCP was confirmed by a direct comparison of transcript
profiles in treated and untreated fruit after 24 h of incubation with 106 targets
differentially expressed. About 30% of these targets correspond to genes involved
in primary metabolism and response processes related to ethylene, auxin, and
other hormones. In treated fruit, altered transcript accumulation was detected
for some genes with a role in ripening-related events such as softening, colour
development, and sugar metabolism. A rapid decrease in flesh firmness and an
increase in ethylene production were observed in treated fruit maintained for 48 
h in air at 20 degrees C after the end of the incubation period. Microarray
comparison of this sample with untreated fruit 24 h after harvest revealed that
about 45% of the genes affected by 1-MCP at the end of the incubation period
changed their expression during the following 48 h in air. Among these genes, an 
ethylene receptor (ETR2) and three ethylene-responsive factors (ERF) were
present, together with other transcription factors and ethylene-dependent genes
involved in quality parameter changes.

PMCID: PMC2486471
PMID: 18515268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. BMC Infect Dis. 2008 May 16;8:66. doi: 10.1186/1471-2334-8-66.

Potential impact of infant feeding recommendations on mortality and HIV-infection
in children born to HIV-infected mothers in Africa: a simulation.

Atashili J(1), Kalilani L, Seksaria V, Sickbert-Bennett EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, USA.
atashili@email.unc.edu

BACKGROUND: Although breast-feeding accounts for 15-20% of mother-to-child
transmission (MTCT) of HIV, it is not prohibited in some developing countries
because of the higher mortality associated with not breast-feeding. We assessed
the potential impact, on HIV infection and infant mortality, of a recommendation 
for shorter durations of exclusive breast-feeding (EBF) and poor compliance to
these recommendations.
METHODS: We developed a deterministic mathematical model using primarily
parameters from published studies conducted in Uganda or Kenya and took into
account non-compliance resulting in mixed-feeding practices. Outcomes included
the number of children HIV-infected and/or dead (cumulative mortality) at 2 years
following each of 6 scenarios of infant-feeding recommendations in children born 
to HIV-infected women: Exclusive replacement-feeding (ERF) with 100% compliance, 
EBF for 6 months with 100% compliance, EBF for 4 months with 100% compliance, ERF
with 70% compliance, EBF for 6 months with 85% compliance, EBF for 4 months with 
85% compliance
RESULTS: In the base model, reducing the duration of EBF from 6 to 4 months
reduced HIV infection by 11.8% while increasing mortality by 0.4%. Mixed-feeding 
in 15% of the infants increased HIV infection and mortality respectively by 2.1% 
and 0.5% when EBF for 6 months was recommended; and by 1.7% and 0.3% when EBF for
4 months was recommended. In sensitivity analysis, recommending EBF resulted in
the least cumulative mortality when the a) mortality in replacement-fed infants
was greater than 50 per 1000 person-years, b) rate of infection in exclusively
breast-fed infants was less than 2 per 1000 breast-fed infants per week, c) rate 
of progression from HIV to AIDS was less than 15 per 1000 infected infants per
week, or d) mortality due to HIV/AIDS was less than 200 per 1000 infants with
HIV/AIDS per year.
CONCLUSION: Recommending shorter durations of breast-feeding in infants born to
HIV-infected women in these settings may substantially reduce infant HIV
infection but not mortality. When EBF for shorter durations is recommended, lower
mortality could be achieved by a simultaneous reduction in the rate of
progression from HIV to AIDS and or HIV/AIDS mortality, achievable by the use of 
HAART in infants.

PMCID: PMC2396166
PMID: 18485200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Plant Physiol. 2008 Jul;147(3):1347-57. doi: 10.1104/pp.108.117523. Epub 2008 May
8.

The AP2/ERF domain transcription factor ORA59 integrates jasmonic acid and
ethylene signals in plant defense.

Pré M(1), Atallah M, Champion A, De Vos M, Pieterse CM, Memelink J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology Leiden, Clusius Laboratory, Leiden University, 2333 AL
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Plant defense against pathogens depends on the action of several endogenously
produced hormones, including jasmonic acid (JA) and ethylene. In certain defense 
responses, JA and ethylene signaling pathways synergize to activate a specific
set of defense genes. Here, we describe the role of the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis 
thaliana) APETALA2/ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR (AP2/ERF) domain transcription factor
ORA59 in JA and ethylene signaling and in defense. JA- and ethylene-responsive
expression of several defense genes, including PLANT DEFENSIN1.2 (PDF1.2),
depended on ORA59. As a result, overexpression of ORA59 caused increased
resistance against the fungus Botrytis cinerea, whereas ORA59-silenced plants
were more susceptible. Several AP2/ERF domain transcription factors have been
suggested to be positive regulators of PDF1.2 gene expression based on
overexpression in stably transformed plants. Using two different transient
overexpression approaches, we found that only ORA59 and ERF1 were able to
activate PDF1.2 gene expression, in contrast to the related proteins AtERF1 and
AtERF2. Our results demonstrate that ORA59 is an essential integrator of the JA
and ethylene signal transduction pathways and thereby provide new insight into
the nature of the molecular components involved in the cross talk between these
two hormones.

PMCID: PMC2442530
PMID: 18467450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jul 4;371(3):468-74. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.087. Epub 2008 Apr 28.

Genome-wide analysis of the AP2/ERF gene family in Populus trichocarpa.

Zhuang J(1), Cai B, Peng RH, Zhu B, Jin XF, Xue Y, Gao F, Fu XY, Tian YS, Zhao W,
Qiao YS, Zhang Z, Xiong AS, Yao QH.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 2901 Beidi Road, Shanghai 201106,
China.

Populus is a model system for investigating the wood development, crown
formation, and disease resistance in perennial plants. AR2/ERF is a large family 
of transcription factors in plant, encoding transcriptional regulators with a
variety of functions involved in the developmental and physiological processes.
Here, starting from database of Populus genome, we identified 200 AP2/ERF genes
by in silico cloning method using the AP2/ERF conserved domain amino acid
sequence of Arabidopsis thaliana as probe. Based on the number of AP2/ERF domains
and the function of the genes, those AP2/ERF genes from Populus were classified
into four subfamilies named the AP2, DREB, ERF, RAV, and a soloist. Among these
genes, the number genes of total AP2/ERF family genes, DREB subfamily, and ERF
subfamily from Populus trichocarpa were about 1.4-1.6-fold than those from A.
thaliana. The rates were very similar for the putative homologs between Populus
and Arabidopsis.

PMID: 18442469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Plant Physiol. 2008 Jun;147(2):528-42. doi: 10.1104/pp.108.116897. Epub 2008 Apr 
25.

Functional identification of Arabidopsis stress regulatory genes using the
controlled cDNA overexpression system.

Papdi C(1), Abrahám E, Joseph MP, Popescu C, Koncz C, Szabados L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Biology, Biological Research Centre, 6726-Szeged, Hungary.

Responses to environmental stresses in higher plants are controlled by a complex 
web of abscisic acid (ABA)-dependent and independent signaling pathways. To
perform genetic screens for identification of novel Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis
thaliana) loci involved in the control of abiotic stress responses, a
complementary DNA (cDNA) expression library was created in a Gateway version of
estradiol-inducible XVE binary vector (controlled cDNA overexpression system
[COS]). The COS system was tested in three genetic screens by selecting for ABA
insensitivity, salt tolerance, and activation of a stress-responsive ADH1-LUC
(alcohol dehydrogenase-luciferase) reporter gene. Twenty-seven cDNAs conferring
dominant, estradiol-dependent stress tolerance phenotype, were identified by
polymerase chain reaction amplification and sequence analysis. Several cDNAs were
recloned into the XVE vector and transformed recurrently into Arabidopsis, to
confirm that the observed conditional phenotypes were due to their
estradiol-dependent expression. Characterization of a cDNA conferring
insensitivity to ABA in germination assays has identified the coding region of
heat shock protein HSP17.6A suggesting its implication in ABA signal
transduction. Screening for enhanced salt tolerance in germination and seedling
growth assays revealed that estradiol-controlled overexpression of a 2-alkenal
reductase cDNA confers considerable level of salt insensitivity. Screening for
transcriptional activation of stress- and ABA-inducible ADH1-LUC reporter gene
has identified the ERF/AP2-type transcription factor RAP2.12, which sustained
high-level ADH1-LUC bioluminescence, enhanced ADH1 transcription rate, and
increased ADH enzyme activity in the presence of estradiol. These data illustrate
that application of the COS cDNA expression library provides an efficient
strategy for genetic identification and characterization of novel regulators of
abiotic stress responses.

PMCID: PMC2409023
PMID: 18441225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Coll Antropol. 2008 Jan;32 Suppl 1:177-81.

Mental lexicon and derivational rules.

Palmovic M(1), Maricic A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Psycholinguistic Research, Department for Speech and Language
Pathology, Faculty of Education and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of
Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. palmovic@erf.hr

Lexical decision task in an event-related potential experiment was used in order 
to determine the organization of mental lexicon regarding the polimorphemic
words: are they stored as unanalyzable items or as separate morphemes? The
results indicate the later: while monomorphemic words elicit N400 component,
usually related to lexical-semantic processing, prefixed words and prefixed
pseudo-words elicit left anterior negativity (LAN), usually related to
grammatical (morphosyntactic) processes. These components indicate that the
speakers apply grammatical (i.e., word-formation) rules and combine morphemes in 
order to obtain lexical meaning of the prefixed word.

PMID: 18405079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2008;133:132-40.

Modeling and simulation of an intelligent ER force element for rehabilitation of 
human hands.

Hosseini-Sianaki A(1), Nikkhoo M.

Author information: 
(1)Islamic Azad University, Central Tehran Branch, Tehran, Iran.
a_hoseini@iauctb.ac.ir

Improving the process of designing modern tools and devices for rehabilitation of
both muscular and neural disabilities requires such intelligent systems that
together with organizing intensive therapy could have an effective role in
returning some of the patient's abilities and encourage them to complete the
course of the training in order to get back to normal daily life. In this paper, 
first properties and laws governing the behavior of the electro-rheological fluid
(ERF) as a smart material are briefly described. Then the principles of designing
a two-degree-of-freedom intelligent damping system based on an
electro-rheological fluid for the application in rehabilitation of human hands
are explained. This mechanism provides the capability to create a virtual
environment in which the training can be intelligently manipulated on the basis
of body's feedback system. Also it can encourage the patient to continue with the
therapy. Modeling and simulation of the electro-rheological (ER) force element is
presented and results are compared with the available experimental data obtained,
by other researchers, from a prototype system with relatively similar geometry
but for other applications. Very good agreement is being noted between the
theoretical model and the experimental data for different test configurations.

PMID: 18376021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Sci China C Life Sci. 2008 Apr;51(4):336-45. doi: 10.1007/s11427-008-0044-6. Epub
2008 Mar 27.

A seed-specific AP2-domain transcription factor from soybean plays a certain role
in regulation of seed germination.

Wang C(1), Wang H, Zhang J, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Plant seed development and germination are under strict temporal and spatial
regulation, and transcription factors play important roles in this regulation. In
the present study we identified an EST expressed specifically in the developing
soybean seeds. The full length of the gene was obtained through further RACE
analysis and the gene was named GmSGR. Sequence analysis revealed that this gene 
belonged to the AP2/ERF transcription factor family. Its AP2 domain had the
highest similarity with that of the A-3 member AtABI4 of DREB subgroup in the
AP2/ERF family in Arabidopsis. GmSGR did not exhibit transcriptional activation
activity in the yeast assay system. GmSGR was overexpressed in Arabidopsis and
the germination rates of the transgenic seeds were significantly higher than that
of the wild type seeds under higher concentrations of ABA and glucose
respectively. However, the germination rates of the transgenic seeds were lower
than that of control under salt stress. The expression of AtEm6 and AtRD29B was
higher in the seedlings of the transgenic plants than that in the wild-type
seedlings. These results suggest that GmSGR may confer reduced ABA sensitivity
and enhanced salt sensitivity to the transgenic seeds through regulating the
expression of AtEm6 and AtRD29B genes.

PMID: 18368311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Plant Mol Biol. 2008 Jun;67(3):305-22. doi: 10.1007/s11103-008-9319-3.

The Q-type C2H2 zinc finger subfamily of transcription factors in Triticum
aestivum is predominantly expressed in roots and enriched with members containing
an EAR repressor motif and responsive to drought stress.

Kam J(1), Gresshoff PM, Shorter R, Xue GP.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Plant Industry, St. Lucia, QLD 4067, Australia.

Q-type C2H2 zinc finger proteins (ZFPs) form a subfamily of transcription factors
that contain a plant-specific QALGGH amino acid motif. A total of 47 expressed
Q-type C2H2 zinc finger genes in bread wheat (Triticum aestivum) (designated
TaZFP) were identified from the current databases. Protein sequence analysis for 
the presence of ERF-associated amphiphilic repressor (EAR) motif sequences from
known transcriptional repressors revealed that 26% of the TaZFP subfamily members
contain an EAR motif. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of the mRNA distribution of 44
TaZFP genes in various organs revealed that 30 genes were predominantly expressed
in the roots. The majority of the TaZFP genes showed significant changes in their
mRNA levels during leaf development and aging. Expression of 37 TaZFP genes in
the leaves and roots responded to drought stress at least in one organ with 74%
of the drought-responsive TaZFP genes being down-regulated in the
drought-stressed roots. In contrast, only 6 out of the 44 TaZFP genes showed
expression changes in the leaves with sucrose treatment. Expression of 50% of the
drought-responsive TaZFP genes in the leaves (16 genes analysed) did not respond 
to ABA treatment, indicating that some TaZFP genes are involved in
ABA-independent signalling pathways. These results indicate that the Q-type TaZFP
subfamily is likely to have an important role in wheat roots and is enriched with
members that are potentially involved in regulating cellular activities during
changes of the physiological status of plant cells, as it occurs during drought
stress or leaf development/aging.

PMID: 18347915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Int J Psychophysiol. 2008 May;68(2):94-103. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2007.12.006. 
Epub 2008 Feb 12.

Face processing in adolescents with and without epilepsy.

Taylor MJ(1), Mills T, Smith ML, Pang EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Hospital for Sick Children, University of
Toronto, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X8.
margot.taylor@sickkids.ca

Children with temporal lobe epilepsy frequently suffer memory deficits, often
marked in face processing. To determine the neural correlates of this
dysfunction, we investigated face processing in adolescents with intractable
epilepsy compared to typically developing controls. The M170 and M220 MEG
event-related fields (ERFs) were recorded while the adolescents completed an
n-back task on blocks of upright and inverted faces. Source analyses of the ERF
data were performed using an event-related beamforming technique that allowed the
detection of multiple sources. The control adolescents showed the expected
waveforms and inversion effects, although there were differences in source
localization, compared to the adult literature. The participants with epilepsy
had poor performance on the tasks. The adolescents with extra-temporal lobe
epilepsy showed both the M170 and M220 but the source localizations were highly
atypical. The patients with right temporal lobe epilepsy had an absent or highly 
atypical M220, a component related to face recognition processes. We hypothesize 
that the children with extra-temporal lobe epilepsy have difficulty with face
encoding processes while the patients with right temporal lobe epilepsy have
specific difficulty with face recognition.

PMID: 18343516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Brain Topogr. 2008 Jun;20(4):205-15. doi: 10.1007/s10548-008-0052-7. Epub 2008
Mar 14.

Emotion processing in the visual brain: a MEG analysis.

Peyk P(1), Schupp HT, Elbert T, Junghöfer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Basel, Missionsstrasse 60/62, 4055
Basel, Switzerland. peter.peyk@unibas.ch

Recent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and event-related brain
potential (ERP) studies provide empirical support for the notion that emotional
cues guide selective attention. Extending this line of research, whole head
magneto-encephalogram (MEG) was measured while participants viewed in separate
experimental blocks a continuous stream of either pleasant and neutral or
unpleasant and neutral pictures, presented for 330 ms each. Event-related
magnetic fields (ERF) were analyzed after intersubject sensor coregistration,
complemented by minimum norm estimates (MNE) to explore neural generator sources.
Both streams of analysis converge by demonstrating the selective emotion
processing in an early (120-170 ms) and a late time interval (220-310 ms). ERF
analysis revealed that the polarity of the emotion difference fields was reversed
across early and late intervals suggesting distinct patterns of activation in the
visual processing stream. Source analysis revealed the amplified processing of
emotional pictures in visual processing areas with more pronounced
occipito-parieto-temporal activation in the early time interval, and a stronger
engagement of more anterior, temporal, regions in the later interval. Confirming 
previous ERP studies showing facilitated emotion processing, the present data
suggest that MEG provides a complementary look at the spread of activation in the
visual processing stream.

PMID: 18340522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Poult Sci. 2008 Apr;87(4):636-44. doi: 10.3382/ps.2007-00468.

Expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase in lungs of broiler chickens
following intravenous cellulose microparticle injection.

Hamal KR(1), Wideman R, Anthony N, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA.

Intravenous microparticle (MP) injection is a patented method used to select
broilers with a robust pulmonary capacity and improved resistance to pulmonary
hypertension syndrome (PHS, ascites). Injected MP become entrapped in the
terminal pulmonary arterioles where they elicit an increase in pulmonary arterial
pressure attributable to vascular occlusion and focal thrombocyte aggregation.
Within 2 to 48 h postinjection perivascular mononuclear cell aggregates begin to 
form around MP-occluded vessels. Nitric oxide (NO) has been shown to modulate the
pulmonary arterial pressure response to MP entrapment, but a role of NO during
the more chronic (2 to 48 h) focal inflammatory response has not been evaluated. 
In this study we determined the time-course of inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) expression in the lungs of MP-injected broilers from PHS-resistant (RES)
and PHS-susceptible (SUS) lines. Four-week-old broilers (10 broilers/line per
time point) were injected i.v. with a minimally lethal dose of MP, and the right 
lung was collected at 0 h (no MP) and 2, 24, and 48 h postinjection.
Immunohistochemistry revealed that macrophage infiltration increased over time in
both lines and was higher in the RES line than the SUS line (P<0.0001) at all
time points. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate diaphorase staining
showed nitric oxide synthase activity around MP-occluded vessels and in the
perivascular mononuclear cell aggregates. Relative iNOS expression in lung tissue
was examined by 2-step reverse transcription PCR. Lines differed in relative iNOS
mRNA expression only at 24 h (P<0.001; RES > SUS line). For the RES line iNOS
mRNA expression increased consistently from 0 to 48 h, but for the SUS line iNOS 
mRNA expression increased at 2 h, decreased to baseline at 24 h, and increased
again by 48 h. The decline in iNOS expression in the SUS line between 2 and 24 h 
coincides with the interval when most of the MP-induced mortality occurs, which
suggests that NO synthesized by iNOS may contribute to lower MP-induced mortality
in the RES line when compared with the SUS line.

PMID: 18339983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Plant Physiol. 2008 May;147(1):280-95. doi: 10.1104/pp.107.114041. Epub 2008 Mar 
12.

Tobacco transcription factors: novel insights into transcriptional regulation in 
the Solanaceae.

Rushton PJ(1), Bokowiec MT, Han S, Zhang H, Brannock JF, Chen X, Laudeman TW,
Timko MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA.

Tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) is a member of the Solanaceae, one of the
agronomically most important groups of flowering plants. We have performed an in 
silico analysis of 1.15 million gene-space sequence reads from the tobacco
nuclear genome and report the detailed analysis of more than 2,500 tobacco
transcription factors (TFs). The tobacco genome contains at least one member of
each of the 64 well-characterized TF families identified in sequenced vascular
plant genomes, indicating that evolution of the Solanaceae was not associated
with the gain or loss of TF families. However, we found notable differences
between tobacco and non-Solanaceae species in TF family size and evidence for
both tobacco- and Solanaceae-specific subfamily expansions. Compared with TF
families from sequenced plant genomes, tobacco has a higher proportion of
ERF/AP2, C2H2 zinc finger, homeodomain, GRF, TCP, zinc finger homeodomain, BES,
and STERILE APETALA (SAP) genes and novel subfamilies of BES, C2H2 zinc finger,
SAP, and NAC genes. The novel NAC subfamily, termed TNACS, appears restricted to 
the Solanaceae, as they are absent from currently sequenced plant genomes but
present in tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), pepper (Capsicum annuum), and potato
(Solanum tuberosum). They constitute approximately 25% of NAC genes in tobacco.
Based on our phylogenetic studies, we predict that many of the more than 50
tobacco group IX ERF genes are involved in jasmonate responses. Consistent with
this, over two-thirds of group IX ERF genes tested showed increased mRNA levels
following jasmonate treatment. Our data are a major resource for the Solanaceae
and fill a void in studies of TF families across the plant kingdom.

PMCID: PMC2330323
PMID: 18337489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 11;105(10):4062-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0711034105. Epub 2008 Mar 3.

Barley grain with adhering hulls is controlled by an ERF family transcription
factor gene regulating a lipid biosynthesis pathway.

Taketa S(1), Amano S, Tsujino Y, Sato T, Saisho D, Kakeda K, Nomura M, Suzuki T, 
Matsumoto T, Sato K, Kanamori H, Kawasaki S, Takeda K.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, Kagawa University, Kagawa 761-0795, Japan.

In contrast to other cereals, typical barley cultivars have caryopses with
adhering hulls at maturity, known as covered (hulled) barley. However, a few
barley cultivars are a free-threshing variant called naked (hulless) barley. The 
covered/naked caryopsis is controlled by a single locus (nud) on chromosome arm
7HL. On the basis of positional cloning, we concluded that an ethylene response
factor (ERF) family transcription factor gene controls the covered/naked
caryopsis phenotype. This conclusion was validated by (i) fixation of the 17-kb
deletion harboring the ERF gene among all 100 naked cultivars studied; (ii) two
x-ray-induced nud alleles with a DNA lesion at a different site, each affecting
the putative functional motif; and (iii) gene expression strictly localized to
the testa. Available results indicate the monophyletic origin of naked barley.
The Nud gene has homology to the Arabidopsis WIN1/SHN1 transcription factor gene,
whose deduced function is control of a lipid biosynthesis pathway. Staining with 
a lipophilic dye (Sudan black B) detected a lipid layer on the pericarp epidermis
only in covered barley. We infer that, in covered barley, the contact of the
caryopsis surface, overlaid with lipids to the inner side of the hull, generates 
organ adhesion.

PMCID: PMC2268812
PMID: 18316719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Plant Physiol. 2008 Nov 1;165(16):1717-25. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2007.12.006.
Epub 2008 Mar 3.

Overexpression of OsERF1, a novel rice ERF gene, up-regulates ethylene-responsive
genes expression besides affects growth and development in Arabidopsis.

Hu Y(1), Zhao L, Chong K, Wang T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Molecular & Developmental Biology, Key Laboratory of
Photosynthesis & Environmental Molecular Physiology, Institute of Botany, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Ethylene-responsive factors (ERFs), composing the largest group of AP2/EREBP
transcription factors, are involved in diverse functions and some of them have
been identified in plants. However, even in model plants Arabidopsis and rice,
most of the genes in this group are functionally unknown yet. Especially in rice,
ERF genes involved in ethylene response have not been reported previously. Here, 
we report a novel member of ERF group in rice, OsERF1 (Ethylene Response Factor
gene in Oryza sativa). OsERF1 expressed consistently in different organs of rice 
and could be up-regulated by ethylene, a plant hormone associated with stress
response. Overexpression of OsERF1 in Arabidopsis up-regulated the expression of 
two known ethylene-responsive genes, PDF1.2 and b-chitinase, and also
significantly affected the growth and development of transgenic Arabidopsis.
These results suggest the involvement of OsERF1 in ethylene response.

PMID: 18313797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2008 Feb;16(1):91-8. doi:
10.1109/TNSRE.2007.910286.

MR_CHIROD v.2: magnetic resonance compatible smart hand rehabilitation device for
brain imaging.

Khanicheh A(1), Mintzopoulos D, Weinberg B, Tzika AA, Mavroidis C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Northeastern University, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. azadeh@coe.neu.edu

This paper presents the design, fabrication, and testing of a novel, one
degree-of-freedom, magnetic resonance compatible smart hand interfaced
rehabilitation device (MR_CHIROD v.2), which may be used in brain magnetic
resonance (MR) imaging during handgrip rehabilitation. A key feature of the
device is the use of electrorheological fluids (ERFs) to achieve computer
controlled, variable, and tunable resistive force generation. The device consists
of three major subsystems: 1) an ERF based resistive element, 2) handles, and c) 
two sensors, one optical encoder and one force sensor, to measure the patient
induced motion and force. MR_CHIROD v.2 is designed to resist up to 50% of the
maximum level of gripping force of a human hand and be controlled in real time.
Our results demonstrate that the MR environment does not interfere with the
performance of the MR_CHIROD v.2, and, reciprocally, its use does not cause fMR
image artifacts. The results are encouraging in jointly using MR_CHIROD v.2 and
brain MR imaging to study motor performance and assess rehabilitation after
neurological injuries such as stroke.

PMID: 18303810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Med Trop (Mars). 2007 Dec;67(6):569-72.

[Profile of patients admitted for myocardial infarction at the emergency
reception facility of Principal Hospital in Dakar, Senegal].

[Article in French]

Seck M(1), Diouf I, Acouetey L, Wade KA, Thiam M, Diatta B.

Author information: 
(1)Département urgences anesthésie réanimation hémodialyse, Hôpital Principal de 
Dakar, Sénégal. seckmapate@yahoo.fr

This retrospective study was carried out from January 2005 to December 2006 to
ascertain the profile of patients admitted for treatment of myocardial infarction
(MI) in a modern emergency reception facility (ERF) in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Diagnosis of MI was based on clinical presentation, electrocardiography
(persistent ST-segment depression), and laboratory findings (measurement of
troponine T and CPK MB). Study data included epidemiological parameters
(including risk factors and interval between onset of symptoms and admission),
clinical and paraclinical findings, therapeutic modalities (including any
prehospital management), complications at the time of admission, and mortality
within the first five days. Men accounted for 77% of the 52 consecutive patients 
hospitalized for MI during the study period. Mean age was 59 years. Risk factors 
included hypertension in 46% of cases, tobacco use in 40%, and diabetes in 21%.
The mean interval for management was approximately 29 hours with only 5 patients 
receiving care within the first 6 hours. Chest pain was the main reason for
coming to the ERF (86%). The location of pain was anterior in 58% of cases and
inferior in 37%. Diagnosis was confirmed by laboratory findings in 96% of
patients. Ten patients benefited from transportation by ambulance and four
patients underwent thrombolysis before hospitalization. Complications at the time
of admissions included cardiovascular collapse (n=3), acute pulmonary edema
(n=13), and arrhythmia (n=6). Eleven patients (21%) died within the first five
days. These findings confirm the need to educate the population in an effort to
reduce the interval for management, to develop prehospital medical care, and to
increase the availability of coronary artery revascularization modalities to
improve the prognosis of MI in the acute phase.

PMID: 18300517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Planta. 2008 May;227(6):1389-99. doi: 10.1007/s00425-008-0711-7. Epub 2008 Feb
23.

A RAV-like transcription factor controls photosynthesis and senescence in
soybean.

Zhao L(1), Luo Q, Yang C, Han Y, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Soybean Biology of Chinese Education Ministry, Northeast
Agriculture University, 150030, Harbin, China.

A cDNA library enriched for mRNAs encoding ESTs that increased in abundance
during short days was constructed by SSH from leaf tissues of a photoperiod
sensitive soybean. The proteins predicted to be encoded by the mRNAs were
inferred to be involved in diverse functions. A full-length mRNA that encoded a
soybean ortholog of the transcription factor RAV was isolated by RACE, containing
an open reading frame of 1,056 bp. The GmRAV protein included an AP2/ERF domain
and a B3 domain. GmRAV mRNA abundance was increased in SDs following leaf
treatments with ABA and decreased following BR treatment. Transgenic tobacco
overexpressing GmRAV showed morphological and physiological alterations such as
slower plant growth rate (dwarfing), reduced root elongation, delayed flowering
time and reduced photosynthetic rate, reduced chlorophyll contents in leaves.
Therefore GmRAV may be a negative regulator acting on both photosynthesis and
growth. Transgenic tobacco also showed accelerated senescence with both dark and 
ABA treatments versus the longer longevity compared to the wild type in LDs. The 
analyses of soybean leaf, root and stem organs showed that GmRAV mRNA abundances 
were higher in SDs than in LDs. Therefore, the enhanced expression of GmRAV in
SDs compared to LDs may have caused the inhibited growth of soybean leaf, root
and stem.

PMID: 18297307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Plant Cell Physiol. 2008 Apr;49(4):512-25. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pcn025. Epub 2008 Feb
16.

SodERF3, a novel sugarcane ethylene responsive factor (ERF), enhances salt and
drought tolerance when overexpressed in tobacco plants.

Trujillo LE(1), Sotolongo M, Menéndez C, Ochogavía ME, Coll Y, Hernández I,
Borrás-Hidalgo O, Thomma BP, Vera P, Hernández L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Microbe Interactions, Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Havana, Cuba. luis.trujillo@cigb.edu.cu

The molecular signals and pathways that govern biotic and abiotic stress
responses in sugarcane are poorly understood. Here we describe SodERF3, a
sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum L. cv Ja60-5) cDNA that encodes a 201-amino acid
DNA-binding protein that acts as a transcriptional regulator of the ethylene
responsive factor (ERF) superfamily. Like other ERF transcription factors, the
SodERF3 protein binds to the GCC box, and its deduced amino acid sequence
contains an N-terminal putative nuclear localization signal (NLS). In addition, a
C-terminal short hydrophobic region that is highly homologous to an
ERF-associated amphiphilic repression-like motif, typical for class II ERFs, was 
found. Northern and Western blot analysis showed that SodERF3 is induced by
ethylene. In addition, SodERF3 is induced by ABA, salt stress and wounding.
Greenhouse-grown transgenic tobacco plants (Nicotiana tabacum L. cv. SR1)
expressing SodERF3 were found to display increased tolerance to drought and
osmotic stress.

PMID: 18281696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Phys Chem A. 2008 Mar 13;112(10):2110-9. doi: 10.1021/jp0775956. Epub 2008 Feb 
9.

A study of the effect of attenuation curvature on molecular correlation energies 
by introducing an explicit cutoff radius into two-electron integrals.

Dutoi AD(1), Head-Gordon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of California at Berkeley, and Chemical
Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California
94720, USA. t_dutoi@bastille.cchem.berkeley.edu

We present a new attenuator function that can be applied to the Coulomb operator.
Similar to the popular erf(omegar) attenuator, the function [erf(omega(r + r0)) +
erf(omega(r - r0))]/2 divides the Coulomb potential into a singular short-range
piece and a non-singular long-range piece. In our attenuator, omega controls the 
sharpness of the short-range/long-range division at r0. With r0 = 0, this reduces
to erf(omegar), but the additional parameter allows more flexible adjustment of
the potential, for physical and/or computational reasons. We present some
illustrative results for a truncated MP2 method, where mean field effects are
handled exactly and correlation is treated locally. This study indicates,
somewhat expectedly, that the slope and curvature of the attenuated potential are
more important than its value (a trivial constant may always be added to a
potential). However, there are some surprising features of the data that suggest 
what bounds need to be put on the curvature of the attenuated potential in order 
to achieve reasonable physics. Conveniently, we find that our attenuator form has
the ability to preserve the curvature of the Coulomb potential almost exactly at 
short range, allowing for the truncation of long-range interactions while
preserving the local physics very well. The molecular integrals for the resultant
operator can be done analytically over Gaussian basis functions, and the
extensive algebraic manipulations necessary to evaluate them stably are shown.

PMID: 18260657  [PubMed]


175. Science. 2008 Mar 7;319(5868):1384-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1151461. Epub 2008 Feb
7.

TOPLESS mediates auxin-dependent transcriptional repression during Arabidopsis
embryogenesis.

Szemenyei H(1), Hannon M, Long JA.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biology Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North
Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The transcriptional response to auxin is critical for root and vascular
development during Arabidopsis embryogenesis. Auxin induces the degradation of
AUXIN/INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (AUX/IAA) transcriptional repressors, freeing their
binding partners, the AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR (ARF) proteins, which can activate
transcription of auxin response genes. We show that TOPLESS (TPL) can physically 
interact with IAA12/BODENLOS (IAA12/BDL) through an ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR
(ERF)-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif. TPL can repress
transcription in vivo and is required for IAA12/BDL repressive activity. In
addition, tpl-1 can suppress the patterning defects of the bdl-1 mutant. Direct
interaction between TPL and ARF5/MONOPTEROS, which is regulated by IAA12/BDL,
results in a loss-of-function arf5/mp phenotype. These observations show that TPL
is a transcriptional co-repressor and further our understanding of how auxin
regulates transcription during plant development.

PMID: 18258861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Exp Bot. 2008;59(3):645-52. doi: 10.1093/jxb/erm353. Epub 2008 Feb 4.

Abscisic acid regulates TSRF1-mediated resistance to Ralstonia solanacearum by
modifying the expression of GCC box-containing genes in tobacco.

Zhou J(1), Zhang H, Yang Y, Zhang Z, Zhang H, Hu X, Chen J, Wang XC, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Beijing 100081, China.

Although recent studies have established a significant regulatory role for
abscisic acid (ABA) and ethylene response factor (ERF) proteins in plant pathogen
resistance, it is not clear whether and how ABA performs this role. Previously,
it was reported that an ERF protein, TSRF1, activates the expression of GCC
box-containing genes and significantly enhances the resistance to Ralstonia
solanacearum in both tobacco and tomato plants. Here, it is reported that
TSRF1-regulated pathogen resistance is modified by ABA application. TSRF1
activates the expression of ABA biosynthesis-related genes, resulting in the
increase of ABA biosynthesis, which further stimulates ethylene production. More 
interestingly, ABA application decreases, while the inhibitor of ABA biosynthesis
fluridone increases, the TSRF1-enhanced resistance to R. solanacearum. This
observation is further supported by the finding that ABA and fluridone reversibly
modify the ability of TSRF1 to bind the ethylene-responsive GCC box, consequently
altering the expression of element-controlled genes. These results therefore
establish that TSRF1-regulated resistance to R. solanacearum can be modified in
tobacco by ABA.

PMID: 18252700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Plant Physiol. 2008 Sep 29;165(14):1474-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jplph.2007.11.003.
Epub 2008 Feb 19.

Expression analysis of light-regulated genes isolated from a full-length-enriched
cDNA library of Onosma paniculatum cell cultures.

Qi JL(1), Zhang WJ, Liu SH, Wang H, Sun DY, Xu GH, Shi MW, Liu Z, Zhang MS, Zhang
HM, Yang YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Molecular Biology, State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, PR China.

Shikonin and its derivatives are formed in large amounts in dark-cultured Onosma 
paniculatum cells. In order to isolate and identify the genes regulating shikonin
biosynthesis, we constructed and characterized a full-length-enriched cDNA
library of dark-cultured cells by using the SMART (Switching Mechanism At 5'-end 
of RNA Transcript) cDNA synthesis and LD-PCR (long-distance PCR) strategies. The 
titer of the primary cDNA library was 1.04 x 10(6)pfu/mL with a recombination
rate of 99.60%. Most of the cDNA inserts ranged from 1.0 to 2.5 kb, and 78.33% of
the 76 randomly selected clones contained full-length coding regions. Expression 
analysis of randomly selected genes by small scale microarray revealed that 23
genes were down-regulated, including 17 genes with known functions, 2 genes with 
putative functions, and 4 novel genes, and that 3 genes were up-regulated
(two-fold) in cells cultured under white light as compared with those cultured in
the dark. Interestingly, two of the down-regulated genes, encoding aci-reductone 
dioxygenase (ARD)-like protein and ethylene responsive factor (ERF), are involved
in ethylene biosynthesis and signal transduction, implying that ethylene might
play an important role as a signal molecule in light-regulated shikonin
formation. These data contribute to a better understanding of light-involvement
in regulating the formation of plant secondary metabolites.

PMID: 18242776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cancer Cell. 2008 Feb;13(2):91-104. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.01.001.

Identification of CDK10 as an important determinant of resistance to endocrine
therapy for breast cancer.

Iorns E(1), Turner NC, Elliott R, Syed N, Garrone O, Gasco M, Tutt AN, Crook T,
Lord CJ, Ashworth A.

Author information: 
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer
Research, Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.

Therapies that target estrogen signaling have transformed the treatment of breast
cancer. However, the effectiveness of these agents is limited by the development 
of resistance. Here, an RNAi screen was used to identify modifiers of tamoxifen
sensitivity. We demonstrate that CDK10 is an important determinant of resistance 
to endocrine therapies and show that CDK10 silencing increases ETS2-driven
transcription of c-RAF, resulting in MAPK pathway activation and loss of tumor
cell reliance upon estrogen signaling. Patients with ER alpha-positive tumors
that express low levels of CDK10 relapse early on tamoxifen, demonstrating the
clinical significance of these observations. The association of low levels of
CDK10 with methylation of the CDK10 promoter suggests a mechanism by which CDK10 
expression is reduced in tumors.

PMID: 18242510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Cell. 2008 Feb;13(2):83-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.01.021.

Unraveling the complexity of endocrine resistance in breast cancer by functional 
genomics.

Swanton C(1), Downward J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, Signal Transduction Laboratory, 
44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK. swanton@cancer.org.uk
<swanton@cancer.org.uk>

Despite the proven benefit of antiestrogen drugs in breast cancer treatment,
resistant disease ultimately develops in advanced breast cancer. In this issue of
Cancer Cell, Iorns et al. find that loss of CDK10 expression promotes resistance 
of cells to tamoxifen and is associated with poor outcome in breast cancer
patients treated with the drug. CDK10 loss increases the activity of the
transcription factor ETS2 on the promoter of the RAF1 gene, elevating ERK/MAPK
kinase pathway activity and relieving tamoxifen-induced G1 arrest. CDK10 is thus 
a potential biomarker for sensitivity in prospective clinical trials of patients 
treated with endocrine therapies.

PMID: 18242507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Plant Physiol. 2008 Apr;146(4):1622-36. doi: 10.1104/pp.107.110379. Epub 2008 Jan
30.

The transcription factor MtSERF1 of the ERF subfamily identified by
transcriptional profiling is required for somatic embryogenesis induced by auxin 
plus cytokinin in Medicago truncatula.

Mantiri FR(1), Kurdyukov S, Lohar DP, Sharopova N, Saeed NA, Wang XD, Vandenbosch
KA, Rose RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Integrative Legume
Research, School of Environmental and Life Sciences, University of Newcastle,
Callaghan, New South Wales 2308, Australia.

Transcriptional profiling of embryogenic callus produced from Medicago truncatula
mesophyll protoplasts indicated up-regulation of ethylene biosynthesis and
ethylene response genes. Using inhibitors of ethylene biosynthesis and
perception, it was shown that ethylene was necessary for somatic embryogenesis
(SE) in this model legume. We chose several genes involved in ethylene
biosynthesis and response for subsequent molecular analyses. One of these genes
is a gene encoding a transcription factor that belongs to the AP2/ERF superfamily
and ERF subfamily of transcription factors. We demonstrate that this gene,
designated M. truncatula SOMATIC EMBRYO RELATED FACTOR1 (MtSERF1), is induced by 
ethylene and is expressed in embryogenic calli. MtSERF1 is strongly expressed in 
the globular somatic embryo and there is high expression in a small group of
cells in the developing shoot meristem of the heart-stage embryo. RNA
interference knockdown of this gene causes strong inhibition of SE. We also
provide evidence that MtSERF1 is expressed in zygotic embryos. MtSERF1 appears to
be essential for SE and may enable a connection between stress and development.

PMCID: PMC2287338
PMID: 18235037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. World J Surg Oncol. 2008 Jan 26;6:8. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-6-8.

Laparotomy enables retrograde dilatation and stent placement for malignant
esophago-respiratory fistula.

Rehders A(1), Cupisti K, Schmitt M, Renter MA, Kröpil P, Iskender O, Knoefel WT.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Allgemein-, Viszeral- und Kinderchirurgie, Heinrich Heine
Universität, Düsseldorf, Germany. rehders@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

BACKGROUND: Malignant esophageal stenosis with complete obstruction and
esophagorespiratory fistula (ERF) is difficult to treat with standard endoscopic 
techniques.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a patient in whom with local recurrence of
esophageal carcinoma an esophagotracheal fistula occurred. Initially the patient 
had undergone esophageal resection with interposition of a gastric tube. Due to
complete obstruction of the lumen by recurrent tumor conventional transoral stent
placement failed. For retrograde dilatation a laparotomy was performed. Via a
duodenal incision endoscopic access to the gastric tube was achieved. Using a
guidewire the esophageal obstruction was traversed and dilated. Then it was
possible to place an esophageal stent via an antegrade approach.
CONCLUSION: Open surgery enables a safe access for retrograde endoscopic therapy 
in patients who had undergone esophageal resection with gastric interposition.

PMCID: PMC2267468
PMID: 18221555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jan 29;105(4):1380-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0711203105. Epub 2008 Jan 23.

Mapping methyl jasmonate-mediated transcriptional reprogramming of metabolism and
cell cycle progression in cultured Arabidopsis cells.

Pauwels L(1), Morreel K, De Witte E, Lammertyn F, Van Montagu M, Boerjan W, Inzé 
D, Goossens A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Systems Biology, Flanders Institute for Biotechnology,
Ghent University, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.

Jasmonates (JAs) are plant-specific signaling molecules that steer a diverse set 
of physiological and developmental processes. Pathogen attack and wounding
inflicted by herbivores induce the biosynthesis of these hormones, triggering
defense responses both locally and systemically. We report on alterations in the 
transcriptome of a fast-dividing cell culture of the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana after exogenous application of methyl JA (MeJA). Early MeJA response
genes encoded the JA biosynthesis pathway proteins and key regulators of MeJA
responses, including most JA ZIM domain proteins and MYC2, together with
transcriptional regulators with potential, but yet unknown, functions in MeJA
signaling. In a second transcriptional wave, MeJA reprogrammed cellular
metabolism and cell cycle progression. Up-regulation of the monolignol
biosynthesis gene set resulted in an increased production of monolignols and
oligolignols, the building blocks of lignin. Simultaneously, MeJA repressed
activation of M-phase genes, arresting the cell cycle in G(2). MeJA-responsive
transcription factors were screened for their involvement in early signaling
events, in particular the regulation of JA biosynthesis. Parallel screens based
on yeast one-hybrid and transient transactivation assays identified both positive
(MYC2 and the AP2/ERF factor ORA47) and negative (the C2H2 Zn finger proteins
STZ/ZAT10 and AZF2) regulators, revealing a complex control of the JA
autoregulatory loop and possibly other MeJA-mediated downstream processes.

PMCID: PMC2234147
PMID: 18216250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Plant Cell Rep. 2008 Apr;27(4):795-803. doi: 10.1007/s00299-007-0499-0. Epub 2008
Jan 9.

A novel WRKY transcriptional factor from Thlaspi caerulescens negatively
regulates the osmotic stress tolerance of transgenic tobacco.

Wei W(1), Zhang Y, Han L, Guan Z, Chai T.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Graduate University of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

A novel member of the WRKY gene family, designated TcWRKY53, was isolated from a 
cadmium (Cd)-treated Thlaspi caerulescens cDNA library by differential screening.
WRKY proteins specifically bind to W-boxes, which are found in the promoters of
many genes involved in defense and response to environmental stress. TcWRKY53
contains a 975-bp open reading frame encoding a putative protein of 324 amino
acids. Homology searches showed that TcWRKY53 resembles similar WRKY
domain-containing proteins from rice, parsley and tobacco, especially AtWRKY53
from Arabidopsis thaliana. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR showed that the expression of
TcWRKY53 was strongly induced by various environmental stresses, including an
excess of NaCl, drought, cold and the signal molecule salicylic acid (SA). The
expression of TcWRKY53 in response to NaCl, drought and cold suggested a possible
role of TcWRKY53 in abiotic stress response. However, physiological tests
indicated that the expression of TcWRKY53 in tobaccos decreases tolerance to
sorbitol during seedling root development. This was consistent with PEG6000
treatment of tobacco seedlings, and together these results indicate a negative
modulation of TcWRKY53 in response to osmotic stress. Furthermore, two ethylene
responsive factor (ERF) family genes, NtERF5 and NtEREBP-1, were negatively
induced in TcWRKY53-overexpressing transgenic plants. In contrast, a LEA family
gene, NtLEA5, showed no change, suggesting that TcWRKY53 might regulate the plant
osmotic stress response by interacting with an ERF-type transcription factor
rather than by regulating function genes directly.

PMID: 18183400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Cytometry A. 2008 Apr;73(4):279-88. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.20507.

Toward quantitative fluorescence measurements with multicolor flow cytometry.

Wang L(1), Gaigalas AK, Marti G, Abbasi F, Hoffman RA.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8312,
USA. lili.wang@nist.gov

A procedure is presented for calibrating the output of a multicolor flow
cytometer in units of antibodies bound per cell (ABC). The procedure involves two
steps. First, each of the fluorescence channels of the flow cytometer is
calibrated using Ultra Rainbow beads with assigned values of equivalent number of
reference fluorophores (ERF). The objective of this step is to establish a linear
relation between the fluorescence signal in a given fluorescence channel of
multicolor flow cytometers and the value of ERF. The second step involves a
biological standard such as a lymphocyte with a known number of antibody binding 
sites (e.g., CD4 binding sites). The biological standard is incubated with
antibodies labeled with one type of fluorophores for a particular fluorescence
channel and serves to translate the ERF scale to an ABC scale. A significant part
of the two-step calibration procedure involves the assignment of ERF values to
the different populations of Ultra Rainbow beads. The assignment of ERF values
quantifies the relative amount of embedded fluorophore mixture in each bead
population. It is crucial to insure that the fluorescence signal in a given range
of fluorescence emission wavelengths is related linearly to the assigned values
of ERF. The biological standard has to poses a known number of binding sites for 
a given antibody. In addition, this antibody has to be amenable to labeling with 
different types of fluorophores associated with various fluorescence channels.
The present work suggests that all of the requirements for a successful
calibration of a multicolor flow cytometer in terms of ABC values can be
fulfilled. The calibration procedure is based on firm scientific foundations so
that it is easy to envision future improvements in accuracy and ease of
implementation.

PMID: 18163471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Plant. 2008 Jan;1(1):27-41. doi: 10.1093/mp/ssm009. Epub 2007 Oct 23.

The development of protein microarrays and their applications in DNA-protein and 
protein-protein interaction analyses of Arabidopsis transcription factors.

Gong W(1), He K, Covington M, Dinesh-Kumar SP, Snyder M, Harmer SL, Zhu YX, Deng 
XW.

Author information: 
(1)Peking-Yale Joint Center for Plant Molecular Genetics and Agrobiotechnology,
College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

We used our collection of Arabidopsis transcription factor (TF) ORFeome clones to
construct protein microarrays containing as many as 802 TF proteins. These
protein microarrays were used for both protein-DNA and protein-protein
interaction analyses. For protein-DNA interaction studies, we examined AP2/ERF
family TFs and their cognate cis-elements. By careful comparison of the
DNA-binding specificity of 13 TFs on the protein microarray with previous
non-microarray data, we showed that protein microarrays provide an efficient and 
high throughput tool for genome-wide analysis of TF-DNA interactions. This
microarray protein-DNA interaction analysis allowed us to derive a comprehensive 
view of DNA-binding profiles of AP2/ERF family proteins in Arabidopsis. It also
revealed four TFs that bound the EE (evening element) and had the expected phased
gene expression under clock-regulation, thus providing a basis for further
functional analysis of their roles in clock regulation of gene expression. We
also developed procedures for detecting protein interactions using this TF
protein microarray and discovered four novel partners that interact with HY5,
which can be validated by yeast two-hybrid assays. Thus, plant TF protein
microarrays offer an attractive high-throughput alternative to traditional
techniques for TF functional characterization on a global scale.

PMCID: PMC2756181
PMID: 19802365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Ter Arkh. 2008;80(9):72-5.

[Pulmonary hypertension in patients with ankylosing spondilitis: main factors of 
development].

[Article in Russian]

Poddubnyi DA, Rebrov AP.

AIM: To detect factors associated with onset of pulmonary hypertension (PH) in
patients with ankylosing spondilitis (AS).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 102 patients aged 38.1 +/- 8.9 years (18-58 years) with a
documented diagnosis of AS were examined with estimation of clinical idices,
smoking status, spinal motility, chest excurtion, AS activity, severity of
functional impairment. External respiration function was assessed at spirography,
systolic pressure in the pulmonary artery (SPPA) was studied with
echocardiography. PH was stated at SPPA > or = 36 mm Hg. Endothelial function was
assessed by dopplerography of the brachial artery in the test with reactive
hyperemia (endothelium-dependent vasodilation -EDVD) and nitroglycerin
(non-endothelium-dependent vasodilation - NEDVD). As a marker of endothelial
affection we used the level of circulating endothelial cells (CEC).
RESULTS: PH patients were characterized by older age, body mass index, longer
smoking history, AS duration, more severe functional impairment by BASFI, worse
spinal motility. Both subgroups had moderate reduction of respiratory volumes. PH
patients had much lower EDVD while CEC was higher.
CONCLUSION: Some factors were revealed which are associated with PH onset in AS
patients irrespective of ERF disorders. Endothelial dysfunction is a pathogenetic
link mediating effects of these factors, first of all hypoxia, smoking and
persistent systemic inflammation, on blood pressure in the system of pulmonary
circulation in AS patients.

PMID: 19555042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2008 Mar;49(2):155-64.

Evaluation of evidence for infection as a mode of action for induction of rat
lymphoma.

Caldwell JC(1), Jinot J, DeVoney D, Gift JS.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Environmental Assessment, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Washington, DC, USA. caldwell.jane@epa.gov

Comment in
    Environ Mol Mutagen. 2009 Jan;50(1):4-5; author reply 6-9.
    Environ Mol Mutagen. 2009 Jan;50(1):1-3; author reply 6-9.

The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) released a 2006 report questioning the 
relationship of aspartame exposure with increased incidence of
lymphomas/leukemias in a European Ramazzini Foundation (ERF) rat study. The EFSA 
report suggested that the lymphoma/leukemia findings were most likely explained
by infection in the rat colony. The ERF has also conducted the only available
long-term oral study of methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE). Thus, using the EFSA 
report as support, some have now raised questions about the human relevance of
MTBE-associated hemolymphoreticular tumors reported by the ERF in female rats as 
well as whether their incidence was elevated above background levels. In this
report, we discuss the hypothesized mode of action (MOA) of infection-induced
lymphoma and its relevance to MTBE-associated lymphomas. We address the
relationship of rat strain and study duration to lymphoma susceptibility and
review evidence of low background rates of this tumor in control animals at the
ERF, similar survival rates for female rats at the ERF and National Toxicology
Program (NTP), and chemical- and gender-specificity of tumor induction for this
type of tumor in studies at the ERF. We find that the background incidence of
hemolymphoreticular tumors in female rats in the MTBE study is consistent with
contemporaneous studies at the ERF and that there is an exposure-related effect, 
which is unlikely to be due to infections. We examine more recent tumor
classification schemes for lymphomas, which support the combination of
lymphoblastic leukemias and lymphomas reported by Belpoggi et al. ([1995] Toxicol
Ind Health 11:119-149; [1998] Eur J Oncol 3:201-206).

Published 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18095346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Opt Lett. 1999 Sep 15;24(18):1284-6.

Diode-pumped 1-W Er-doped fluoride glass M-profile fiber laser emitting at 2.8
mum.

Sandrock T, Fischer D, Glas P, Leitner M, Wrage M, Diening A.

We report a novel short-length diode-pumped cw fiber laser with high output power
at a wavelength of 2.8mum . The system combines continuous-wave diode pumping at 
970 nm, a high doping concentration (5-mol. % ErF(3)) of the active fiber, and an
annular geometry of the laser medium, an M-profile fiber. Output powers in excess
of 1 W with a slope efficiency of 25% were obtained.

PMID: 18079781  [PubMed]


189. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Feb;1779(2):122-7. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

Molecular cloning and functional analysis of an ERF gene from cotton (Gossypium
hirsutum).

Qiao ZX(1), Huang B, Liu JY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Protein Science Laboratory of the Ministry
of Education, Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, PR China.

Ethylene response factors (ERFs) play important roles in regulating plant biotic 
and abiotic stress tolerance. In this paper, a new ethylene response factor gene 
GhERF1 was isolated from cotton. The deduced amino acid sequence of GhERF1
contained an AP2/ERF domain, which shared high similarity with other reported
AP2/ERF domains and was most closely related to the B3 subgroup of the ERF
subfamily. The particle bombardment assay showed that GhERF1 functioned as an in 
vivo transcription activator in tobacco cells and was localized in the nuclei of 
onion epidermis cells. In addition, semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed that GhERF1
accumulated highly and rapidly when plants were treated with exogenous ethylene, 
abscisic acid (ABA), high salinity, cold and drought. These results suggested
that GhERF1 might be functionally important in acclimation of cotton to stress.

PMID: 18078841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Opt Lett. 1999 Mar 15;24(6):382-4.

Laser emission of erbium-doped fluoride bulk glasses in the spectral range from
2.7 to 2.8 mum.

Sandrock T, Diening A, Huber G.

We report on the laser emission of erbium-doped fluoride glasses in the spectral 
range from 2.7 to 2.8 mum . The pump source was a fiber-coupled InGaAs
semiconductor laser emitting near lambda(p)~970 nm . The laser performance of
bulk samples with various ErF(3) contents was investigated with respect to the
optimum doping concentration, which is estimated to be higher than 8 mol. %. A
maximum output power of P(out) > 160 mW and a slope efficiency of eta = 10% were 
achieved. Results are compared with previously published data on erbium-doped
ZBLAN fiber and LiYF(4) crystal lasers.

PMID: 18071513  [PubMed]


191. J Exp Bot. 2007;58(13):3631-43.

Isolation and characterization of four ethylene signal transduction elements in
plums (Prunus salicina L.).

El-Sharkawy I(1), Kim WS, El-Kereamy A, Jayasankar S, Svircev AM, Brown DC.

Author information: 
(1)University of Guelph, Department of Plant Agriculture, 4890 Victoria Ave. N., 
PO Box 7000, Vineland Station, ON L0R 2E0, Canada.

Plums are climacteric fruits: their ripening is associated with a burst of
ethylene production and respiration rate. Stone fruits, including plum, have a
distinct pattern of growth and development, described as a double sigmoid
pattern. In order to understand the developmental control of ethylene perception 
in plum, four ethylene perception and signal transduction components (EPSTCs)
were characterized, including two ETR1-like proteins (Ps-ETR1 and Ps-ERS1), a
CTR1-like protein, and an ethylene-responsive element-binding factor (ERF). Their
regulation was studied throughout fruit development and ripening in early and
late cultivars. Analysis of transcript levels revealed that only Ps-ERF1 and
Ps-ERS1 accumulated immediately after fertilization. Increases in Ps-ETR1 and
Ps-CTR1 transcript levels could not be detected before S3 of fruit development.
Marked differences associated with the ripening behaviour of early ('Early
Golden') and late ('Shiro') Japanese plum cultivars were observed. The early
cultivar showed ripening patterns typical of climacteric fruits accompanied by
sharp increases of the four transcript levels in an ethylene-dependent manner.
However, the late cultivar exhibited a suppressed-climacteric pattern, with a
slight increase in ethylene production related to ripening. The accumulation of
the Ps-ETR1 (and not Ps-CTR1) mRNA in the late cultivar was ethylene independent.
Ps-ERS1 mRNA was expressed at low, constant levels, while, Ps-ERF1 remained
undetectable. The differences between the two plum cultivars in the date and rate
of ripening in relation to the differences in the accumulation patterns of the
four mRNAs are discussed.

PMID: 18057041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2007 Aug;22 Suppl 7:vii176-80.

Growth in children with established renal failure--a Registry analysis (chapter
14).

Lewis M(1), Shaw J, Reid C, Evans J, Webb N, Verrier-Jones K.

Author information: 
(1)Central Manchester & Manchester Childrens University Hospitals NHS Trust, UK. 
malcolm.lewis@cmmc.nhs.uk

Short stature is a major problem in paediatric ERF patients with 29% of
transplant patients and 41% of dialysis patients below the second percentile for 
height. Only 6.5% of transplant patients and 15.5% of dialysis patients are
receiving rhGH. There is no significant difference in the height distribution of 
patients commencing RRT and those who have had a functioning allograft for at
least 1 year. In patients with at least 2 years between presentation and RRT,
there is a significant fall in height Z score. This overall statistic is strongly
influenced by the very poor growth of patients with glomerular disease.

PMID: 17724045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2007 Aug;22 Suppl 7:vii165-75.

Demography and management of childhood established renal failure in the UK
(chapter 13).

Lewis M(1), Shaw J, Reid C, Evans J, Webb N, Verrier-Jones K.

Author information: 
(1)Central Manchester & Manchester Childrens University Hospitals NHS Trust, UK. 
malcolm.lewis@cmmc.nhs.uk

The incidence and prevalence of ERF in children in the UK are relatively static
at 8.0 and 47.7 per million population under the age of 15 years, respectively.
The prevalence of ERF in children from the South Asian community is almost three 
times that of the White population whilst the incidence is over three times that 
of the White population and similar to the increase seen in the adult population.
The high incidence and prevalence are related to the high incidence of inherited 
diseases which cause ERF in the South Asian community. ERF in children is more
common in males than females (male to female ratio 1.54:1). This is due to a
preponderance of males with renal dysplasia and obstructive uropathy causing ERF.
For the South Asian patients, the gender ratio is 1:1 as the inherited diseases
are mainly autosomal recessive. Renal dysplasia is the single most common cause
of ERF in childhood, followed closely by glomerular disorders and then
obstructive uropathy. The majority of prevalent paediatric ERF patients (76%)
have a renal allograft. Of these, 28% are from living donations. The proportion
of patients from ethnic minority groups with a functioning allograft is
significantly smaller than that in the White population (P < 0.0001). Despite
this, the rate of living related donation is no higher in the ethnic minority
population. In prevalent patients PD is twice as commonly used as HD with the
majority managed with automated PD. For patients at one year from starting RRT,
49% are on PD, 10% on HD and 41% have a transplant.

PMID: 17724044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Exp Bot. 2007;58(15-16):4047-60. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Gene expression during the induction, maintenance, and release of dormancy in
apical buds of poplar.

Rohde A(1), Ruttink T, Hostyn V, Sterck L, Van Driessche K, Boerjan W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Systems Biology, Flanders Institute for Biotechnology
(VIB), 9052 Gent, Belgium.

The perennial lifestyle of trees is characterized by seasonal cycles of growth
and dormancy. The recurrent transitions into and out of dormancy represent an
adaptation mechanism that largely determines survival and, hence, the
geographical distribution of tree species. To understand better the molecular
basis of bud dormancy, cDNA-amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP)
transcript profiling was used to map differential gene expression during dormancy
induction, dormancy, dormancy release by chilling, and subsequent bud break in
apical buds of poplar (Populus tremulaxP. alba). Unexpectedly, besides poplar
transcript sequences, the cDNA-AFLP profiles revealed sequence signatures
originating from a complex bacterial community, which was more pronounced during 
dormancy and displayed temporal dynamics in composition and complexity. Based on 
poplar gene expression dynamics, processes and potential regulators during
different phases of dormancy are described. Novel genes were linked to a crucial 
transitory step in dormancy induction, and to dormancy release through chilling, 
a molecularly unresolved phenomenon. One WRKY- and two ERF-related transcription 
factors were similarly expressed during the transition to dormancy in apical and 
axillary buds. These regulatory genes could be involved in the differentiation of
stipule-like leaf organs protecting the bud, or act during the growth-dormancy
transition in the meristem, revealing commonalities between para- and
endodormancy.

PMID: 18039739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2008 Jan;46(1):46-53. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Molecular cloning, expression profile and promoter analysis of a novel ethylene
responsive transcription factor gene GhERF4 from cotton (Gossypium hirstum).

Jin LG(1), Liu JY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Protein Science Laboratory of the Ministry
of Education, Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua
University, Beijing, PR China.

Ethylene-responsive element binding factors (ERFs) are plant-specific
transcription factors, many of which have been linked to stress responses. A
novel ERF gene, designated GhERF4, was isolated by RACE-PCR from Gossypium
hirsutum. The GhERF4 cDNA has a total length of 1061bp with an open reading frame
of 669bp, encoding a protein of 222 amino acids with a molecular weight of
23.5kDa and a calculated pI of 9.03. Sequence alignment shows that GhERF4
contains a 58 amino acid long AP2/ERF domain and a RKRP nuclear localization
signal, and belongs to a group II protein in the ERF subfamily as typified by the
C-terminal ERF-associated Amphiphilic Repression (EAR) motif. Southern blot
analysis indicates that GhERF4 is a single copy gene in cotton genome. Using
green fluorescent protein fusion, we demonstrate that GhERF4 accumulates
specifically in the nucleus of onion epidermis cells. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR
reveals that GhERF4 is constitutively expressed in true leaves, roots, seeds and 
stems. The transcripts of GhERF4 accumulate highly and rapidly when plants are
treated with exogenous ethylene, salt, cold, drought stresses and exogenous
abscisic acid (ABA) treatment, suggesting that GhERF4 is regulated by certain
components of the stress signaling pathway. Promoter analysis indicates that the 
5' upstream region of GhERF4 possesses some elements induced by physiological and
environmental factors. These results indicate that GhERF4 may play an important
role in response to ethylene, ABA and environmental stresses.

PMID: 18035549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Poult Sci. 2007 Dec;86(12):2550-4.

Plasma nitric oxide concentrations in broilers after intravenous injections of
lipopolysaccharide or microparticles.

Bowen OT(1), Erf GF, Chapman ME, Wideman RF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA. otbowen@uark.edu

Nitric oxide is a potent vasodilator synthesized from l-Arg by NO synthase (NOS).
Constitutive NOS in endothelial cells (eNOS) produces transient bursts of NO in
low but physiologically effective levels. Activated monocytes and macrophages
express inducible NOS (iNOS), which produces copious quantities of NO. Previous
studies showed that NO attenuates pulmonary hypertensive responses induced by
i.v. injections of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or cellulose microparticles (MP). The
present study determined whether changes in plasma NO concentrations could be
used to assess the time course of NO production in response to LPS or MP
injections. Broilers were injected i.v. with 1 mL of PBS (control), 1 mL of LPS
(1 mg/mL), or 0.4 mL of MP (0.02 g/mL). Plasma samples were collected from 10
different broilers per group at 15, 30, 45, and 60 min and at 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8,
10, and 12 h postinjection. Total plasma NO concentrations were analyzed by
nitrate + nitrite assay. After PBS or MP injection, plasma NO levels did not
change throughout the 12-h period. Nitric oxide measured in the plasma increased 
in LPS-injected broilers from 4.8 +/- 0.8 microM at 15 min to 46.6 +/- 5.7 microM
by 4 h postinjection, reached peak levels of 85.1 +/- 10.6 microM at 5 h, and
returned to baseline levels similar to PBS-injected broilers by 12 h
postinjection. We conclude that LPS triggered widespread iNOS expression by
circulating monocytes and macrophages, resulting in copious NO production as
reflected by significant increases in total plasma NO. Proportionally few
monocytes and macrophages responded to MP entrapped in pulmonary arterioles.
Consequently, NO produced by iNOS in activated leukocytes or by eNOS in the
pulmonary vasculature had a minimal impact on total plasma NO. Total plasma NO
from broilers did reflect the time course of massive iNOS activation in response 
to LPS, but biologically relevant quantities of NO produced by iNOS and eNOS
activated during the local inflammatory response to entrapped MPs were too low to
affect total plasma NO concentrations.

PMID: 18029801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Clin Linguist Phon. 2007 Nov-Dec;21(11-12):1007-17.

Information status and word order in Croatian Sign Language.

Milkovic M(1), Bradaric-Joncic S, Wilbur RB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Zagreb, Croatia. mmilkov@erf.hr

This paper presents the results of research on information structure and word
order in narrative sentences taken from signed short stories in Croatian Sign
Language (HZJ). The basic word order in HZJ is SVO. Factors that result in other 
word orders include: reversible arguments, verb categories, locative
constructions, contrastive focus, and prior context. Word order in context
depends on communication rules, based on the relationship between old (theme) and
new (rheme) information, which is predicated of the theme. In accordance with
Grice's Maxim of Quantity, HZJ has a tendency to omit old information, or to
reduce it to pronominal status. If old information is overtly signed in
non-pronominal form, it precedes the rheme. We have observed a variety of sign
language mechanisms that are used to show items of reduced contextual
significance: use of assigned spatial location for previously introduced
referents; eyegaze to indicate spatial location of previously introduced
referents; use of the non-dominant hand for backgrounded information; use of a
special category of signs known as classifiers as pronominal indicators of
previously introduced referents; and complex noun phrases that allow a single
occurrence of a noun to simultaneously serve multiple functions. These devices
permit information to be conveyed without the need for separate signs for every
referent, which would create longer constructions that could be taxing to both
production and perception. The results of this research are compatible with
well-known word order generalizations - HZJ has its own grammar, independent of
spoken language, like any other sign language.

PMID: 17972196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2007 Nov 7;9(41):5591-8. Epub 2007 Aug 30.

EPR and optical studies of erbium-doped beta-PbF2 single-crystals and
nanocrystals in transparent glass-ceramics.

Dantelle G(1), Mortier M, Vivien D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Chimie de la Matière Condensée de Paris, ENSCP, UMR 7574, 11
rue Curie, F- 75231, Paris Cedex 05, France.

beta-PbF(2) single-crystals and nanocrystals in transparent glass-ceramics doped 
with ErF(3) have been synthesized and studied with two complementary techniques: 
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and optical spectroscopy (absorption,
selective excitation, fluorescence). A comparative study shows that, in both
single-crystals and glass-ceramics, Er(3+) ions occupy the same types of sites,
leading to similar optical properties. An EPR investigation demonstrates that, in
these materials, part of the Er(3+) ions occupy cubic symmetry sites. For these
ions, we determine the crystal field splitting of the ground state (4)I(15/2) and
the symmetry of its sublevels. We also provide evidence for the presence of
another type of Er(3+) ions, not detectable by EPR but evidenced by optical
spectroscopy. We clearly show that this Er(3+), which gives rise to up-conversion
luminescence, corresponds to clusters associating Er(3+) and F(-) ions. In the
single-crystals, the proportion of these two types of erbium ions is estimated.
It strongly depends on the doping rate of the beta-PbF(2) crystals.

PMID: 17957316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Poult Sci. 2007 Nov;86(11):2315-21.

Effect of probiotic treatment in broiler chicks on intestinal macrophage numbers 
and phagocytosis of Salmonella enteritidis by abdominal exudate cells.

Higgins SE(1), Erf GF, Higgins JP, Henderson SN, Wolfenden AD, Gaona-Ramirez G,
Hargis BM.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 
72701, USA.

Previous data have indicated that a Lactobacillus-based probiotic culture
(FM-B11) is efficacious in reducing Salmonella Enteritidis colonization within 24
h when administered within 1 h of challenge. We hypothesized that the innate
immune system, specifically macrophages, may play a role in the observed
reduction of Salmonella Enteritidis colonization with probiotic treatment.
Day-of-hatch chicks were challenged with Salmonella Enteritidis and then treated 
with the probiotic culture 1 h later. Three other treatment groups were not
treated (negative control), challenged only, or treated with probiotic only. In
all experiments, probiotic treatment on the day of hatch reduced (P < 0.05) cecal
Salmonella Enteritidis recovery as compared with the control treatment. In
experiments 1 and 2, immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate the presence of
macrophages (KUL01+) in the ileum and cecum of 7 to 10 chicks per group at 24 h
posttreatment. In experiment 1, the number of macrophages observed per 10,000
microm(2) in the ileum of Salmonella Enteritidis-challenged chicks was higher (P 
< 0.05) than that of nonchallenged chicks (4.87 +/- 0.31 vs. 3.05 +/- 0.19). In
the cecum, there were more (P < 0.05) macrophages per 10,000 microm(2) in chicks 
receiving probiotic treatment without challenge than in negative control chicks
(5.32 +/- 0.41 vs. 3.66 +/- 0.35). However, in experiment 2 we found no
differences among treatments in the numbers of macrophages for both the ileum and
cecum. Experiments 3 and 4 were performed to evaluate the ability of
Sephadex-elicited abdominal exudate cells (AEC) from chicks to phagocytose
Salmonella Enteritidis in vitro. Abdominal exudate cells were isolated from the
abdominal cavity, maintained in tissue culture plates overnight, and then assayed
for phagocytic activity by coincubating with Salmonella Enteritidis. In
experiment 3, more (P < 0.05) Salmonella Enteritidis was recovered from AEC
derived from probiotic-treated chicks than in any other treatment. However, in
experiment 4, all treatments resulted in similar levels of elicited AEC, and
phagocytosis of Salmonella Enteritidis was at low levels in all groups. Although 
not conclusive, the modest differences detected in experiments 1 and 3, and the
fact that those differences were not repeatedly detectable, suggest that these
macrophage-related changes were not solely responsible for the reductions of
Salmonella Enteritidis following probiotic treatment.

PMID: 17954580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Ter Arkh. 2007;79(8):38-41.

[External respiration function and quality of life in patients with bronchial
asthma in correction of selenium deficiency].

[Article in Russian]

Voicekovska JG, Orlikov GA, Karpov IuG, Teibe U, Ivanov AD, Baidekalne I,
Voicehovskis NV, Maulins E.

AIM: To examine the effect of selenium (Se) adjuvant therapy on external
respiration function (ERF) and quality of life (QOL) in bronchial asthma (BA)
patients.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 26 patients with BA received standard therapy and adjuvant 
200 mcg/day selenium (SelenoPRECISE, PharmaNord, Denmark) for 16 weeks. ERF was
estimated by FEV1 and FVC, QOF--by the response to Juniper Adult Asthma Quality
of life Short Questionnaire (AQLQ-S) at initiation and end of the study.
Difference with the baseline was assessed using Paired Samples T-Test, SPSS 14.0.
RESULTS: Paired-samples T-test showed that FVC increased significantly from 76.5 
+/- 23.8% to 81.8 +/- 23.2% (p = 0.015). FEV1 showed a significant increase from 
62.3 +/- 29.6% to 67.7 +/- 28.1% (p = 0.018). Total AQLQ score elevated from 3.25
to 4.71 (p = 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Correction of Se deficiency in BA patients on standard therapy
improves ERF and BA-related QOL. Mechanisms of a protective Se action are
involved in antioxidant defense by means of Se participation in enzymatic
detoxication of peroxides and a stabilizing effect on biomembranes.

PMID: 17926469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 25;104(39):15270-5. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Improvement of water use efficiency in rice by expression of HARDY, an
Arabidopsis drought and salt tolerance gene.

Karaba A(1), Dixit S, Greco R, Aharoni A, Trijatmiko KR, Marsch-Martinez N,
Krishnan A, Nataraja KN, Udayakumar M, Pereira A.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Research International, Wageningen University and Research Centre, P.O. 
Box 16, 6700AA Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Freshwater is a limited and dwindling global resource; therefore, efficient water
use is required for food crops that have high water demands, such as rice, or for
the production of sustainable energy biomass. We show here that expression of the
Arabidopsis HARDY (HRD) gene in rice improves water use efficiency, the ratio of 
biomass produced to the water used, by enhancing photosynthetic assimilation and 
reducing transpiration. These drought-tolerant, low-water-consuming rice plants
exhibit increased shoot biomass under well irrigated conditions and an adaptive
increase in root biomass under drought stress. The HRD gene, an AP2/ERF-like
transcription factor, identified by a gain-of-function Arabidopsis mutant hrd-D
having roots with enhanced strength, branching, and cortical cells, exhibits
drought resistance and salt tolerance, accompanied by an enhancement in the
expression of abiotic stress associated genes. HRD overexpression in Arabidopsis 
produces thicker leaves with more chloroplast-bearing mesophyll cells, and in
rice, there is an increase in leaf biomass and bundle sheath cells that probably 
contributes to the enhanced photosynthesis assimilation and efficiency. The
results exemplify application of a gene identified from the model plant
Arabidopsis for the improvement of water use efficiency coincident with drought
resistance in the crop plant rice.

PMCID: PMC1986572
PMID: 17881564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Plant Mol Biol. 2007 Dec;65(6):719-32. Epub 2007 Sep 15.

Isolation and molecular characterization of the Triticum aestivum L.
ethylene-responsive factor 1 (TaERF1) that increases multiple stress tolerance.

Xu ZS(1), Xia LQ, Chen M, Cheng XG, Zhang RY, Li LC, Zhao YX, Lu Y, Ni ZY, Liu L,
Qiu ZG, Ma YZ.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Facility of Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement, Key
Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, Institute of
Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agriculture Sciences, Beijing 100081, PR China.

ERF transcription factors play important roles in regulating gene expression
under abiotic and biotic stresses. The first member of the ERF gene family in
wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) was isolated by screening a drought-induced cDNA
library and designated as T. aestivum ethylene-responsive factor 1 (TaERF1),
which encoded a putative protein of 355 amino acids with a conserved DNA-binding 
domain and a conserved N-terminal motif (MCGGAIL). The TaERF1 gene was located on
chromosome 7A. Protein interaction assays indicated that TaERF1, with a putative 
phosphorylation site (TPDITS) in the C-terminal region, was a potential
phosphorylation substrate for TaMAPK1 protein kinase. Deletion of the N-terminal 
motif enhanced the interaction of TaERF1 with TaMAPK1. The predicted TaERF1
protein contained three putative nuclear localization signals (NLSs), and three
NLSs modulated synergistically the activity of subcellular localization. As a
trans-acting factor, TaERF1 was capable of binding to the GCC-box and CRT/DRE
elements in vitro, and of trans-activating reporter gene expression in tobacco
(Nicotiana tabacum L.) leaves. Transcription of the TaERF1 gene was induced not
only by drought, salinity and low-temperature stresses and exogenous ABA,
ethylene and salicylic acid, but also by infection with Blumeria graminis f. sp. 
tritici. Furthermore, overexpression of TaERF1 activated stress-related genes,
including PR and COR/RD genes, under normal growth conditions, and improved
pathogen and abiotic stress tolerance in transgenic plants. These results
suggested that the TaERF1 gene encodes a GCC-box and CRT/DRE element binding
factor that might be involved in multiple stress signal transduction pathways.

PMID: 17874224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Disabil Rehabil. 2008;30(4):261-74.

The Multiple Sclerosis impact Profile (MSIP). Development and testing
psychometric properties of an ICF-based health measure.

Wynia K(1), Middel B, van Dijk JP, de Ruiter H, de Keyser J, Reijneveld SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University Medical Center Groningen, University
of Groningen, The Netherlands. k.wynia@med.umcg.nl

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to develop and test the structure of the
Multiple Sclerosis Impact Profile (MSIP), and to evaluate its reliability and
validity within a large group of MS patients.
METHOD: Data were obtained from a postal survey of 377 patients attending the
Groningen MS centre of the university hospital and 153 patients from the MS
patients' association.
RESULTS: Factor analysis showed that the MSIP comprised domains representing the 
four components of the International Classification (ICF). The body functions
component comprised two factors, which we divided into three scales: 'muscles and
muscle movement functions' (MMF), 'excretion and reproductive functions' (ERF)
and 'mental functions' (MF). The activities component comprised one factor, which
we divided into two scales: 'basic movement functions' (BMF) and 'activities of
daily living' (ADL). The participation component comprised one factor:
'participation in life situations' (PLS). The environmental factors component
comprised one factor: 'environmental factors' (EF). Four clinically relevant
'symptom' items were added to the questionnaire as single items. The MISP scales 
yielded sufficient to good internal consistency coefficients. Analysis of the
convergent, divergent and known-groups validity indicated that the MSIP measures 
the physical, psychological and social impact of MS and discriminates between
categories of course of disease and disease severity.
CONCLUSION: The MSIP seems to be a reliable and valid ICF-based outcome measure
that covers a broad range of clinically relevant aspects of health. ICF can play 
an important role in measurement development and improvement of a unified and
standard language in clinical practice and research.

PMID: 17852244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Plant Cell. 2007 Sep;19(9):2866-85. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

AP2-ERF transcription factors mediate Nod factor dependent Mt ENOD11 activation
in root hairs via a novel cis-regulatory motif.

Andriankaja A(1), Boisson-Dernier A, Frances L, Sauviac L, Jauneau A, Barker DG, 
de Carvalho-Niebel F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Microbe Interactions, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique-Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, BP 52627,
Castanet-Tolosan Cedex, France.

Rhizobium Nod factors (NFs) are specific lipochitooligosaccharides that activate 
host legume signaling pathways essential for initiating the nitrogen-fixing
symbiotic association. This study describes the characterization of
cis-regulatory elements and trans-interacting factors that regulate NF-dependent 
and epidermis-specific gene transcription in Medicago truncatula. Detailed
analysis of the Mt ENOD11 promoter using deletion, mutation, and gain-of-function
constructs has led to the identification of an NF-responsive regulatory unit (the
NF box) sufficient to direct NF-elicited expression in root hairs. NF
box-mediated expression requires a major GCC-like motif, which is also essential 
for the binding of root hair-specific nuclear factors. Yeast one-hybrid screening
has identified three closely related AP2/ERF transcription factors (ERN1 to ERN3)
that are able to bind specifically to the NF box. ERN1 is identical to an
ERF-like factor identified recently. Expression analysis has revealed that ERN1
and ERN2 genes are upregulated in root hairs following NF treatment and that this
activation requires a functional NFP gene. Transient expression assays in
Nicotiana benthamiana have further shown that nucleus-targeted ERN1 and ERN2
factors activate NF box-containing reporters, whereas ERN3 represses
ERN1/ERN2-dependent transcription activation. A model is proposed for the
fine-tuning of NF-elicited gene transcription in root hairs involving the
interplay between repressor and activator ERN factors.

PMCID: PMC2048698
PMID: 17827349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Environ Health Perspect. 2007 Sep;115(9):1293-7.

Life-span exposure to low doses of aspartame beginning during prenatal life
increases cancer effects in rats.

Soffritti M(1), Belpoggi F, Tibaldi E, Esposti DD, Lauriola M.

Author information: 
(1)Cesare Maltoni Cancer Research Center, European Ramazzini Foundation of
Oncology and Environmental Sciences, Bologna, Italy. crcfr@ramazzini.it

Comment in
    Environ Health Perspect. 2008 Jun;116(6):A239-40; author reply A240.

BACKGROUND: In a previous study conducted at the Cesare Maltoni Cancer Research
Center of the European Ramazzini Foundation (CMCRC/ERF), we demonstrated for the 
first time that aspartame (APM) is a multipotent carcinogenic agent when various 
doses are administered with feed to Sprague-Dawley rats from 8 weeks of age
throughout the life span.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this second study is to better quantify the carcinogenic
risk of APM, beginning treatment during fetal life.
METHODS: We studied groups of 70-95 male and female Sprague-Dawley rats
administered APM (2,000, 400, or 0 ppm) with feed from the 12th day of fetal life
until natural death.
RESULTS: Our results show a) a significant dose-related increase of malignant
tumor-bearing animals in males (p < 0.01), particularly in the group treated with
2,000 ppm APM (p < 0.01); b) a significant increase in incidence of
lymphomas/leukemias in males treated with 2,000 ppm (p < 0.05) and a significant 
dose-related increase in incidence of lymphomas/leukemias in females (p < 0.01), 
particularly in the 2,000-ppm group (p < 0.01); and c) a significant dose-related
increase in incidence of mammary cancer in females (p < 0.05), particularly in
the 2,000-ppm group (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this carcinogenicity bioassay confirm and reinforce
the first experimental demonstration of APM's multipotential carcinogenicity at a
dose level close to the acceptable daily intake for humans. Furthermore, the
study demonstrates that when life-span exposure to APM begins during fetal life, 
its carcinogenic effects are increased.

PMCID: PMC1964906
PMID: 17805418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Exp Bot. 2007;58(11):2993-3003. Epub 2007 Aug 28.

A novel ERF transcription activator in wheat and its induction kinetics after
pathogen and hormone treatments.

Zhang Z(1), Yao W, Dong N, Liang H, Liu H, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)The National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement,
Institute of Crop Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing
10008, PR China. zyzh-68@163.com

In this study, a pathogen-inducible ERF (ethylene-response factor) gene in wheat,
designated TaERF3, was isolated and characterized in detail. The sequence of the 
TaERF3 protein possesses all of the traits commonly associated with ERFs, but its
entire sequence shares low identity with other ERFs of transcription factor
families. The results of assays on subcelluar localization, GCC box-binding
ability, and transactivation activity indicated that TaERF3 is a nuclear
targeting protein and functions as a GCC box-binding transcriptional activator.
Following infection with Blumeria graminis, the induction peak of TaERF3
expression occurring at 12 h in the resistant line was about six times higher
than that in its susceptible parent. Following infections with Fusarium
graminearum or Rhizoctonia cerealis, the TaERF3 maximum inductions in the
susceptible line occurring at 12 h were about three or six times higher than
those in the resistant lines, whereas after 24 h or 48 h, the transcript
inductions in the resistant lines were much higher than that in the susceptible
line. Furthermore, the TaERF3 transcript peak induced by salicylic acid (SA)
treatment occurred at 4 h, whereas the peaks induced by exogenous ethylene and
methyl jasmonate (MeJA) occurred at 24 h, all of which were earlier than those
induced by pathogens in the resistant lines. These results suggested that TaERF3 
might be mainly involved in the active defence response to B. graminis at an
earlier stage through SA signalling, and to F. graminearum and R. cerealis at a
later stage through the ethylene/jasmonic acid signalling pathways.

PMID: 17728298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Oct 19;362(2):431-6. Epub 2007 Aug 10.

Over-expression of the Arabidopsis DRE/CRT-binding transcription factor DREB2C
enhances thermotolerance.

Lim CJ(1), Hwang JE, Chen H, Hong JK, Yang KA, Choi MS, Lee KO, Chung WS, Lee SY,
Lim CO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied Life Science (BK21), Environmental Biotechnology National 
Core Research Center and PMBBRC, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701,
Republic of Korea.

The dehydration responsive element binding protein 2 (DREB2) subgroup belongs to 
the plant-specific APETALA2/ethylene-responsive element binding factor (AP2/ERF) 
family of transcription factors. We have characterized cDNA encoding Arabidopsis 
thaliana DREB2C, which is induced by mild heat stress. Both an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) and a yeast one-hybrid assay revealed that
DREB2C(145-528) was able to form a complex with the dehydration responsive
element/C-repeat (DRE/CRT; A/GCCGAC) motif. A trans-activating ability test in
yeast demonstrated that DREB2C could effectively function as a trans-activator.
Constitutive expression of DREB2C under the control of the cauliflower mosaic
virus (CaMV) 35S promoter led to enhanced thermotolerance in transgenic lines of 
Arabidopsis. Microarray and RT-PCR analyses of transgenic plants revealed that
DREB2C regulates expression of several heat stress-inducible genes that contain
DRE/CRT elements in their promoters. From these data, we deduced that DREB2C is a
regulator of heat stress tolerance in Arabidopsis.

PMID: 17716623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 12;282(41):30285-94. Epub 2007 Aug 14.

The RAS-dependent ERF control of cell proliferation and differentiation is
mediated by c-Myc repression.

Verykokakis M(1), Papadaki C, Vorgia E, Le Gallic L, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Crete and Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Crete,
710 03, Greece.

The ERF transcriptional repressor is a downstream effector of the RAS/ERK pathway
that interacts with and is directly phosphorylated by ERKs in vivo and in vitro. 
This phosphorylation results in its cytoplasmic export and inactivation, although
lack of ERK activity allows its immediate nuclear accumulation and repressor
function. Nuclear ERFs arrest cell cycle progression in G(1) and can suppress
ras-dependent tumorigenicity. Here we provide evidence that ERF function is
mediated by its ability to repress transcription of c-Myc. Promoter reporter
assays indicate a DNA binding-dependent and repressor domain-dependent Myc
transcriptional repression. Chromatin immunoprecipitations in primary cells
suggest that ERF specifically binds on the c-Myc promoter in an E2F4/5-dependent 
manner and only under conditions that the physiological c-Myc transcription is
stopped. Cellular systems overexpressing nuclear ERF exhibit reduced c-Myc mRNA
and tumorigenic potential. Elimination of Erf in animal models results in
increased c-Myc expression, whereas Erf(-)(/)(-) primary fibroblasts fail to
down-regulate Myc in response to growth factor withdrawal. Finally, elimination
of c-Myc in primary mouse embryo fibroblasts negates the ability of nuclear ERF
to suppress proliferation. Thus Erf provides a direct link between the RAS/ERK
signaling and the transcriptional regulation of c-Myc and suggests that RAS/ERK
attenuation actively regulates cell fate.

PMID: 17699159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Plant J. 2007 Oct;52(2):382-90. Epub 2007 Aug 2.

In planta ORFeome analysis by large-scale over-expression of GATEWAY-compatible
cDNA clones: screening of ERF transcription factors involved in abiotic stress
defense.

Weiste C(1), Iven T, Fischer U, Oñate-Sánchez L, Dröge-Laser W.

Author information: 
(1)Albrecht-von-Haller-Institut, Universität Göttingen, Untere Karspüle 2,
D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

Genomic approaches have generated large Arabidopsis thaliana open reading frame
(ORF) collections. However, tools are required to functionally characterize this 
ORFeome. Here we describe a batch procedure to simultaneously recombine a
population of GATEWAY-tagged full-length cDNAs into a plant expression vector. A 
pool of agrobacteria carrying these constructs has been used in flower-dip
transformation experiments to obtain a collection of transgenic lines that
over-express HA-tagged ORFs. This AtTORF-Ex library can be used in various
screening approaches to identify particular gene family members involved in plant
development or stress responses. The feasibility of the approach was studied
using a near-complete collection of the Arabidopsis ethylene response factor
(ERF) transcription factor (TF) family. Quality control performed at each step of
the procedure revealed that the complexity of the population is maintained, and
that almost all members of the ORF collection are covered by the plant library.
The frequency of multiple transformation events has been determined as
approximately 4%. Significant transgene expression was detected at the RNA and
protein level in more than 60% and 30% of the transgenic plants, respectively.
Striking phenotypic alterations were observed in approximately 4% of the plants. 
Many ERF TFs have been shown to participate in plant stress responses. As a proof
of principle, the AtTORF-Ex library has been used in a selection procedure to
isolate TFs involved in enhanced abiotic stress tolerance. The corresponding TF
gene can be easily polymerase chain reaction-amplified using GATEWAY att
site-specific primers. In summary, we describe here a method that can be
generally applied for functional analysis of ORFeomes in planta.

PMID: 17672839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Plant Physiol. 2008 Apr 18;165(6):662-70. Epub 2007 Jun 13.

Differential regulation of tomato ethylene responsive factor LeERF3b, a putative 
repressor, and the activator Pti4 in ripening mutants and in response to
environmental stresses.

Chen G(1), Hu Z, Grierson D.

Author information: 
(1)College of Bioengineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing, PR China.

Ethylene responsive transcription factors (ERFs) can be grouped into different
classes with either gene activator or repressor activity. We have isolated a
tomato ERF cDNA clone (LeERF3b) with sequence similarity to class II (repressor
class) of the ERF family, which is regulated differently from Pti4 (a tomato ERF 
domain-containing gene that activates other genes). LeERF3b has similarities to
other tomato ERF cDNAs but the DNA or predicted amino acid sequences have
significant differences. Northern analysis showed that Pti4 was highly expressed 
during fruit ripening, whereas LeERF3b accumulated before and declined sharply
after the onset of ripening. Furthermore, Pti4 mRNA was significantly reduced in 
low-ethylene tomato fruit containing an ACC oxidase sense-suppression transgene
and also in the ethylene insensitive mutant never ripe (Nr). By contrast, the
LeERF3b mRNA was markedly increased in those fruits. Environmental stresses
including drought, desiccation and low temperature increased significantly the
expression level of LeERF3b, but markedly reduced the level of Pti4 mRNA.
Conversely, wounding induced the accumulation of Pti4 mRNA, but had no
significant effect on the level of LeERF3b. These opposing patterns of regulation
of mRNA accumulation are consistent with the activator function of Pti4 and a
repressor function for LeERF3b in ethylene responses.

PMID: 17570560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. FEBS Lett. 2007 Jun 26;581(16):3044-50. Epub 2007 Jun 4.

Identification of the amino acids crucial for the activities of drought
responsive element binding factors (DREBs) of Brassica napus.

Zhao TJ(1), Liu Y, Yan YB, Feng F, Liu WQ, Zhou HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China.

We have previously identified two homologous groups of BnDREBs in Brassica napus,
the trans-active BnDREBI and the trans-inactive BnDREBII, which provided an ideal
system to study the trans-activation of DREB1/CBF. Deletion analysis indicated
that the two additional regions in BnDREBI contributed little to the
transcriptional activity. Domain swapping analysis indicated that all the domains
contributed to the activity of BnDREBI, including the ERF/AP2 DNA binding domain.
Through site-directed mutagenesis, we identified nine residues that were involved
in the activity of BnDREBI, among which six residues are specific to BnDREBI, and
three are common to DREB1A.

PMID: 17560577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Planta. 2007 Sep;226(4):827-38. Epub 2007 Jun 1.

Cloning and functional characterization of PpDBF1 gene encoding a DRE-binding
transcription factor from Physcomitrella patens.

Liu N(1), Zhong NQ, Wang GL, Li LJ, Liu XL, He YK, Xia GX.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

The dehydration-responsive element binding (DREB) transcription factors play
central roles in regulating expression of stress-inducible genes under abiotic
stresses. In the present work, PpDBF1 (Physcomitrella patens DRE-binding Factor1)
containing a conserved AP2/ERF domain was isolated from the moss P. patens.
Sequence comparison and phylogenetic analysis revealed that PpDBF1 belongs to the
A-5 group of DREB transcription factor subfamily. The transcriptional activation 
activity and DNA-binding specificity of PpDBF1 were verified by yeast one-hybrid 
and electrophoretic mobility shift assay experiments, and its nuclear
localization was demonstrated by particle biolisitics. PpDBF1 transcripts were
accumulated under various abiotic stresses and phytohormones treatments in P.
patens, and transgenic tobacco plants over-expressing PpDBF1 gained higher
tolerance to salt, drought and cold stresses. These results suggest that PpDBF1
may play a role in P. patens as a DREB transcription factor, implying that
similar regulating systems are conserved in moss and higher plants.

PMID: 17541631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cell Cycle. 2007 Jul 1;6(13):1594-604. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Differential repression of c-myc and cdc2 gene expression by ERF and PE-1/METS.

Hester KD(1), Verhelle D, Escoubet-Lozach L, Luna R, Rose DW, Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

The molecular mechanisms that control the proliferation and differentiation of
specific cell types remain poorly understood. Positive ETS factors play important
roles in mediating proliferative responses to Ras/MAPK signaling in many cell
types following mitogenic stimulation. PE-1/METS, a member of the ETS-domain
family transcription factors that functions as a transcriptional repressor, can
block mitogenic responses mediated by positively acting Ets factors. The
anti-proliferative functions of PE-1/METS require its interaction with DP103, a
multifunctional DEAD-box protein that mediates interactions with corepressor
proteins and acts in a cooperative manner with Rb family members and to repress
cell cycle control genes. ETS-2 repressor factor (ERF) is structurally related to
and also functions as a transcriptional repressor, but endogenous target genes
and mechanisms of repression remain unknown. Here, we demonstrate that like
PE-1/METS, ERF-mediated repression also requires DP103, and that ERF negatively
regulates the c-myc and cdc2 genes. In contrast to PE-1/METS, however,
ERF-mediated repression of these genes is inactivated by MAPK signaling through
phosphorylation sites that are ERF-specific. Furthermore, constitutive activation
of the Ras/MAPK pathway in RAW 264.7 cells transformed by the v-Abelson leukemia 
virus is associated with constitutive inactivation of ERF in this cell type. We
propose that ERF and PE-1/METS function to impose 'repression checkpoints' on a
subset of cell cycle control genes that are differentially regulated by growth
factor signaling pathways that control proliferation and differentiation and that
ERF is targeted for inactivation by transforming oncogenes such as vAbl.

PMID: 17525531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Biotechnol Lett. 2007 Aug;29(8):1293-9. Epub 2007 May 22.

Isolation and characterization of a novel cDNA encoding ERF/AP2-type
transcription factor OsAP25 from Oryza sativa L.

Fu XY(1), Zhang Z, Peng RH, Xiong AS, Liu JG, Wu LJ, Gao F, Zhu H, Guo ZK, Yao
QH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Weigang, Nanjing,
210095, P.R. China.

Using a yeast one-hybrid method, a transcription factor, OsAP25, which interacts 
specifically with a GCC box was isolated from rice. The OsAP25 protein contained 
a conserved ethylene-responsive element binding factor (ERF) domain which shared 
identity with other reported ERF domains. Phylogenetic analysis showed that
OsAP25 could be categorized into class III ERF of the previously characterized
ERF proteins on an evolutionary relationship. The semi-quantitative RT-PCR
analysis revealed that OsAP25 gene was constitutively expressed in leaves, roots,
growing points, flower, bolting stage and grain filling stage. In addition,
OsAP25 gene was induced by NaCl, cold, drought, abscisic acid and exogenous
ethylene.

PMID: 17516027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Aug;18(8):2864-72. Epub 2007 May 16.

Ets-2 repressor factor silences extrasynaptic utrophin by N-box mediated
repression in skeletal muscle.

Perkins KJ(1), Basu U, Budak MT, Ketterer C, Baby SM, Lozynska O, Lunde JA,
Jasmin BJ, Rubinstein NA, Khurana TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pennsylvania Muscle Institute, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6085, USA.

Utrophin is the autosomal homologue of dystrophin, the protein product of the
Duchenne's muscular dystrophy (DMD) locus. Utrophin expression is temporally and 
spatially regulated being developmentally down-regulated perinatally and enriched
at neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) in adult muscle. Synaptic localization of
utrophin occurs in part by heregulin-mediated extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK)-phosphorylation, leading to binding of GABPalpha/beta to the
N-box/EBS and activation of the major utrophin promoter-A expressed in myofibers.
However, molecular mechanisms contributing to concurrent extrasynaptic silencing 
that must occur to achieve NMJ localization are unknown. We demonstrate that the 
Ets-2 repressor factor (ERF) represses extrasynaptic utrophin-A in muscle. Gel
shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated physical association
of ERF with the utrophin-A promoter N-box/EBS site. ERF overexpression repressed 
utrophin-A promoter activity; conversely, small interfering RNA-mediated ERF
knockdown enhanced promoter activity as well as endogenous utrophin mRNA levels
in cultured muscle cells in vitro. Laser-capture microscopy of tibialis anterior 
NMJ and extrasynaptic transcriptomes and gene transfer studies provide spatial
and direct evidence, respectively, for ERF-mediated utrophin repression in vivo. 
Together, these studies suggest "repressing repressors" as a potential strategy
for achieving utrophin up-regulation in DMD, and they provide a model for
utrophin-A regulation in muscle.

PMCID: PMC1949368
PMID: 17507653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(14):5201-13. Epub 2007 May 14.

Transcriptional repressor erf determines extraembryonic ectoderm differentiation.

Papadaki C(1), Alexiou M, Cecena G, Verykokakis M, Bilitou A, Cross JC, Oshima
RG, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Crete, Voutes, Heraklion, Crete 710 03, Greece.

Extraembryonic ectoderm differentiation and chorioallantoic attachment are
fibroblast growth factor (FGF)- and transforming growth factor beta-regulated
processes that are the first steps in the development of the placenta labyrinth
and the establishment of the fetal-maternal circulation in the developing embryo.
Only a small number of genes have been demonstrated to be important in
trophoblast stem cell differentiation. Erf is a ubiquitously expressed
Erk-regulated, ets domain transcriptional repressor expressed throughout
embryonic development and adulthood. However, in the developing placenta, after
7.5 days postcoitum (dpc) its expression is restricted to the extraembryonic
ectoderm, and its expression is restricted after 9.5 dpc in a subpopulation of
labyrinth cells. Homozygous deletion of Erf in mice leads to a block of chorionic
cell differentiation before chorioallantoic attachment, resulting in a persisting
chorion layer, a persisting ectoplacental cone cavity, failure of chorioallantoic
attachment, and absence of labyrinth. These defects result in embryo death by
10.5 dpc. Trophoblast stem cell lines derived from Erf(dl1/dl1) knockout
blastocysts exhibit delayed differentiation and decreased expression of
spongiotrophoblast markers, consistent with the persisting chorion layer, the
expanded giant cell layer, and the diminished spongiotrophoblast layer observed
in vivo. Our data suggest that attenuation of FGF/Erk signaling and consecutive
Erf nuclear localization and function is required for extraembryonic ectoderm
differentiation, ectoplacental cone cavity closure, and chorioallantoic
attachment.

PMCID: PMC1951951
PMID: 17502352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Plant J. 2007 Jun;50(6):1079-92. Epub 2007 May 3.

Two novel AP2/ERF domain proteins interact with cis-element VWRE for
wound-induced expression of the Tobacco tpoxN1 gene.

Sasaki K(1), Mitsuhara I, Seo S, Ito H, Matsui H, Ohashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plant Sciences, Organization of National Institute of
Agrobiological Sciences, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8602, Japan.

The vascular system-specific and wound-responsive cis-element (VWRE) has been
identified as a novel cis-element for wound-induced and vascular system-specific 
expression of the tobacco peroxidase gene, tpoxN1. Here we isolated two
independent clones that encode VWRE binding proteins by yeast one-hybrid
screening. As the gene products have an AP2/ERF (APETALA2/ethylene-responsive
factor) domain, and the transcripts were accumulated transiently after wounding, 
we named them wound-responsive AP2/ERF-like factor 1 (WRAF1) and WRAF2. The
AP2/ERF domains of the two WRAFs share 97% homology, and are classified into the 
ERF subfamily B-4. Gel mobility shift analysis indicated that WRAFs specifically 
bind VWRE, which contains no known cis-elements for other AP2/ERF proteins. The
binding activity of the WRAFs was found to be localized in the AP2/ERF domain.
The WRAFs transactivated a promoter containing four tandem repeats of the VWRE,
but not that of the mutated VWRE. Overexpression of the WRAF genes led to
constitutive expression of the potential target gene, tpoxN1, in unwounded
transgenic plants. These results indicate that the novel transcription factors
WRAF1 and WRAF2 bind the VWRE as positive regulators for the expression of the
tpoxN1 gene.

PMID: 17488240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Planta. 2007 Sep;226(4):815-25. Epub 2007 May 4.

ERF protein JERF1 that transcriptionally modulates the expression of abscisic
acid biosynthesis-related gene enhances the tolerance under salinity and cold in 
tobacco.

Wu L(1), Chen X, Ren H, Zhang Z, Zhang H, Wang J, Wang XC, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094, China.

Increasing evidences indicate that ethylene responsive factor (ERF) proteins
regulate a variety of biotic and abiotic stress responses, and plant development 
as well. Previously we demonstrated that JERF1, encoding an ERF transcriptional
activator, is inducible by ethylene, MeJA, ABA, and NaCl, suggesting its possible
regulation in multiple stress responses. In the present paper, we report that
expressing JERF1 in tobacco increases the seed germination under mannitol
treatment, and enhances the tolerance to high salinity and low temperature,
through accumulating sodium in vacuole of leaves and stabilizing the plasma
membrane, respectively, and significantly increases the growth of tobacco roots
and leaves under salinity and low temperature through an unknown mechanism. The
evidence that JERF1 interacts with multiple cis-acting elements, such as GCC-box,
DRE, and CE1, to activate the expression of stress-related genes, supports the
possible involvement of JERF1 in multiple plant stress responses with
ABA-dependent and ABA-independent manner. More importantly, we reveal that
expressing JERF1 in tobacco transcriptionally regulates the expression of ABA
biosynthesis-related gene NtSDR, resulting in the increase of the ABA content.
Together, our results indicate that JERF1 interacts with multiple cis-acting
elements and activates the expression of stress responsive and ABA
biosynthesis-related genes, consequently causing ABA biosynthesis, and ultimately
enhancing tobacco tolerance and growth under high salinity and low temperature.

PMID: 17479283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Neuroimage. 2007 Jun;36(2):332-45. Epub 2007 Mar 13.

Dynamic causal modelling of evoked responses: the role of intrinsic connections.

Kiebel SJ(1), Garrido MI, Friston KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, Institute of Neurology, University
College London, 12 Queen Square, London, WC1N 3AR, UK. skiebel@fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk

Dynamic causal modelling is an approach to characterising evoked responses as
measured by magneto/electroencephalography (M/EEG). A dynamic causal model (DCM) 
is a spatiotemporal, generative network model for event-related fields/responses 
(ERP/ERF) data. Using Bayesian model inversion, one can compute the posterior
distributions of the DCM's physiological parameters and its marginal likelihood
for model comparison. Model comparison can be used to test mechanistic hypotheses
about how electrophysiological data were generated. In this work, we look at the 
relative importance of changes in intrinsic (within source) and extrinsic
(between sources) connections in generating mismatch responses. In short, we
introduce the modulation of intrinsic connectivity to the DCM framework. This is 
useful for testing hypotheses about adaptation of neuronal responses to local
influences, in relation to influences that are mediated by long-range extrinsic
connections (forward, backward, and lateral) from other sources. We illustrate
this extension using synthetic data and empirical data from an oddball ERP
experiment.

PMID: 17462916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Cancer. 2007 Apr 23;6:31.

LEDGF/p75 has increased expression in blasts from chemotherapy-resistant human
acute myelogenic leukemia patients and protects leukemia cells from apoptosis in 
vitro.

Huang TS(1), Myklebust LM, Kjarland E, Gjertsen BT, Pendino F, Bruserud Ø,
Døskeland SO, Lillehaug JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
david.huang@gades.uib.no

BACKGROUND: Relapse due to chemoresistant residual disease is a major cause of
death in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). The present study was undertaken to
elucidate the molecular mechanisms of chemoresistance by comparing differential
gene expression in blasts from patients with resistant relapsing AML and
chemosensitive AML.
RESULTS: About 20 genes were identified as preferentially expressed in blasts
pooled from patients with resistant disease, as compared to chemosensitive AML
blasts, based on differential gene expression screening. Half of these genes
encoded proteins related to protein translation, of these a novel protein related
to the ribosomal stalk protein P0. Other upregulated mRNAs coded for cytochrome C
oxidase III, the transcription factors ERF-2/TIS11d, and the p75 and p52 splice
variants of Lens Epithelial Derived Growth Factor (LEDGF). Analysis of blasts
from single patients disclosed that LEDGF/p75 was the most consistently
upregulated mRNA in resistant AML. Transfection experiments demonstrated that
LEDGF/p75 and p52b antagonized daunorubicin-induced and cAMP-induced apoptosis in
an AML cell line. Also HEK-293 cells were protected against daunorubicin by
LEDGF/p75 and p52b, whereas LEDGF/p52 splice variants lacking exon 6 had
proapoptotic effects. Interestingly, full length LEDGF/p75 protected against
truncated pro-apoptotic LEDGF/p75.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide evidence for an association between the
overexpression of genes encoding survival proteins like LEDGF/p75 and
chemo-resistance in acute myelogenous leukemia. LEDGF/p75 has previously not been
shown to protect against chemotherapy, and is a potential drug target in AML.

PMCID: PMC1876472
PMID: 17451600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Plant Cell. 2007 Apr;19(4):1221-34. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

An ERF transcription factor in Medicago truncatula that is essential for Nod
factor signal transduction.

Middleton PH(1), Jakab J, Penmetsa RV, Starker CG, Doll J, Kaló P, Prabhu R,
Marsh JF, Mitra RM, Kereszt A, Dudas B, VandenBosch K, Long SR, Cook DR, Kiss GB,
Oldroyd GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Disease and Stress Biology, John Ines Centre, Norwich NR4 7UH,
UK.

Rhizobial bacteria activate the formation of nodules on the appropriate host
legume plant, and this requires the bacterial signaling molecule Nod factor.
Perception of Nod factor in the plant leads to the activation of a number of
rhizobial-induced genes. Putative transcriptional regulators in the GRAS family
are known to function in Nod factor signaling, but these proteins have not been
shown to be capable of direct DNA binding. Here, we identify an ERF transcription
factor, ERF Required for Nodulation (ERN), which contains a highly conserved AP2 
DNA binding domain, that is necessary for nodulation. Mutations in this gene
block the initiation and development of rhizobial invasion structures, termed
infection threads, and thus block nodule invasion by the bacteria. We show that
ERN is necessary for Nod factor-induced gene expression and for spontaneous
nodulation activated by the calcium- and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase,
DMI3, which is a component of the Nod factor signaling pathway. We propose that
ERN is a component of the Nod factor signal transduction pathway and functions
downstream of DMI3 to activate nodulation gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1913751
PMID: 17449807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Psychiatry Res. 2007 Aug 30;152(2-3):205-10. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Subjective and cardiovascular effects of cocaine during treatment with amantadine
and baclofen in combination.

Rotheram-Fuller E(1), De La Garza R 2nd, Mahoney JJ 3rd, Shoptaw S, Newton TF.

Author information: 
(1)UCLA Department of Family Medicine, 10880 Wilshire Blvd. Suite 1800, Los
Angeles, CA 90024, USA. erf@ucla.edu

This study assessed the subjective and cardiovascular effects of relevant doses
of cocaine administration during steady-state treatment of the combination of
amantadine and baclofen compared to placebo. Participants included 8 healthy,
male, cocaine-dependent, non-treatment-seeking individuals (age=36.6+/-5.9; 75%
African American, 25% Caucasian; using cocaine for an average of 15.3+/-6.5
years). Data were collected prior to and following double-blind intravenous
administration of 0 mg, 20 mg, and 40 mg of cocaine. Data were collected at
baseline, following 5 days of treatment with placebo, and again following 5 days 
of treatment with a combination of amantadine 100 mg t.i.d. and baclofen 30 mg
t.i.d. counterbalanced for order of medication and placebo in a cross-over
design. Results showed no significant alterations to cardiovascular variables
(heart rate, systolic and diastolic blood pressure) from treatment using
combination medication or placebo in the presence of cocaine. Self-rated "desire"
for cocaine was significantly lower during cocaine administrations while
participants were receiving treatment with amantadine-baclofen compared to
infusions while taking placebo medication, although there was no difference in
the intensity of cocaine-induced euphoria, or reduction in the likelihood to use 
cocaine if given access. Study findings support the safety of the
amantadine-baclofen combination treatment for cocaine dependence.

PMID: 17449110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Poult Sci. 2007 May;86(5):984-98.

An inadequate pulmonary vascular capacity and susceptibility to pulmonary
arterial hypertension in broilers.

Wideman RF(1), Chapman ME, Hamal KR, Bowen OT, Lorenzoni AG, Erf GF, Anthony NB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA. rwideman@uark.edu

Broilers are susceptible to pulmonary hypertension syndrome (PHS; ascites
syndrome) when their pulmonary vascular capacity is anatomically or functionally 
inadequate to accommodate the requisite cardiac output without an excessive
elevation in pulmonary arterial pressure. The consequences of an inadequate
pulmonary vascular capacity have been demonstrated experimentally and include
elevated pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) attributable to noncompliant, fully 
engorged vascular channels; sustained pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH);
systemic hypoxemia and hypercapnia; specific right ventricular hypertrophy, and
right atrioventricular valve failure (regurgitation), leading to central venous
hypertension and hepatic cirrhosis. Pulmonary vascular capacity is broadly
defined to encompass anatomical constraints related to the compliance and
effective volume of blood vessels, as well as functional limitations related to
the tone (degree of constriction) maintained by the primary resistance vessels
(arterioles) within the lungs. Surgical occlusion of 1 pulmonary artery halves
the anatomical pulmonary vascular capacity, doubles the PVR, triggers PAH,
eliminates PHS-susceptible broilers, and reveals PHS-resistant survivors whose
lungs are innately capable of handling sustained increases in pulmonary arterial 
pressure and cardiac output. We currently are using i.v. microparticle injections
to increase the PVR and trigger PAH sufficient in magnitude to eliminate
PHS-susceptible individuals while allowing PHS-resistant individuals to survive
as progenitors of robust broiler lines. The microparticles obstruct pulmonary
arterioles and cause local tissues and responding leukocytes to release
vasoactive substances, including the vasodilator NO and the highly effective
vasoconstrictors thromboxane A(2) and serotonin [5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)].
Nitric oxide is the principal vasodilator responsible for modulating
(attenuating) the PAH response and ensuing mortality triggered by i.v.
microparticle injections, whereas microparticle-induced increases in PVR can be
attributed principally to 5-HT. Our observations support the hypothesis that
susceptibility to PHS is a consequence of anatomically inadequate pulmonary
vascular capacity combined with the functional predominance of the
vasoconstrictor 5-HT over the vasodilator NO. The contribution of TxA(2) remains 
to be determined. Selecting broiler lines for resistance to PHS depends upon
improving both anatomical and functional components of pulmonary vascular
capacity.

PMID: 17435037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Plant Cell Environ. 2007 May;30(5):630-45.

Transcriptional profiling of hexaploid wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) roots
identifies novel, dehydration-responsive genes.

Mohammadi M(1), Kav NN, Deyholos MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada T6E
2L3.

We used a long-oligonucleotide microarray to identify transcripts that increased 
or decreased in abundance in roots of dehydration-tolerant hexaploid bread wheat,
in response to withholding of water. We observed that the major classes of
dehydration-responsive genes (e.g. osmoprotectants, compatible solutes,
proteases, glycosyltransferases/hydrolases, signal transducers components, ion
transporters) were generally similar to those observed previously in other
species and osmotic stresses. More specifically, we highlighted increases in
transcript expression for specific genes including those putatively related to
the synthesis of asparagine, trehalose, oligopeptide transporters, metal-binding 
proteins, the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) shunt and transcription factors.
Conversely, we noted a decrease in transcript abundance for diverse classes of
glutathione and sulphur-related enzymes, specific amino acids, as well as
MATE-efflux carrier proteins. From these data, we identified a novel,
dehydration-induced putative AP2/ERF transcription factor, which we predict to
function as a transcriptional repressor. We also identified a dehydration-induced
'little protein' (LitP; predicted mass: 8 kDa) that is highly conserved across
spermatophytes. Using qRT-PCR, we compared the expression patterns of selected
genes between two related wheat genotypes that differed in their susceptibility
to dehydration, and confirmed that these novel genes were highly inducible by
water limitation in both genotypes, although the magnitude of induction differed.

PMID: 17407540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Sci China C Life Sci. 2007 Feb;50(1):7-14.

Molecular cloning and functional characterization of a DREB1/CBF-like gene
(GhDREB1L) from cotton.

Huang B(1), Jin L, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Ministry of Education, Department of
Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084,
China.

The transcription factors DREB1s/CBFs play important roles in the regulation of
plant resistance to environmental stresses and are quite useful for generating
transgenic plants tolerant to these stresses. In the present work, a cDNA
encoding DREB1/CBF-like protein (GhDREB1L) from cotton was isolated, and its
sequence features, DNA binding preference, and expression patterns of the
transcripts were also characterized. GhDREB1L contained one conserved AP2/ERF
domain and its amino acid sequence was similar to the DREB1/CBF group of the DREB
family from other plants. The DNA-binding domain of GhDREB1L was successfully
expressed as a fusion protein in Escherichia coli BL21 (DE3) and purified by
Ni-NTA affinity chromatography. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay revealed
that the purified GhDREB1L fusion protein had a specific binding activity with
the previously characterized DRE element (core sequence, ACCGAC) and also with
the DRE-like sequence (core sequence, GCCGAC) in the promoter of the
dehydration-responsive late embryogenesis-abundant gene LEA D113.
Semi-quantitative RT-PCR showed that GhDREB1L was induced in the cotton
cotyledons by low temperature, as well as drought and NaCl treatments. These
results suggested that the novel cotton GhDREB1L might play an important role in 
response to low temperature as well as drought and high salinity through binding 
to the DRE cis-element.

PMID: 17393077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Plant Mol Biol. 2007 Jun;64(3):265-78. Epub 2007 Mar 9.

Heterologous expression of two Medicago truncatula putative ERF transcription
factor genes, WXP1 and WXP2, in Arabidopsis led to increased leaf wax
accumulation and improved drought tolerance, but differential response in
freezing tolerance.

Zhang JY(1), Broeckling CD, Sumner LW, Wang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Forage Improvement Division, The Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, 2510 Sam
Noble Parkway, P.O. Box 2180, Ardmore, OK 73401, USA.

Cuticular waxes are the major components of plant cuticle and play an important
role in protecting aerial organs from damage caused by biotic and abiotic
stresses. Here we report the functional characterization of two putative ERF
transcription factor genes WXP1 and its paralog WXP2 from Medicago truncatula.
Transgenic expression of WXP1 and WXP2 in Arabidopsis (ecotype Columbia) led to
significantly increased cuticular wax deposition on leaves of 4-week-old and
6-week-old transgenic plants, assessed based on fresh weight or based on surface 
area. Differences in the accumulation of various wax components as well as their 
chain length distributions were found in the WXP1 and WXP2 plants. The major wax 
component in Arabidopsis, n-alkanes, increased substantially in both WXP1 and
WXP2 transgenics, however, another wax component, primary alcohols, increased in 
WXP1 plants but decreased in WXP2 plants. Cuticle properties of the transgenic
leaves were analyzed by chlorophyll leaching assay; while the WXP1 plants had no 
change, the WXP2 plants showed more chlorophyll leaching. Analysis of fresh
weight loss from detached leaves revealed that the transgenic leaves tend to
retain more water than the control. Both WXP1 and WXP2 transgenic plants showed
significantly enhanced whole plant drought tolerance. Analysis of freezing
tolerance at the whole plant level and measurement of electrolyte leakage from
detached leaves revealed that the WXP1 plants had increased freezing tolerance
while the WXP2 plants were more sensitive to low temperature when compared to the
control. Transgenic expression of WXP1 had no obvious effects on plant growth and
development, however, the expression of WXP2 led to slower plant growth. These
results indicate that WXP1 is a useful candidate gene for improving plant drought
and freezing tolerance by genetic transformation.

PMID: 17347795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Chem Phys. 2007 Feb 21;126(7):074111.

On the universality of the long-/short-range separation in multiconfigurational
density-functional theory.

Fromager E(1), Toulouse J, Jensen HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Chemistry, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej
55, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark.

In many cases, the dynamic correlation can be calculated quite accurately and at 
a fairly low computational cost in Kohn-Sham density-functional theory (KS-DFT), 
using current standard approximate functionals. However, in general, KS-DFT does 
not treat static correlation effects (near degeneracy) adequately which, on the
other hand, can be described in wave-function theory (WFT), for example, with a
multiconfigurational self-consistent field (MCSCF) model. It is therefore of high
interest to develop a hybrid model which combines the best of both WFT and DFT
approaches. The merge of WFT and DFT can be achieved by splitting the
two-electron interaction into long-range and short-range parts. The long-range
part is then treated by WFT and the short-range part by DFT. In this work the
authors consider the so-called "erf" long-range interaction erf(micror12)/r12,
which is based on the standard error function, and where mu is a free parameter
which controls the range of the long-/short-range decomposition. In order to
formulate a general method, they propose a recipe for the definition of an
optimal microopt parameter, which is independent of the approximate short-range
functional and the approximate wave function, and they discuss its universality. 
Calculations on a test set consisting of He, Be, Ne, Mg, H2, N2, and H2O yield
microopt approximately 0.4 a.u.. A similar analysis on other types of test
systems such as actinide compounds is currently in progress. Using the value of
0.4 a.u. for micro, encouraging results are obtained with the hybrid MCSCF-DFT
method for the dissociation energies of H2, N2, and H2O, with both short-range
local-density approximation and PBE-type functionals.

PMID: 17328597  [PubMed]


228. Gene. 2007 Apr 15;391(1-2):80-90. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

Over-expression GbERF2 transcription factor in tobacco enhances brown spots
disease resistance by activating expression of downstream genes.

Zuo KJ(1), Qin J, Zhao JY, Ling H, Zhang LD, Cao YF, Tang KX.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biotechnology Research Center, School of Agriculture and Biology,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200030, People's Republic of China.
Kjzuo@sjtu.edu.cn

ERF transcription factors can bind GCC boxes or non-GCC cis elements to regulate 
biotic and abiotic stress responses. Here, we report that an ERF transcription
factor gene (GbERF2) was cloned by suppression subtraction hybridization from
sea-island cotton after Verticillium dahliae attack. The GbERF2 cDNA has a total 
length of 1143 bp with an open reading frame of 597 bp. The genomic sequence of
GbERF2 contains an intron of 515 bp. The gene encodes a predicated polypeptide of
198 amino acids with a molecular weight of 22.5 kDa and a calculated pI of 9.82. 
The GbERF2 protein has a highly conserved ERF domain while the nucleotide and
amino acid sequences have low homology with other ERF plant proteins. An RNA blot
revealed that GbERF2 is constitutively expressed in different tissues, but is
higher in the leaves. High levels of GbERF2 transcripts rapidly accumulated when 
the plants were exposed to exogenous ethylene treatment and V. dahliae infection,
while there was only a slight accumulation in response to salt, cold, drought and
water stresses. In contrast, GbERF2 transcripts declined in response to exogenous
abscisic acid (ABA) treatment. GbERF2 transgenic tobacco plants constitutively
accumulated higher levels of pathogenesis-related gene transcripts, such as
PR-1b, PR2 and PR4. The resistance of transgenic tobacco to fungal infection by
Alternaria longipes was enhanced. However, the resistance to bacterial infection 
by Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci was not improved. These results show that
GbERF2 plays an important role in response to ethylene stress and fungal attack
in cotton.

PMID: 17321073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Ter Arkh. 2006;78(12):24-7.

[Clinicofunctional characteristics of the heart in patients with stable angina
pectoris in combination with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Russian]

Borovkov NN, Grigor'eva NIu.

AIM: To specify clinicofunctional characteristics of the heart in patients with
stable angina in combination with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 125 anginal patients with COPD were devided into
three groups. The study group consisted of 80 patients (48 males and 32 females) 
aged 53.10+/-0.83 years with angina of effort (AE) offunctional class (FC) II-III
and mild to moderate COPD. Control group 1 consisted of 23 patients with FC
II-IIIAE, control group 2--of 22 COPD patients. The examination included
doppler-echocardiography (DECG), 24-h ECG monitoring (ECGM), selective
coronarography, assessment of external respiration function (ERF), lipid
metabolism and blood gases.
RESULTS: Patients with AE of FC II-III and COPD complain of dysonea and
palpitation, their 24-h DECG registered arrhythmia and asymtomatic ischemic heart
disease more frequently than in the controls, their systolic and diastolic left
ventricular dysfunction is more serious.
CONCLUSION: AE patients with COPD should undergo a comprehensive examination
including DECG, 24-h ECGM, assessment of ERF and blood gases for early detection 
of various disorders and administration of adequate treatment.

PMID: 17294859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 23;282(12):8883-94. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

Molecular basis of RNA recognition by the embryonic polarity determinant MEX-5.

Pagano JM(1), Farley BM, McCoig LM, Ryder SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Embryonic development requires maternal proteins and RNA. In Caenorhabditis
elegans, a gradient of CCCH tandem zinc finger (TZF) proteins coordinates axis
polarization and germline differentiation. These proteins govern expression from 
maternal mRNAs by an unknown mechanism. Here we show that the TZF protein MEX-5, 
a primary anterior determinant, is an RNA-binding protein that recognizes linear 
RNA sequences with high affinity but low specificity. The minimal binding site is
a tract of six or more uridines within a 9-13-nucleotide window. This sequence is
remarkably abundant in the 3'-untranslated region of C. elegans transcripts,
demonstrating that MEX-5 alone cannot specify mRNA target selection. In contrast,
human TZF homologs tristetraprolin and ERF-2 bind with high specificity to
UUAUUUAUU elements. We show that mutation of a single amino acid in each MEX-5
zinc finger confers tristetraprolin-like specificity to this protein. We propose 
that divergence of this discriminator residue modulates the RNA-binding
specificity in this protein class. This residue is variable in nematode TZF
proteins, but is invariant in other metazoans. Therefore, the divergence of TZF
proteins and their critical role in early development is likely a
nematode-specific adaptation.

PMID: 17264081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Exp Bot. 2007;58(3):673-86. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

Members of the ethylene signalling pathway are regulated in sugarcane during the 
association with nitrogen-fixing endophytic bacteria.

Cavalcante JJ(1), Vargas C, Nogueira EM, Vinagre F, Schwarcz K, Baldani JI,
Ferreira PC, Hemerly AS.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioquímica Médica, UFRJ, 21941-590, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

Nitrogen-fixing bacteria have been isolated from sugarcane in an endophytic and
beneficial interaction that promotes plant growth. In this work, for the first
time, the involvement of ethylene signalling in this interaction was investigated
by molecular characterizing members of this pathway in sugarcane. The expression 
pattern of a putative ethylene receptor (SCER1) and two putative ERF
transcription factors (SCERF1 and SCERF2) show exclusive modulation in plants
inoculated with the diazotrophic endophytes. The gene expression profile of
SCER1, SCERF1, and SCERF2 is differentially regulated in sugarcane genotypes that
can establish efficient or inefficient associations with diazotrophic
micro-organisms, exhibiting high or low biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) rates,
respectively. In addition, SCER1, SCERF1, and SCERF2 expression is different in
response to interactions with pathogenic and beneficial micro-organisms. Taken
together, that data suggest that SCER1, SCERF1, and SCERF2 might participate in
specific ethylene signalling cascade(s) that can identify a beneficial endophytic
association, modulating sugarcane responses toward the diazotrophic endophytes.

PMID: 17210990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. New Solut. 2004;14(1):19-42.

The chemical wars.

Montague P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Evironmental Research Foundation, New Brunswick, NJ 08903-0160, USA.
erf@rachel.org

The culture of economic growth and rapid innovation has led the chemical industry
to contaminate tens of thousands of locales with hazardous chemicals that are
poorly understood. As a result, the chemical industry finds itself at war with
citizens who are troubled by the widespread dissemination of industrial poisons
and alarmed by the power and unaccountability of the corporations themselves. The
current chemical regulatory system has not provided an effective or reassuring
restraint on chemical contamination because it relies heavily on a technique
called risk assessment instead of the newer approach being tried now in Europe
and elsewhere, the precautionary principle. Here's a riddle to keep you up at
night: How come, at a time when the environmental movement is stronger and richer
than ever, our most pressing ecological problems just get worse? It's as though
the planet has hit a Humpty-Dumpty moment in which unprecedented amounts of
manpower and money are unable to put the world back together again.

PMID: 17208883  [PubMed]


233. Ann Bot. 2007 Feb;99(2):239-44. Epub 2007 Jan 4.

Mutual regulation of Arabidopsis thaliana ethylene-responsive element binding
protein and a plant floral homeotic gene, APETALA2.

Ogawa T(1), Uchimiya H, Kawai-Yamada M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo,
1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: It has previously been shown that Arabidopsis thaliana
ethylene-responsive element binding protein (AtEBP) contributed to resistance to 
abiotic stresses. Interestingly, it has also been reported that expression of
ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) genes including AtEBP were regulated by the
activity of APETALA2 (AP2), a floral homeotic factor. AP2 is known to regulate
expression of several floral-specific homeotic genes such as AGAMOUS. The aim of 
this study was to clarify the relationship between AP2 and AtEBP in gene
expression.
METHODS: Northern blot analysis was performed on ap2 mutants, ethylene-related
Arabidopsis mutants and transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressing AtEBP, and 
a T-DNA insertional mutant of AtEBP. Phenotypic analysis of these plants was
performed.
KEY RESULTS: Expression levels of ERF genes such as AtEBP and AtERF1 were
increased in ap2 mutants. Over-expression of AtEBP caused upregulation of AP2
expression in leaves. AP2 expression was suppressed by the null-function of
ethylene-insensitive2 (EIN2), although AP2 expression was not affected by
ethylene treatment. Loss of AtEBP function slightly reduced the average number of
stamens.
CONCLUSIONS: AP2 and AtEBP are mutually regulated in terms of gene expression.
AP2 expression was affected by EIN2 but was not regulated by ethylene treatment.

PMCID: PMC2803001
PMID: 17204538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Eukaryot Microbiol. 2006;53 Suppl 1:S10-1.

Acanthamoeba isolated from contaminated groundwater.

Ramirez E(1), Campoy E, Matuz D, Robles E.

Author information: 
(1)Conservation and Improvement of Environment Lab, FES Iztacala, Autonomous
National University of Mexico, Av. De los Barrios num. 1, Los Reyes Iztacala,
Tlalnepantla 54090, Estado de Mexico, Mexico. erf@servidor.unam.mx

PMID: 17169014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Plant Mol Biol. 2007 Jan;63(1):63-71. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

Transcriptional activator TSRF1 reversely regulates pathogen resistance and
osmotic stress tolerance in tobacco.

Zhang H(1), Li W, Chen J, Yang Y, Zhang Z, Zhang H, Wang XC, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100094, China.

Increasing evidences show that ethylene-responsive factor (ERF) proteins regulate
plant stress response and the interaction of different stress responsive pathways
through interacting with different cis-acting elements, even other transcription 
factors. Here, we report a transcriptional activator TSRF1, which was previously 
demonstrated to regulate plant resistance to Ralstonia solanacearum, reversely
regulates pathogen resistance and osmotic stress tolerance in tobacco. Sequence
analysis revealed that TSRF1 contains a putative transcriptional activation
domain. Using yeast two hybrid system we evidenced that this activation domain is
essential for activating the expression of reporter gene. To confirm the
broad-spectrum pathogen resistance of TSRF1 we observed that over-expressing
TSRF1 enhances the resistance to Pseudomonas syringae and Botrytis cinerea in
both tobacco and tomato plants, but RNA interference of TSRF1 in tomato plants
decreases the resistance to these pathogens, unraveling the positive regulation
of TSRF1 in plant pathogen infections. The expression of TSRF1 in response to
NaCl and mannitol suggests the possible functions of TSRF1 in osmotic stress
responses, but the physiological tests indicate that expressing TSRF1 in tobaccos
decreases tolerance to NaCl or mannitol during germination and seedling root
development, and this result was consistent with PEG6000 treatment with mature
tobacco seedlings, indicating the negative modulation of TSRF1 in osmotic stress 
response. Therefore, our research reveals that transcriptional activator TSRF1
reversely regulates plant pathogen resistance and osmotic stress response.

PMID: 17160455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Hell J Nucl Med. 2006 Sep-Dec;9(3):167-72.

Effects of low intensity static electromagnetic radiofrequency fields on
leiomyosarcoma and smooth muscle cell lines.

Karkabounas S(1), Havelas K, Kostoula OK, Vezyraki P, Avdikos A, Binolis J,
Hatziavazis G, Metsios A, Verginadis I, Evangelou A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ioannina, University Campus, 451 10, Greece. skarkabu@cc.uoi.gr

In this study we investigated the effects of low intensity static radiofrequency 
electromagnetic field (EMF) causing no thermal effects, on leiomyosarcoma cells
(LSC), isolated from tumors of fifteen Wistar rats induced via a 3,4-benzopyrene 
injection. Electromagnetic resonance frequencies measurements and exposure of
cells to static EMF were performed by a device called multi channel dynamic
exciter 100 V1 (MCDE). The LSC were exposed to electromagnetic resonance
radiofrequencies (ERF) between 10 kHz to 120 kHz, for 45 min. During a 24h
period, after the exposure of the LSC to ERF, there was no inhibition of cells
proliferation. In contrast, at the end of a 48 h incubation period, LSC
proliferation dramatically decreased by more than 98% (P<0.001). At that time,
the survived LSC were only 2% of the total cell population exposed to ERF, and
under the same culture conditions showed significant decrease of proliferation.
These cells were exposed once again to ERF for 45 min (totally 4 sessions of
exposure, of 45 min duration each) and tested using a flow cytometer. Experiments
as above were repeated five times. It was found that 45% of these double exposed 
to ERF, LSC (EMF cells) were apoptotic and only a small percentage 2%, underwent 
mitosis. In order to determinate their metastatic potential, these EMF cells were
also counted and tested by an aggregometer for their ability to aggregate
platelets and found to maintain this ability., since they showed no difference in
platelet aggregation ability compared to the LSC not exposed to ERF (control
cells). In conclusion, exposure of LSC to specific ERF, decreases their
proliferation rate and induces cell apoptosis. Also, the LSC that survived after 
exposed to ERF, had a lower proliferation rate compared to the LSC controls
(P<0.05) but did not loose their potential for metastases (platelet aggregation
ability). The non-malignant SMC were not affected by the EMF exposure (P<0.4).
The specific ERF generated from the MCDE electronic device, used in this study,
is safe for humans and animals, according to the international safety standards.

PMID: 17160157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Adv Immunol. 2006;92:71-117.

Avian models with spontaneous autoimmune diseases.

Wick G(1), Andersson L, Hala K, Gershwin ME, Selmi C, Erf GF, Lamont SJ, Sgonc R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathophysiology and Immunology, Biocenter, Innsbruck 
Medical University, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Autoimmune diseases in human patients only become clinically manifest when the
disease process has developed to a stage where functional compensation by the
afflicted organ or system is not possible anymore. In order to understand the
initial etiologic and pathogenic events that are generally not yet accessible in 
humans, appropriate animal models are required. In this respect, spontaneously
developing models--albeit rare--reflect the situation in humans much more closely
than experimentally induced models, including knockout and transgenic mice. The
present chapter describes three spontaneous chicken models for human autoimmune
diseases, the Obese strain (OS) with a Hashimoto-like autoimmune thyroiditis, the
University of California at Davis lines 200 and 206 (UCD-200 and -206) with a
scleroderma-like disease, and the amelanotic Smyth line with a vitiligo-like
syndrome (SLV). Special emphasis is given to the new opportunities to unravel the
genetic basis of these diseases in view of the recently completed sequencing of
the chicken genome.

PMCID: PMC3292797
PMID: 17145302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Palliat Support Care. 2006 Dec;4(4):419-24.

Psychological intervention in fluid management.

Fisher L(1), Cairns HS, Amir-Ansari B, Scoble JE, Chalder T, Treasure J.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Department of Psychological Medicine, Section of General Hospital
Psychiatry, GKT School of Medicine & Institute of Psychiatry, Weston Education
Centre, London, UK. l.fisher@iop.kcl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Hemodialysis is a palliative treatment for patients with established 
renal failure (ERF), and volume overload is a common problem for hemodialysis
patients with low urinary output. Volume overload is thought to be mostly
attributable to interdialytic fluid intake by the patient and is associated with 
an increased symptom burden and the development of serious medical complications.
Repeated episodes of volume overload may adversely affect staff-patient
relationships and the perception of care in this patient population. The aim of
this case series study was to evaluate the effect and experience of a
psychological intervention on interdialytic weight gain in a small group of
patients.
METHODS: Five patients were treated. The intervention involved using techniques
derived from both cognitive behavior therapy and motivational interviewing. The
main outcome measures were interdialytic weight gain and patient perception of
the intervention.
RESULTS: Three of the five patients reduced both mean interdialytic weight gain
and the frequency with which they gained in excess of 3% of their dry weight
during the intervention phase. The intervention was found to be acceptable to
patients.
SIGNIFICANCE OF RESULTS: The intervention was effective in helping three of the
five patients to reduce both the frequency and the severity of volume overload,
and two of these patients maintained this for at least 6 months post
intervention. The intervention used actively engaged the patients and appeared to
be experienced positively. The methods used to mobilize patient resources and
optimize staff-patient relationships as vehicles of change are discussed. Both
may have implications for treatment concordance and the perception of care
delivered.

PMID: 17133900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Sep;1076:578-91.

Results of a long-term carcinogenicity bioassay on Sprague-Dawley rats exposed to
sodium arsenite administered in drinking water.

Soffritti M(1), Belpoggi F, Degli Esposti D, Lambertini L.

Author information: 
(1)Cesare Maltoni Cancer Research Center, European Foundation of Oncology and
Environmental Sciences B. Ramazzini, 40010 Bentivoglio, Bologna, Italy.
crcfr@ramazzini.it

Arsenic (As) is a metal found in nature whose acute and chronic toxic effects
have been known for decades. Hundreds of millions of people are at risk of
exposure to As and its various chemical forms which can occur in the occupational
and general environment in air, water, soil, food, and medicines. Several
epidemiological studies have shown that prolonged exposure to As can induce
various types of malignant tumors in humans, namely, skin, lung, liver, kidney,
and bladder cancers. These effects have been observed particularly in geographic 
areas where people are exposed to well water with high concentrations of As.
While the risks of As at high concentrations are well documented, there is still 
a great deal of uncertainty regarding the risk of exposure to As at very low
levels. This uncertainty is due to the absence of adequate epidemiological data
and the insufficiency of experimental data currently available. Given the limited
evidence demonstrating the carcinogenic potential of As in animals, a long-term
carcinogenicity bioassay on sodium arsenite (NaAsO(2)) was performed at the
Cesare Maltoni Cancer Research Center (CMCRC) of the European Ramazzini
Foundation (ERF). NaAsO(2) was administrated with drinking water at
concentrations of 200, 100, 50, or 0 mg/L, for 104 weeks to Sprague-Dawley rats
(50/sex/group), 8 weeks old at the start of the study. The animals were monitored
until spontaneous death at which time each animal underwent complete necropsy.
Histopathological evaluation of all pathological lesions and of all organs and
tissues collected was routinely performed on each animal. The results demonstrate
that in our experimental conditions NaAsO(2) induces sparse benign and malignant 
tumors among treated rats. The types of tumors observed are infrequent in the
strain of Sprague-Dawley rats of the colony used in our laboratory, namely, lung 
adenomas and carcinomas, kidney adenomas/papillomas and carcinomas, and bladder
carcinomas. Notably, an elevated incidence of these types of oncological lesions 
is also observed among people living in geographical areas where As is present at
higher concentrations in drinking water.

PMID: 17119234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Plant Physiol. 2007 Jan;143(1):400-9. Epub 2006 Nov 17.

AtERF14, a member of the ERF family of transcription factors, plays a
nonredundant role in plant defense.

Oñate-Sánchez L(1), Anderson JP, Young J, Singh KB.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Plant Industry, Floreat, Western Australia 6913, Australia.

We had previously shown that several transcription factors of the ethylene (ET)
response factor (ERF) family were induced with different but overlapping kinetics
following challenge of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) with Pseudomonas
syringae pv tomato DC3000 (avrRpt2). One of these genes, a transcriptional
activator, AtERF14, was induced at the same time as ERF-target genes (ChiB, basic
chitinase). To unravel the potential function of AtERF14 in regulating the plant 
defense response, we have analyzed gain- and loss-of-function mutants. We show
here that AtERF14 has a prominent role in the plant defense response, since
overexpression of AtERF14 had dramatic effects on both plant phenotype and
defense gene expression and AtERF14 loss-of-function mutants showed impaired
induction of defense genes following exogenous ET treatment and increased
susceptibility to Fusarium oxysporum. Moreover, the expression of other ERF genes
involved in defense and ET/jasmonic acid responses, such as ERF1 and AtERF2,
depends on AtERF14 expression. A number of ERFs have been shown to function in
the defense response through overexpression. However, the effect of loss of
AtERF14 function on defense gene expression, pathogen resistance, and regulation 
of the expression of other ERF genes is unique thus far. These results suggest a 
unique role for AtERF14 in regulating the plant defense response.

PMCID: PMC1761963
PMID: 17114278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Plant Mol Biol. 2007 Feb;63(3):419-28. Epub 2006 Nov 11.

Isolation and functional characterization of the JcERF gene, a putative AP2/EREBP
domain-containing transcription factor, in the woody oil plant Jatropha curcas.

Tang M(1), Sun J, Liu Y, Chen F, Shen S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Photosynthesis & Environmental Molecular Physiology,
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, P.R. China.

A cDNA clone, named JcERF, was isolated from Jatropha curcas seedlings (a woody
oil plant). It was classified as an ERF subfamily member based on multiple
sequence alignment and phylogenetic characterization. The deduced amino acid
sequences of the JcERF clone showed no significant sequence similarity with other
known ERF proteins except for the conserved AP2/EREBP DNA-binding domain.
Expression of the JcERF gene was rapidly induced upon salinity, drought, ethylene
and mechanical wounding treatments. No significant changes in the JcERF
expression were observed under ABA stress. Gel retardation assay revealed that
the JcERF protein could bind specifically to the GCC box as well as to the C/DRE 
motif. Also it can be inferred from the gel-shift that there is a possibility
that the near sequence of the GCC box has an important effect on the DNA-binding 
activity. In yeast, the JcERF protein specifically bound to the DRE sequence and 
activated the transcription of two reporter genes His3 and LacZ driven by the DRE
sequence. When fused to the LexA DNA-binding domain, the full-length JcERF
functioned effectively as a trans-activator in the yeast one-hybrid assay.
Overexpression of JcERF cDNA in transgenic Arabidopsis enhanced the salt and
freezing tolerance. Meanwhile the seed germination of JcERF transgenic plants was
not affected by various concentrations ABA in MS medium. Taken together, the
results showed that JcERF functioned as a novel transcription factor and it
exhibited a mechanism of plant response to environmental factors like the other
AP2/EREBP regulons that also exist in tropical woody plants.

PMID: 17103014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Plant Mol Biol. 2006 Dec;62(6):825-43. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

BOLITA, an Arabidopsis AP2/ERF-like transcription factor that affects cell
expansion and proliferation/differentiation pathways.

Marsch-Martinez N(1), Greco R, Becker JD, Dixit S, Bergervoet JH, Karaba A, de
Folter S, Pereira A.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Research International, Wageningen University and Research Centre, PO
Box 16, 6700 AA, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

The BOLITA (BOL) gene, an AP2/ERF transcription factor, was characterized with
the help of an activation tag mutant and overexpression lines in Arabidopsis and 
tobacco. The leaf size of plants overexpressing BOL was smaller than wild type
plants due to a reduction in both cell size and cell number. Moreover, severe
overexpressors showed ectopic callus formation in roots. Accordingly, global gene
expression analysis using the overexpression mutant reflected the alterations in 
cell proliferation, differentiation and growth through expression changes in RBR,
CYCD, and TCP genes, as well as genes involved in cell expansion (i.e. expansins 
and the actin remodeling factor ADF5). Furthermore, the expression of hormone
signaling (i.e. auxin and cytokinin), biosynthesis (i.e. ethylene and jasmonic
acid) and regulatory genes was found to be perturbed in bol-D mutant leaves.

PMID: 17096212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Plant Cell Environ. 2006 Jul;29(7):1210-9.

Expression of tobacco ethylene receptor NTHK1 alters plant responses to salt
stress.

Cao WH(1), Liu J, Zhou QY, Cao YR, Zheng SF, Du BX, Zhang JS, Chen SY.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Ethylene has been regarded as a stress hormone involved in many stress responses.
However, ethylene receptors have not been studied for the roles they played under
salt stress condition. Previously, we characterized an ethylene receptor gene
NTHK1 from tobacco, and found that NTHK1 is salt-inducible. Here, we report a
further investigation towards the function of NTHK1 in response to salt stress by
using a transgenic approach. We found that NTHK1 promotes leaf growth in the
transgenic tobacco seedlings but affects salt sensitivity in these transgenic
seedlings under salt stress condition. Differential Na+/K+ ratio was observed in 
the control Xanthi and NTHK1-transgenic plants after salt stress treatment. We
further found that the NTHK1 transgene is also salt-inducible in the transgenic
plants, and the higher NTHK1 expression results in early inductions of the ACC
(1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid) oxidase gene NtACO3 and ethylene
responsive factor (ERF) genes NtERF1 and NtERF4 under salt stress. However, NTHK1
suppresses the salt-inducible expression of the ACC synthase gene NtACS1. These
results indicate that NTHK1 regulates salt stress responses by affecting ion
accumulation and related gene expressions, and hence have significance in
elucidation of ethylene receptor functions during stress signal transduction.

PMID: 17080944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Clin EEG Neurosci. 2006 Oct;37(4):300-8.

Electromagnetic correlates of recognition memory processes.

Neufang M(1), Heinze HJ, Düzel E.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Epilepsy Center, Switzerland.

Recognition memory is critically dependent on a hierarchically organized network 
of brain areas including the visual ventral stream, medial temporal lobe
structures, frontal and parietal cortices. In recent years, cognitive theories of
recognition memory have been helpful to further our understanding of the
functional organization of this network. A prominent, although not unchallenged, 
set of theories proposes that recognition memory is not a unitary phenomenon, but
can be based on the recollection of contextual information about events or on
familiarity in the absence of recollection. A number of hemodynamic and
electromagnetic studies have been undertaken to relate recollection and
familiarity to neuronal substrates both in healthy subjects as well as in
patients with brain lesions. Today, it is evident that both event-related
potential and event-related field (ERP/ERF) data as well as data of oscillatory
brain activity (e.g., theta oscillations) are necessary to fully understand the
neural dynamics of recollection and familiarity and their relationship to
functional anatomy. Ultimately, such data are required from patients with
isolated brain injuries to designated components of the networks (such as the
hippocampus) to obtain converging evidence for functional relationships between
recollection and familiarity and respective neuroanatomic substrates. The
complexity of this task is highlighted by findings indicating that recognition
memory can already be affected by preparatory processes prior to stimulus onset.

PMID: 17073168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2006 Oct 6;3:24.

fMRI-compatible rehabilitation hand device.

Khanicheh A(1), Muto A, Triantafyllou C, Weinberg B, Astrakas L, Tzika A,
Mavroidis C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Northeastern University, 
Boston, MA, USA. azadeh@coe.neu.edu

BACKGROUND: Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has been widely used in 
studying human brain functions and neurorehabilitation. In order to develop
complex and well-controlled fMRI paradigms, interfaces that can precisely control
and measure output force and kinematics of the movements in human subjects are
needed. Optimized state-of-the-art fMRI methods, combined with magnetic resonance
(MR) compatible robotic devices for rehabilitation, can assist therapists to
quantify, monitor, and improve physical rehabilitation. To achieve this goal,
robotic or mechatronic devices with actuators and sensors need to be introduced
into an MR environment. The common standard mechanical parts can not be used in
MR environment and MR compatibility has been a tough hurdle for device
developers.
METHODS: This paper presents the design, fabrication and preliminary testing of a
novel, one degree of freedom, MR compatible, computer controlled, variable
resistance hand device that may be used in brain MR imaging during hand grip
rehabilitation. We named the device MR_CHIROD (Magnetic Resonance Compatible
Smart Hand Interfaced Rehabilitation Device). A novel feature of the device is
the use of Electro-Rheological Fluids (ERFs) to achieve tunable and controllable 
resistive force generation. ERFs are fluids that experience dramatic changes in
rheological properties, such as viscosity or yield stress, in the presence of an 
electric field. The device consists of four major subsystems: a) an ERF based
resistive element; b) a gearbox; c) two handles and d) two sensors, one optical
encoder and one force sensor, to measure the patient induced motion and force.
The smart hand device is designed to resist up to 50% of the maximum level of
gripping force of a human hand and be controlled in real time.
RESULTS: Laboratory tests of the device indicate that it was able to meet its
design objective to resist up to approximately 50% of the maximum handgrip force.
The detailed compatibility tests demonstrated that there is neither an effect
from the MR environment on the ERF properties and performance of the sensors, nor
significant degradation on MR images by the introduction of the MR_CHIROD in the 
MR scanner.
CONCLUSION: The MR compatible hand device was built to aid in the study of brain 
function during generation of controllable and tunable force during handgrip
exercising. The device was shown to be MR compatible. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first system that utilizes ERF in MR environment.

PMCID: PMC1634859
PMID: 17022828  [PubMed]


246. Prog Brain Res. 2006;156:123-43.

Neuroimaging methods in affective neuroscience: selected methodological issues.

Junghöfer M(1), Peyk P, Flaisch T, Schupp HT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biosignalanalysis and Biomagnetism, University of Münster,
Münster, Germany. markus.junghofer@uni-muenster.de

A current goal of affective neuroscience is to reveal the relationship between
emotion and dynamic brain activity in specific neural circuits. In humans,
noninvasive neuroimaging measures are of primary interest in this endeavor.
However, methodological issues, unique to each neuroimaging method, have
important implications for the design of studies, interpretation of findings, and
comparison across studies. With regard to event-related brain potentials, we
discuss the need for dense sensor arrays to achieve reference-independent
characterization of field potentials and improved estimate of cortical brain
sources. Furthermore, limitations and caveats regarding sparse sensor sampling
are discussed. With regard to event-related magnetic field (ERF) recordings, we
outline a method to achieve magnetoencephalography (MEG) sensor standardization, 
which improves effects' sizes in typical neuroscientific investigations, avoids
the finding of ghost effects, and facilitates comparison of MEG waveforms across 
studies. Focusing on functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we question
the unjustified application of proportional global signal scaling in emotion
research, which can greatly distort statistical findings in key structures
implicated in emotional processing and possibly contributing to conflicting
results in affective neuroscience fMRI studies, in particular with respect to
limbic and paralimbic structures. Finally, a distributed EEG/MEG source analysis 
with statistical parametric mapping is outlined providing a common software
platform for hemodynamic and electromagnetic neuroimaging measures. Taken
together, to achieve consistent and replicable patterns of the relationship
between emotion and neuroimaging measures, methodological aspects associated with
the various neuroimaging techniques may be of similar importance as the
definition of emotional cues and task context used to study emotion.

PMID: 17015078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Rays. 2006 Jan-Mar;31(1):21-4.

Sems (self expanding metal stents) in a patient with esophagogastric cancer and
esophagorespiratory fistula (ERF).

Montesano M(1), Crucitti P, Pandolfi M, Zanca A, Gabbrielli A, Coppola R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento delle Malattie dell'Apparato Digerente Università Campus
Bio-Medico, Roma, Italy. m.montesano@unicampus.it

Esophagorespiratory fistulas, especially in the upper third of the esophagus, are
a complication of malignant esophageal tumors, whose management is difficult and 
prognosis is poor. Treatment is palliative and involves restoration of the
ability to ingest food and prevention of aspiration by insertion of esophageal or
tracheobronchial stents. In selected patients the insertion of a single stent may
be insufficient for pallation therefore the placement of parallel stents may be
indicated in patients with symptoms caused by malignant esophagorespiratory
fistula. A case of esophagorespiratory fistula managed with insertion of parallel
stents is presented.

PMID: 16999371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Dev Biol. 2006 Dec 1;300(1):35-48. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Identification and developmental expression of the ets gene family in the sea
urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus).

Rizzo F(1), Fernandez-Serra M, Squarzoni P, Archimandritis A, Arnone MI.

Author information: 
(1)Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Villa Comunale, 80121 Naples, Italy.

A systematic search in the available scaffolds of the Strongylocentrotus
purpuratus genome has revealed that this sea urchin has 11 members of the ets
gene family. A phylogenetic analysis of these genes showed that almost all
vertebrate ets subfamilies, with the exception of one, so far found only in
mammals, are each represented by one orthologous sea urchin gene. The temporal
and spatial expression of the identified ETS factors was also analyzed during
embryogenesis. Five ets genes (Sp-Ets1/2, Sp-Tel, Sp-Pea, Sp-Ets4, Sp-Erf) are
also maternally expressed. Three genes (Sp-Elk, Sp-Elf, Sp-Erf) are ubiquitously 
expressed during embryogenesis, while two others (Sp-Gabp, Sp-Pu.1) are not
transcribed until late larval stages. Remarkably, five of the nine sea urchin ets
genes expressed during embryogenesis are exclusively (Sp-Ets1/2, Sp-Erg, Sp-Ese) 
or additionally (Sp-Tel, Sp-Pea) expressed in mesenchyme cells and/or their
progenitors. Functional analysis of Sp-Ets1/2 has previously demonstrated an
essential role of this gene in the specification of the skeletogenic mesenchyme
lineage. The dynamic, and in some cases overlapping and/or unique, developmental 
expression pattern of the latter five genes suggests a complex, non-redundant
function for ETS factors in sea urchin mesenchyme formation and differentiation.

PMID: 16997294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Fungal Genet Biol. 2007 Feb;44(2):139-51. Epub 2006 Sep 12.

Suppression of the acuH13 and acuH31 nonsense mutations in the
carnitine/acylcarnitine translocase (acuH) gene of Aspergillus nidulans by the
G265S substitution in the domain 2 of the release factor eRF1.

Martínez O(1), Marco E, Gago F, Laborda F, Ramón De Lucas J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología y Parasitología, Facultad de Farmacia, Campus
Universitario, Universidad de Alcalá, Carretera Madrid-Barcelona Km 33, Alcalá de
Henares ES-28871, Madrid, Spain.

A search for suppressors of the carnitine/acylcarnitine translocase (CACT)
deficiency in Aspergillus nidulans permitted the identification of the suaE7
mutation, mapping at a new translational suppressor (suaE) gene. The suaE gene is
essential in A. nidulans and encodes the eukaryotic release factor 1 (eRF1). The 
suaE7 mutation suppresses two acuH alleles (acuH13 and acuH31), both carrying
nonsense mutations in the CACT encoding gene that involve the replacement of a
CAG (Gln) codon with a premature TAG stop codon. In contrast, the suaE7 gene does
not suppress the acuH20 amber nonsense mutation involving a TGG-->TAG change. The
phenotype associated to the suaE7 mutation strictly resembles that of mutants at 
the suaA and suaC genes, two translational suppressor genes previously
identified, suggesting that their gene products might functionally interact in
translation termination. Sequencing of the suaE7 gene allowed the identification 
of a mutation in the domain 2 of the omnipotent class-1 eukaryotic release factor
involving the Gly265Ser substitution in the A. nidulans eRF1. This mutation
creates a structural context unfavourable for normal eRF binding that allows the 
misreading of stop codons by natural suppressor tRNAs, such as the tRNAs(Gln).
Structural analysis using molecular modelling of A. nidulans eRF1 domain 2
bearing the G265S substitution and computer simulation results suggest that this 
mutation might impair the necessary conformational changes in the eRF1 to
optimally recognize the stop codon and simultaneously interact with the peptidyl 
transferase centre of the 60S ribosomal subunit.

PMID: 16971148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Hereditas. 2005 Feb;142(2005):92-7.

Morphological and molecular characterization of a new frizzy panicle mutant,
"fzp-9(t)", in rice (Oryza sativa L.).

Yi G(1), Choi JH, Jeong EG, Chon NS, Jena KK, Ku YC, Kim DH, Eun MY, Jeon JS, Nam
MH.

Author information: 
(1)Yeongnam Agricultural Research Institute, NICS, RDA, Milyang, Korea.

The spikelet identity gene "fzp" (frizzy panicle) is required for transformation 
of the floral meristems to inflorescent shoots. In fzp mutants, spikelets are
replaced by branches and spikelet meristems produce massive numbers of branch
meristems. We have isolated and characterized a new fzp mutant derived from
anther culture lines in rice and designated as fzp-9(t). The fzp-9(t) mutant
showed retarded growth habit and developed fewer tillers than those of the
wild-type plant. The primary and secondary rachis branches of fzp-9(t) appeared
to be normal, but higher-order branches formed continuous bract-like structures
without developing spikelets. The genetic segregation of fzp-9(t) showed a good
fit to the expected ratio of 3: 1. The sequence analysis of fzp-9(t) revealed
that there is a single nucleotide base change upstream of the ERF
(ethylene-responsive element-binding factor) domain compare to wild-type plant.
The mutation point of fzp-9(t) (W66G) was one of the six amino acids of the ERF
domain that contributed to GCC box-specific binding. The premature formation of a
stop codon at the beginning of the ERF domain might cause a non-functional
product.

PMID: 16970618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Plant Cell Rep. 2007 Jan;26(1):115-24. Epub 2006 Aug 26.

Enhanced stress tolerance in transgenic pine expressing the pepper CaPF1 gene is 
associated with the polyamine biosynthesis.

Tang W(1), Newton RJ, Li C, Charles TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Howell Science Complex, East Carolina University,
Greenville, NC 27858-4353, USA. tangw@mail.ecu.edu

ERF/AP2 transcription factors play an important role in plant stress tolerance.
However, little is known about the functional significance of ERF/AP2 genes in
pine, compared to the model plant species Arabidopsis. Capsicum annuum pathogen
and freezing tolerance-related protein 1 (CaPF1) is an ERF/AP2 transcription
factor. We show here that overexpression of CaPF1 resulted in a dramatic increase
in tolerance to drought, freezing, and salt stress in a gymnosperm species,
eastern white pine (Pinus strobus L.). Measurement of polyamines demonstrated
that the levels of putrescine (Put), spermidine (Spd), and spermine (Spm) did not
increase but remain constant in CaPF1-overexpressed eastern white pine, whereas
the levels decreased in the controls, probably increasing the ability of
transgenic callus cultures and plants to stress tolerance. These results
demonstrated that enhanced stress tolerance in transgenic pine expressing the
pepper CaPF1 gene is associated with the polyamine biosynthesis and this pepper
transcription factor may be used to engineer pine species for multiple stress
tolerance.

PMID: 16937149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Planta. 2007 Feb;225(3):575-88. Epub 2006 Aug 26.

The barley ERF-type transcription factor HvRAF confers enhanced pathogen
resistance and salt tolerance in Arabidopsis.

Jung J(1), Won SY, Suh SC, Kim H, Wing R, Jeong Y, Hwang I, Kim M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agricultural Biotechnology, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-921, Republic of Korea.

We isolated HvRAF (Hordeum vulgare root abundant factor), a cDNA encoding a novel
ethylene response factor (ERF)-type transcription factor, from young seedlings of
barley. In addition to the most highly conserved APETALA2/ERF DNA-binding domain,
the encoded protein contained an N-terminal MCGGAIL signature sequence, a
putative nuclear localization sequence, and a C-terminal acidic transcription
activation domain containing a novel mammalian hemopexin domain signature-like
sequence. Their homologous sequences were found in AAK92635 from rice and RAP2.2 
from Arabidopsis; the ERF proteins most closely related to HvRAF, reflecting
their functional importance. RNA blot analyses revealed that HvRAF transcripts
were more abundant in roots than in leaves. HvRAF expression was induced in
barley seedlings by various treatment regimes such as salicylic acid, ethephon,
methyl jasmonate, cellulase, and methyl viologen. In a subcellular localization
assay, the HvRAF-GFP fusion protein was targeted to the nucleus. The fusion
protein of HvRAF with the GAL4 DNA-binding domain strongly activated
transcription in yeast. Various deletion mutants of HvRAF indicated that the
transactivating activity was localized to the acidic domain of the C-terminal
region, and that the hemopexin domain signature-like sequence was important for
the activity. Overexpression of the HvRAF gene in Arabidopsis plants induced the 
activation of various stress-responsive genes, including PDF1.2, JR3, PR1, PR5,
KIN2, and GSH1. Furthermore, the transgenic Arabidopsis plants showed enhanced
resistance to Ralstonia solanacearum strain GMI1000, as well as seed germination 
and root growth tolerance to high salinity. These results collectively indicate
that HvRAF is a transcription factor that plays dual regulatory roles in response
to biotic and abiotic stresses in plants.

PMID: 16937017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Extremophiles. 2007 Jan;11(1):95-104. Epub 2006 Aug 25.

Genome and proteome characterization of the psychrophilic Flavobacterium
bacteriophage 11b.

Borriss M(1), Lombardot T, Glöckner FO, Becher D, Albrecht D, Schweder T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Marine Biotechnology, W.-Rathenau-Str. 49a, 17489, Greifswald,
Germany.

Virion DNA of bacteriophage 11b (Phi11b), which infects a psychrophilic
Flavobacterium isolate from Arctic sea-ice, was determined to consist of 36,012
bp. With 30.6% its GC content corresponds to that of host-genus species and is
the lowest of all phages of Gram-negative bacteria sequenced so far. Similarities
of several of 65 predicted ORFs, genome organization and phylogeny suggest an
affiliation to 'mesophilic' nonmarine siphoviruses, e.g. to bacteriophages SPP1
and HK97. Early genes presumably encode an essential recombination factor (ERF), 
a single strand binding (SSB) protein, an endonuclease, and a DNA methylase. The 
late gene segment is likely to contain a terminase, portal, minor head, protease 
and a major capsid gene. Five ORFs exhibited similarities to Bacteroidetes
species and seem to reflect the host specificity of the phage. Among
PAGE-separated virion proteins that were identified by MALDI-ToF mass
spectrometry are the portal, the major capsid, and a putative conserved tail
protein. The Phi11b genome is the first to be described of a cultivated virus
infecting a psychrophilic host as well as a Bacteroidetes bacterium.

PMID: 16932843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Planta. 2007 Jan;225(2):341-51. Epub 2006 Aug 19.

Heterologous expression of the BABY BOOM AP2/ERF transcription factor enhances
the regeneration capacity of tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.).

Srinivasan C(1), Liu Z, Heidmann I, Supena ED, Fukuoka H, Joosen R, Lambalk J,
Angenent G, Scorza R, Custers JB, Boutilier K.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service,
Appalachian Fruit Research Station, Kearneysville, WV 25430, USA.
srinivas@afrs.ars.usda.gov

Gain-of-function studies have shown that ectopic expression of the BABY BOOM
(BBM) AP2/ERF domain transcription factor is sufficient to induce spontaneous
somatic embryogenesis in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh) and
Brassica napus (B. napus L.) seedlings. Here we examined the effect of ectopic
BBM expression on the development and regenerative capacity of tobacco (Nicotiana
tabacum L.) through heterologous expression of Arabidopsis and B. napus BBM
genes. 35S::BBM tobacco lines exhibited a number of the phenotypes previously
observed in 35S::BBM Arabidopsis and B. napus transgenics, including callus
formation, leaf rumpling, and sterility, but they did not undergo spontaneous
somatic embryogenesis. 35S::BBM plants with severe ectopic expression phenotypes 
could not be assessed for enhanced regeneration at the seedling stage due to
complete male and female sterility of the primary transformants, therefore
fertile BBM ectopic expression lines with strong misexpression phenotypes were
generated by expressing a steroid-inducible, post-translationally controlled BBM 
fusion protein (BBM:GR) under the control of a 35S promoter. These lines
exhibited spontaneous shoot and root formation, while somatic embryogenesis could
be induced from in-vitro germinated seedling hypocotyls cultured on media
supplemented with cytokinin. Together these results suggest that ectopic BBM
expression in transgenic tobacco also activates cell proliferation pathways, but 
differences exist between Arabidopsis/B. napus and N. tabacum with respect to
their competence to respond to the BBM signalling molecule.

PMID: 16924539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Poult Sci. 2006 Aug;85(8):1364-72.

Maternal antibody transfer from dams to their egg yolks, egg whites, and chicks
in meat lines of chickens.

Hamal KR(1), Burgess SC, Pevzner IY, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA.

Maternal antibodies are transferred from hens to the chicks via the egg. To gain 
insight into maternal antibody transfer and endogenous production of antibodies
in broiler chicks, total IgY, IgA, IgM, as well as anti-Newcastle disease virus
(NDV) and anti-infectious bronchitis (IBV) antibody levels were examined in the
dams' plasma, egg yolks, egg whites, and chicks' plasma on d 3, 7, 14, and 21.
Blood was collected from 39-wk-old breeder hens (line 1, n = 17; line 2, n = 21).
Fertile eggs were used for antibody extraction from the egg yolks and egg whites 
(4 to 5 eggs/dam) and for hatching. Unvaccinated chicks (4 to 5 chicks/dam) were 
reared in a HEPA-filtered room and were bled on d 3, 7, 14 and 21. Based on ELISA
methods, plasma levels of IgY and IgM were higher (P < 0.0001), and those of IgA 
were similar (P = 0.31), in line 2 compared with line 1. Egg yolk IgY and IgA, as
well as egg white IgY, IgA, and IgM levels were higher in line 2 compared with
line 1 (P < 0.0001). Independent of line of chicken, the percentage dam-to-chick 
(3 d) plasma transfer of IgY was estimated to be approximately 30%, with that for
IgM and IgA less than 1%. Chicks synthesized IgM first, followed by IgA and IgY. 
Anti-NDV and anti-IBV antibodies were detected in the dams' plasma, egg yolks,
and in the chicks' plasma on d 3 and 7, with line 2 having higher anti-IBV and
lower anti-NDV levels than line 1 in all samples (P < 0.0001). In summary, IgY
levels, total or antigen-specific, in the dams' plasma or eggs were found to be a
direct indicator of maternal antibody transfer to the chicks' circulation, with
an expected percentage transfer of approximately 30%. This knowledge, together
with the observed time course of endogenous antibody production in broiler
chicks, may find direct application in formulating strategies for protecting
chicks, especially during the first few weeks of age when their immune system is 
not yet fully functional.

PMID: 16903465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Poult Sci. 2006 Aug;85(8):1349-63.

Variation in the pulmonary hypertensive responsiveness of broilers to
lipopolysaccharide and innate variation in nitric oxide production by mononuclear
cells.

Bowen OT(1), Wideman RF, Anthony NB, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA. otbowen@uark.edu

Variability among broilers in their pulmonary hypertensive (PH) responsiveness to
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) appears to reflect innate variation in the types or
proportions of vasodilators and vasoconstrictors released by leukocytes and
endothelial cells. Two experiments were designed to evaluate possible
correlations between the PH responsiveness to LPS in vivo and the quantities of
nitric oxide (NO; a potent pulmonary vasodilator) produced by mononuclear cells
in vitro. In Experiment 1, blood samples were collected from male broilers from a
base population (control group) and from survivors of a 60% lethal dose i.v.
injection of cellulose microparticles (MP survivor group). In Experiment 2, blood
samples were collected from male broilers from a relaxed line and from lines
known to be susceptible or resistant to pulmonary hypertension syndrome.
Peripheral mononuclear cells (PMNC) from each blood sample were cultured at 2
million cells per well, remained unstimulated, or were stimulated with LPS to
elicit the expression of inducible NO synthase, and the 24-h production of NO was
measured. In both experiments, unstimulated PMNC cultures did not produce
consistently detectable levels of NO, whereas LPS-stimulated cultures produced
quantities of NO that varied widely among individuals. Nitric oxide production by
cultured PMNC also was evaluated by flow cytometry, demonstrating that
LPS-stimulated PMNC produced substantially more NO than did unstimulated cells in
all of the groups evaluated. Moreover, NO-producing PMNC were identified to be
monocytes. The same broilers from which PMNC had been isolated were catheterized 
subsequently to record pulmonary arterial pressure, LPS was injected i.v. to
assess the amplitudes of peak and postpeak PH responses, then
N(omega)-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester was injected to inhibit ongoing NO
production. In Experiment 1, the amplitude of the peak and postpeak PH responses 
to LPS were correlated with the quantity of NO produced by LPS-stimulated
cultured PMNC from broilers in the control group but not for MP survivors. In
Experiment 2, the postpeak PH response to LPS was correlated with the quantity of
NO produced by LPS-stimulated PMNC from broilers in the relaxed line, but not in 
the susceptible or resistant lines. In all groups, N(omega)-nitro-L-arginine
methyl ester injections triggered substantial increases in pulmonary arterial
pressure (> or = 8 mm Hg), thereby revealing a significant ongoing modulation by 
NO of the PH response to LPS. We concluded that most of the modulatory NO
generated in vivo during the acute PH response to LPS (within 60 min
postinjection) likely is produced by constitutive NO synthase in the vascular
endothelium. In addition, the NO produced by inducible NO synthase in PMNC
appeared to have modulated the LPS-stimulated PH responses of unselected broilers
having the broadest range of pulmonary vascular capacities (control broilers and 
relaxed line), but not in broilers whose pulmonary vascular capacities had been
selected to represent the higher (MP survivors, resistant line) or lower
(susceptible line) extremes of the population.

PMID: 16903464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Hum Hered. 2006;61(4):222-8. Epub 2006 Jul 27.

Heritability of serum iron, ferritin and transferrin saturation in a genetically 
isolated population, the Erasmus Rucphen Family (ERF) Study.

Njajou OT(1), Alizadeh BZ, Aulchenko Y, Zillikens MC, Pols HA, Oostra BA,
Swinkels DW, van Duijn CM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Departments of Epidemiology & Biostatistics and
Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
o.njajou@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: Iron has been implicated in the pathogenesis of various disorders.
Mutations in the HFE gene are associated with an increase in serum iron
parameters. The aim of this study was to estimate the heritability in serum iron 
parameters explained by HFE.
METHODS: Ninety families (980 subjects) were included in the present analysis.
Heritability estimation was conducted using the variance component method. The
likelihood ratio test was used to compare models. Phenotypic and genetic
correlations between serum iron parameters were calculated.
RESULTS: The heritability (h(2) +/- SE) estimates were 0.23 +/- 0.07 (p < 0.0001)
for iron, 0.29 +/- 0.09 (p < 0.0001) for ferritin and 0.28 +/- 0.07 (p < 0.0001) 
for transferrin saturation while adjusting for age, age(2) and sex. The HFE
genotypes explained between 2 to 6% of the sex and age-adjusted variance in serum
iron, ferritin and transferrin saturation. There was a high genetic correlation
between serum iron parameters, suggesting pleiotropy between these traits.
CONCLUSION: A substantial proportion of the variance of iron, ferritin and
transferrin saturation can be explained by additive genetic effects, independent 
of sex and age. The HFE genotypes explained a considerable proportion of serum
iron parameters and may be an important factor in the complex iron network.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 16877869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Plant Cell Rep. 2006 Dec;25(12):1263-74. Epub 2006 Jul 21.

Role of DREB transcription factors in abiotic and biotic stress tolerance in
plants.

Agarwal PK(1), Agarwal P, Reddy MK, Sopory SK.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali
Road, New Delhi, 110067, India. pagarwal@csmcri.org

Abiotic and biotic stresses negatively influence survival, biomass production and
crop yield. Being multigenic as well as a quantitative trait, it is a challenge
to understand the molecular basis of abiotic stress tolerance and to manipulate
it as compared to biotic stresses. Lately, some transcription factor(s) that
regulate the expression of several genes related to stress have been discovered. 
One such class of the transcription factors is DREB/CBF that binds to drought
responsive cis-acting elements. DREBs belong to ERF family of transcription
factors consisting of two subclasses, i.e. DREB1/CBF and DREB2 that are induced
by cold and dehydration, respectively. The DREBs are apparently involved in
biotic stress signaling pathway. It has been possible to engineer stress
tolerance in transgenic plants by manipulating the expression of DREBs. This
opens an excellent opportunity to develop stress tolerant crops in future. This
review intends to focus on the structure, role of DREBs in plant stress signaling
and the present status of their deployment in developing stress tolerant
transgenic plants.

PMID: 16858552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Plant Cell Physiol. 2006 Sep;47(9):1195-205. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

Sl-ERF2, a tomato ethylene response factor involved in ethylene response and seed
germination.

Pirrello J(1), Jaimes-Miranda F, Sanchez-Ballesta MT, Tournier B, Khalil-Ahmad Q,
Regad F, Latché A, Pech JC, Bouzayen M.

Author information: 
(1)UMR990 INRA/INP-ENSA Toulouse Génomique et Biotechnologie des Fruits Avenue de
l'Agrobiopole, BP 32607, 31326 Castanet-Tolosan cedex, France.

Ethylene response factors (ERFs) are plant transcriptional regulators mediating
ethylene-dependent gene expression via binding to the GCC motif found in the
promoter region of ethylene-regulated genes. We report here on the structural and
functional characterization of the tomato Sl-ERF2 gene that belongs to a distinct
class of the large ERF gene family. Both spliced and unspliced versions of
Sl-ERF2 transcripts were amplified from RNA samples and the search in the public 
tomato expressed sequence tag (EST) database confirmed the existence of the two
transcript species in a number of cDNA libraries. The unspliced transcript
contains two open reading frames yielding two hypothetical proteins, a small
highly truncated version lacking the APETALA2 domain and a bigger protein lacking
the N-terminal MCGGAAI(I)/(L) consensus peptide specific to ERF members from
subfamily IV. Nevertheless, functional Sl-ERF2 protein may only derive from
spliced transcripts since, depending on the tissue, the level of the spliced
transcript is much higher than that of the unspliced transcript. Sl-ERF2 is
expressed in all plant tissues tested, though its transcript accumulates
preferentially in germinating seeds and ripening fruit. Overexpression of the
Sl-ERF2 gene in transgenic tomato lines results in premature seed germination and
enhanced hook formation of dark-grown seedlings, which is indicative of increased
ethylene sensitivity. The expression of the mannanase2 gene is upregulated in
Sl-ERF2-overexpressing seeds, suggesting that Sl-ERF2 stimulates seed germination
through the induction of the mannanase2 gene. It is noteworthy that the
exaggerated hook phenotype is abolished when ethylene perception is blocked,
strongly suggesting that Sl-ERF2 requires other ethylene-dependent components to 
impact the hook formation process.

PMID: 16857696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Med Eng Phys. 2006 Dec;28(10):989-98. Epub 2006 Jul 11.

Characterization of a laminar flow cell for the prevention of biosensor fouling.

Kyriacou G(1), Vadgama P, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Research Centre in Biomedical Materials, Queen Mary,
University of London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, UK.

A flow cell using dual parallel laminar flows was designed and fabricated with
the aim to prevent biosensor fouling. Y-shaped entrances allowed the introduction
of sample and electrolyte streams, with the electrolyte serving as a mobile
protective layer near the biosensor. Potassium permanganate was used to quantify 
the diffusion in the flow cell. Optical intensity analysis of potassium
permanganate along a series of transverse lines across the flow cell was carried 
out under different flow conditions. It was found that the error function,
erf(y/[square root](Dt)), where y was the position along the transverse line, D
the diffusion coefficient of the solute and t was the time, gave reasonable
approximation to the diffusion of potassium permanganate in the cell. The
diffusion coefficient of potassium permanganate was determined in stop-flow
measurements and the value, D=4.0 x 10(-5)cm(2)/s, agreed to previously reported 
values. Velocity distribution in the flow cell was simulated numerically to
reveal the development of two inflows into one single laminar flow. Results from 
the study provided preliminary data on solute diffusion characteristics in the
flow cell and supported the working principle of laminar flow cells in preventing
biosensor fouling.

PMID: 16837233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Plant Res. 2006 Jul;119(4):407-13. Epub 2006 Jul 5.

Identification of genes of the plant-specific transcription-factor families
cooperatively regulated by ethylene and jasmonate in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Nakano T(1), Suzuki K, Ohtsuki N, Tsujimoto Y, Fujimura T, Shinshi H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Breeding Research Group, Institute for Biological
Resources and Functions, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology (AIST), Tsukuba Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566,
Japan.

The analysis of expression patterns of transcription-factor genes will be the
basis for a better understanding of their biological functions in plants. In this
study, we designed and developed an oligo-DNA macroarray consisting of
gene-specific probes of 60-65 nucleotides for 288 transcription-factor genes,
which cover COL, DOF, ERF, and NAC family genes. To investigate
transcription-factor genes that are cooperatively regulated by jasmonate and
ethylene in arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh.) plants, we analyzed
the expression profile of transcription-factor genes using the oligo-DNA
macroarray technique in arabidopsis plants treated with methyl jasmonate and
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid. Then, transcript levels of candidate
genes-which were selected based on the result of macroarray analysis-were
evaluated by the quantitative real-time RT-PCR method. Finally, we identified an 
ERF family gene that is cooperatively regulated by both hormones, and designated 
as cooperatively regulated by ethylene and jasmonate 1 (CEJ1).

PMID: 16820983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Plant Cell. 2006 Aug;18(8):2021-34. Epub 2006 Jun 30.

A variable cluster of ethylene response factor-like genes regulates metabolic and
developmental acclimation responses to submergence in rice.

Fukao T(1), Xu K, Ronald PC, Bailey-Serres J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, Center for Plant Cell Biology,
University of California, Riverside, California 92521, USA.

Submergence-1 (Sub1), a major quantitative trait locus affecting tolerance to
complete submergence in lowland rice (Oryza sativa), contains two or three
ethylene response factor (ERF)-like genes whose transcripts are regulated by
submergence. In the submergence-intolerant japonica cultivar M202, this locus
encodes two ERF genes, Sub1B and Sub1C. In the tolerant near-isogenic line
containing the Sub1 locus from the indica FR13A, M202(Sub1), the locus
additionally encodes the ERF gene Sub1A. During submergence, the tolerant
M202(Sub1) displayed restrained leaf and internode elongation, chlorophyll
degradation, and carbohydrate consumption, whereas the enzymatic activities of
pyruvate decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase were increased significantly
compared with the intolerant M202. Transcript levels of genes associated with
carbohydrate consumption, ethanolic fermentation, and cell expansion were
distinctly regulated in the two lines. Sub1A and Sub1C transcript levels were
shown to be upregulated by submergence and ethylene, with the Sub1C allele in
M202 also upregulated by treatment with gibberellic acid (GA). These findings
demonstrate that the Sub1 region haplotype determines ethylene- and GA-mediated
metabolic and developmental responses to submergence through differential
expression of Sub1A and Sub1C. Submergence tolerance in lowland rice is conferred
by a specific allele variant of Sub1A that dampens ethylene production and GA
responsiveness, causing quiescence in growth that correlates with the capacity
for regrowth upon desubmergence.

PMCID: PMC1533987
PMID: 16816135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biosci. 2006 Jun;31(2):255-63.

Overexpression of GbERF confers alteration of ethylene-responsive gene expression
and enhanced resistance to Pseudomonas syringae in transgenic tobacco.

Qin J(1), Zuo K, Zhao J, Ling H, Cao Y, Qiu C, Li F, Sun X, Tang K.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biotechnology Research Center, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant
Biotechnology, R&D Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, Shaghai, People's Republic of China.

GbERF belongs to the ERF (ethylene responsive factor) family of transcription
factors and regulates the GCC-box containing pathogen-related (PR) genes in the
ethylene signal transduction pathway. To study the function of GbERF in the
process of biotic stress, transgenic tobacco plants expressing GbERF were
generated. Overexpression of GbERF did not change transgenic plant's phenotype
and endogenous ethylene level. However, the expression profile of some
ethylene-inducible GCC-box and non-GCC-box containing genes was altered, such as 
PR1b, PR2, PR3, PR4, Osmotin, CHN50, ACC oxidase and ACC synthase genes. These
data indicate that the cotton GbERF could act as a transcriptional activator or
repressor to regulate the differential expression of ethylene-inducible genes via
GCC and non-GCC cis-elements. Moreover, the constitutive expression of GbERF in
transgenic tobacco enhanced the plant's resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv
tabaci infection. In conclusion, GbERF mediates the expression of a wide array of
PR and ethylene-responsive genes and plays an important role in the plant's
response to biotic stress.

PMID: 16809858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 1;281(35):25601-11. Epub 2006 Jun 23.

The transcriptional ETS2 repressor factor associates with active and inactive
Erks through distinct FXF motifs.

Polychronopoulos S(1), Verykokakis M, Yazicioglu MN, Sakarellos-Daitsiotis M,
Cobb MH, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Crete, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Crete
710 03, Greece.

The transcriptional ETS2 repressor factor (ERF) is phosphorylated by Erks both in
vivo and in vitro. This phosphorylation determines the subcellular localization
and biological function of ERF. Here, we show that active and inactive Erk2
proteins bind ERF with high affinity through a hydrophobic pocket formed by the
alphaF and alphaG helices and the activation loop of Erk2. We have identified two
FXF motifs on ERF that mediate the specific interaction with Erks. One of these
motifs is utilized only by active Erks, whereas the other mediates the
association with inactive Erks but also contributes to interaction with active
Erks. Mutation of the phenylalanines of these motifs to alanines resulted in
decreased association and phosphorylation of ERF by Erks both in cells and in
vitro. ERF proteins carrying these mutations exhibited increased nuclear
accumulation and increased inhibition of cellular proliferation. Expression of
ERF regions harboring these motifs could inhibit Erk activity in cells. Our data 
suggest that, in the proper context, FXF motifs can mediate a strong and specific
interaction not only with active but also inactive Erks and that these
interactions determine protein function in vivo.

PMID: 16799155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Mol Genet Genomics. 2006 Sep;276(3):242-53. Epub 2006 Jun 10.

Expression of a transcription factor from Capsicum annuum in pine calli
counteracts the inhibitory effects of salt stress on adventitious shoot
formation.

Tang W(1), Newton RJ, Lin J, Charles TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Howell Science Complex, East Carolina University,
Greenville, NC 27858-4353, USA. tangw@mail.ecu.edu

Transcription factors regulating the stress-responsive gene expression play an
important role in plant stress adaptation. In this study, we examined the salt
stress tolerance of transgenic Virginia pine (Pinus virginiana Mill.)
overexpressing a Capsicum annuum ERF/AP2-type transcription factor (CaPF1), which
may enhance the ability of transgenic plants to tolerate various kinds of
stresses during vegetative growth. CaPF1 transgene increased the salt and
oxidative stress tolerances of pine tissues and counteracted the inhibitory
effects of salt stress on the growth of transgenic Virginia pine calli, shoots,
and plants. To our surprise, the ability of shoot formation was enhanced in three
CaPF1 transgenic Virginia pine cell lines under stress of different NaCl
concentrations. NaCl at 200 mM significantly increased the frequency of
adventitious shoot formation and the number of shoots per gram calli. Measurement
of plant hormone demonstrated that the levels of cytokinin was altered in
CaPF1-overexpressed Virginia pine calli, compared to the control. Based on our
results, we speculate that the altered level of cytokinin may result in enhancing
adventitious shoot formation of transgenic calli exposed to salt for 1 week via
an unknown mechanism.

PMID: 16767459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Vopr Kurortol Fizioter Lech Fiz Kult. 2006 Mar-Apr;(2):8-10.

[Low-intensity laser radiation in therapy of bronchial asthma].

[Article in Russian]

Ostronosova NS.

Efficacy of low-intensity laser radiation (LR) was studied by changes in a
histamine level in peripheral blood and external respiration function (ERF). A
total of 228 patients with exogenic bronchial asthma (EBA) were divided into two 
groups: 167 patients with nonhormone dependent asthma (group 1) and 61 patients
with hormone-dependent bronchial asthma (group 2). Low-intensity LR lowered a
histamine level and improved ERF in both group 1 and 2. A definite negative
correlation was found between histamine content and ERF parameters. Laser therapy
alone is effective in mild EBA. For moderate and severe EBA and hormone-dependent
bronchial asthma a combination of conventional drug therapy with low-intensity LR
is recommended.

PMID: 16752817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biomol Screen. 2006 Jun;11(4):423-34. Epub 2006 Apr 28.

Identification of RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway
modulators in an ERF1 redistribution screen.

Grånäs C(1), Lundholt BK, Loechel F, Pedersen HC, Bjørn SP, Linde V, Krogh-Jensen
C, Nielsen EM, Praestegaard M, Nielsen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)BioImage A/S, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway has a central
role in regulating the proliferation and survival of both normal and tumor cells.
This pathway has been 1 focus area for the development of anticancer drugs,
resulting in several compounds, primarily kinase inhibitors, in clinical testing.
The authors have undertaken a cell-based, high-throughput screen using a novel
ERF1 Redistribution assay to identify compounds that modulate the signaling
pathway. The hit compounds were subsequently tested for activity in a functional 
cell proliferation assay designed to selectively detect compounds inhibiting the 
proliferation of MAPK pathway-dependent cancer cells. The authors report the
identification of 2 cell membrane-permeable compounds that exhibit activity in
the ERF1 Redistribution assay and selectively inhibit proliferation of MAPK
pathway-dependent malignant melanoma cells at similar potencies (IC(50)=< 5
microM). These compounds have drug-like structures and are negative in RAF, MEK, 
and ERK in vitro kinase assays. Drugs belonging to these compound classes may
prove useful for treating cancers caused by excessive MAPK pathway signaling. The
results also show that cell-based, high-content Redistribution screens can detect
compounds with different modes of action and reveal novel targets in a pathway
known to be disease relevant.

PMID: 16751337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Klin Khir. 2006 Jan;(1):47-8.

[The external respiration function in patients with purulent-septic
complications].

[Article in Russian]

Berezovchuk LV.

In 7 patients with postoperative purulent-septic complications the external
respiration function (ERF) was studied. Preoperatively in them were observed
significant changes of the ERF speed characteristics. The average volume speed in
25-75% interval (AVS 25-75) of the forced vital pulmonary capacity (FVPC) was
lower than normal level by 43%, the extreme volume speed (EVS) of FVPC--by 49%,
the moment volume speed in inspiration 50% of FVPC (EVS 50)--by 42%, EVS in
expiration 75% of FVPC (MOS 75)--by 48%. This have witnessed the pronounced
obstructive pulmonary changes, which influenced negatively the postoperative
period course. Insignificantly expressed restrictive changes did not cause the
purulent-septic complications occurrence.

PMID: 16719073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Neurobiol Aging. 2007 May;28(5):735-41. Epub 2006 May 12.

Cerebrovascular risk factors do not contribute to genetic variance of cognitive
function: the ERF study.

Sleegers K(1), de Koning I, Aulchenko YS, van Rijn MJ, Houben MP, Croes EA, van
Swieten JC, Oostra BA, van Duijn CM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Impaired cognition in later life may result from Alzheimer's disease-related
pathology, but also from vascular pathology. We studied to what extent vascular
risk explained heritability of cognition in 780 individuals, related in one
extended pedigree in a genetically isolated population, in the ERF study.
Heritability was estimated using variance components modelling (SOLAR).
Univariate analyses included models with and without vascular disease; bivariate 
analyses included both cognitive and vascular traits, such as blood pressure,
serum glucose or lipids. Heritability for immediate and delayed recall,
recognition, semantic fluency, Trail making B and Stroop tests was significant,
with estimates from 0.16 to 0.36. Vascular factors did not affect cognitive
functions, except immediate recall and the Stroop test. Heritability estimates
did not change significantly when adjusted for vascular disease. We found no
genetic correlation between cognition and vascular traits. Therefore, in this
population vascular disease is mildly associated with cognitive dysfunction, and 
in those with vascular disease, the underlying genetic risk factors are not
likely to account for the genetic variation in cognition at adult age.

PMID: 16698126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Plant Physiol. 2006 Jun;141(2):620-37. Epub 2006 Apr 28.

Gene expression programs during shoot, root, and callus development in
Arabidopsis tissue culture.

Che P(1), Lall S, Nettleton D, Howell SH.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Sciences Institute, Iowa State University, Ames, 50011, USA.

Shoots can be regenerated from Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) root explants
in tissue culture through a two-step process requiring preincubation on an
auxin-rich callus induction medium. Regenerating tissues can be directed along
different developmental pathways leading to the formation of shoots, new roots,
or callus by transferring to the appropriate organ induction medium. Using
gene-profiling methods, we identified groups of genes that serve as molecular
signatures of the different developmental processes, i.e. genes that were
specifically up- or down-regulated on one developmental pathway, but not on
others. One transcription factor gene that was up-regulated during early shoot
development was RAP2.6L (At5g13330), a member of the ERF (ethylene response
factor) subfamily B-4 of the ERF/APETALA2 transcription factor gene family.
RAP2.6L functions in shoot regeneration because T-DNA knockdown mutations in the 
gene reduced the efficiency of shoot formation in tissue culture, but not normal 
embryo or seedling development. RAP2.6L promoter:beta-glucuronidase fusions
demonstrated that the up-regulation of the gene during shoot regeneration was, at
least in part, transcriptionally controlled. The promoter:beta-glucuronidase
fusions also demonstrated that RAP2.6L expression was localized to the shoot and 
emerging leaves, but expression declined in the leaf lamina as leaves expanded.
T-DNA knockdown mutations in RAP2.6L reduced the expression of many genes that
are normally up-regulated during shoot development including CUP-SHAPED
COTYLEDON2 that is involved in shoot meristem specification. Thus, RAP2.6L
appears to be part of a network involved in regulating the expression of many
other genes in shoot regeneration.

PMCID: PMC1475446
PMID: 16648215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2006 Jun 15;111(3-4):187-98. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

The influence of different management systems and age on intestinal morphology,
immune cell numbers and mucin production from goblet cells in post-weaning pigs.

Brown DC(1), Maxwell CV, Erf GF, Davis ME, Singh S, Johnson ZB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Agriculture, Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA. dlance@uark.edu

At time of weaning, the immune system in piglets is not fully mature resulting in
reduced growth and increased mortality. Early-weaned pigs transported to a
segregated early weaning (SEW) facility have enhanced performance and gut
development compared to conventional (CONV) pigs which may be due, in part, to
decreased pathogen challenge. To gain further insight into SEW enhanced
performance and gut development, gut samples from pigs weaned at 19+/-2 days were
assessed during the post-weaning (PW) period. The numbers of cells expressing
CD2, CD4, CD8, and CD172 (the 74-22-15 (SWC3) antibody is now known to be
specific for CD172), MHC class II, and CD25 were quantified using
immunohistochemistry. Additionally, samples of duodenum, jejunum, and ileum were 
evaluated for the production of neutral, acidic, and sulfuric mucins from goblet 
cells and morphological measurements were also made. No effects due to the
management systems alone were observed for any of the parameters. However, there 
were interactive effects of age/time post-weaning and management system on the
immune cells as well as on the mucin secreting goblet cells. There were no
differences in gut morphology between SEW and CONV reared pigs.

PMID: 16621019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Annu Rev Phytopathol. 2006;44:393-416.

The role of ethylene in host-pathogen interactions.

Broekaert WF(1), Delauré SL, De Bolle MF, Cammue BP.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Microbial and Plant Genetics, Department of Microbial and Molecular 
Systems, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 3001 Leuven, Belgium.
willem.broekaert@biw.kuleuven.be

The phytohormone ethylene is a principal modulator in many aspects of plant life,
including various mechanisms by which plants react to pathogen attack. Induced
ethylene biosynthesis and subsequent intracellular signaling through a single
conserved pathway have been well characterized. This leads to a cascade of
transcription factors consisting of primary EIN3-like regulators and downstream
ERF-like transcription factors. The latter control the expression of various
effector genes involved in various aspects of systemic induced defense responses.
Moreover, at this level significant cross-talk occurs with other defense response
pathways controlled by salicylic acid and jasmonate, eventually resulting in a
differentiated disease response.

PMID: 16602950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2006 Oct;99(3):351-64. Epub 2006 Apr 1.

Capsaicin-induced inactivation of sensory neurons promotes a more aggressive gene
expression phenotype in breast cancer cells.

Erin N(1), Zhao W, Bylander J, Chase G, Clawson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Gittlen Cancer Research Foundation, Hershey Medical
Center, H059, Pennsylvania State University, 500 University drive, Hershey, PA
17033, USA.

Capsaicin-induced inactivation of sensory neurons has been reported to enhance
metastasis of a murine breast cancer cell line, specifically enhancing myocardial
metastases. Here we characterized changes in gene expression patterns in primary 
tumors which developed in capsaicin-treated vs. control mice. We identified a
small cohort of genes (17) which all showed significant decreases in expression
levels. All of the identified genes have been linked to cell growth,
differentiation, and/or cancer progression. Three representative genes, Caspase-7
(an executor of apoptosis), ADAM-10 (A Disintegrin and Metalloprotease), and
Elk-3 (a transcriptional repressor of the ternary factor subfamily of the Ets
factors) were further investigated. All three showed dramatic downregulation at
the protein level in primary tumors from capsaicin-treated animals compared with 
control (vehicle-treated) animals, and their expression was also lost in cell
culture. Elk-3 and Caspase-7 were not expressed in vitro in cultured cell lines, 
suggesting that their expression was induced by the tumor microenvironment. Loss 
of Caspase-7 expression can be expected to result in loss of function of
apoptotic pathways. At first glance, loss of ADAM-10 expression would be expected
to result in decreased invasive capability, due to loss of matrix metalloprotease
activity. However, just the opposite appears to be true. We found that ADAM-10
actually hydrolyzes Substance P. Specifically ADAM-10 produces the same
growth-inhibitory products from Substance P (i.e., SP (1-7)) that Neprilysin
does, so that loss of ADAM-10 expression actually results in loss of production
of growth inhibitory peptides from Substance P. Similarly, ADAM-10 also
efficiently hydrolyzes Calcitonin Gene-Related Peptide, which may act in concert 
with Substance P. Finally, overactivity of Ets transcriptional suppressor
functions has been linked to inhibition of tumorigenesis (e.g., Erf and Mef), and
in addition loss of Elk-3 expression might also be be linked to tumorigenesis via
loss of its putative anti-inflammatory activities. There is anecdotal evidence in
the literature to indicate that the rest of the down-regulated genes may also
contribute to development of a more aggressive phenotype in this breast cancer
model.

PMID: 16583263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Poult Sci. 2006 Mar;85(3):528-36.

Pulmonary hypertension triggered by lipopolysaccharide in ascites-susceptible and
-resistant broilers is not amplified by aminoguanidine, a specific inhibitor of
inducible nitric oxide synthase.

Bowen OT(1), Erf GF, Anthony NB, Wideman RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA.

Nitric oxide (NO) is a potent pulmonary vasodilator that modulates the pulmonary 
vasoconstriction and pulmonary hypertension (PH) triggered by bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in broilers. The amplitude and duration of the
LPS-induced PH are markedly enhanced following pretreatment with
N(omega)-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME), which inhibits NO synthesis by
both the constitutive (endothelial) and inducible (inflammatory) forms of nitric 
oxide synthase (eNOS and iNOS, respectively). In the present study L-NAME and the
selective iNOS inhibitor aminoguanidine (AG) were administered to differentiate
between iNOS and eNOS as the primary source of NO that attenuates the pulmonary
vascular response to LPS. Clinically healthy male progeny from
ascites-susceptible and ascites-resistant lines were anesthetized, and their
pulmonary artery was cannulated. The initial pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP)
was recorded, then the broilers either remained untreated (control group) or were
injected i.v. with AG. Ten minutes later all birds received an i.v. injection of 
LPS, followed 40 min later by an i.v. injection of L-NAME. When compared with
untreated controls, AG neither increased the baseline PAP nor did it increase or 
prolong the PH response to LPS. The ascites-susceptible broilers maintained a
higher PAP than the ascites-resistant broilers throughout the experiment, and the
ascites-resistant broilers exhibited greater relative increases in PAP in
response to LPS than did the ascites-susceptible broilers. Within 40 min after
the LPS injection, PAP subsided to a level that did not differ from the
respective preinjection value for each line. Injecting L-NAME reversed the
decline in PAP, and within 5 min PAP returned to hypertensive levels approaching 
the maximum peak PH response to LPS. The absence of any impact of AG coupled with
the profound response to L-NAME indicates that NO synthesized by eNOS rather than
iNOS likely modulated the acute (within 1 h) PH elicited by LPS. Evidently eNOS
is activated by the increased shear stress exerted on the endothelium during the 
PH response to LPS, whereas LPS-mediated up-regulation of iNOS expression may
take longer than 1 h before biologically effective quantities of NO are produced.

PMID: 16553285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Poult Sci. 2006 Mar;85(3):511-27.

Influence of aminoguanidine, an inhibitor of inducible nitric oxide synthase, on 
the pulmonary hypertensive response to microparticle injections in broilers.

Wideman RF(1), Bowen OT, Erf GF, Chapman ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA. rwideman@uark.edu

The pulmonary hypertensive response to pulmonary vascular obstruction caused by
intravenously injected microparticles is amplified by pretreatment with
N(omega)nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME). The L-NAME prevents the synthesis
of the potent vasodilator nitric oxide (NO) by inhibiting both the constitutive
[endothelial NO synthase (eNOS or NOS-3)] and inducible [inducible NO synthase
(iNOS or NOS-2)] forms of NO synthase. In the present study we used the selective
iNOS inhibitor aminoguanidine (AG) to evaluate the role of iNOS in modulating the
pulmonary hypertension (PH) triggered by microparticle injections. Experiment 1
was conducted to confirm the ability of AG to inhibit NO synthesis by iNOS in
broiler peripheral blood mononuclear cells exposed to bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS, endotoxin). Mononuclear leukocytes treated with LPS
produced 10-fold more NO than untreated (control) cells. The LPS-stimulated
production of NO was partially inhibited by L-NAME and was fully inhibited by AG,
thereby confirming that AG inhibits LPS-mediated iNOS activation in broilers. In 
Experiment 2 we evaluated the responses of male progeny from a base population
(MP Base) and from a derivative line selected for one generation from the
survivors of an LD50 microparticle injection (MP Select). The pulmonary arterial 
pressure (PAP) was lower in MP Select than in MP Base broilers. Both lines
exhibited similar percentage increases in PAP after microparticles were injected,
and AG modestly amplified the PH triggered by microparticles in both lines. In
Experiment 3 we evaluated the responses of male progeny from a second base
population (PAC Base) and from a derivative line selected for 3 generations using
the unilateral pulmonary artery clamp technique (PAC Select). The PAP was lower
in PAC Select than in PAC Base broilers, and both lines exhibited similar
percentage increases in PAP in response to the microparticles. The PH triggered
by microparticles was not amplified by AG but was doubled by L-NAME. These
experiments demonstrate that during the 30 min following pulmonary vascular
entrapment of microparticles, iNOS modulated the PH elicited in broilers derived 
from the MP pedigree line, but not in broilers from the PAC pedigree line.
Different NOS-mediated responses among broiler populations may affect pulmonary
hemodynamic characteristics of broiler lines selected using i.v. microparticle
injections.

PMID: 16553284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. EDTNA ERCA J. 2005 Oct-Dec;31(4):185-90.

Expanding the donor pool--we need more living donors.

Trevitt R(1), Sternberg M, Calic M.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Transplant Clinic, Royal London Hospital, UK.
ray.trevitt@bushinternet.com

This paper describes some of the issues currently influencing thoughts and
practice in expanding the use of living kidney donors. One of the challenges
facing kidney transplantation is the increasing number of patients with
Established Renal Failure (ERF) waiting for a kidney, and the ethical concerns
raised as a result of meeting these challenges by the use of living donors.
Nephrology professionals play an important role in the education of patients and 
potential living kidney donors and should be familiar with current issues related
to this field.

PMID: 16551022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Planta. 2006 Aug;224(3):612-21. Epub 2006 Mar 8.

Mapping sequences required for nuclear localization and the transcriptional
activation function of the Arabidopsis protein AINTEGUMENTA.

Krizek BA(1), Sulli C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 
29208, USA. krizek@sc.edu

The Arabidopsis thaliana floral development protein AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) is a
member of a large family of DNA binding proteins (AP2/ERF family) that control
plant growth and development in response to developmental or environmental
signals. Transcriptional activation and/or repression activities have been
demonstrated for several members of this protein family. We have used fusions
between ANT and the GAL4 DNA binding domain to identify an 80 amino acid sequence
important for the transcriptional activation function of ANT. This region shows
similarity to transcriptional activation domains in other proteins, as it is rich
in Ser/Thr, Gln/Asn, and acidic amino acids. We also demonstrate that ANT can
activate gene expression in Arabidopsis plants through binding to a DNA sequence 
corresponding to an in vitro determined ANT binding site. Finally, we show that
ANT is nuclear localized and that the sequence KKKR (amino acids 252-255) is
required for nuclear localization of the protein.

PMID: 16523347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Ter Arkh. 2005;77(12):74-6.

[Long-acting m-cholinolytic thiotropium bromide (spiriva) in therapy of patients 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (stage 3)].

[Article in Russian]

Shmelev EI, Khmel'kova MA.

AIM: To elicit efficacy of a 3-month treatment with new inhaled cholinolytic drug
spiriva in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) of stage 3.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Clinical symptoms (a total score of symptoms), external
respiration function (ERF), pressure in the pulmonary artery were examined in 28 
patients with COPD (stage 3).
RESULTS: Long-acting thiotropium bromide relieved symptoms (the score decreased
from 7.8 +/- 0.4 to 5.6 +/- 0.5), respiratory capacity rose from 68.8 +/- 2.4% to
75.9 +/- 2.5%, forced expiratory volume per 1 s increased from 41.9 +/- 2.6% to
46.6 +/- 3.2%, mean pressure in the pulmonary artery lowered from 29.0 +/- 0.8 to
25.1 +/- 1.2 mm Hg.
CONCLUSION: Regular therapy with long-acting thiotropium bromide in patients with
COPD stage 3 reduces clinical symptoms: dyspnea, mean pressure in the pulmonary
artery. It also improves bronchial permeability.

PMID: 16514826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Hum Brain Mapp. 2006 Oct;27(10):811-8.

Differential priming effects of color-opponent subliminal stimulation on visual
magnetic responses.

Hoshiyama M(1), Kakigi R, Takeshima Y, Miki K, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Physiology, National Institute for Physiological
Sciences, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Japan. hosiyama@met.nagoya-u.ac.jp

We investigated the effects of subliminal stimulation on visible stimulation to
demonstrate the priority of facial discrimination processing, using a unique,
indiscernible, color-opponent subliminal (COS) stimulation. We recorded
event-related magnetic cortical fields (ERF) by magnetoencephalography (MEG)
after the presentation of a face or flower stimulus with COS conditioning using a
face, flower, random pattern, and blank. The COS stimulation enhanced the
response to visible stimulation when the figure in the COS stimulation was
identical to the target visible stimulus, but more so for the face than for the
flower stimulus. The ERF component modulated by the COS stimulation was estimated
to be located in the ventral temporal cortex. We speculated that the enhancement 
was caused by an interaction of the responses after subthreshold stimulation by
the COS stimulation and the suprathreshold stimulation after target stimulation, 
such as in the processing for categorization or discrimination. We also
speculated that the face was processed with priority at the level of the ventral 
temporal cortex during visual processing outside of consciousness.

PMID: 16511887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Acta Radiol. 2006 Feb;47(1):3-9.

Malignant esophageal-tracheobronchial strictures: parallel placement of covered
retrievable expandable nitinol stents.

Nam DH(1), Shin JH, Song HY, Jung GS, Han YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Soonchunhyang University Chonan Hospital, College of 
Medicine, Soonchunhyang University, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: To assess the safety and clinical effectiveness of the parallel
placement of covered retrievable expandable metallic stents in the palliative
treatment of malignant esophageal and tracheobronchial strictures.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Under fluoroscopic guidance, parallel stents were placed in
12 symptomatic patients with both malignant esophageal and tracheobronchial
strictures. Seven of these 12 patients also had an esophagorespiratory fistula
(ERF) and one patient had an esophagocutaneous fistula. Technical success,
clinical improvement, complications, and survival rates were evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 28 esophageal and airway stents were successfully placed. The
grade of dysphagia and dyspnea score significantly decreased after stent
placement (P=0.002 and 0.003, respectively). ERF and esophagocutaneous fistula
were sealed off in all eight patients after esophageal stent placement; however, 
the esophagocutaneous fistula reopened 1 month later. Complications included
stent migration or expectoration (n=3), tracheal compression by the esophageal
stent (n=3), new fistula development due to covering membrane degradation of the 
esophageal stent (n=1), and symptomatic sputum retention (n=1). Stent removal was
easily performed for two stents; one migrated stent and the other with covering
membrane degradation. All 12 patients died within the mean survival period of
72.50 days (range 7-375 days).
CONCLUSION: Parallel placement of covered retrievable expandable metallic stents 
is safe and effective for the palliative treatment of malignant esophageal and
tracheobronchial strictures.

PMID: 16498926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Anim Sci. 2006 Mar;84(3):567-78.

Ontogeny of T lymphocytes and intestinal morphological characteristics in
neonatal pigs at different ages in the postnatal period.

Brown DC(1), Maxwell CV, Erf GF, Davis ME, Singh S, Johnson ZB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, 72701,
USA.

To evaluate morphological characteristics and development of the immune system at
different ages in neonatal pigs, 4 piglets were euthanized at 7, 14, and 18 d of 
age for collection of blood, bile, and intestinal tissue for morphological
measurements. Blood was collected for differential cell counts, lymphocyte
blastogenesis, immunoglobulin (Ig) concentrations, cytokine concentrations, and
flow cytometric analysis. Bile was collected for quantification of Ig-A and Ig-M.
Villus width and crypt depth from duodenum sections, as well as ileum crypt
depth, were reduced (P < or = 0.08) in 18-d-old pigs compared with 7-d-old pigs. 
No age-related differences (P > or = 0.11) were observed in the number of goblet 
cells with neutral and acidic mucins, serum or enteric Ig concentrations, IL-2,
IL-4, spontaneous lymphocyte proliferation, or leukocyte concentrations. When
measured as counts per minute (cpm) and as a stimulation index (SI), lymphocyte
proliferation responses to phytohaemagglutinin increased (P = 0.05) between 7 and
14 d of age; no changes (P = 0.10) occurred at 18 d of age. No age-related
changes (P = 0.39) were observed in response to pokeweed mitogen (PWM) when
measured as cpm; however, the SI from PWM-induced lymphocytes decreased (P =
0.04) 4-fold between 7 and 18 d of age. The CD4+:CD8+ and populations of
lymphocytes expressing CD2+CD4+CD8- (T helper cells) and CD25+CD4+CD8- (activated
T helper cells) were greater (P > or = 0.04) at 7 d of age than at 14 and 18 d.
Populations of T lymphocytes, cytotoxic T cells (CD2+CD4-CD8+), activated
lymphocytes (CD25+), and activated cytotoxic T cells (CD25+CD4-CD8+) were greater
(P > or = 0.02) in 18-d-old pigs compared with 7-d-old pigs, whereas CD2+CD4-CD8-
[double negative cells] were lower (P = 0.08) in 18-d-old pigs compared with
14-d-old pigs. The percentage of CD2+ T cells was 8.4% at 7 d of age, and by the 
time the pigs reached 18 d of age, the percentage of CD2+ T cells was 33.8%.
Moreover, the percentage of gammadelta T cells was greater (P = 0.02) in 18-d-old
pigs than in 7-d-old pigs (74.8 vs. 46.1%, respectively). Results indicate that
the porcine immune system and gut are continuously changing as the young pig
matures. Changes occurred in lymphocyte phenotypic expression and functional
capabilities, as well as morphology and mucin production, and their role may be
to further protect the neonate from antigenic challenge as protection from
passive immunity declines.

PMID: 16478948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. FEBS Lett. 2006 Feb 20;580(5):1303-8. Epub 2006 Jan 26.

The conserved Ala37 in the ERF/AP2 domain is essential for binding with the DRE
element and the GCC box.

Liu Y(1), Zhao TJ, Liu JM, Liu WQ, Liu Q, Yan YB, Zhou HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China.

Four AP2/EREBP genes encoding putative ethylene-responsive element binding factor
(ERF)/AP2 domains were cloned from Brassica napus, and these genes could be
induced by low temperature, ethylene, drought, high salinity, abscisic acid and
jasmonate treatments. These four genes, named BnDREBIII-1 to BnDREBIII-4, were
highly homologous and the 37th amino acid was the only difference among their
ERF/AP2 domains. BnDREBIII-1 was demonstrated to be able to bind to both
dehydration-responsive element and the GCC box and transactivate the expression
of downstream genes, while BnDREBIII-4 could bind neither. Further results
suggested that Ala37 might play a crucial role in the DNA binding or the
stability of the ERF/AP2 domain.

PMID: 16457823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Plant Cell Physiol. 2006 Apr;47(4):554-8. Epub 2006 Feb 1.

Studies on transcriptional regulation of endogenous genes by ERF2 transcription
factor in tobacco cells.

Nakano T(1), Nishiuchi T, Suzuki K, Fujimura T, Shinshi H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Breeding Research Group, Institute for Biological
Resources and Functions, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology (AIST), Tsukuba Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8566
Japan.

In this study, we showed that overexpression of ethylene-responsive transcription
factor (ERF) 2 activated the expression of endogenous genes that have the GCC box
in their promoter region, in tobacco plants. These include not only a
defense-related gene, CHN50, encoding class I basic chitinase, but also a
transcriptional repressor gene, ERF3. In tobacco plants constitutively expressing
ERF2:glucocorticoid receptor fusion protein, treatment with dexamethazone induced
a rapid increase of ERF3 mRNA and a slow increase of CHN50 mRNA. These results
suggest that an antagonistic interplay of ERF2 and ERF3 is involved in the
transcriptional regulation of the class I basic chitinase genes in tobacco.

PMID: 16452120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Plant Physiol. 2006 Nov;163(11):1167-78. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Molecular characterization of four rice genes encoding ethylene-responsive
transcriptional factors and their expressions in response to biotic and abiotic
stress.

Cao Y(1), Song F, Goodman RM, Zheng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310029, PR
China.

We isolated and identified four rice genes, OsBIERF1 to OsBIERF4 (Oryza sativa
benzothiadiazole (BTH)-induced ethylene responsive transcriptional factors (ERF))
and analyzed their expressions in rice disease resistance response and under
various abiotic stress conditions. The OsBIERF1-4 proteins contain conserved ERF 
domains, but are categorized into different classes of the previously
characterized ERF proteins based on their structural organizations. OsBIERF3 and 
OsBIERF2 belong to Classes I and II, respectively; while OsBIRERF1 and OsBIERF4
are members of Class IV. OsBIERF3 could bind specifically to the GCC box sequence
and was targeted to nucleus when transiently expressed in onion epidermis cells. 
Expression of OsBIERF1, OsBIERF3 and OsBIERF4 was induced by treatments with BTH 
and salicylic acid, chemical inducers capable of inducing disease resistance
response in rice. In the BTH-treated rice seedlings, expression of OsBIERF1,
OsBIERF3 and OsBIERF4 was further induced by infection with Magnaporthe grisea,
the rice blast fungus, as compared with those in water-treated seedlings.
OsBIERF1 and OsBIERF3 were activated in an incompatible interaction but not in
compatible interaction between rice and M. grisea. Moreover, OsBIERF1, OsBIERF3
and OsBIERF4 were also up-regulated by salt, cold, drought and wounding. These
results suggest that OsBIERF proteins may participate in different signaling
pathways that mediate disease resistance response and stress responses to abiotic
factors.

PMID: 16436304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Plant Physiol. 2006 Feb;140(2):411-32. Epub 2006 Jan 11.

Genome-wide analysis of the ERF gene family in Arabidopsis and rice.

Nakano T(1), Suzuki K, Fujimura T, Shinshi H.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Breeding Research Group, Institute for Biological
Resources and Functions, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and
Technology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

Genes in the ERF family encode transcriptional regulators with a variety of
functions involved in the developmental and physiological processes in plants. In
this study, a comprehensive computational analysis identified 122 and 139 ERF
family genes in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and rice (Oryza sativa L.
subsp. japonica), respectively. A complete overview of this gene family in
Arabidopsis is presented, including the gene structures, phylogeny, chromosome
locations, and conserved motifs. In addition, a comparative analysis between
these genes in Arabidopsis and rice was performed. As a result of these analyses,
the ERF families in Arabidopsis and rice were divided into 12 and 15 groups,
respectively, and several of these groups were further divided into subgroups.
Based on the observation that 11 of these groups were present in both Arabidopsis
and rice, it was concluded that the major functional diversification within the
ERF family predated the monocot/dicot divergence. In contrast, some
groups/subgroups are species specific. We discuss the relationship between the
structure and function of the ERF family proteins based on these results and
published information. It was further concluded that the expansion of the ERF
family in plants might have been due to chromosomal/segmental duplication and
tandem duplication, as well as more ancient transposition and homing. These
results will be useful for future functional analyses of the ERF family genes.

PMCID: PMC1361313
PMID: 16407444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Gene. 2006 Feb 1;366(2):256-65. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Molecular evolution of the AP2 subfamily.

Shigyo M(1), Hasebe M, Ito M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General System Studies, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

The AP2 (APETALA2)/EREBP (Ethylene Responsive Element Binding Protein) multigene 
family includes developmentally and physiologically important transcription
factors. AP2/EREBP genes are divided into two subfamilies: AP2 genes with two AP2
domains and EREBP genes with a single AP2/ERF (Ethylene Responsive Element
Binding Factor) domain. Based on previous phylogenetic analyses, AP2 genes can be
divided into two clades, AP2 and ANT groups. To clarify the molecular evolution
of the AP2 subfamily, we isolated and sequenced genes with two AP2 domains from
three gymnosperms, Cycas revoluta, Ginkgo biloba, and Gnetum parvifolium,as well 
as from the moss Physcomitrella patens. Expressions of AP2-like genes, including 
AP2, in Arabidopsis thaliana are regulated by the microRNA miR172. We found that 
the target site of miR172 is significantly conserved in gymnosperm AP2 homologs, 
suggesting that regulatory mechanisms of gene expression using microRNA have been
conserved over the three hundred million years since the divergence of gymnosperm
and flowering plant lineages. We inferred a phylogenetic relationship of these
genes with the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and seed-plant genes
available in public DNA databases. The phylogenetic tree showed that the AP2
subfamily diverged into the AP2 and ANT groups before the last common ancestor of
land plants and after C. reinhardtii diverged from the land-plant lineage. The
tree also indicated that each AP2 and ANT group further diverged into several
clades through gene duplications prior to the divergence of gymnosperms and
angiosperms.

PMID: 16388920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Phys Rev Lett. 2005 Nov 4;95(19):197203. Epub 2005 Nov 3.

Scaling and renormalization group in replica-symmetry-breaking space: evidence
for a simple analytical solution of the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model at zero
temperature.

Oppermann R(1), Sherrington D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Theoretische Physik, Universität Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074
Würzburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

Using numerical self-consistent solutions of a sequence of finite replica
symmetry breakings (RSB) and Wilson's renormalization group but with the number
of RSB steps playing a role of decimation scales, we report evidence for a
nontrivial T-->0 limit of the Parisi order function q(x) for the
Sherrington-Kirkpatrick spin glass. Supported by scaling in RSB space, the fixed 
point order function is conjectured to be q*(a)=sqrt[pi]/2 a/xi erf(xi/a) on
0<or=a<or=infinity, where x/T --> a at T =0 and xi approximately 1.13+/-0.01. Xi 
plays the role of a correlation length in a-space. q*(a) may be viewed as the
solution of an effective 1D field theory.

PMID: 16384018  [PubMed]


288. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2002 Jul 15;251(2):376-80.

In situ sol-gel preparation of polysaccharide/titanium oxide hybrid colloids and 
their electrorheological effect.

Zhao XP(1), Duan X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Electrorheological Technology, Department of Applied Physics,
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an, 710072, People's Republic of China.
xpzhao@nwpu.edu.cn

A new type of organic/inorganic hybrid colloid, made of modified carboxylmethyl
starch (CMS) and titanium oxide (TiO(2)), was synthesized by an in situ sol-gel
technique. IR spectra analysis shows strong a interaction of functional groups
between two components, whose dispersion is almost at the molecular level. Due to
the highly active surfaces hybrid particles and their characteristic dielectric
behavior in accordance with the previous theoretic calculation, the suspensions
of hybrids in silicone oil display a remarkable ER effect. The static yield
stress can be above 20 kPa (shear rate 5 S(-1)) under a direct current field of 4
kV/mm at room temperature, much higher than that of simple blends of starch and
titanium dioxide. In the meanwhile, the temperature dependence and sedimentation 
stability were optimized. Based on existing experimental results, we propose that
dielectric properties and surface (interface) activity are two necessary
conditions fulfilling the requirement of high ER activity. The combination of
both factors may effectively reduce the activation energy needed for ERF
restructuring.

PMID: 16290743  [PubMed]


289. J Theor Biol. 2006 May 7;240(1):87-97. Epub 2005 Oct 27.

Polarity and hydrophobicity interactions in protein synthesis process.

Li XQ(1), Fan P, Fan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Kunming University of Science and
Technology, Kunming 650051, PR China.

About 30 years ago, experiments found that there are polarity and hydrophobicity 
(P and H) correlations and affinity between amino acids and their anticodons.
Although it is shown that these experimental findings are important for
explaining the origins of the genetic code, the great potential of P and H
interactions in investigating other bio-functions have not been fully explored.
Here, through raising, discussing and answering seven relevant questions hidden
in tRNA aminoacylation, the formation of peptide bonds, and the ending of
translations, etc., we show our theoretical findings that the P and H
correlations and affinity take vital roles in the protein synthesis process. We
found the relationship between the 3' end ACCN sequences of tRNA molecules and
the activated amino acids and its biological significance, the rRNAs' consensus
sequences 5'NCC...TGG3' or 5'TGG...NCC3' which may perform as functional segments
of rRNAs to help triggering the reaction of peptide formation, and common nature 
of releasing factors that the first amino acid residue of releasing factors ERF, 
RF1 and RF2 are all Methionine, except a few Alanine, which may be necessary for 
releasing the translated polypeptide and stopping the translating process. In the
terms of P and H correlations and affinity, we provide explanations of why only
using the poly (G) as mRNA template cannot get the poly (Gly) in experiments
deciphering the genetic code, why Gly often appears in beta turns and why
translational bypassing might occur when translating 5'GGAUGA on mRNA. Since
amino acids and nucleotides are the subunits, respectively, for composing
proteins and nucleic acids, these findings will help in further understanding
interactions among the bio-macromolecules. These findings are also helpful for
investigating rRNAs, further understanding the protein synthesis process and
analysing similar bio-problems, and should be proved useful for experimental
biologists.

PMID: 16257010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Plant Mol Biol. 2005 Nov;59(4):603-17.

Overexpression of the pepper transcription factor CaPF1 in transgenic Virginia
pine (Pinus Virginiana Mill.) confers multiple stress tolerance and enhances
organ growth.

Tang W(1), Charles TM, Newton RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Howell Science Complex, East Carolina University,
Greenville, NC 27858-4353, USA. tangw@mail.ecu.edu

Transcription factors play an important role in regulating gene expression in
response to stress and pathogen tolerance. We describe here that overexpression
of an ERF/AP2 pepper transcription factor (CaPF1) in transgenic Virginia pine
(Pinus virginiana Mill.) confers tolerance to heavy metals Cadmium, Copper, and
Zinc, to heat, and to pathogens Bacillus thuringiensis and Staphylococcus
epidermidis, as by the survival rate of transgenic plants and the number of
decreasing pathogen cells in transgenic tissues. Measurement of antioxidant
enzymes ascorbate peroxidase (APOX), glutathione reductase (GR), and superoxide
dismutase (SOD) activities demonstrated that the level of the enzyme activities
was higher in transgenic Virginia pine plants overexpressing the CaPF1 gene,
which may protect cells from the oxidative damage caused by stresses, compared to
the controls. Constitutive overexpression of CaPF1 gene enhanced organ growth by 
increasing organ size and cell numbers in transgenic Virginia pine plants over
those in control plants.

PMID: 16244910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Stroke. 2005 Nov;36(11):2351-6. Epub 2005 Oct 20.

Heritability of the function and structure of the arterial wall: findings of the 
Erasmus Rucphen Family (ERF) study.

Sayed-Tabatabaei FA(1), van Rijn MJ, Schut AF, Aulchenko YS, Croes EA, Zillikens 
MC, Pols HA, Witteman JC, Oostra BA, van Duijn CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Postbus
1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Using 930 individuals connected in a single pedigree from
an isolated population, participants of the Erasmus Rucphen Family (ERF) study,
we investigated the heritability of carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity (PWV),
carotid intima media thickness (IMT), and carotid plaque score.
METHODS: PWV was measured between the carotid and femoral arteries as an
indicator of aortic stiffness. Common carotid IMT and plaque score, quantifying
alterations in arterial wall structure, were measured by ultrasonography.
RESULTS: All 3 traits were significantly associated with classic cardiovascular
risk factors. Age- and gender-adjusted heritability estimates were 0.36 for PWV, 
0.41 for carotid IMT, and 0.28 for plaque score. After adjustment for appropriate
risk factors, the heritabilities were 0.26, 0.35, and 0.21 for PWV, IMT, and
plaque score, respectively. All heritability estimates were statistically
significant (P<0.001). Taking into account different proportions of variance
associated with covariates for each trait, genetic factors explained &12% of the 
total variability for each of the phenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first report on the heritability of
PWV. The heritability estimates of IMT and plaque score were similar to those in 
previous reports. We conclude that genetic factors significantly contribute to
arterial structure and function in this isolated population, presenting the
opportunity to locate susceptibility genes related to cardiovascular disorders.

PMID: 16239631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Anesteziol Reanimatol. 2005 Jul-Aug;(4):60-3.

[Characteristics of hemodynamic and external respiratory function in patients
with concomitant wounds of the heart and lung during early postoperative period].

[Article in Russian]

Manykin IE, Nikitina OV, Zabavskaia OA.

The parameters of intracardiac hemodynamics and external respiratory function
(ERF) were studied by echocardiography and computed spirography with
pneumotachometry in 123 patients with punctured and lacerated wounds of the chest
in the early postoperative period. All the patients were divided into 6 groups
according to the pattern of injuries. Group 1 included 25 patients with chest
wound without organ damages; Group 2 comprised 42 patients with wound of the
lung; Group 3 consisted of 22 patients with wound of the left ventricle (LV); in 
Group 4 there were 11 persons with wound of LV and the lung; Group 5 included 8
victims with wound of the right ventricle (RV); and Group 6 comprised 15 patients
with wounds of the lung and RV. One- and five-day follow-ups revealed the most
pronounced disorders of intracardiac hemodynamics and ERF in patients with
concomitant wound of the lung and RV (Group 6). At the same time it was found
that when wounds of the lung were concomitant with those of the heart, there was 
discoordination of RV and LV work with decreased volumetric blood flow along the 
pulmonary artery. These impairments also persisted by day 5 of the moment of
wound. By that time there were positive hemodynamic and ERF changes in the other 
groups.

PMID: 16206591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Plant Physiol. 2005 Oct;139(2):949-59. Epub 2005 Sep 23.

Repressor- and activator-type ethylene response factors functioning in jasmonate 
signaling and disease resistance identified via a genome-wide screen of
Arabidopsis transcription factor gene expression.

McGrath KC(1), Dombrecht B, Manners JM, Schenk PM, Edgar CI, Maclean DJ, Scheible
WR, Udvardi MK, Kazan K.

Author information: 
(1)Cooperative Research Centre for Tropical Plant Protection, University of
Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia.

To identify transcription factors (TFs) involved in jasmonate (JA) signaling and 
plant defense, we screened 1,534 Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) TFs by
real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR for their altered transcript at 
6 h following either methyl JA treatment or inoculation with the incompatible
pathogen Alternaria brassicicola. We identified 134 TFs that showed a significant
change in expression, including many APETALA2/ethylene response factor (AP2/ERF),
MYB, WRKY, and NAC TF genes with unknown functions. Twenty TF genes were induced 
by both the pathogen and methyl JA and these included 10 members of the AP2/ERF
TF family, primarily from the B1a and B3 subclusters. Functional analysis of the 
B1a TF AtERF4 revealed that AtERF4 acts as a novel negative regulator of
JA-responsive defense gene expression and resistance to the necrotrophic fungal
pathogen Fusarium oxysporum and antagonizes JA inhibition of root elongation. In 
contrast, functional analysis of the B3 TF AtERF2 showed that AtERF2 is a
positive regulator of JA-responsive defense genes and resistance to F. oxysporum 
and enhances JA inhibition of root elongation. Our results suggest that plants
coordinately express multiple repressor- and activator-type AP2/ERFs during
pathogen challenge to modulate defense gene expression and disease resistance.

PMCID: PMC1256008
PMID: 16183832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Epileptic Disord. 2005 Sep;7(3):253-96.

Nonconvulsive status epilepticus: Epilepsy Research Foundation workshop reports.

Walker M(1), Cross H, Smith S, Young C, Aicardi J, Appleton R, Aylett S, Besag F,
Cock H, DeLorenzo R, Drislane F, Duncan J, Ferrie C, Fujikawa D, Gray W, Kaplan
P, Koutroumanidis M, O'Regan M, Plouin P, Sander J, Scott R, Shorvon S, Treiman
D, Wasterlain C, Wieshmann U.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Research Foundation, London, United Kingdom. info@erf.org.uk

In April 2004, a group of physicians with an interest in nonconvulsive status
epilepticus representing a spectrum of opinion met in Oxford, sponsored by the
Epilepsy Research Foundation (a charitable organization), to discuss and debate
the definition, diagnosis and treatment of nonconvulsive status epilepticus. We
felt that such a meeting would be useful, as nonconvulsive status epilepticus is 
a subject that provokes strong reactions, perhaps largely due to the relative
lack of evidence and the surfeit of opinion. The meeting was arranged such that
there were formal talks followed by a discussion led by one of the attendees. We 
present here the extended abstracts of the main talks with the points raised by
the discussants. Despite disagreements on certain issues there was much in the
way of consensus. First, it was agreed that nonconvulsive status epilepticus is a
term that covers a range of disparate conditions with varying prognoses and
treatments. The agreed definition was thus suitably vague, A<<Nonconvulsive
status epilepticus is a term used to denote a range of conditions in which
electrographic seizure activity is prolonged and results in nonconvulsive
clinical symptomsA>>. Secondly, it was agreed that even within a specific
condition (e.g. complex partial status epilepticus), the prognosis and treatment 
depends upon the context in which the condition occurs (e.g. in the critically
ill, in coma, in the A<<walking woundedA>> and in people with prior epilepsy).
Perhaps, most importantly it was agreed that we lacked good clinical data, and
the challenge was to design good studies for a condition that is underrecognised 
and often difficult to diagnose.

PMID: 16162436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. BMC Plant Biol. 2005 Sep 1;5:18.

Generation and analysis of 9792 EST sequences from cold acclimated oat, Avena
sativa.

Bräutigam M(1), Lindlöf A, Zakhrabekova S, Gharti-Chhetri G, Olsson B, Olsson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Göteborg University, Box 462, 403 20
Göteborg, Sweden. marcus.brautigam@molbio.gu.se

BACKGROUND: Oat is an important crop in North America and northern Europe. In
Scandinavia, yields are limited by the fact that oat cannot be used as a winter
crop. In order to develop such a crop, more knowledge about mechanisms of cold
tolerance in oat is required.
RESULTS: From an oat cDNA library 9792 single-pass EST sequences were obtained.
The library was prepared from pooled RNA samples isolated from leaves of
four-week old Avena sativa (oat) plants incubated at +4 degrees C for 4, 8, 16
and 32 hours. Exclusion of sequences shorter than 100 bp resulted in 8508
high-quality ESTs with a mean length of 710.7 bp. Clustering and assembly
identified a set of 2800 different transcripts denoted the Avena sativa cold
induced UniGene set (AsCIUniGene set). Taking advantage of various tools and
databases, putative functions were assigned to 1620 (58%) of these genes. Of the 
remaining 1180 unclassified sequences, 427 appeared to be oat-specific since they
lacked any significant sequence similarity (Blast E values > 10(-10)) to any
sequence available in the public databases. Of the 2800 UniGene sequences, 398
displayed significant homology (BlastX E values < or = 10(-10)) to genes
previously reported to be involved in cold stress related processes. 107 novel
oat transcription factors were also identified, out of which 51 were similar to
genes previously shown to be cold induced. The CBF transcription factors have a
major role in regulating cold acclimation. Four oat CBF sequences were found,
belonging to the monocot cluster of DREB family ERF/AP2 domain proteins. Finally 
in the total EST sequence data (5.3 Mbp) approximately 400 potential SSRs were
found, a frequency similar to what has previously been identified in Arabidopsis 
ESTs.
CONCLUSION: The AsCIUniGene set will now be used to fabricate an oat biochip, to 
perform various expression studies with different oat cultivars incubated at
varying temperatures, to generate molecular markers and provide tools for various
genetic transformation experiments in oat. This will lead to a better
understanding of the cellular biology of this important crop and will open up new
ways to improve its agronomical properties.

PMCID: PMC1236939
PMID: 16137325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Neuropsychologia. 2006;44(5):785-94. Epub 2005 Aug 29.

Reduced hemispheric asymmetry of the auditory N260m in dyslexia.

Paul I(1), Bott C, Heim S, Eulitz C, Elbert T.

Author information: 
(1)University of Konstanz, Department of Psychology, PO-Box D 25, 78457 Konstanz,
Germany. Isabella.Paul@uni-konstanz.de

Dyslexia seems to be related to a lack of planum temporale (PT) asymmetry that is
accompanied by functional differences to control subjects in both left and right 
hemispheric temporal regions during language tasks. PT asymmetry has been found
to correlate with phonological and verbal skills. In accordance, reduced
asymmetry of the auditory N100m sources in dyslexic adults and P100m sources in
dyslexic children has been reported. These results might also be related to an
atypical PT symmetry or the recruitment of other structures than the PT for
speech processing in dyslexia. In the present study we tried to replicate and
extend previous findings by examining a sample of 64 dyslexic and 22 control
children in the MEG. We measured cortical activity during a passive auditory
oddball-paradigm and localised ERF sources evoked by the standard stimulus /ba/. 
Reduced hemispheric asymmetry in the localisation of the auditory N260m was
revealed. While control children displayed a typical asymmetrical pattern with
more anterior sources in the right hemisphere, this asymmetry was not present for
the dyslexic children. Further, a correlation between N260m asymmetry and
spelling test performance was found. Our results suggest that localisation of ERF
components is indeed an applicative tool for investigating cortical deviances in 
dyslexia. A lack of source localisation asymmetry in dyslexia appears to be a
robust finding across different samples of dyslexic children and adults. It
appears that cortical auditory (language) processing is organised differently in 
dyslexic subjects than in controls. This might be the consequence of a more
symmetrical PT organisation, which in turn might be the result of maturational
delay.

PMID: 16129458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Plant J. 2005 Aug;43(4):491-505.

High-throughput in planta expression screening identifies a class II
ethylene-responsive element binding factor-like protein that regulates plant cell
death and non-host resistance.

Nasir KH(1), Takahashi Y, Ito A, Saitoh H, Matsumura H, Kanzaki H, Shimizu T, Ito
M, Fujisawa S, Sharma PC, Ohme-Takagi M, Kamoun S, Terauchi R.

Author information: 
(1)Iwate Biotechnology Research Center, 22-174-4, Narita, Kitakami, Iwate
024-0003, Japan.

We performed high-throughput screening using the potato virus X (PVX) system to
overexpress Nicotiana benthamiana genes in planta and identify positive
regulators of cell death. This screening identified NbCD1, a novel class II
ethylene-responsive element binding factor (ERF), as a potent inducer of the
hypersensitive response (HR)-like cell death. NbCD1 expression was induced by
treatments with INF1 elicitor and a non-host pathogen Pseudomonas cichorii. NbCD1
exhibited transcriptional repressor activity through its EAR motif, and this
motif was necessary for NbCD1 to cause cell death. We identified 58 genes that
displayed altered transcription following NbCD1 overexpression. NbCD1
overexpression downregulated the expression of HSR203, a negative regulator of
hypersensitive death. Conditional expression of NbCD1 in Arabidopsis also caused 
cell death, indicating that NbCD1 downstream cascades are conserved in dicot
plants. To further confirm the role of NbCD1 in defense, we used virus-induced
gene silencing to demonstrate that NbCD1 is required for non-host resistance of
N. benthamiana to the bacterial pathogen P. cichorii. Our data point to a model
of transcriptional regulatory cascades. NbCD1 positively regulates cell death and
contributes to non-host resistance, possibly by downregulating the expression of 
other defense response genes.

PMID: 16098104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2005 Aug;24(8):1053-7.

A method for determination of the timing stability of PET scanners.

Thompson CJ(1), Goertzen AL.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute, 3801 University St. #798, Montreal, QC H3A
2B4, Canada. christopher.thompson@mcgill.ca

We report on the timing resolution and stability of the MicroPET R4 PET scanner. 
Its detectors have energy resolutions in the range of 25% and previously reported
timing resolutions 3.2 ns. Our preliminary evaluation of this instrument showed
that artefact-free normalization sinograms could only be obtained with a timing
window of 10 ns or more in spite of a timing resolution of 3.2 ns. This
instrument uses high-speed electronics albeit with 2-ns timing clock. We
performed sham transmission scans with nothing in the field of view, and a range 
of timing windows from 2 to 14 ns and used a 14-ns timing blank scan to generate 
effective attenuation sinograms as a function of timing window. These showed
trues count-rates which fit well to a ERF (tau) function. However, the effective 
attenuation value, which should be 1.0, changes from block to block and becomes
very high in some blocks (> 3.5 at 6 ns) suggesting the need for timing
alignment. A method was devised to measure the timing stability to a precision
better than the timing bin width of 2 ns.

PMID: 16092336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Jul 31;38(4):440-6.

Molecular cloning, phylogenetic analysis, expressional profiling and in vitro
studies of TINY2 from Arabidopsis thaliana.

Wei G(1), Pan Y, Lei J, Zhu YX.

Author information: 
(1)The National Laboratory of Protein Engineering and Plant Genetic Engineering, 
College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

A cDNA that was rapidly induced upon abscisic acid, cold, drought, mechanical
wounding and to a lesser extent, by high salinity treatment, was isolated from
Arabidopsis seedlings. It was classified as DREB subfamily member based on
multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic characterization. Since it encoded a
protein with a typical ERF/AP2 DNA-binding domain and was closely related to the 
TINY gene, we named it TINY2. Gel retardation assay revealed that TINY2 was able 
to form a specific complex with the previously characterized DRE element while
showed only residual affinity to the GCC box. When fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding 
domain, either full-length or its C-terminus functioned effectively as a
trans-activator in the yeast one-hybrid assay while its N-terminus was completely
inactive. Our data indicate that TINY2 could be a new member of the AP2/EREBP
transcription factor family involved in activation of down-stream genes in
response to environmental stress.

PMID: 16053711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Poult Sci. 2005 Jul;84(7):1077-91.

Nomega-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME) amplifies the pulmonary
hypertensive response to microparticle injections in broilers.

Wideman RF(1), Erf GF, Chapman ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 
72701, USA. rwideman@uark.edu

We tested the hypothesis that microparticles entrapped within the pulmonary
vasculature elicit the production of nitric oxide (NO) in quantities sufficient
to modulate the combined impact of physical occlusion plus contemporaneously
released vasoconstrictors. In experiment 1, male broilers were given an injection
of the NO synthase (NOS) inhibitor Nomega-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME),
followed by an intravenous injection of cellulose microparticles while the
pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) and cardiac output (CO) were recorded. When
L-NAME was used to block NO synthesis induced by the microparticles, an early
peak of pulmonary hypertension was revealed that rarely developed in the absence 
of L-NAME. The subsequent more prolonged increases in PAP and pulmonary vascular 
resistance (PVR) were greater in amplitude and duration in broilers pretreated
with L-NAME than in broilers in the control group. These amplified responses
occurred in spite of a simultaneous reduction in CO, thereby conclusively
demonstrating that inhibiting NOS permitted the development of a much more
profound increase in the PVR. In experiment 2 the mortality triggered within 48 h
after injecting microparticles was evaluated in the presence and absence of
L-NAME. The 48 h postinjection mortality more than doubled when L-NAME was
combined with microparticle injection doses that otherwise caused relatively low 
mortality in the absence of L-NAME. Experiment 3 was conducted to determine
whether NO contributes to the systemic hypoxemia that develops after
microparticles are injected. L-NAME administration had no impact on the magnitude
and duration of the microparticle induced decline in the percentage saturation of
hemoglobin with oxygen (%HbO2). Evidently hypoxemia per se contributes relatively
little to the amplified pulmonary vasoconstriction and 48 h postinjection
mortality triggered by microparticle injections in broilers pretreated with
L-NAME. These observations indicate that NO modulates the responses to
vasoconstrictors released when microparticles become entrapped in the pulmonary
vasculature. Inhibition of NOS by L-NAME exposed a more dramatic increase in PVR 
and pulmonary hypertension leading to enhanced mortality in response to
microparticle injections.

PMID: 16050125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Poult Sci. 2005 Jul;84(7):1069-76.

Utilization of metabolizable energy by young broilers and birds of intermediate
growth rate.

Lopez G(1), Leeson S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Science, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada, N1G 2W1.

An experiment was conducted to study the utilization of ME by 3 strains of birds 
with different growth rates: commercial broilers, Plymouth Barred Rocks, and
Leghorns. Birds were fed a diet providing 3,100 kcal of ME/kg and 20% CP from 0
to 42 d. ME and nitrogen balance were determined from 10 to 15, 23 to 28, and 37 
to 42 d. Energy retained (ER) as fat (ERF) and protein (ERP) were derived from
body analyses for each period and group of birds. ERF and ERP were obtained as
the difference in values at the end of each period and their respective predicted
values based on BW at the beginning of the period. ER, ERF, and ERP per unit
metabolic BW were significantly different for broilers vs. the other 2 strains in
all periods (P < 0.001). Heat production and ER increased significantly (P <
0.01) for all groups. There was a significant decrease in HP (P < 0.001) over
time with no change in ER, ERF, or ERP over time. Age appeared to have no
significant effect on ERF/ME regardless of strain. Estimation of maintenance
requirements as a function of BW0.75 vs. BW0.60 showed that requirements for
broilers per kilogram of BW0.75 are 8% lower compared with estimates based on
BW0.60. It seems that energy requirements for maintenance has been underestimated
for younger or smaller birds and implies greater apparent efficiency for growth. 
Because ME intake for maintenance requirements represents a large portion of the 
ME intake, the results from this experiment could be considered in calculation of
energy requirements for growing broilers.

PMID: 16050124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Plant Mol Biol. 2005 Jul;58(4):585-96.

Arabidopsis ERF4 is a transcriptional repressor capable of modulating ethylene
and abscisic acid responses.

Yang Z(1), Tian L, Latoszek-Green M, Brown D, Wu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA.

ERFs (ethylene-responsive element binding factors) belong to a large family of
plant transcription factors that are found exclusively in plants. A small
subfamily of ERF proteins can act as transcriptional repressors. The Arabidopsis 
genome contains eight ERF repressors, namely AtERF3, AtERF4, and AtERF7 to
AtERF12. Members of ERF repressors show differential expression, suggesting that 
they may have different function. Using a transient expression system, we
demonstrated that AtERF4, AtERF7, AtERF10, AtERF11 and AtERF12 can function as
transcriptional repressors. The expression of AtERF4 can be induced by ethylene, 
jasmonic acid, and abscisic acid (ABA). By using green fluorescent protein
fusion, we demonstrated that AtEFR4 accumulated in the nuclear bodies of
Arabidopsis cells. Expression of 35S:AtERF4-GFP in transgenic Arabidopsis plants 
conferred an ethylene-insensitive phenotype and repressed the expression of Basic
Chitinase and beta-1,3-Glucanase, the GCC-box-containing genes. In comparison
with wild-type plants, 35S:AtERF4-GFP transgenic plants had decreased sensitivity
to ABA and were hypersensitive to sodium chloride. The expression of the ABA
responsive genes, ABI2, rd29B and rab18, was decreased in the 35S:AtERF4-GFP
transgenic plants. Our study provides evidence that AtERF4 is a negative
regulator capable of modulating ethylene and abscisic acid responses.

PMID: 16021341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Neurol Clin Neurophysiol. 2004 Nov 30;2004:109.

Localization of event-related activity by SAM(erf).

Robinson SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)VSM MedTech Ltd., CTF Systems, Coquitlam, BC, Canada. ser@vsmmedtech.com

Synthetic aperture magnetometry (SAM) has been used to image source power or
source signal-to-noise ratio from MEG. However, the locations of maximal
event-related oscillatory activity (or changes from resting state) do not
necessarily coincide with those sites that are phase-locked to external events
(i.e., localized by dipole fit to the averaged evoked response). Since an
estimate of the source time-series may also be obtained by applying the
beamformer coefficients to the MEG signal, one can image event-related activity
by mapping some function reflecting the reliability of the averaged source
waveform at each location. We have devised a new analysis method, SAM(erf), for
obtaining a functional image of event-related brain activity and revealing the
corresponding waveforms for activated sites. The mapping function used is the
ratio of RMS amplitude of the averaged source waveform to that of the +/- average
waveform, for a selected time window. This function is computed at each
coordinate on a three-dimensional grid in the head. In addition to the SAM(erf)
functional image, the averaged source waveforms for each local maximum in the
image can be computed and displayed. This procedure can reveal multiple locations
and waveforms at sites in the brain engaged in event-related activities. When
this method is applied to evoked response studies, phase-locked activity can
sometimes be found in areas distant from primary sensory cortex. Given the
sensitivity of this functional imaging method to areas outside primary sensory
cortex, it has the potential for detecting subtle changes in brain activity in
health and disease.

PMID: 16012649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Exp Bot. 2005 Aug;56(418):2211-27. Epub 2005 Jul 4.

Molecular changes associated with the setting up of secondary growth in aspen.

van Raemdonck D(1), Pesquet E, Cloquet S, Beeckman H, Boerjan W, Goffner D, El
Jaziri M, Baucher M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Biotechnology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Chaussée de 
Wavre 1850, B-1160 Brussels, Belgium.

Vascular secondary growth results from the activity of the vascular cambium,
which produces secondary phloem and secondary xylem. By means of cDNA-amplified
fragment length polymorphism (cDNA-AFLP) analysis along aspen stems, several
potential regulatory genes involved in the progressive transition from primary to
secondary growth were identified. A total of 83 unique transcript-derived
fragments (TDFs) was found to be differentiated between the top and the bottom of
the stem. An independent RT-PCR expression analysis validated the cDNA-AFLP
profiles for 19 of the TDFs. Among these, seven correspond to new genes encoding 
putative regulatory proteins. Emphasis was laid upon two genes encoding,
respectively, an AP2/ERF-like transcription factor (PtaERF1) and a RING finger
protein (PtaRHE1); their differential expression was further confirmed by reverse
northern analysis. In situ RT-PCR revealed that PtaERF1 was expressed in phloem
tissue and that PtaRHE1 had a pronounced expression in ray initials and their
derivatives within the cambial zone. These results suggest that these genes have 
a potential role in vascular tissue development and/or functioning.

PMID: 15996985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Plant Mol Biol. 2005 Mar;57(5):613-28.

AINTEGUMENTA-like (AIL) genes are expressed in young tissues and may specify
meristematic or division-competent states.

Nole-Wilson S(1), Tranby TL, Krizek BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 
29208, USA.

Although several members of the AP2/ERF family of transcription factors are
important developmental regulators in plants, many genes in this large protein
family remain uncharacterized. Here, we present a phylogenetic analysis of the 18
genes that make up the AP2 subgroup of this family. We report expression analyses
of seven Arabidopsis genes most closely related to the floral development gene
AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) and show that all AINTEGUMENTA-like (AIL) genes are
transcribed in multiple tissues during development. They are expressed primarily 
in young actively dividing tissues of a plant and not in mature leaves or stems. 
The spatial distribution of AIL5, AIL6, and AIL7 mRNA in inflorescences was
characterized by in situ hybridization. Each of these genes is expressed in a
spatially and temporally distinct pattern within inflorescence meristems and
flowers. Ectopic expression of AIL5 resulted in a larger floral organ phenotype, 
similar to that resulting from ectopic expression of ANT. Our results are
consistent with AIL genes having roles in specification of meristematic or
division-competent states.

PMID: 15988559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Jul 10;1729(3):141-6.

Identification of a CaRAV1 possessing an AP2/ERF and B3 DNA-binding domain from
pepper leaves infected with Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. glycines 8ra by
differential display.

Kim SY(1), Kim YC, Lee JH, Oh SK, Chung E, Lee S, Lee YH, Choi D, Park JM.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Genomics Lab., Division of Genomics, Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology, P.O. Box 115, Yusung, Daejon 305-600, Republic of
Korea.

We isolated a cDNA clone, CaRAV1, which exhibited significant similarity to those
of Arabidopsis RAV proteins containing AP2/ERF and B3-like DNA-binding domains.
CaRAV1 expression was rapidly and specifically induced in both host and non-host 
resistant responses against bacterial pathogens in the chili pepper plant. CaRAV1
also strongly increased following salicylic acid and ethephon treatments, whereas
methyl-jasmonate only had mild effects. Furthermore, CaRAV1 transcript levels
were also investigated in response to ABA and abiotic stress. No significant
CaRAV1 expression was evident following ABA, mannitol, or cold treatments. These 
observations collectively provide initial evidence that the pepper RAV
transcription factor homolog may function in plant defense responses.

PMID: 15978683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Plant J. 2005 Jun;42(5):689-707.

Overexpression of WXP1, a putative Medicago truncatula AP2 domain-containing
transcription factor gene, increases cuticular wax accumulation and enhances
drought tolerance in transgenic alfalfa (Medicago sativa).

Zhang JY(1), Broeckling CD, Blancaflor EB, Sledge MK, Sumner LW, Wang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Forage Improvement Division, The Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation, Ardmore, OK 
73401, USA.

The identification of leaf wax genes involved in stress tolerance is expected to 
have great potential for crop improvement. Here we report the characterization of
a novel AP2 domain-containing putative transcription factor gene from the model
legume Medicago truncatula. The gene, designated WXP1, is able to activate wax
production and confer drought tolerance in alfalfa (Medicago sativa), the most
important forage legume species in the world and a close relative of M.
truncatula. The predicted protein of WXP1 has 371 aa; it is one of the longest
peptides of all the single AP2 domain proteins in M. truncatula. WXP1 is
distinctly different from the most studied genes in the AP2/ERF transcription
factor family such as AP2s, CBF/DREB1s, DREB2s, WIN1/SHN1 and GL15. Transcript
level of WXP1 is inducible by cold, abscisic acid and drought treatment mainly in
shoot tissues in M. truncatula. Overexpression of WXP1 under the control of the
CaMV35S promoter led to a significant increase in cuticular wax loading on leaves
of transgenic alfalfa. Scanning electron microscopy revealed earlier accumulation
of wax crystals on the adaxial surface of newly expanded leaves and higher
densities of wax crystalline structures on both adaxial and abaxial surfaces of
mature leaves. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis revealed that total 
leaf wax accumulation per surface area increased 29.6-37.7% in the transgenic
lines, and the increase was mainly contributed by C30 primary alcohol. WXP1
overexpression induced a number of wax-related genes. Transgenic leaves showed
reduced water loss and chlorophyll leaching. Transgenic alfalfa plants with
increased cuticular waxes showed enhanced drought tolerance demonstrated by
delayed wilting after watering was ceased and quicker and better recovery when
the dehydrated plants were re-watered.

PMID: 15918883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Plant Physiol. 2005 Jun;138(2):675-85. Epub 2005 May 13.

Analysis of a sugar response mutant of Arabidopsis identified a novel B3 domain
protein that functions as an active transcriptional repressor.

Tsukagoshi H(1), Saijo T, Shibata D, Morikami A, Nakamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Graduate School of Bioagricultural Science, Nagoya
University, Chikusa, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan. i032011d@mbox.nagoya-u.ac.jp

A recessive mutation hsi2 of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) expressing
luciferase (LUC) under control of a short promoter derived from a sweet potato
(Ipomoea batatas) sporamin gene (Spo(min)LUC) caused enhanced LUC expression
under both low- and high-sugar conditions, which was not due to increased level
of abscisic acid. The hsi2 mutant contained a nonsense mutation in a gene
encoding a protein with B3 DNA-binding domain. HSI2 and two other Arabidopsis
proteins appear to constitute a novel subfamily of B3 domain proteins distinct
from ABI3, FUS3, and LEC2, which are transcription activators involved in seed
development. The C-terminal part of HSI2 subfamily proteins contained a sequence 
similar to the ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif. Deletion of the
C-terminal portion of HSI2 lost in the hsi2 mutant caused reduced nuclear
targeting of HSI2. Null allele of HSI2 showed even higher Spo(min)LUC expression 
than the hsi2 mutant, whereas overexpression of HSI2 reduced the LUC expression. 
Transient coexpression of 35SHSI2 with Spo(min)LUC in protoplasts repressed the
expression of LUC activity, and deletion or mutation of the EAR motif
significantly reduced the repression activity of HSI2. These results indicate
that HSI2 and related proteins are B3 domain-EAR motif active transcription
repressors.

PMCID: PMC1150388
PMID: 15894743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Planta. 2005 Oct;222(3):494-501. Epub 2005 May 4.

Expressing TERF1 in tobacco enhances drought tolerance and abscisic acid
sensitivity during seedling development.

Zhang X(1), Zhang Z, Chen J, Chen Q, Wang XC, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, College of
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094, China.

Previously, we reported on a tomato ERF transcription activator, TERF1, which was
concluded to act as a linker between ethylene and osmotic signal pathways. We now
report on the regulatory role of TERF1 in ABA sensitivity and drought response
during seedling development. Northern blotting analysis indicated that the
transcripts of TERF1 were significantly accumulated in response to drought, cold 
and ABA. TERF1 activated GCC box- or DRE-driven reporter gene expression in
transient expression assay, subsequently increasing the tolerance to drought and 
the osmoticum, PEG6000, in tobacco expressing TERF1. Further tests showed that
TERF1 did not affect the seed germination, but greatly enhanced the sensitivity
during tobacco seedling development under ABA treatment. This ABA
hypersensitivity in transgenic TERF1 tobacco is both indirect ethylene action and
expressions of ABA responsive genes, demonstrating that TERF1 is a
multifunctional ERF protein that can integrate different stress signal pathways.

PMID: 15871029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Biotechnol Lett. 2005 Mar;27(6):423-8.

Cloning and DNA-binding properties of ethylene response factor, LeERF1 and
LeERF2, in tomato.

Hongxing Z(1), Benzhong Z, Bianyun Y, Yanling H, Daqi F, Wentao X, Yunbo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, the College of Food Science and Nutritional
Engineering, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100083, China.

Two new genes, LeERF1 andLeERF2, were isolated from a tomato (Lycopersicon
esculentum cv. Lichun) cDNA library. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that they
encoded Ethylene Responsive Element Binding Proteins (EREBPs), characterized by a
conserved ERF (ethylene response factor) domain of specific binding plant
cis-acting elements GCC box. Both LeERF1 and LeERF2 proteins were obtained via
prokaryotic expression and purification. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
showed that LeERF1 and LeERF2 protein could bind to the promoter of the NP24 gene
coding for pathogenesis-related protein osmotin precursor but not the mutant
promoter where its GCC box was deleted. Polyclonal antibodies of LeERF1 and
LeERF2 blocked their binding in vitro.

PMID: 15834808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Neuroimage. 2005 Apr 15;25(3):756-70.

Modelling event-related responses in the brain.

David O(1), Harrison L, Friston KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Functional Imaging Laboratory, 12
Queen Square, London WC1N 3BG, UK. Olivier.David@ujf-grenoble.fr

The aim of this work was to investigate the mechanisms that shape evoked
electroencephalographic (EEG) and magneto-encephalographic (MEG) responses. We
used a neuronally plausible model to characterise the dependency of response
components on the models parameters. This generative model was a neural mass
model of hierarchically arranged areas using three kinds of inter-area
connections (forward, backward and lateral). We investigated how responses, at
each level of a cortical hierarchy, depended on the strength of connections or
coupling. Our strategy was to systematically add connections and examine the
responses of each successive architecture. We did this in the context of
deterministic responses and then with stochastic spontaneous activity. Our aim
was to show, in a simple way, how event-related dynamics depend on extrinsic
connectivity. To emphasise the importance of nonlinear interactions, we tried to 
disambiguate the components of event-related potentials (ERPs) or event-related
fields (ERFs) that can be explained by a linear superposition of trial-specific
responses and those engendered nonlinearly (e.g., by phase-resetting). Our key
conclusions were; (i) when forward connections, mediating bottom-up or extrinsic 
inputs, are sufficiently strong, nonlinear mechanisms cause a saturation of
excitatory interneuron responses. This endows the system with an inherent
stability that precludes nondissipative population dynamics. (ii) The duration of
evoked transients increases with the hierarchical depth or level of processing.
(iii) When backward connections are added, evoked transients become more
protracted, exhibiting damped oscillations. These are formally identical to late 
or endogenous components seen empirically. This suggests that late components are
mediated by reentrant dynamics within cortical hierarchies. (iv) Bilateral
connections produce similar effects to backward connections but can also mediate 
zero-lag phase-locking among areas. (v) Finally, with spontaneous activity,
ERPs/ERFs can arise from two distinct mechanisms: For low levels of (stimulus
related and ongoing) activity, the systems response conforms to a quasi-linear
superposition of separable responses to the fixed and stochastic inputs. This is 
consistent with classical assumptions that motivate trial averaging to suppress
spontaneous activity and disclose the ERP/ERF. However, when activity is
sufficiently high, there are nonlinear interactions between the fixed and
stochastic inputs. This interaction is expressed as a phase-resetting and
represents a qualitatively different explanation for the ERP/ERF.

PMID: 15808977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Poult Sci. 2005 Mar;84(3):442-53.

Pulmonary and systemic hemodynamic responses to intravenous prostacyclin in
broilers.

Wideman RF(1), Chapman ME, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 
72701, USA. rwideman@uark.edu

The eicosanoid vasodilator prostacyclin (PGI2) reduces resistance to pulmonary
blood flow and attenuates pulmonary hypertension in mammals. However, sparse
information is available regarding the responsiveness of the avian pulmonary
vasculature to PGI2. Accordingly, in 3 experiments we evaluated the pulmonary
vascular responses to PGI2 in male broilers. In experiment 1, infusing PGI2 (10
microg/min) into clinically healthy broilers did not reduce their pulmonary
vascular resistance (PVR) but did reduce their pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) 
by lowering their cardiac output. Within 4 min after stopping the PGI2 infusion, 
the cardiac output and PAP returned to preinfusion levels. In experiment 2, the
responses to PGI2 were evaluated after arachidonic acid (AA) had been infused to 
preconstrict the pulmonary vasculature. The AA infusion (400 microg/min)
consistently triggered dramatic, sustained pulmonary vasoconstriction (increased 
PVR) and pulmonary hypertension (increased PAP). Concurrent PGI2 infusions did
not reduce PVR but did reduce PAP by lowering cardiac output. Within 4 min after 
stopping the PGI2 infusion, PAP and cardiac output returned to their previous
(hypertensive) levels attributable to the ongoing AA infusion. In experiment 3,
PGI2 was infused (10 microg/min) into clinically healthy (PAP < or = 24 mmHg) or 
subclinically hypertensive (PAP > or = 27 mmHg) broilers. Throughout this
experiment broilers in the hypertensive group had higher PAP values than broilers
in the healthy group. The PGI2 infusion reduced PAP in both groups but did not
reduce PVR. Instead, the pulmonary hypotensive response to PGI2 infusion was
associated with a reduction in cardiac output in both groups. In all 3
experiments PGI2 reduced PAP by reducing cardiac output rather than by reducing
PVR. There was no evidence that PGI2 acts as an effective pulmonary vasodilator
in broilers regardless of whether their pulmonary vasculature was apparently
normal (clinically healthy), had been pharmacologically preconstricted (AA
infusion), or initially exhibited the vasoconstriction that is typical of the
pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension syndrome in broilers (PAP > or = 27 mmHg).
The consistent failure of PGI2 to elicit pulmonary vasodilation in this study
suggests fundamental differences in AA metabolism or the etiology of pulmonary
hypertension may exist when broilers are compared with mammals.

PMID: 15782913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Poult Sci. 2005 Mar;84(3):432-41.

Pulmonary hypertensive responses of broilers to bacterial lipopolysaccharide
(LPS): evaluation of LPS source and dose, and impact of pre-existing pulmonary
hypertension and cellulose micro-particle selection.

Chapman ME(1), Wang W, Erf GF, Wideman RF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 
72701, USA. mchapman@uark.edu

Previous studies demonstrated that bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS, endotoxin) 
triggers pulmonary vasoconstriction leading to pulmonary hypertension (PHS,
ascites) in broilers. The lungs of broilers are constantly challenged with LPS
that can trigger pulmonary vasoconstriction. Among broilers from a single genetic
line, some individuals respond to LPS with large increases in pulmonary arterial 
pressure (PAP), whereas others fail to exhibit any response to the same
supramaximal dose of LPS. In the present study we evaluated the impact of a
variety of factors on the magnitude of the PAP response of male broilers to LPS, 
including: (1) the role of the initial PAP (low vs. high initial PAP); (2) the
source of the LPS (Salmonella typhimurium vs. Escherichia coli); (3) the dose of 
LPS (0.02, 0.1, and 0.5 mg/kg of BW); and (4) the role of micro-particle
selection for improved pulmonary vascular capacity (cellulose survivors vs.
saline-injected controls). Broilers in the low initial PAP group (21 +/- 0.34
mmHg, mean +/- SEM) did not differ in their pulmonary hypertensive response to
LPS compared with broilers in the high initial PAP group (29 +/- 0.55 mmHg, mean 
+/- SEM). Lipopolysaccharide from S. typhimurium elicited pulmonary hypertensive 
responses qualitatively similar to those elicited by E. coli LPS. A detailed
evaluation revealed that an LPS dose of 0.1 mg/kg of BW elicits a maximal
pulmonary hypertensive response in male broilers, and broilers selected by
micro-particle injection for a robust pulmonary vascular capacity did not differ 
in their pulmonary hypertensive response to LPS compared with unselected
broilers. This research confirms that the variable pulmonary hypertensive
responses among broilers cannot be attributed to the source or dosage of LPS, or 
to differences in the baseline pulmonary arterial pressure or micro-particle
selection before injecting LPS. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis
that innate rather than acquired variability may influence the profile of
chemical mediators released during the inflammatory cascade.

PMID: 15782912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Gen Virol. 2005 Mar;86(Pt 3):535-44.

Ets-2 repressor factor recruits histone deacetylase to silence human
cytomegalovirus immediate-early gene expression in non-permissive cells.

Wright E(1), Bain M, Teague L, Murphy J, Sinclair J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, PO Box 157, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.

Previous work from this laboratory has shown that expression of human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) immediate-early (IE) genes from the major immediate-early 
promoter (MIEP) is likely to be regulated by chromatin remodelling around the
promoter affecting the acetylation state of core histone tails. The HCMV MIEP
contains sequences that bind cellular transcription factors responsible for its
negative regulation in undifferentiated, non-permissive cells. Ets-2 repressor
factor (ERF) is one such factor that binds to such sequences and represses IE
gene expression. Although it is not known how cellular transcription factors such
as ERF mediate transcriptional repression of the MIEP, it is likely to involve
differentiation-specific co-factors. In this study, the mechanism by which ERF
represses HCMV IE gene expression was analysed. ERF physically interacts with the
histone deacetylase, HDAC1, both in vitro and in vivo and this physical
interaction between ERF and HDAC1 mediates repression of the MIEP. This suggests 
that silencing of viral IE gene expression, associated with histone deacetylation
events around the MIEP, is mediated by differentiation-dependent cellular factors
such as ERF, which specifically recruit chromatin remodellers to the MIEP in
non-permissive cells.

PMID: 15722512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. EDTNA ERCA J. 2004 Jul-Sep;30(3):163-5.

Diabetic nephropathy--who cares?

Wilde C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Renal Home Care Team, Leicester General Hospital, UK.

Diabetic nephropathy has become the most common single cause of Established Renal
Failure (ERF) in the United States of America (USA) and Europe. In the United
Kingdom (UK) diabetic nephropathy is seen in 18% of new patients requiring
dialysis. In the USA 7.3% of all adults and 17.8% of those over 65 years have
diabetes mellitus. Furthermore diabetic nephropathy is the cause of ERF in up to 
45% of patients on dialysis. Recently compiled data by the World Health
Organisation (WHO) shows that approximately 150 million people worldwide have
diabetes and predict that this number may well have doubled to 300 million by
2025. These figures are clearly daunting and renal units must prepare themselves 
for the rising number of patients with diabetes needing renal replacement therapy
(RRT) in the future. Renal specialist nurses do not always have a major role to
play in the prevention of diabetic nephropathy. Their remit must be to try and
delay the progression to ERF and perhaps more importantly to concentrate their
efforts on their ERF patient population with diabetes that have co-existing
diabetes related pathologies. This article will attempt to discuss how renal
nurses can best expand/extend their skills and knowledge to provide effective
care for this patient group, and explore whether developing new and innovative
roles or just new ways of working is the way forward.

PMID: 15715122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Trends Plant Sci. 2005 Feb;10(2):54-6.

Homing into the origin of the AP2 DNA binding domain.

Wessler SR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
sue@plantbio.uga.edu

The AP2 DNA binding domain was thought to be plant specific because of its
presence in plant, but not animal, transcriptional regulators, particularly
members of the AP2/ERF family. Two recent studies have identified the AP2 domain 
in bacteria, bacteriophage and a ciliate as part of proteins that also encode
site-specific endonucleases. The association of AP2 with an enzyme known to
catalyze its own movement within populations and between species explains the
unusual distribution of AP2 and, as such, adds to a growing list of phenomena
where mobile DNA has promoted evolutionary novelty.

PMID: 15708341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Cereb Cortex. 2005 Nov;15(11):1697-702. Epub 2005 Feb 9.

Spatial phase sensitivity of V1 neurons in alert monkey.

Xu WF(1), Shen ZM, Li CY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Shanghai Institutes of Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue-Yang Road, Shanghai, 200031, China.

The activity of V1 neurons evoked by stimuli within the classical receptive field
(CRF) is known to be modulated by stimuli in the surrounding field, the
extra-receptive field (ERF). By varying the relative spatial phase (RSP) between 
a central grating presented in the CRF and a surround grating in the ERF, we
studied the contextual modulation in V1 neurons of alert monkeys (Macaca mulata).
Results from two monkeys show that most of the V1 neurons with suppressive ERF
are sensitive to the RSP, and the degree of sensitivity is strongly dependent on 
the strength of ERF suppression. This sensitivity is maximal when the RSP is
generated at or near CRF/ERF boundary, but is observed over the entire ERF.
Interestingly, the suppressive effect of the surround grating can be largely
abolished by inserting a narrow gap between the center and surround gratings or
by a phase displacement between them corresponding to <10% of the CRF diameter.
These properties of V1 neurons may serve important perceptual functions.

PMID: 15703250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Vestn Otorinolaringol. 2005;(1):39-40.

[External respiration functions in patients with laryngeal and tracheal
stenoses].

[Article in Russian]

Kirasirova EA, Ezhova EG.

External respiration function (ERF) was examined in 89 patients with stenoses of 
the larynx and/or trachea (50 males, 39 females, age 23-62 years). ERF was
assessed by correlation between air flow and volume during forced expiration. ERF
parameters before surgical treatment were not sufficiently informative as
tracheostoma does not allow complete air impermeability in the system
patient-apparatus-ventilation. Suturing of tracheal defect improves ERF
noticeably and its results can be assessed objectively.

PMID: 15700008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Plant Cell Physiol. 2004 Dec;45(12):1738-48.

Characterization of full-length enriched expressed sequence tags of
stress-treated poplar leaves.

Nanjo T(1), Futamura N, Nishiguchi M, Igasaki T, Shinozaki K, Shinohara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Forestry and Forest Products
Research Institute, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8687 Japan. nanjo@affrc.go.jp

Poplar, whose genome is the first to be sequenced among woody plants, is a
favorable model for plant biologists to enable them to understand molecular
processes of growth, development and responses to environmental stimuli in trees.
The sequence will allow the development of a strategy for improving environmental
stress tolerance in forest trees. In this study, we have generated a full-length 
enriched cDNA library from leaves of axenically grown poplar (Populus nigra var. 
italica) subjected to environmental stress treatments by dehydration, high
salinity, chilling, heat, abscisic acid (ABA) and H2O2. We sequenced >30,000
expressed sequence tags (ESTs) from the cDNA library and consequently collected
approximately 4,500 non-redundant clones. We further analyzed cDNAs encoding an
ERF/AP2-domain transcription factor which is specific in plants and plays an
important role under stress. Thirteen candidates containing the ERF/AP2 domain
were found within our EST resource. Some of them showed stress-responsive gene
expression. We report here the first collection of full-length enriched
stress-related ESTs of poplar and discuss environmental stress responses of
forest trees in the light of comparative genomics.

PMID: 15653793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Schizophr Res. 2005 Mar 1;73(2-3):311-8.

M50 sensory gating predicts negative symptoms in schizophrenia.

Thoma RJ(1), Hanlon FM, Moses SN, Ricker D, Huang M, Edgar C, Irwin J, Torres F, 
Weisend MP, Adler LE, Miller GA, Canive JM.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatry Service, New Mexico VA Health Care System, Albuquerque, NM 87108,
United States. robert.thoma@med.va.gov

Impaired auditory sensory gating is considered characteristic of schizophrenia
and a marker of the information processing deficit inherent to that disorder.
Predominance of negative symptoms also reflects the degree of deficit in
schizophrenia and is associated with poorer pre-morbid functioning, lower IQ, and
poorer outcomes. However, a consistent relationship between auditory sensory
gating and negative symptoms in schizophrenia has yet to be demonstrated. The
absence of such a finding is surprising, since both impaired auditory gating and 
negative symptoms have been linked with impaired fronto-temporal cortical
function. The present study measured auditory gating using the P50 event related 
potential (ERP) in a paired-click paradigm and capitalized on the relative
localization advantage of magnetoencephalography (MEG) to assess auditory sensory
gating in terms of the event related field (ERF) M50 source dipoles on bilateral 
superior temporal gyrus (STG). The primary hypothesis was that there would be a
positive correlation between lateralized M50 auditory sensory gating measures and
negative symptoms in patients with schizophrenia. A standard paired-click
paradigm was used during simultaneous EEG and MEG data collection to determine
S2/S1 sensory gating ratios in a group of 20 patients for both neuroimaging
techniques. Participants were administered the Schedule for the Assessment of
Negative Symptoms (SANS), the Positive and Negative Symptom Scale (PANSS), and
the Calgary Depression Scale for Schizophrenia. Consistent with previous reports,
there was no relationship between ERP P50 sensory gating and negative symptoms.
However, right (not left) hemisphere ERF M50 sensory gating ratio was
significantly and positively correlated with negative symptoms. This finding is
compatible with information processing theories of negative symptoms and with
more recent findings of fronto-temporal abnormality in patients with
predominantly negative symptoms.

PMID: 15653276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Zhi Wu Sheng Li Yu Fen Zi Sheng Wu Xue Xue Bao. 2004 Dec;30(6):601-8.

[Research progress of ethylene signal transduction in plants].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang ZF(1), Ying TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biosystem Engineering and Food Science College, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 
310029, China.

During the past decade, molecular genetic studies on the model plant Arabidopsis 
have established a largely linear signal transduction pathway for the response to
ethylene gas. Ethylene response occurs by receptors binding ethylene and
signaling along a linear signal transduction pathway comprising of MAPK and
transcriptional cascades. Ethylene receptor family in Arabidopsis consists of
five components, ETR1, ERS1, ETR2, ERS2 and EIN4. Each receptor contains an
amino-terminal ethylene-binding domain (also called the sensor domain). Some
receptors contain a well-conserved carboxy terminal histidine (His) kinase domain
and some have an additional receiver domain. Some contain a degenerate
His-kinase-like domain that lacks one or more elements and some lack the receiver
domain. The ETR1 localizing to endoplasmic reticulum and activating CTR1
negatively regulates the ethylene response as an inhibitive ETR-CTR1 complex.
ENI2, EIN3, ERF in turn act downstream of CTR1 and positively regulate the
ethylene response. EIN3/EIL, members of regulative protein family activating
transcription factor, is posttranscriptionally regulated and stabilized by
ethylene. F box protein EBF1/EBF2 accelerate the EIN3 degeneration. ERF1, one of 
transcription factor family, also called ethylene response element binding
protein, is the direct target of EIN3. The biochemical mechanisms of components
interaction with each other in the signal transduction pathway are still unknown 
and largely further research are needed. The signaling pathway is possibly a
network consisting of many branches, in which various ethylene-dependent and
independent signaling factors cooperate with each other, and complete the
specific regulation of different species, developmental stages and tissues
response to ethylene.

PMID: 15643078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. QJM. 2005 Jan;98(1):21-8.

Trends in adult renal replacement therapy in the UK: 1982-2002.

Feest TG(1), Rajamahesh J, Byrne C, Ahmad A, Ansell D, Burden R, Roderick PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Richard Bright Renal Unit, Southmead Hospital, Southmead Road, Bristol BS10
5NB , UK. terry.feest@nbt.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Following the introduction of dialysis and transplantation for the
treatment of established renal failure (ERF) 40 years ago, the UK failed to match
the achievements of many other countries.
AIM: To review progress with treatment for ERF in the UK in the past 20 years.
DESIGN: Review of four cross-sectional national studies, and 1997-2002 annual UK 
Renal Registry data.
METHODS: Data on UK patients on renal replacement treatment (RRT) were collated
from three sources: European Registry reports for 1982-1990, surveys carried out 
within the UK in 1993, 1996, 1998 and 2002, and the UK Renal Registry database
(1997-2002). Trends in acceptance and prevalence rates, median age, cause of ERF,
and treatment modality were analysed and compared with current data from other
countries.
RESULTS: The UK annual acceptance rate for RRT increased from 20 per million
population (pmp) in 1982 to 101 pmp in 2002. This growth was largely in those
aged over 65 years, and in those with co-morbidity. Annual acceptance rates for
ERF due to diabetes rose from 1.6 to 18 pmp. The prevalence of RRT increased from
157 pmp in 1982 to 626 pmp in 2002. Hospital haemodialysis has become the main
modality, and is increasingly being provided in satellite units. Although rising,
UK acceptance and prevalence rates are still lower than in many developed
countries.
DISCUSSION: Despite significant expansion in RRT services for adults in the UK
over the last 20 years, there is evidence of unmet need, and need is expected to 
rise, due to demographic changes and trends in type 2 diabetes. Continuing growth
in the already substantial investment in RRT will be needed, unless efforts to
prevent the occurrence of ERF are successful.

PMID: 15625350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Plant Mol Biol. 2004 Aug;55(6):825-34.

Tomato stress-responsive factor TSRF1 interacts with ethylene responsive element 
GCC box and regulates pathogen resistance to Ralstonia solanacearum.

Zhang H(1), Zhang D, Chen J, Yang Y, Huang Z, Huang D, Wang XC, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)The National Plant Gene Research Center (Beijing), Biotechnology Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China.

Ethylene responsive factors (ERFs) are important in regulating plant pathogen
resistance, abiotic stress tolerance and plant development. Recent studies have
greatly enlarged the ERF protein family and revealed more important roles of ERFs
in plants. Here, we report our finding of a tomato ERF protein TSRF1, which is
transcriptionally up-regulated by ethylene, salicylic acid, or Ralstonia
solanacearum strain BJ1057 infection. Biochemical analysis indicates that TSRF1
specifically interacts in vitro with the GCC box, an element present in the
promoters of many pathogenesis-related (PR) genes. Further investigation
evidences that TSRF1 activates in vivo the expression of reporter
beta-glucuronidase gene controlled by GCC box. More importantly, overexpressing
TSRF1 in tobacco and tomato constitutively activates the expression of PR genes, 
and subsequently enhancing transgenic plant resistance to the bacterial wilt
caused by Ralstonia solanacearum strain BJ1057. Therefore our investigation not
only extends the functions of ERF proteins in plant resistance to R.
solanacearum, but also provides further clues to understanding the mechanism of
host regulatory proteins in response to the infection of pathogens.

PMID: 15604719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Plant Mol Biol. 2004 May;55(2):183-92.

Ectopic overexpression of tomato JERF3 in tobacco activates downstream gene
expression and enhances salt tolerance.

Wang H(1), Huang Z, Chen Q, Zhang Z, Zhang H, Wu Y, Huang D, Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)The National Plant Gene Research Center (Beijing), Biotechnology Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 10081, China.

The ethylene, jasmonic acid and osmotic signaling pathways respond to
environmental stimuli and in order to understand how plants adapt to biotic and
abiotic stresses it is important to understand how these pathways interact each
other. In this paper, we report a novel ERF protein--jasmonate and
ethylene-responsive factor 3 (JERF3)--that unites these pathways. JERF3, which
functions as an in vivo transcription activator in yeast, binds to the GCC box,
an element responsive to ethylene/JA signaling, as well as to DRE, a
dehydration-responsive element that responds to dehydration, high salt and
low-temperature. Expression of JERF3 in tomato is mainly induced by ethylene, JA,
cold, salt or ABA. Constitutive expression of JERF3 in transgenic tobacco
significantly activated expression of pathogenesis-related genes that contained
the GCC box, resulting in enhanced tolerance to salt. These results indicate that
JERF3 functions as a linker in ethylene- and osmotic stress-signaling pathways.

PMID: 15604674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Plant Mol Biol. 2004 May;55(1):61-81.

The ethylene-responsive factor like protein 1 (CaERFLP1) of hot pepper (Capsicum 
annuum L.) interacts in vitro with both GCC and DRE/CRT sequences with different 
binding affinities: possible biological roles of CaERFLP1 in response to pathogen
infection and high salinity conditions in transgenic tobacco plants.

Lee JH(1), Hong JP, Oh SK, Lee S, Choi D, Kim WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Science, Yonsei University, South Korea.

From a pathogen-inoculated hot pepper (Capsicum annuum L. cv. Pukang) leaf EST,
we identified a cDNA clone, pCaERFLP1, encoding a putative transcription factor
that contains a single ERF/AP2 DNA binding domain. CaERFLP1 was most closely
related to tomato LeERF2 (73%), both of which belong to the novel ERF class IV
typified by the N-terminal MCGGAIL signature sequence, while it had a limited
sequence identity (25-30%) with Arabidopsis AtERFs and tobacco NtERFs.
Quantitative gel retardation assays revealed that bacterially expressed
full-length CaERFLP1 was able to form a specific complex with both the GCC box
and DRE/CRT motif, with its binding affinity for GCC being stronger than for
DRE/CRT. When fused to the GAL4 DNA binding domain, the N-terminal CaERFLP1(1-37)
and C-terminal CaERFLP1(198-264) mutant polypeptides could function individually 
as transactivators in yeast. This suggests that two separate domains of CaERFLP1 
may play distinct roles in transcription activation. In particle co-bombardment
experiments, CaERFLP1 activated the transcription of reporter genes containing
the 4X[GCC] element in tobacco cells. In hot pepper plants, the steady-state
level of CaERFLP1 mRNA was markedly induced by multiple environmental factors,
such as pathogen infection, ethylene, mechanical wounding and high salinity.
Furthermore, ectopic expression of CaERFLP1 in transgenic tobacco plants resulted
in partially improved tolerance against the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas
syringae and salt stress (100 mM NaCl). Consistently, various defense-related
genes, including GCC box-containing PR genes and the DRE/CRT-containing LTI45
(ERD10) gene, were constitutively expressed in 35S::CaERFLP1 tobacco plants.
Thus, it appears that CaERFLP1 is functional in tobacco cells, where it induces
the transactivation of some GCC- and DRE/CRT-genes to trigger a subset of stress 
response. Here, the possible biological role(s) of CaERFLP1 is discussed,
especially with regard to the possibility that CaERFLP1 has multiple functions in
the regulation of GCC- and DRE/CRT-mediated gene expression in hot pepper plants.

PMID: 15604665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Fetal Diagn Ther. 2004 Nov-Dec;19(6):525-32.

Sonographic findings of fetuses with an empty renal fossa and normal amniotic
fluid volume.

Yuksel A(1), Batukan C.

Author information: 
(1)PREMED (Tertiary Referral Center for Prenatal Diagnosis and Therapy),
Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: To review the antenatal sonographic findings and postnatal follow-up
of fetuses with empty renal fossa (ERF) and normal amniotic fluid volume.
METHODS: Sonographic examinations of 13,705 fetuses were retrospectively analyzed
and all fetuses with at least one ERF and normal antenatal amniotic fluid volume 
were included in this study.
RESULTS: Forty cases with antenatal ERF were diagnosed. Prenatal diagnosis
consisted of pelvic kidney (n = 24), unilateral renal agenesis (n = 13),
horseshoe kidney (n = 2) and crossed fused renal ectopia (n = 1). The prevalence 
of ERF in the low-risk population approximated 3.2 per thousand. There was no
serious renal complication during a mean follow-up period of 30 months except one
case of crossed fused renal ectopia requiring hemodialysis.
CONCLUSION: The underlying cause of ERF in the majority of cases with normal
amniotic fluid volume is renal ectopia. Prenatal ultrasonography seems to be
highly reliable in diagnosing these anomalies. Prognosis is favorable in the
absence of additional extraurinary malformations.

2004 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15539878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Planta. 2005 Apr;220(6):875-88. Epub 2004 Nov 5.

Isolation and functional characterization of the Ca-DREBLP1 gene encoding a
dehydration-responsive element binding-factor-like protein 1 in hot pepper
(Capsicum annuum L. cv. Pukang).

Hong JP(1), Kim WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Science, Yonsei University, 120-749, Seoul, 
Korea.

Through the use of subtractive hybridization analysis, we have identified 14
partial cDNA clones (pCa-DSRs) that are rapidly induced by dehydration in hot
pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) roots. The predicted proteins encoded by Ca-DSRs are 
putatively involved in processes as diverse as primary and secondary metabolism, 
protein degradation, and stress responses, indicating the complexity of cellular 
responses to water deficit in hot pepper roots. Particularly, we investigated the
detailed structural properties and expression profiles of Ca-DSR2 (Ca-DREBLP1:
dehydration-responsive element binding-factor-like protein 1) encoding a protein 
that contains a single ERF/AP2 DNA-binding domain. Based on the conserved 14th
valine and 19th glutamic acid residues in the ERF/AP2 domain, a basic amino acid 
stretch (PKKPAGRKKFR) near its N-terminal region, and DSAW signature sequence at 
the end of its ERF/AP2 domain, Ca-DREBLP1 was classified as a member of a
DREB1-type subfamily. Gel retardation assays revealed that Ca-DREBLP1 was able to
form a specific complex with the DRE/CRT motif, but not with the GCC box. When
fused to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain, the Ca-DREBLP1(190-215) mutant could
effectively function as a trans-activator in yeast. This suggests that the
extreme C-terminal region plays an essential role in transcription activation. In
hot pepper plants, Ca-DREBLP1 was rapidly induced by dehydration, high salinity
and, to a lesser extent, mechanical wounding, but not by cold stress. Thus,
although the structural features of Ca-DREBLP1 resemble those of the DREB1-type
proteins of Arabidopsis thaliana and rice plants, its induction patterns are
reminiscent of the DREB2-type proteins, indicating that Ca-DREBLP1 is a novel
class DREB subfamily in hot pepper.

PMID: 15538622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Nov 18;1675(1-3):1-11.

Mechanism to study 1:1 stoichiometry of NADPH and alkoxyphenoxazones metabolism
spectrophotometrically in subcellular biological preparations.

Das M(1), Rastogi S, Khanna SK.

Author information: 
(1)Food Toxicology Laboratory, Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Mahatma
Gandhi Marg, PO Box 80, Lucknow-226001, India. mditrc@rediffmail.com

Our prior studies have shown that pentoxyresorufin-O-dealkylation (PROD) can be
measured spectrophotometrically with simultaneous monitoring of stoichiometry of 
NADPH/substrate and NADP/product as 10:1:10:1 [Rastogi et al. FEBS Letters 512
(2002) 121-124]. In the present investigation, mechanism of action of other
enzymes in modulating the stoichiometry of alkoxyphenoxazones metabolism to 1:1
for electron donor/substrate and oxidized electron donor/product in the same
incubation mixture was studied. The spectrophotometric analysis reveals 10:1
ratio between NADPH and pentoxyresorufin (PRF)-ethoxyresorufin (ERF) in
microsomal system. The high ratio of electron donor to substrate is due to the
presence of the other forms of P-450, which may participate in endogenous
metabolism of compounds, thereby reducing the ratio to 4:1 and 7:1 for
NADPH/PRF-ERF. Incubation of dicumarol in the microsomal PROD or
ethoxyresorufin-O-dealkylase (EROD) assay led to significant decrease in the
consumption of NADPH with a ratio of 4:1 and 7:1 for NADPH/PRF-ERF which is due
to inhibition of NADPH cytochrome c (P-450) reductase. In post mitochondrial
fraction (S-9), the ratio of 11:1 and 15:1 is seen for NADPH/PRF-ERF. The
addition of dicumarol in S-9 fraction showed enhanced rate of alkoxyphenoxazone
utilization, suggesting the possibility of reduced resorufin product as a
feedback inhibitor. Equating the ratio of NADPH/substrate(s) derived after
endogenous utilization of NADPH with the ratio after accounting for NADPH
consumption following dicumarol addition in either S-9 or microsomal fraction, a 
1:1 mol of NADPH/substrate(s) and oxidized electron donor/product is obtained.
The results further suggest that cytosolic fraction may interfere in monitoring
the formation of resorufin during dealkylation of alkoxyphenoxazones making
dicumarol a mandatory cofactor.

PMID: 15535962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. ISA Trans. 2004 Oct;43(4):491-7.

A simple numerical procedure for estimating nonlinear uncertainty propagation.

Luck R(1), Stevens JW.

Author information: 
(1)Mechanical Engineering Department, Mississippi State University, Mail Stop
9552, 210 Carpenter Building, P.O. Box ME, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA.
luck@me.msstate.edu

Accurately determining the effect of the propagation of uncertainty in nonlinear 
applications can be awkward and difficult. The Monte Carlo approach requires
statistically significant numbers of function evaluations (typically 10(5) or
more) and analytical methods are intractable for all but the simplest cases. This
paper derives and demonstrates a method to estimate the propagation of
uncertainty in nonlinear cases by representing the function in a piecewise
fashion with straight line segments. The probability density function of the
result can be calculated from the transformation of the line segments. The mean
and confidence intervals of the result can then be calculated from the
probability density function. For the special case of a normal distribution in
the independent variable, calculation of the mean and confidence intervals
requires evaluation of only the error function (erf). A simple example is
presented to demonstrate the technique. Variations on the basic approach are
presented and discussed.

PMID: 15535389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2004 Oct;8(10):1204-12.

Impact of the human immunodeficiency virus on the epidemiology of tuberculosis in
area 15 of the Valencian community in Spain.

Calpe JL(1), Chiner E, Marín-Pardo J, Calpe A, Armero V.

Author information: 
(1)Pneumology Service, Hospital Marina Baixa, Alicante 03570, Spain.
calpe_jos@gva.es

Erratum in
    Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2004 Dec;8(12):1513. Pardo, JM [corrected to [Marín-Pardo,
J].

SETTING: Area 15 in Valencia.
OBJECTIVES: To describe the epidemiology (1987-2001) of tuberculosis (TB) in
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) patients.
METHODS: Study of annual incidence, age distribution, excess cases attributed to 
HIV, etiological risk fraction (ERF), population attributable fraction (PAF) and 
f factor.
RESULTS: Of 476 cases diagnosed, 459 were TB, 16 environmental and one mixed; 76%
of environmental cases were HIV-positive (P < 0.001). There was a mean annual TB 
incidence of 24.6/100000, with an annual reduction of 4%. Seventy-three patients 
were HIV coinfected (16%) (mean incidence 3834/100 000 seropositives). The
principal risk factor was drug use (59%) for HIV+ and contact with TB for HIV-.
We found no difference in pulmonary or extra-pulmonary location between groups,
contrary to mixed cases (P < 0.001). In HIV+ there was a lower frequency of
infiltrates (P < 0.001) and cavitation (P < 0.01), and a higher frequency of
adenitis (P < 0.001), miliary or nodular pattern and normal X-ray (P < 0.001).
Seropositives had a 174 times higher probability of developing TB. The mean ERF
attributed to HIV was 99%, the PAF was 16% and the f factor was 1.19. Highly
active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) reduced the risk of TB in HIV+ by 80%.
CONCLUSIONS: TB has continued its decline, although HIV generated an excess of
cases in the 1990s. HAART has reduced the TB risk in HIV+ and possibly the
overall rate of TB.

PMID: 15527152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2004 Oct;17(10):1162-71.

Overexpression of NtERF5, a new member of the tobacco ethylene response
transcription factor family enhances resistance to tobacco mosaic virus.

Fischer U(1), Dröge-Laser W.

Author information: 
(1)Albrecht-von-Haller Institut, Universität Göttingen, Untere Karspüle 2,
D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

A new member of the tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) AP2/ERF (ethylene response
factor) transcription factor family, designated NtERF5, has been isolated by
yeast one-hybrid screening. In vitro, recombinant NtERF5 protein weakly binds GCC
box cis-elements, which mediate pathogen-regulated transcription of several PR
(pathogenesis related) genes. NtERF5 transcription is transiently activated by
wounding, by infection with the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae, as well 
as by inoculation with Tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). In contrast, NtERF5
transcription is not enhanced after application of salicylic acid, jasmonic acid,
or ethylene. Constitutive overexpression of NtERF5 (ERF5-Oex) under control of
the 35S promoter results in no visible alterations in plant growth or enhanced
resistance to Pseudomonas infection. Furthermore, no constitutive expression of
PR genes has been observed. In contrast, ERF5-Oex plants show enhanced resistance
to TMV with reference to reduced size of local hypersensitive-response lesions
and impaired systemic spread of the virus. Since, in TMV-infected ERF5-Oex
plants, the viral RNA accumulates only up to 10 to 30% of the wild-type level, we
suggest that NtERF5-regulated gene expression is controlling resistance to viral 
propagation. Previous research has demonstrated that overexpression of ERF genes 
enhances resistance to bacterial and fungal pathogens. Here, we provide further
evidence that resistance to viral infection can be engineered by overexpression
of ERF transcription factors.

PMID: 15497409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Klin Med (Mosk). 2004;82(7):65-8.

[Computed tomography and study of external respiratory function in the diagnosis 
of complications due to chronic obstructive lung disease].

[Article in Russian]

Shoikhet IaN, Bednarzhevskaia TV.

Forty patients with chronic obstructive lung disease (COLD) were examined.
Determinations were made of pulmonary pressure (PP), by using Doppler
echocardiography, lung tissue density (LTD) and the diameter of the pulmonary
trunk (PT) from the data of computed tomography, as well as external respiratory 
function (ERF). An inverse correlation was found between LTD and the diameter of 
PT. Panlobular pulmonary emphysema occurring in 82.5% of the examined was
characterized by decreased LTD less than (-) 930 Hounsefield units (HU) and a
more than 40% increase in the RV/TLC ratio. In any severity of COLD, the values
of PP were statistically significantly greater than those in the control group.
In severe COLD, the diameter of PT exceeded that in healthy individuals. There
was a statistically significant relationship of the values of ERF to LTD in 65%
of the patients (with LTD of (-) 900 to (-) 1000 HU).

PMID: 15449780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Klin Med (Mosk). 2004;82(7):36-40.

[Temporal organization of external respiratory function in elderly patients with 
chronic obstructive lung disease].

[Article in Russian]

Zaslavskaia RM, Veklenko GV, Teiblium MM.

The clinical course and the circadian, circaseptan, and circasemiseptan
chronostructure of external respiratory function (ERF) were studied in 26 elderly
patients with chronic obstructive lung diseases before and after routine therapy 
(RT). ERF was studied on a meta-test spirograph (Russia) and a Ferraris medical
peak flowmeter (UK). The values of ERF and bronchial patency were measured every 
4 hours within 7 days before and after 10-day RT. The latter included euphylline,
expectorants, and antibacterial drugs, if indicated. The patients also use
"on-demand" dosage aerosol inhalators not more than 3-5 times a day. The
chronobiological data were analyzed by the averaged group cosinor test described 
by F. Halberg. The results of the study made it possible to detect the impaired
temporary organization of ERF and bronchial patency, the phenomena of external
and internal desynchronism both prior to and following RT. It clinical effect
occurred on day 5.5 after RT. Before RT, circadian variations were found in
respiratory volume (RV), respiratory minute volume (RMV), vital capacity (VC),
forced expiratory value per sec (FEV1), the Tiffeneau test, and peakflowmetry.
After RT, they remained other than variations in RV. The average daily values of 
VC, FEV1, Tiffeneau test, PO2, and KIO2 statistically significantly increased.
The increases of MESORs and other indices tended to be significant.
Circasemiseptan variations were found in RV, VC, and FEV1 before RT. After
treatment, these were detected in respiration rate (RR), RMV, VC, and KIO2. The
MESORs of RMV, VC, FEV1, and KIO2 statistically significantly increased. Prior to
and following RT, there were virtually no 7-day (circaseptan) variations, other
than those in RR before therapy. The MESORs of VC, FEV1, MVL, and RD
statistically significantly increased. The MESORs of other parameters of ERF
tended to be significant. Thus, RT led to the improved circadian and
circasemiseptan organization of ERF and, to a lesser degree, to that of
circaseptan chronostructure of the parameters of ERF.

PMID: 15449772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Poult Sci. 2004 Sep;83(9):1530-4.

Influence of dietary vitamin E on phagocytic functions of macrophages in
broilers.

Konjufca VK(1), Bottje WG, Bersi TK, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)University of Arkansas, Department of Poultry Science, Fayetteville, Arkansas,
USA.

Vitamin E (VE) is known for its antioxidant properties and has been shown to
modulate immune system functions in various species. This study examined the
influence of different levels of dietary VE (alpha-tocopherol acetate) on
phagocytic functions of macrophages (abdominal exudate cells) in broiler chickens
at 3, 5, and 7 wk. Birds were fed commercial diets containing 16 (control), 110, 
or 220 mg of VE/kg of feed. Macrophages were elicited into the abdominal cavity
by injecting a 3% Sephadex solution prepared in PBS (G50-50, 1 mL/100 g of BW) 42
h prior to harvest. The percentage of phagocytically active macrophages and the
number of SRBC phagocytosed per macrophage for unopsonized and antibody-opsonized
SRBC were determined. These aspects of macrophage function were assessed based on
900 macrophages per sample. When unopsonized SRBC were used, dietary VE
supplementation above control level did not affect phagocytic function of
macrophages at wk 3, 5, or 7. With antibody-opsonized SRBC, the percentage of
phagocytically active macrophages and the number of SRBC phagocytosed per
macrophage were higher (P = 0.08 and P = 0.01, respectively) in 3-wk-old birds
fed 110 and 220 mg of VE/kg of feed compared with age-matched controls. This
enhancing effect of VE supplementation on macrophage function was not observed in
5- and 7-wk-old broilers. It appears from this study that supplemental VE
enhances Fc-receptor-mediated macrophage phagocytic activity at early stages of
broiler growth.

PMID: 15384903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Probl Tuberk Bolezn Legk. 2004;(7):42-5.

[Hemodynamics, blood gas composition and viscosity in patients with chronic
obstructive bronchitis complicated by chronic cor pulmonale].

[Article in Russian]

Verbitskii ON, Buturov IV, Purkh TIu, Mohamed Fadi Fanari, Paraska VI.

Hemodynamics, external respiratory function (ERF), blood gas composition and
viscosity were studied in 120 patients with chronic obstructive bronchitis at
different developmental stage of cor pulmonale. In pulmonary hypertension, there 
were moderate ERF disorders that became more marked in the compensatory and
particularly decompensatory cor pulmonale. As bronchial patency deteriorated, the
index of right ventricular performance increased from 0.76+0.081 to 1.23+0.022 in
the examinees. Examination of blood gas composition revealed insignificant
hypoxemia in pulmonary hypertension and compensatory cor pulmonale, which
progressed with decompensation of chronic cor pulmonale (CCP). As bronchial
obstruction progressed, there were increases in systolic, diastolic, and mean
pressure in the pulmonary artery. The viscosity of blood and plasma and the
indices of red blood cell aggregation and deformability were in the normal range 
in pulmonary hypertension and compensatory CCP. In CCP decompensation, the
viscosity of blood and plasma and the index of red blood cell aggregation were
increased and the index of red blood cell deformability was decreased.

PMID: 15379042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Plant Cell Physiol. 2004 Aug;45(8):1042-52.

Cloning and functional analysis of a novel DREB1/CBF transcription factor
involved in cold-responsive gene expression in Zea mays L.

Qin F(1), Sakuma Y, Li J, Liu Q, Li YQ, Shinozaki K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Tsinghua University,
100084 Beijing, China.

The transcription factors DREB1s/CBFs specifically interact with the DRE/CRT
cis-acting element (core motif: G/ACCGAC) and control the expression of many
stress-inducible genes in Arabidopsis. We isolated a cDNA for a DREB1/CBF
homolog, ZmDREB1A in maize using a yeast one-hybrid system. The ZmDREB1A proteins
specifically bound to DRE and the highly conserved valine at the 14th residue in 
the ERF/AP2 DNA binding domain was a key to determining the specific interaction 
between this protein and the DRE sequence. Expression of ZmDREB1A was induced by 
cold stress and slightly increased by high-salinity stress. This gene was also
transiently expressed by mechanical attack. ZmDREB1A activated the transcription 
of the GUS reporter gene driven by DRE in rice protoplasts. Overexpression of
ZmDREB1A in transgenic Arabidopsis induced overexpression of target
stress-inducible genes of Arabidopsis DREB1A resulting in plants with higher
tolerance to drought and freezing stresses. This indicated that ZmDREB1A has
functional similarity to DREB1s/CBFs in Arabidopsis. The structure of the ERF/AP2
domain of ZmDREB1A in maize is closely related to DREB1-type ERF/AP2 domains in
the monocots as compared with that in the dicots. ZmDREB1A is suggested to be
potentially useful for producing transgenic plants that is tolerant to drought,
high-salinity and/or cold stresses.

PMID: 15356330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Plant Physiol. 2004 Sep;136(1):2862-74. Epub 2004 Sep 3.

The pepper transcription factor CaPF1 confers pathogen and freezing tolerance in 
Arabidopsis.

Yi SY(1), Kim JH, Joung YH, Lee S, Kim WT, Yu SH, Choi D.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Genomics Laboratory, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yusung, Taejeon 305-600, Korea.

An ERF/AP2-type transcription factor (CaPF1) was isolated by differential-display
reverse transcription-PCR, following inoculation of the soybean pustule pathogen 
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv glycines 8ra, which induces hypersensitive response in 
pepper (Capsicum annuum) leaves. CaPF1 mRNA was induced under conditions of
biotic and abiotic stress. Higher levels of CaPF1 transcripts were observed in
disease-resistant tissue compared with susceptible tissue. CaPF1 expression was
additionally induced using various treatment regimes, including ethephon, methyl 
jasmonate, and cold stress. To determine the role of CaPF1 in plants, transgenic 
Arabidopsis and tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) plants expressing higher levels of
CaPF1 were generated. Gene expression analyses of transgenic Arabidopsis and
tobacco revealed that the CaPF1 level in transgenic plants affects expression of 
genes that contain either a GCC or a CRT/DRE box in their promoter regions.
Furthermore, transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing CaPF1 displayed tolerance
against freezing temperatures and enhanced resistance to Pseudomonas syringae pv 
tomato DC3000. Disease tolerance was additionally observed in CaPF1 transgenic
tobacco plants. The results collectively indicate that CaPF1 is an ERF/AP2
transcription factor in hot pepper plants that may play dual roles in response to
biotic and abiotic stress in plants.

PMCID: PMC523348
PMID: 15347795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Plant Cell. 2004 Sep;16(9):2265-77. Epub 2004 Aug 19.

From endonucleases to transcription factors: evolution of the AP2 DNA binding
domain in plants.

Magnani E(1), Sjölander K, Hake S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA. emagnani@berkeley.edu

All members of the AP2/ERF family of plant transcription regulators contain at
least one copy of a DNA binding domain called the AP2 domain. The AP2 domain has 
been considered plant specific. Here, we show that homologs are present in the
cyanobacterium Trichodesmium erythraeum, the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila, and
the viruses Enterobacteria phage Rb49 and Bacteriophage Felix 01. We demonstrate 
that the T. erythraeum AP2 domain selectively binds stretches of
poly(dG)/poly(dC) showing functional conservation with plant AP2/ERF proteins.
The newly discovered nonplant proteins bearing an AP2 domain are predicted to be 
HNH endonucleases. Sequence conservation extends outside the AP2 domain to
include part of the endonuclease domain for the T. erythraeum protein and some
plant AP2/ERF proteins. Our phylogenetic analysis of the broader family of AP2
domains supports the possibility of lateral gene transfer. We hypothesize that a 
horizontal transfer of an HNH-AP2 endonuclease from bacteria or viruses into
plants may have led to the origin of the AP2/ERF family of transcription factors 
via transposition and homing processes.

PMCID: PMC520932
PMID: 15319480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Planta. 2004 Dec;220(2):262-70. Epub 2004 Aug 5.

The ethylene-, jasmonate-, abscisic acid- and NaCl-responsive tomato
transcription factor JERF1 modulates expression of GCC box-containing genes and
salt tolerance in tobacco.

Zhang H(1), Huang Z, Xie B, Chen Q, Tian X, Zhang X, Zhang H, Lu X, Huang D,
Huang R.

Author information: 
(1)The National Plant Gene Research Center (Beijing), Biotechnology Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 100081 Beijing, China.

Ethylene responsive factors (ERFs) are important plant-specific transcription
factors, some of which have been demonstrated to interact with the
ethylene-responsive GCC box and the dehydration-responsive element (DRE);
however, data on the roles of ERF proteins in connection with various signaling
pathways are limited. In this research, we used the GCC box, an essential
cis-acting element responsive to ethylene and methyl jasmonate (MeJA), as bait in
a yeast one-hybrid system to isolate transcription factors from tomato
(Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.). One of the cDNAs, which was designated Jasmonate
and Ethylene Response Factor 1 (JERF1), encodes an ERF protein, containing a
conserved ERF DNA-binding motif and functioning as a transcriptional activator in
yeast through targeting to the nucleus in onion (Allium cepa L.) epidermal cells.
Biochemical analysis revealed that JERF1 bound not only to the GCC box but also
to the DRE sequence. Expression of the JERF1 gene in tomato was induced by
ethylene, MeJA, abscisic acid (ABA) and salt treatment, indicating that JERF1
might act as a connector among different signal transduction pathways. Further
research with transgenic JERF1 tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum L.) plants indicated
that overexpressing JERF1 activated expression of GCC box-containing genes such
as osmotin, GLA, Prb-1b and CHN50 under normal growth conditions, and
subsequently resulted in enhanced tolerance to salt stress, suggesting that JERF1
modulates osmotic tolerance by activation of downstream gene expression through
interaction with the GCC box or DRE.

PMID: 15300440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Curr Opin Plant Biol. 2004 Aug;7(4):465-71.

Regulation of disease resistance pathways by AP2/ERF transcription factors.

Gutterson N(1), Reuber TL.

Author information: 
(1)Mendel Biotechnology, 21375 Cabot Blvd, Hayward, California 94545, USA.
ngutterson@mendelbio.com

The AP2 transcription factor family, found only in plants, includes several genes
that encode proteins involved in the regulation of disease resistance pathways.
These genes are members of the ethylene response factor (ERF) subfamily of AP2
transcription factor genes, which have only a single DNA-binding domain and are
distinct from members of the dehydration-responsive element binding (DREB)
subfamily. Some ERF subgroups are enriched in such genes, suggesting that they
have conserved functions that are required for the regulation of disease
resistance pathways. The expression of several ERF genes is regulated by plant
hormones, such as jasmonic acid, salicylic acid and ethylene, as well as by
pathogen challenge. A phylogenetic overview of these genes, with a focus on
Arabidopsis, rice and tomato, suggests that despite broad conservation of their
function in monocots and dicots, some structural elements are specialized within 
each of these two lineages.

PMID: 15231271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Anim Sci. 2004 Jun;82(6):1882-91.

Dietary supplementation with phosphorylated mannans improves growth response and 
modulates immune function of weanling pigs.

Davis ME(1), Maxwell CV, Erf GF, Brown DC, Wistuba TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701, USA.
medavis@uark.edu

Phosphorylated mannans derived from the yeast cell wall of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae may beneficially modulate immune function in the weanling pig,
possibly providing an alternative to the use of dietary growth-promoting
antibiotics. Therefore, in this study, 32 pigs averaging 19 d of age and 5.7 +/- 
0.2 kg initial BW were randomly assigned to 16 pens in an environmentally
controlled nursery to determine the effects of dietary supplementation with
phosphorylated mannans on growth and immune function. Average daily gain and G:F 
ratio increased (P < 0.05) when pigs were fed diets supplemented with mannans
from d 0 to 14 after weaning and in the overall experiment. Percentage of
neutrophils was lower (P < 0.08) and percentage of lymphocytes was higher (P <
0.05) in blood from pigs fed mannans than when pigs were fed the basal diet.
Lamina propria macrophages isolated from pigs fed diets containing mannans
phagocytosed a greater (P < 0.05) number of sheep red blood cells (2.63 +/- 0.11)
than did lamina propria macrophages isolated from pigs fed the basal diet (2.31
+/- 0.11). On d 19 after weaning, pigs fed diets supplemented with mannans tended
to have a greater (P < 0.10) percentage of CD14+ lamina propria leukocytes than
did pigs fed the basal diet. On d 21 following weaning, the percentage of
CD14+MHCII+ leukocytes isolated from lamina propria tissue tended (P < 0.10) to
be lower when pigs were fed mannans than when pigs were fed the basal diet. Pigs 
fed diets containing mannans had a lower (P < 0.05) ratio of CD3+CD4+:CD3+CD8+ T 
lymphocytes isolated from jejunal lamina propria tissue only on d 21 after
weaning compared with pigs fed the basal diet. Supplementation of mannans in the 
diets of weanling pigs improved gain and efficiency, and intermittently affected 
selected components of the young pigs' immune function both systemically and
enterically.

PMID: 15217018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2004 Apr;69(4 Pt 2):046403. Epub 2004
Apr 14.

X-ray emission from z pinches at 10 7 A: current scaling, gap closure, and
shot-to-shot fluctuations.

Stygar WA(1), Ives HC, Fehl DL, Cuneo ME, Mazarakis MG, Bailey JE, Bennett GR,
Bliss DE, Chandler GA, Leeper RJ, Matzen MK, McDaniel DH, McGurn JS, McKenney JL,
Mix LP, Muron DJ, Porter JL, Ramirez JJ, Ruggles LE, Seamen JF, Simpson WW, Speas
CS, Spielman RB, Struve KW, Torres JA, Vesey RA, Wagoner TC, Gilliland TL, Horry 
ML, Jobe DO, Lazier SE, Mills JA, Mulville TD, Pyle JH, Romero TM, Seamen JJ,
Smelser RM.

Author information: 
(1)Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185-1196, USA.

We have measured the x-ray power and energy radiated by a tungsten-wire-array z
pinch as a function of the peak pinch current and the width of the anode-cathode 
gap at the base of the pinch. The measurements were performed at 13- and 19-MA
currents and 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-mm gaps. The wire material, number of wires,
wire-array diameter, wire-array length, wire-array-electrode design,
normalized-pinch-current time history, implosion time, and diagnostic package
were held constant for the experiments. To keep the implosion time constant, the 
mass of the array was increased as I2 (i.e., the diameter of each wire was
increased as I), where I is the peak pinch current. At 19 MA, the mass of the
300-wire 20-mm-diam 10-mm-length array was 5.9 mg. For the configuration studied,
we find that to eliminate the effects of gap closure on the radiated energy, the 
width of the gap must be increased approximately as I. For shots unaffected by
gap closure, we find that the peak radiated x-ray power P(r) proportional to
I1.24+/-0.18, the total radiated x-ray energy E(r) proportional to I1.73+/-0.18, 
the x-ray-power rise time tau(r) proportional to I0.39+/-0.34, and the
x-ray-power pulse width tau(w) proportional to demonstrate that the internal
energy and radiative opacity of the pinch are not responsible for the observed
subquadratic power scaling. Heuristic wire-ablation arguments suggest that
quadratic power scaling will be achieved if the implosion time tau(i) is scaled
as I(-1/3). The measured 1sigma shot-to-shot fluctuations in P(r), E(r), tau(r), 
tau(w), and tau(i) are approximately 12%, 9%, 26%, 9%, and 2%, respectively,
assuming that the fluctuations are independent of I. These variations are for
one-half of the pinch. If the half observed radiates in a manner that is
statistically independent of the other half, the variations are a factor of
2(1/2) less for the entire pinch. We calculate the effect that shot-to-shot
fluctuations of a single pinch would have on the shot-success probability of the 
double-pinch inertial-confinement-fusion driver proposed by Hammer et al. [Phys. 
Plasmas 6, 2129 (1999)]. We find that on a given shot, the probability that two
independent pinches would radiate the same peak power to within a factor of
1+/-alpha (where 0< or =alpha<<1) is equal to erf(alpha/2sigma), where sigma is
the 1sigma fractional variation of the peak power radiated by a single pinch.
Assuming alpha must be < or =7% to achieve adequate odd-Legendre-mode radiation
symmetry for thermonuclear-fusion experiments, sigma must be <3% for the
shot-success probability to be > or =90%. The observed (12/2(1/2))%=8.5%
fluctuation in P(r) would provide adequate symmetry on 44% of the shots. We
propose that three-dimensional radiative-magnetohydrodynamic simulations be
performed to quantify the sensitivity of the x-ray emission to various initial
conditions, and to determine whether an imploding z pinch is a spatiotemporal
chaotic system.

PMID: 15169102  [PubMed]


343. Radiology. 2004 Jul;232(1):252-9. Epub 2004 May 27.

Esophagorespiratory fistula: long-term results of palliative treatment with
covered expandable metallic stents in 61 patients.

Shin JH(1), Song HY, Ko GY, Lim JO, Yoon HK, Sung KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, 388-1 Poongnap-dong, Songpa-ku, Seoul 138-736, Korea.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2005 May;128(5):1518-9.

PURPOSE: To evaluate long-term clinical results of palliative treatment of
esophagorespiratory fistulas (ERFs) with covered expandable metallic stents.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sixty patients with ERFs due to esophageal or bronchogenic
carcinoma and one patient with ERF due to pressure necrosis caused by initial
esophageal stent placement for esophageal carcinoma were treated with covered
expandable esophageal or tracheobronchial metallic stents. Information about
technical success of stent placement, initial clinical success and failure,
fistula reopening, and complications was obtained. Survival curves for both
patient groups with initial clinical success and failure were obtained and
compared with Kaplan-Meier methods and log-rank test.
RESULTS: Stent placement was technically successful in all patients, with no
immediate procedural complications. The stent completely sealed off the fistula
in 49 (80%) of 61 patients so that they had no further aspiration symptoms
(initial clinical success). Twelve (20%) of 61 patients had persistent aspiration
symptoms due to incomplete ERF closure (initial clinical failure). During
follow-up, the fistula reopened in 17 (35%) of 49 patients with initial clinical 
success: In eight patients, the reopened ERF was sealed off successfully with
stent placement or balloon dilation. In two patients with reopened ERF caused by 
food impaction, the reopened fistula resolved spontaneously. Seven patients did
not undergo further treatment. All patients died during follow-up, and mean
survival was 13.4 weeks (range, 1-56 weeks) after stent placement. Mean survival 
in patients with initial clinical success was significantly longer than that in
patients with initial clinical failure (15.1 vs 6.2 weeks, P <.05).
CONCLUSION: Covered expandable metallic stents were placed in 61 patients with
ERFs, but the initial clinical success rate was poor and the rate of reopening
was high; however, interventional treatment was effective for sealing off
reopened ERFs.

Copyright RSNA, 2004

PMID: 15166325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Bacteriol. 2004 Jun;186(11):3649-52.

Lactococcal phage genes involved in sensitivity to AbiK and their relation to
single-strand annealing proteins.

Bouchard JD(1), Moineau S.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biochimie et de microbiologie, Faculté de Sciences et de Génie,
Groupe de Recherche en Ecologie Buccale (GREB), Faculté de Médecine Dentaire,
Université Laval, Québec, Canada G1K 7P4.

Lactococcal phage mutants insensitive to the antiviral abortive infection
mechanism AbiK are divided into two classes. One comprises virulent phages that
result from DNA exchanges between a virulent phage and the host chromosome. Here,
we report the analysis of the second class of phage mutants, which are
insensitive to AbiK as a result of a single nucleotide change causing an amino
acid substitution. The mutated genes occupy the same position in the various
lactococcal phage genomes, but the deduced proteins do not share amino acid
sequence similarity. Four nonsimilar proteins involved in the sensitivity to AbiK
(Sak) were identified. Two of these Sak proteins are related to Erf and RAD52,
single-strand annealing proteins involved in homologous recombination.

PMCID: PMC415755
PMID: 15150253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2004 Mar-Apr;38(2):303-11.

[Molecular morphology of eukaryotic class I translation termination factor eRF1
in solution].

[Article in Russian]

Kononenko AV(1), Dembo KA, Kiselev LL, Volkov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, 119991 Russia.

The integral structural parameters and the shape of the molecule of human
translation termination factor eRF1 were determined from the small-angle X-ray
scattering in solution. The molecular shapes were found by bead modeling with
nonlinear minimization of the root-mean-square deviation of the calculated from
the experimental scattering curve. Comparisons of the small-angle scattering
curves computed for atomic-resolution structures of eRF1 with the experimental
data on scattering from solution testified that the crystal and the solution
conformations are close. In the ribosome, the distance between the eRF1 motifs
GGQ and NIKS must be shorter than in crystal or solution (75 versus 107-112 A).
Therefore, like its bacterial counterpart RF2, the eukaryotic eRF1 must change
its conformation as it binds to the ribosome. The conformational mobility of
eukaryotic and prokaryotic class-1 release factors is another feature making them
functionally akin to tRNA.

PMID: 15125236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Neuroimage. 2004 May;22(1):268-76.

Random field-union intersection tests for EEG/MEG imaging.

Carbonell F(1), Galán L, Valdés P, Worsley K, Biscay RJ, Díaz-Comas L, Bobes MA, 
Parra M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Sistemas Adaptivos, Institute for Cybernetics, Mathematics and
Physics, Calle 15, No. 551, e/C y D, Vedado, Havana 4, C.P. 10400, Cuba.
felix@icmf.inf.cu

Electrophysiological (EEG/MEG) imaging challenges statistics by providing two
views of the same spatiotemporal data: topographic and tomographic. Until now,
statistical tests for these two situations have developed separately. This work
introduces statistical tests for assessing simultaneously the significance of
spatiotemporal event-related potential/event-related field (ERP/ERF) components
and that of their sources. The test for detecting a component at a given time
instant is provided by a Hotelling's T(2) statistic. This statistic is
constructed in such a manner to be invariant to any choice of reference and is
based upon a generalized version of the average reference transform of the data. 
As a consequence, the proposed test is a generalization of the well-known Global 
Field Power statistic. Consideration of tests at all time instants leads to a
multiple comparison problem addressed by the use of Random Field Theory (RFT).
The Union-Intersection (UI) principle is the basis for testing hypotheses about
the topographic and tomographic distributions of such ERP/ERF components. The
performance of the method is illustrated with actual EEG recordings obtained from
a visual experiment of pattern reversal stimuli.

PMID: 15110017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Poult Sci. 2004 Apr;83(4):624-37.

Immune modulation of the pulmonary hypertensive response to bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (endotoxin) in broilers.

Wideman RF(1), Chapman ME, Wang W, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 
72701, USA. rwideman@uark.edu

The lungs of broilers are constantly challenged with lipopolysaccharide (LPS,
endotoxin) that can activate leukocytes and trigger thromboxane A2 (TxA2)- and
serotonin (5HT)-mediated pulmonary vasoconstriction leading to pulmonary
hypertension. Among broilers from a single genetic line, some individuals respond
to LPS with large increases in pulmonary arterial pressure, whereas others fail
to exhibit any response to the same supramaximal dose of LPS. This extreme
variability in the pulmonary hypertensive response to LPS appears to reflect
variability in the types or proportions of chemical mediators released by
leukocytes. Our research has confirmed that TxA2 and 5HT are potent pulmonary
vasoconstrictors in broilers and that broilers hatched and reared together
consistently exhibit pulmonary hypertension after i.v. injections of TxA2 or 5HT.
Previous in vitro studies conducted using macrophages from different lines of
chickens demonstrated innate variability in the LPS-stimulated induction of
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) followed by the onset of an LPS-refractory state.
The NOS enzyme converts arginine to citrulline and nitric oxide (NO). It is known
that NO produced by endothelial NOS serves as a key modulator of flow-dependent
pulmonary vasodilation, and it is likely that NO generated by iNOS also
contributes to the pulmonary vasodilator response. Accordingly, it is our
hypothesis that the pulmonary hypertensive response to LPS in broilers is minimal
when more vasodilators (NO, prostacyclin) than vasoconstrictors (TxA2, 5HT) are
generated during an LPS challenge. Indeed, inhibiting NO production through
pharmacological blockade of NOS with the inhibitor Nomega-nitro-L-arginine methyl
ester modestly increased the baseline pulmonary arterial pressure and
dramatically increased the pulmonary hypertensive response to LPS in all broilers
evaluated. Innate differences in the effect of LPS on the pulmonary vasculature
may contribute to differences in susceptibility of broilers to pulmonary
hypertension syndrome (ascites).

PMID: 15109060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Poult Sci. 2004 Apr;83(4):580-90.

Cell-mediated immunity in poultry.

Erf GF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 
72701, USA. gferf@uark.edu

In avian species, adaptive immunity involves both humoral and cell-mediated
immune (CMI) responses. Although humoral or antibody-mediated immune responses
are particularly effective against extracellular antigens, CMI responses are
specialized in the elimination of intracellular antigens; the latter include
those that have entered cells via the endocytic pathway (exogenous antigens;
e.g., phagocytosed bacteria) or were produced within the cell such as viral
proteins and proteins resulting from neoplastic transformation of the cell
(endogenous antigens). CMI responses, like most humoral immune responses, are
tightly regulated and require "help" from T helper cells, specifically the type 1
T helper cells (Th1, hence, the name Th1 responses). Th1 cells are characterized 
by their production of cytokines such as interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma),
tumor-necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and interleukin-2 that drive CMI
responses. The functional effectors of CMI responses are various immune cells
including cytotoxic lymphocytes (cytotoxic T cells and natural killer cells) and 
macrophages. Cytotoxic lymphocytes and macrophages are specialized in the
elimination of endogenous and exogenous antigens, respectively. In the past
decade, substantial progress has been made in defining the role and regulation of
avian CMI responses. Other advances have addressed strategies that strengthen
this arm of adaptive immunity to optimize defense as well as protection against
neoplastic diseases and nonneoplastic diseases caused by intracellular pathogens.

PMID: 15109055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Ter Arkh. 2004;76(2):55-7.

[Effects of nebuliser treatment with berotec on external respiratory function,
bronchial permeability, hemodynamics, acid-alkaline balance, oxygen saturation,
and their circadian structure in elderly patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease].

[Article in Russian]

Zaslavskaia RM, Veklenko GV, Akhmetov KZh, Teiblium MM.

AIM: To study the effects of nebuliser therapy with berotek on clinical symptoms,
external respiration function (ERF), bronchial permeability, hemodynamics and
their temporal organisation in elderly patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study enrolled 20 COPD patients (mean age 64.9 +/- 1.9 
years) with obstructive respiratory insufficiency of the second-third degree
given nebuliser therapy with berotek as adjuvant to conventional treatment (the
study group) and 12 COPD patients (mean age 69.7 +/- 2.5 years) given only
conventional treatment (the control group). The following parameters were
examined: ERF, BP, HD, AAB, OS (SaO2) in venous blood before and after treatment.
Chronobiological studies of BP and HD were performed for 7 days at the beginning 
and end of the study.
RESULTS: Berotek efficacy manifested on the treatment day 3 as improvement in the
symptoms, IRF, BP, a rise in SaO2 and PaCO2 and a fall in PaCO2 in venous blood. 
Circadian chronostructure of peakflowmetry, systolic and diastolic blood
pressure, mean arterial pressure persisted. Circaseptal and circasemiseptal
rhythms of BP and HD disappeared.
CONCLUSION: Nebuliser therapy with berotek has a positive effect on clinical
symptoms, ERF, BP, gas exchange in the lungs, SaO2, HD and their circadian
chronostructure.

PMID: 15106417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2004 May 15;273(2):651-7.

A new approach of enhancing the shear stress of electrorheological fluids of
montmorillonite nanocomposite by emulsion intercalation of poly-N-methaniline.

Lu J(1), Zhao X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Electrorheological Technology, Department of Applied Physics 141,
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710072, People's Republic of China.

Poly-N-methaniline/montmorillonite (PNMA-MMT) nanocomposite particles with high
dielectric constant as well as suitable conductivity were synthesized by an
emulsion intercalation method and characterized by FT-IR, XRD, and TEM
spectrometry, respectively. The electrorheological (ER) properties of the
suspensions of PNMA-MMT particles in silicone oil (20 wt%) were investigated
under DC electric fields. It was found that the shear stress of
poly-N-methaniline/montmorillonite electrorheological fluid (ERF) is 6.0 kPa in 3
kV/mm (74.5 s(-1)), which is 3.6 times that of electrorheological fluid at zero
field, and also much higher than that of pure poly-N-methaniline (PNMA) and
montmorillonite (MMT). In the range of 10-90 degrees C, the shear stress changes 
slightly with the temperature. The sedimentation ratio of PNMA-MMT ERF was about 
97% after 60 days. Furthermore, the dielectric constant of PNMA-MMT nanocomposite
was increased 3.74 times that of PNMA and 1.99 times that of MMT at 1000 Hz, the 
dielectric loss tangent also increased about 1.58 times that of PNMA. It is
apparent that the notable ER effect of PNMA-MMT ER fluid was attributed to the
prominent dielectric property of the poly-N-methaniline/montmorillonite
nanocomposite particles.

PMID: 15082406  [PubMed]


351. Patol Fiziol Eksp Ter. 2004 Jan-Mar;(1):27-9.

[Correlations between external respiration function and the blood content of the 
immune system cells in hyperventilation ].

[Article in Russian]

Panina MI.

Relations between hyperventilation, hyperventilation syndrome (HVS) and bronchial
asthma (BA) are not finally established. This study modelled HVS in 92 volunteers
to investigate HVS effect on external respiration function (ERF), immune status
and hormonal and amino regulation. HVS was found to induce significant shifts in 
regulating systems (adrenergic, cholinergic, serotoninergic, conticosteroids)
function and to alter correlations between ERF and blood levels of immune cells
carrying various CD- and HLA-DR markers. The HVS model can be used for the study 
of HV role in immunopathogenesis of BA.

PMID: 15052877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Dev Cell. 2004 Mar;6(3):383-95.

Integration of semaphorin-2A/MAB-20, ephrin-4, and UNC-129 TGF-beta signaling
pathways regulates sorting of distinct sensory rays in C. elegans.

Ikegami R(1), Zheng H, Ong SH, Culotti J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mt. Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto M5G 1X5, Canada.

Semaphorins and ephrins are axon guidance cues. In C. elegans,
semaphorin-2a/mab-20 and ephrin-4/efn-4/mab-26 also regulate cell sorting to form
distinct rays in the male tail. Several erf (enhancer of ray fusion) mutations
were identified in a mab-20 enhancer screen. Mutants of plexin-2 (plx-2) and
unc-129, which encodes an axon guiding TGF-beta, were also found to be erfs.
Genetic analyses show that plx-2 and mab-20 function in the same pathway, as
expected if PLX-2 is a receptor for MAB-20. Surprisingly, MAB-20 also signals in 
a parallel pathway that requires efn-4. This signal utilizes a non-plexin
receptor. The expression of plx-2, efn-4, and unc-129 in subsets of 3-cell
sensory ray clusters likely mediates the ray-specific cell sorting functions of
the ubiquitously expressed mab-20. We present a model for the integrated control 
of TGF-beta, semaphorin, and ephrin signaling in the sorting of cell clusters
into distinct rays in the developing male tail.

PMID: 15030761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 16;101(11):3915-20. Epub 2004 Mar 8.

Acute myeloid leukemia with complex karyotypes and abnormal chromosome 21:
Amplification discloses overexpression of APP, ETS2, and ERG genes.

Baldus CD(1), Liyanarachchi S, Mrózek K, Auer H, Tanner SM, Guimond M, Ruppert
AS, Mohamed N, Davuluri RV, Caligiuri MA, Bloomfield CD, de la Chapelle A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Molecular mechanisms of leukemogenesis have been successfully unraveled by
studying genes involved in simple rearrangements including balanced
translocations and inversions. In contrast, little is known about genes altered
in complex karyotypic abnormalities. We studied acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
patients with complex karyotypes and abnormal chromosome 21. High-resolution
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) array-based comparative genomic
hybridization disclosed amplification predominantly in the 25- to 30-megabase
(MB) region that harbors the APP gene (26.3 MB) and at position 38.7-39.1 MB that
harbors the transcription factors ERG and ETS2. Using oligonucleotide arrays, APP
was by far the most overexpressed gene (mean fold change 19.74, P = 0.0003)
compared to a control group of AML with normal cytogenetics; ERG and ETS2 also
ranked among the most highly expressed chromosome 21 genes. Overexpression of APP
and ETS2 correlated with genomic amplification, but high APP expression occurred 
even in a subset of AML patients with normal cytogenetics (10 of 64, 16%). APP
encodes a glycoprotein of unknown function previously implicated in Alzheimer's
disease, but not in AML. We hypothesize that APP and the transcription factors
ERG and ETS2 are altered by yet unknown molecular mechanisms involved in
leukemogenesis. Our results highlight the value of molecularly dissecting
leukemic cells with complex karyotypes.

PMCID: PMC374344
PMID: 15007164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. EBRI Issue Brief. 2004 Feb;(266):1-14.

Americans' future retirement security: implications of the EBRI-ERF retirement
security projection model.

Jaffe J.

PMID: 15004999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Virology. 2004 Jan 5;318(1):245-66.

The genome and proteome of coliphage T1.

Roberts MD(1), Martin NL, Kropinski AM.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Radford University, Radford, VA 24142, USA.

The genome of enterobacterial phage T1 has been sequenced, revealing that its
50.7-kb terminally redundant, circularly permuted sequence contains 48,836 bp of 
nonredundant nucleotides. Seventy-seven open reading frames (ORFs) were
identified, with a high percentage of small genes located at the termini of the
genomes displaying no homology to existing phage or prophage proteins. Of the
genes showing homologs (47%), we identified those involved in host DNA
degradation (three endonucleases) and T1 replication (DNA helicase, primase, and 
single-stranded DNA-binding proteins) and recombination (RecE and Erf homologs). 
While the tail genes showed homology to those from temperate coliphage N15, the
capsid biosynthetic genes were unique. Phage proteins were resolved by 2D gel
electrophoresis, and mass spectrometry was used to identify several of the spots 
including the major head, portal, and tail proteins, thus verifying the
annotation.

PMID: 14972552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2003;102(1-4):109-15.

Construction of a high-resolution comparative gene map between swine chromosome
region 6q11-->q21 and human chromosome 19 q-arm by RH mapping of 51 genes.

Bosak N(1), Faraut T, Mikawa S, Uenishi H, Kiuchi S, Hiraiwa H, Hayashi T, Yasue 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Department, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences,
Ikenodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

A comprehensive and comparative map was constructed for the porcine chromosome
(SSC) 6q11-->q21 region, where the gene(s) responsible for the maldevelopment of 
embryos are localized using swine populations of the National Institute of Animal
Industry, Japan (NIAI). Since the chromosomal region corresponds to a region of
human chromosome (HSA) 19q13.1-->q13.3 based on bi-directional chromosome
painting, primer pairs were designed from porcine cDNA sequences identified, on a
sequence comparison basis, as being transcripts from genes orthologous to those
in the HSA region. Fifty-one genes were successfully assigned to a swine
radiation hybrid (RH) map with LOD scores greater than 6. ERF and PSMD8 genes
were assigned to SSC4 and SSC1, respectively. The remaining 49 genes were
assigned to SSC6, demonstrating that the synteny between the SSC6 and HSA19
chromosomal regions is essentially conserved, therefore confirming, the results
of bi-directional chromosome painting. However, when examined precisely,
rearrangements have apparently occurred within the region of conserved synteny.
For the ERF and PSMD8 genes assigned to SSCs other than SSC6, additional mapping 
using somatic cell hybrid (SCH) panels was performed to confirm the results of
RH-mapping.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14970688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Anal Chem. 2004 Feb 15;76(4):1107-13.

Interdigitated Array microelectrode-based electrochemical impedance immunosensor 
for detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7.

Yang L(1), Li Y, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological & Agricultural Engineering, and Center of Excellence 
for Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA.

A label-free electrochemical impedance immunosensor for rapid detection of
Escherichia coli O157:H7 was developed by immobilizing anti-E. coli antibodies
onto an indium-tin oxide interdigitated array (IDA) microelectrode. Based on the 
general electronic equivalent model of an electrochemical cell and the behavior
of the IDA microelectrode, an equivalent circuit, consisting of an ohmic resistor
of the electrolyte between two electrodes and a double layer capacitor, an
electron-transfer resistor, and a Warburg impedance around each electrode, was
introduced for interpretation of the impedance components of the IDA
microelectrode system. The results showed that the immobilization of antibodies
and the binding of E. coli cells to the IDA microelectrode surface increased the 
electron-transfer resistance, which was directly measured with electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy in the presence of [Fe(CN)(6)](3-/4-) as a redox probe.
The electron-transfer resistance was correlated with the concentration of E. coli
cells in a range from 4.36 x 10(5) to 4.36 x 10(8) cfu/mL with the detection
limit of 10(6) cfu/mL.

PMID: 14961745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004 Apr;28(4):600-5.

Health-related quality of life in a randomised placebo-controlled trial of
sibutramine in obese patients with type II diabetes.

Kaukua JK(1), Pekkarinen TA, Rissanen AM.

Author information: 
(1)Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. Jarmo.Kaukua@dlc.fi

OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the effects of 12-month treatment with sibutramine 15 mg 
daily compared with placebo on health-related quality of life (HRQL) in obese
type II diabetes patients. We examined the associations between the changes in
HRQL and in weight, glycaemic control, and haemodynamic variables. We also
explored the predictive value of HRQL and its changes early during treatment.
DESIGN: A randomised clinical trial. The subjects were enrolled in a 2-week
single-blind run-in period with a modestly hypocaloric diet (700 kcal daily
deficit) and then randomised to receive either sibutramine 15 mg (n=114, 60%
female) or placebo (n=122, 58% female) once daily with the hypocaloric diet for
12 months.
SUBJECTS: Obese (mean BMI 36 kg/m(2) and age 54 y) type II diabetes patients
untreated with antidiabetic medications.
MEASUREMENTS: The main outcome measures included body weight and HRQL (the RAND
36-Item Health Survey 1.0).
RESULTS: The mean weight loss was greater in the sibutramine group (-7.1 kg) than
in the placebo group (-2.6 kg, P<0.001). The baseline HRQL was relatively high.
There were no significant differences between the treatment groups in glycaemic
control or in any of the RAND-36 scales during the study. The scores on physical 
functioning (PF) and health change (HC) since last year improved in both groups
and this improvement was related to weight loss. When HRQL changes were examined 
in categories of weight loss, the scores on PF and HC increased with >/=5% weight
loss, but the scores on vitality (V) and general health (GH) increased only after
>/=15% weight loss. Decrease in HbA1c was associated with increases in the scores
of PF, GH, V, mental health, and HC. In the sibutramine group, the increase in
diastolic blood pressure was associated with the decrease in the scores of PF,
physical role functioning, emotional role functioning (ERF), social functioning
(SF), and bodily pain. High baseline scores on ERF and SF, and low scores on V
predicted weight loss at 12 months. Also, increasing scores on PF and V during
the first 3 months predicted weight loss at 12 months. The sum of four
dichotomised HRQL variables (baseline ERF >/=75=1 and <75=0; baseline SF>/=80=1
and <80=0; 3-month change in PF>0=1 and </=0=0; 3-month change in V>0=1 and
</=0=0) predicted weight loss: In the group with sum 0, the mean(s.d.) weight
change at 12 months was 0.0(2.6)% and with sum 4 it was -9.0(8.1)% of baseline
weight.
CONCLUSION: Despite the superior weight loss, sibutramine 15 mg daily did not
produce HRQL benefits over placebo when measured with the generic RAND-36 in
obese type II diabetes patients. PF and HC since last year improved with >/=5%
weight loss, but >/=15% weight loss was needed to achieve a cluster of HRQL
improvements. The decrease in HbA1c was associated with many HRQL benefits. Poor 
baseline HRQL and the improvement observed in the first months of treatment may
prove to be useful in predicting success in long-term weight loss.

PMID: 14770192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Oncogene. 2004 Mar 4;23(9):1766-79.

ESX induces transformation and functional epithelial to mesenchymal transition in
MCF-12A mammary epithelial cells.

Schedin PJ(1), Eckel-Mahan KL, McDaniel SM, Prescott JD, Brodsky KS, Tentler JJ, 
Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver,
CO 80262, USA. schedinp@amc.org

ESX is an epithelial-restricted member of a large family of transcription factors
known as the Ets family. ESX expression has been shown to be correlated with
Her2/neu proto-oncogene amplification in highly aggressive breast cancers and
induced by Her2/neu in breast cell lines, but its role in tumorigenesis is
unknown. Previously, we have shown that ESX enhances breast cell survival in
colony-formation assays. In order to determine whether ESX can act as a
transforming gene, we stably transfected MCF-12A human mammary epithelial cells
with the ESX expression vector, pCGN2-HA-ESX. The MCF-12A cell line is
immortalized, but nontransformed, and importantly, these cells fail to express
endogenous ESX protein. We used pCGN2-HA-Ets-2 and pSVRas expression vectors as
positive controls for transformation. Like HA-Ets-2 and V12-Ras, stable
expression of ESX induced EGF-independent proliferation, serum-independent MAPK
phosphorylation and growth in soft agar. Additionally, stable ESX expression
conferred increased cell adhesion, motility and invasion in two-dimensional and
transwell filter assays, and an epithelial to mesenchymal morphological
transition. In three-dimensional cultures, parental and vector control (pCGN2)
cells formed highly organized duct-like structures with evidence of cell
polarity, ECM adhesion-dependent proliferation and cell survival, and lack of
cellular invasion into surrounding matrix. Remarkably, the ESX stable cells
formed solid, disorganized structures, with lack of cell polarity, loss of
adhesion junctions and cytokeratin staining and loss of dependence on ECM
adhesion for cell proliferation and survival. In addition, ESX cells invaded the 
surrounding matrix, indicative of a transformed and metastatic phenotype. Taken
together, these data show that ESX expression alone confers a transformed and in 
vitro metastatic phenotype to otherwise normal MCF-12A cells.

PMID: 14767472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Plant J. 2004 Feb;37(4):589-602.

Activation of a COI1-dependent pathway in Arabidopsis by Pseudomonas syringae
type III effectors and coronatine.

He P(1), Chintamanani S, Chen Z, Zhu L, Kunkel BN, Alfano JR, Tang X, Zhou JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506,
USA.

Gram-negative bacteria use a variety of virulence factors including phytotoxins, 
exopolysaccharides, effectors secreted by the type III secretion system, and
cell-wall-degrading enzymes to promote parasitism in plants. However, little is
known about how these virulence factors alter plant cellular responses to promote
disease. In this study, we show that virulent Pseudomonas syringae strains
activate the transcription of an Arabidopsis ethylene response factor (ERF) gene,
RAP2.6, in a coronatine insensitive 1 (COI1)-dependent manner. A highly sensitive
RAP2.6 promoter-firefly luciferase (RAP2.6-LUC) reporter line was developed to
monitor activities of various bacterial virulence genes. Analyses of P. syringae 
pv. tomato DC3000 mutants indicated that both type III secretion system and the
phytotoxin coronatine are required for RAP2.6 induction. We show that at least
five individual type III effectors, avirulence B (AvrB), AvrRpt2, AvrPphB,
HopPtoK, and AvrPphEPto, contributed to RAP2.6 induction. Gene-for-gene
recognition was not involved in RAP2.6 induction because plants lacking RPM1 and 
RPS2 responded normally to AvrB and AvrRpt2 in RAP2.6 expression. Interestingly, 
the role of coronatine in RAP2.6 induction can be partially substituted by the
addition of avrB in DC3000, suggesting that AvrB may mimic coronatine. These
results suggest that P. syringae type III effectors and coronatine act by
augmenting a COI1-dependent pathway to promote parasitism.

PMID: 14756769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. EBRI Issue Brief. 2003 Nov;(263):1-27.

Can American afford tomorrow's retirees: results from the EBRI-ERF Retirement
Security Projection Model.

VanDerhei J, Copeland C.

PMID: 14743718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Curr Opin Plant Biol. 2004 Feb;7(1):40-9.

The ethylene signaling pathway: new insights.

Guo H(1), Ecker JR.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

During the past decade, molecular genetic studies on the reference plant
Arabidopsis have established a largely linear signal transduction pathway for the
response to ethylene gas. The biochemical modes of action of many of the
signaling components are still unresolved. During the past year, however,
progress in several areas has been made on several fronts. The different
approaches used have included a functional study of the activity of the receptor 
His kinase, the determination of the ethylene receptor signaling complex at the
endoplasmic reticulum and of the regulation of CONSTITUTIVE TRIPLE RESPONSE1
(CTR1) activity by these receptors, the identification of a unique
MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE (MAPK) cascade, the cloning and characterization
of numerous ETHYLENE INSENSITIVE3 (EIN3)/EIN3-like (EIL) transcription factors
from many plant species, and the integration of the ethylene and jasmonate
response pathways via the ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR (ERF) family of transcription 
factors. The elucidation of the biochemical mechanisms of ethylene signal
transduction and the identification of new components in the ethylene response
pathway in Arabidopsis are providing a framework for understanding how all plants
sense and respond to ethylene.

PMID: 14732440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Plant J. 2004 Feb;37(3):326-39.

HvDRF1 is involved in abscisic acid-mediated gene regulation in barley and
produces two forms of AP2 transcriptional activators, interacting preferably with
a CT-rich element.

Xue GP(1), Loveridge CW.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Plant Industry, 306 Carmody Road, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, St
Lucia, Qld 4067, Australia. Gang-Ping.Xue@csiro.au

Apetala2/ethylene-responsive factor (AP2/ERF) proteins are AP2 domain-containing 
transcription factors and form the second largest transcription factor family in 
plants. Biological functions of many of these AP2 proteins are still unknown.
Here, we report the characterisation of a novel member of the AP2/ERF
superfamily, dehydration-responsive factor 1 (HvDRF1) from barley, and its role
in abscisic acid (ABA)-mediated gene regulation. The expression of HvDRF1 was
upregulated in barley leaves and roots under drought, salt or ABA treatment, and 
in embryos during seed maturation. Three forms of HvDRF1 transcripts were
produced through alternative splicing, two of which encoded AP2 proteins. This
alternative splicing pattern was also observed in a wheat homologue gene, TaDRF1.
Both of HvDRF1 AP2 proteins acted as transcriptional activators, capable of
activating the promoter activity of an ABA-inducible HVA1s in barley. In vitro
DNA-binding analysis using synthetic oligonucleotides revealed that HvDRF1 AP2
protein bound preferably to a CT-rich element (T(T/A)ACCGCCTT). HvDRF1 activity
on the activation of HVA1s expression in barley leaves was markedly enhanced by
HvABI5 (a bZIP transcription factor), ABA or drought treatment. These results
indicate that the HvDRF1 transcriptional activator co-operates with other
ABA-responsive factors in the upregulation of stress gene expression through an
ABA-dependent pathway.

PMID: 14731254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(3):1206-18.

ERF nuclear shuttling, a continuous monitor of Erk activity that links it to cell
cycle progression.

Le Gallic L(1), Virgilio L, Cohen P, Biteau B, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)IMBB, FORTH, Heraklion, Crete 711 10, Greece.

The ets domain transcriptional repressor ERF is an effector of the receptor
tyrosine kinase/Ras/Erk pathway, which, it has been suggested, is regulated by
subcellular localization as a result of Erk-dependent phosphorylation and is
capable of suppressing cell proliferation and ras-induced tumorigenicity. Here,
we analyze the effect of ERF phosphorylation on nuclear import and export, the
timing of its phosphorylation and dephosphorylation in relation to its
subcellular location, Erk activity, and the requirements for ERF-induced cell
cycle arrest. Our findings indicate that ERF continuously shuttles between the
nucleus and the cytoplasm and that both phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of 
ERF occur within the nucleus. While nuclear import is not affected by
phosphorylation, ERF nuclear export and cytoplasmic release require multisite
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. ERF export is CRM1 dependent, although ERF
does not have a detectable nuclear export signal. ERF phosphorylation and export 
correlate with the levels of nuclear Erk activity. The cell cycle arrest induced 
by nonphosphorylated ERF requires the wild-type retinoblastoma protein and can be
suppressed by overexpression of cyclin. These data suggest that ERF may be a very
sensitive and constant sensor of Erk activity that can affect cell cycle
progression through G(1), providing another link between the Ras/Erk pathway and 
cellular proliferation.

PMCID: PMC321421
PMID: 14729966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 2;279(14):14055-64. Epub 2004 Jan 13.

A Conserved alpha-helical motif mediates the binding of diverse nuclear proteins 
to the SRC1 interaction domain of CBP.

Matsuda S(1), Harries JC, Viskaduraki M, Troke PJ, Kindle KB, Ryan C, Heery DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, University Road Leicester
LE1 7RH, United Kingdom.

CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 contain modular domains that mediate
protein-protein interactions with a wide variety of nuclear factors. A C-terminal
domain of CBP (referred to as the SID) is responsible for interaction with the
alpha-helical AD1 domain of p160 coactivators such as the steroid receptor
coactivator (SRC1), and also other transcriptional regulators such as E1A, Ets-2,
IRF3, and p53. Here we show that the pointed (PNT) domain of Ets-2 mediates its
interaction with the CBP SID, and describe the effects of mutations in the SID on
binding of Ets-2, E1A, and SRC1. In vitro binding studies indicate that SRC1,
Ets-2 and E1A display mutually exclusive binding to the CBP SID. Consistent with 
this, we observed negative cross-talk between ERalpha/SRC1, Ets-2, and E1A
proteins in reporter assays in transiently transfected cells. Transcriptional
inhibition of Ets-2 or GAL4-AD1 activity by E1A was rescued by co-transfection
with a CBP expression plasmid, consistent with the hypothesis that the observed
inhibition was due to competition for CBP in vivo. Sequence comparisons revealed 
that SID-binding proteins contain a leucine-rich motif similar to the alpha-helix
Aalpha1 of the SRC1 AD1 domain. Deletion mutants of E1A and Ets-2 lacking the
conserved motif were unable to bind the CBP SID. Moreover, a peptide
corresponding to this sequence competed the binding of full-length SRC1, Ets-2,
and E1A proteins to the CBP SID. Thus, a leucine-rich amphipathic alpha-helix
mediates mutually exclusive interactions of functionally diverse nuclear proteins
with CBP.

PMID: 14722092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Poult Sci. 2003 Dec;82(12):1886-97.

Effect of intravenous endotoxin on blood cell profiles of broilers housed in
cages and floor litter environments.

Wang W(1), Wideman RF Jr, Chapman ME, Bersi TK, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 
72701, USA.

Commercial broilers are constantly exposed to airborne microorganisms and
endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS). It has been shown that microbial
contamination of the air was higher in broiler houses using floor litter than in 
broiler houses using netting-type floors. The current study evaluated the effect 
of housing conditions on blood leukocyte profiles and tested the hypothesis that,
when compared to broilers reared in clean stainless steel cages (Cage group),
broilers raised on floor litter (Floor group) should experience a higher
environmental challenge and have a desensitized immune system that may exhibit
better tolerance/resistance to subsequent intravenous LPS challenge.
Hematological parameters were evaluated prior to and following i.v.
administration of 1 mg/kg BW Salmonella typhimurium LPS (dissolved at 1 mg/0.25
mL in PBS) or i.v. injection of 0.25 mL/kg BW PBS alone. The results showed that 
prior to LPS/PBS injection, broilers in the cage group had higher heterophil and 
monocyte concentrations, a higher B cell percentage within the lymphocyte
population, and a higher heterophil to lymphocyte (H:L) ratio in the blood. The
i.v. LPS injection resulted in 25% mortality in the cage group and 42% mortality 
in the floor group within 8 h post-injection. LPS reduced the concentrations of
total white blood cells (WBC) and all differential WBC except eosinophils and
increased thrombocyte concentrations within 1 h post-injection in both groups.
All of these values returned to their respective pre-injection levels within 48 h
post-injection in the surviving birds. The two groups exhibited similar overall
hematological changes after LPS injection except that the cage group showed a
higher H:L ratio at 8 h post-injection and a lower B-cell percentage within the
lymphocyte population at 48 h post-injection when compared with the floor group. 
We concluded that the immune systems of broilers reared on floor litter were
desensitized and exhibited less pronounced leukocyte responses to i.v. LPS when
compared with those of broilers reared in clean stainless steel cages. However,
such desensitization of the immune system did not help broilers survive
subsequent i.v. LPS challenge.

PMID: 14717546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2003 Dec;22(12):2833-9.

Speciation of heavy metals in recent sediments of three coastal ecosystems in the
Gulf of Cádiz, southwest Iberian Peninsula.

Sáenz V(1), Blasco J, Gómez-Parra A.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Oceanografía, Instituto de Ciencias Marinas de Andalucía
(CSIC), Campus Universitario de Río San Pedro, 11510 Puerto Real, Cádiz, Spain.

A live-step sequential extraction technique was used to determine the
partitioning of Cr, Mn, Fe, Cu, Zn, Cd, and Pb among the operative sedimentary
phases (exchangeable ions, carbonates, manganese and iron oxides, sulfides and
organic matter. and residual minerals) in coastal sediment from three locations
in the southwest Iberian Peninsula. Two sites are located close to industrial
areas, the salt marshes of the Odiel River and Bay of Cádiz, and one in a
nonindustrial area, the Barbate River salt marshes. The Odiel River salt marshes 
also receive the drainage from mining activities in the Huelva region. In the
sediments from the Bay of Cádiz and Barbate River salt marshes, Cr, Cu, Fe, and
Zn were extracted from the residual fraction at percentages higher than 60%. In
the sediments from the Odiel River salt marshes, concentrations of all the
metals, except Cu. Zn, and Cd, exceeded 60% in the residual fraction as well. In 
the sediments from the Bay of Cádiz and Barbate River salt marshes, the main
bioavailable metals were Mn and Cd; in those from the Odiel River salt marshes,
the main bioavailable metals were Zn and Cd, respectively. The environmental risk
was determined by employing the environmental risk factor (ERF), defined as ERF =
(CSQV - Ci/CSQV), where Ci is the heavy metal concentration in the first four
fractions and CSQV is concentration sediment quality value (the highest
concentration with no associated biological effect). Our results showed that the 
sediments from the Cádiz Bay and Barbate River salt marshes do not constitute any
environmental risk under the current natural conditions. In contrast, in the
Odiel River salt marshes, Cu, Zn, and Pb yielded ERFs of less than zero at
several sampling stations and, consequently, pose a potential threat for the
organisms in the area. This is a consequence of the high levels of metals in the 
area derived from the mining activity (pyrite) and industrial activities and the 
association of these heavy metals with more labile fractions of the sediments.

PMID: 14713021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Autoimmun. 2004 Feb;22(1):21-30.

Apoptosis in feathers of Smyth line chickens with autoimmune vitiligo.

Wang X(1), Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, 1260 Maple Street,
Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA.

Vitiligo is an acquired dermatological disorder characterized by a loss of
epidermal melanocytes resulting in depigmentation of the skin. Mechanisms
underlying the destruction of melanocytes in vitiligo remain unclear. An animal
model to study spontaneously occurring autoimmune vitiligo is the mutant Smyth
line (SL) of chickens. This investigation was designed to determine whether the
pathogenesis of depigmentation in Smyth line chicken vitiligo (SLV) involves an
apoptotic mechanism. Terminal deoxynucleotide transferase-mediated
fluorescein-dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) was used to detect in situ cell
apoptosis in cryostat sections of 2-week-old regenerating feathers. Two-week-old 
regenerating feathers were obtained from SL chickens and their normally pigmented
controls including the parental Brown line (BL) and Light Brown Leghorn (LBL)
chickens at 6, 8, 10 and 12 weeks of age. In feathers from vitiliginous SL
chickens, the number of TUNEL+ cells was significantly (P<or=0.05) higher than
that in the feathers of non-vitiliginous SL, BL or LBL chickens. These TUNEL+
cells were primarily located in the epithelial barb ridge where melanocyte cell
bodies are located. The extent of this apoptosis in the feathers of SLV chickens 
varied with the severity of depigmentation of the feathers (i.e., highest in
active depigmentation), suggesting a close association between apoptosis and the 
disappearance of melanocytes. In addition to TUNEL staining, most sections were
double-stained with monoclonal antibodies specific to either CD8 or MHC class II 
molecules to further explore the relationship between CD8+ feather-infiltrating
lymphocytes and this increase in apoptotic cells. Compared to normally pigmented 
controls, the number of CD8+ and MHC class II+ cells in the feather pulp and the 
barb ridge increased 2-4 weeks before the visible onset of SLV, and was directly 
related to the changes in the number of TUNEL+ cells prior to, at onset and
during depigmentation. Moreover, some of these infiltrating CD8+ cells were
localized next to or near the TUNEL+ cells. These observations suggest that
enhanced apoptosis in the feather of SLV chickens is a pathogenic mechanism
involved in the death of melanocytes and appears to be induced by infiltrating
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CD8+).

PMID: 14709410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Probl Tuberk Bolezn Legk. 2003;(11):26-9.

[Efficiency of perstarium in the treatment of patients with chronic obstructive
bronchitis and pulmonary hypertension].

[Article in Russian]

Buturov IV, Buturov SI, Verbitskii ON, Guzun RG, Paraska VI.

Thirty-two patients with chronic obstructive bronchitis (COB) aged 38 to 52 years
(mean 40.5 +/- 3.8 years) who had clinical and functional parameters of NYHA
functional class (FC) IV (WHO, 1998) pulmonary hypertension (PH). Hemodynamic
parameters were recorded by M- and B-mode and Doppler echocardiography. The
gaseous composition of blood was studied by the Astrup micromethod; the
rheological properties of venous blood were explored by an AKP-2 rotational
viscometer. According to their therapy, the examinees were divided into 2 groups.
Group 1 included 18 patients given prestarium (Servier, France) in a dose of 2-4 
mg/day. Group 2 (a control group) comprised 14 patients receiving the basal
therapy provided by the medical and economical standards of therapy for COB. The 
studies have indicated that the inclusion of prestarium into the combined
treatment of COB patients with FC IV PH promotes a significant improvement of the
clinical status of patients, causes a reduction in the size of the right atrium
(by 16.2%; p < 0.05) and the right ventricle (by 12.4%; p < 0.001), a 12.0%-fold 
increase in left ventricular ejection fraction. The drug produced no negative
effect on ERF and blood gaseous composition and rheological properties.
Therefore, a course and long-term use of prestarium in the combined therapy of
COB patients with FC IV PH leads to clinical improvement, to correction of basic 
cardiohemodynamic parameters, and exerts a remodeling effect on the right and
left ventricles, and improves life quality in patients.

PMID: 14689794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Neurobiol Dis. 2003 Dec;14(3):349-56.

Overexpression of the chromosome 21 transcription factor Ets2 induces neuronal
apoptosis.

Wolvetang EJ(1), Bradfield OM, Hatzistavrou T, Crack PJ, Busciglio J, Kola I,
Hertzog PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Monash
Medical Center, 246 Clayton Road, 3168 Clayton, Australia.
ernst.wolvetang@med.monash.edu.au

Down syndrome (trisomy 21) neurons display an increased rate of apoptosis in
vitro. The genes on chromosome 21 that mediate this increased cell death remain
to be elucidated. Here we show that the chromosome 21 transcription factor Ets2, 
a gene that is overexpressed in Down syndrome, is expressed in neurons, and that 
moderate overexpression of Ets2 leads to increased apoptosis of primary neuronal 
cultures from Ets2 tg mice that involves activation of caspase-3. Our data
therefore suggest that overexpression of ETS2 may contribute to the increased
rate of apoptosis of neurons in Down syndrome.

PMID: 14678752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cell. 2003 Dec 12;115(6):679-89.

EIN3-dependent regulation of plant ethylene hormone signaling by two arabidopsis 
F box proteins: EBF1 and EBF2.

Potuschak T(1), Lechner E, Parmentier Y, Yanagisawa S, Grava S, Koncz C, Genschik
P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes du CNRS, 12 rue du Général
Zimmer, 67084 Cédex, Strasbourg, France.

Comment in
    Cell. 2003 Dec 12;115(6):647-8.

The plant hormone ethylene regulates a wide range of developmental processes and 
the response of plants to stress and pathogens. Genetic studies in Arabidopsis
led to a partial elucidation of the mechanisms of ethylene action. Ethylene
signal transduction initiates with ethylene binding at a family of ethylene
receptors and terminates in a transcription cascade involving the EIN3/EIL and
ERF families of plant-specific transcription factors. Here, we identify two
Arabidopsis F box proteins called EBF1 and EBF2 that interact physically with
EIN3/EIL transcription factors. EBF1 overexpression results in plants insensitive
to ethylene. In contrast, plants carrying the ebf1 and ebf2 mutations display a
constitutive ethylene response and accumulate the EIN3 protein in the absence of 
the hormone. Our work places EBF1 and EBF2 within the genetic framework of the
ethylene-response pathway and supports a model in which ethylene action depends
on EIN3 protein stabilization.

PMID: 14675533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2003 Dec;14(12):1525-34.

Malignant tracheobronchial strictures: palliation with covered retrievable
expandable nitinol stent.

Shin JH(1), Kim SW, Shim TS, Jung GS, Kim TH, Ko GY, Song HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, 388-1 Pungnap-2dong, Songpa-gu, Seoul 138-736, Korea.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the safety and clinical effectiveness of a covered
retrievable expandable nitinol stent for the treatment of malignant
tracheobronchial stricture and/or esophagorespiratory fistula (ERF).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: With fluoroscopic guidance, stents were placed in 35
symptomatic patients with malignant tracheobronchial stricture and/or ERF in most
cases caused by lung or esophageal cancer. The site of stricture was most
commonly at the trachea or left main bronchus. If there were complications, the
stent was removed with a retrieval set. Nine patients had combined symptomatic
ERF.
RESULTS: A total of 47 tracheobronchial stents were placed and were technically
successful and well-tolerated in all patients. Improvement of dyspnea was
achieved in 92% of the patients (24 of 26 patients). Associated ERF in nine
patients was effectively treated with tracheobronchial stent placement with or
without esophageal stent placement. Stent migration, tumor overgrowth,
symptomatic sputum retention, and hemoptysis occurred in 17% (6/35), 6% (2/35),
20% (7/35), and 17% (6/35) of patients, respectively. There were no documented
cases of tumor ingrowth. Stent removal was performed easily in five patients when
stent migration (n = 2), severe pain (n = 1), tumor overgrowth (n = 1), or
persistent gastrobronchial fistula (n = 1) developed. All patients died 2 days to
26 weeks (mean, 9.62 weeks) after stent placement because of disease progression 
(n = 18), pneumonia (n = 9), hemoptysis (n = 5), or unknown cause (n = 3).
CONCLUSION: Use of a covered retrievable expandable nitinol stent is a safe and
effective method for relieving dyspnea. This procedure contributed to improved
quality of life for patients with malignant tracheobronchial stricture and/or
ERF. Stent retrievability was useful in resolving stent-related complications.

PMID: 14654487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Plant Cell. 2003 Dec;15(12):3033-50. Epub 2003 Nov 20.

The tomato transcription factor Pti4 regulates defense-related gene expression
via GCC box and non-GCC box cis elements.

Chakravarthy S(1), Tuori RP, D'Ascenzo MD, Fobert PR, Despres C, Martin GB.

Author information: 
(1)Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research, Ithaca, New York 14853-1801, USA.

The tomato transcription factor Pti4, an ethylene-responsive factor (ERF),
interacts physically with the disease resistance protein Pto and binds the GCC
box cis element that is present in the promoters of many pathogenesis-related
(PR) genes. We reported previously that Arabidopsis plants expressing Pti4
constitutively express several GCC box-containing PR genes and show reduced
disease symptoms compared with wild-type plants after inoculation with
Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato or Erysiphe orontii. To gain insight into how
genome-wide gene expression is affected by Pti4, we used serial analysis of gene 
expression (SAGE) to compare transcripts in wild-type and Pti4-expressing
Arabidopsis plants. SAGE provided quantitative measurements of >20,000
transcripts and identified the 50 most highly expressed genes in Arabidopsis
vegetative tissues. Comparison of the profiles from wild-type and Pti4-expressing
Arabidopsis plants revealed 78 differentially abundant transcripts encoding
defense-related proteins, protein kinases, ribosomal proteins, transporters, and 
two transcription factors (TFs). Many of the genes identified were expressed
differentially in wild-type Arabidopsis during infection by Pseudomonas syringae 
pv tomato, supporting a role for them in defense-related processes. Unexpectedly,
the promoters of most Pti4-regulated genes did not have a GCC box. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed that Pti4 binds in vivo to promoters
lacking this cis element. Potential binding sites for ERF, MYB, and GBF TFs were 
present in statistically significantly increased numbers in promoters regulated
by Pti4. Thus, Pti4 appears to regulate gene expression directly by binding the
GCC box and possibly a non-GCC box element and indirectly by either activating
the expression of TF genes or interacting physically with other TFs.

PMCID: PMC282854
PMID: 14630974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Dec;23(23):8614-25.

Ets2-dependent stromal regulation of mouse mammary tumors.

Man AK(1), Young LJ, Tynan JA, Lesperance J, Egeblad M, Werb Z, Hauser CA, Muller
WJ, Cardiff RD, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The Ets2 transcription factor is regulated by mitogen-activated protein (MAP)
kinase phosphorylation of a single threonine residue. We generated by gene
targeting a single codon mutation in Ets2 substituting Ala for the critical
Thr-72 phosphorylation site (Ets2A72), to investigate the importance of MAP
kinase activation of Ets2 in embryo and tumor development. Ets2(A72/A72) mice are
viable and develop normally. However, combining the Ets2A72 allele with a
deletion mutant of Ets2 results in lethality at E11.5 and shows that Ets2A72 is a
hypomorphic allele. Mammary tumors caused by transgenic polyomavirus middle T
antigen, activated Neu(Erbb2), or the combination of Neu and transgenic VEGF
(Neu; VEGF-25) were all restricted in Ets2(A72/A72) females. The Ets2(A72/A72)
restriction on Neu; VEGF-25 tumor growth was associated with increased p21Cip1
expression. The size of tumors transplanted into fat pads of mice with Ets2
targeted alleles was correlated directly with Ets2 activity and fewer stromal
cells expressing matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9). Decreased MMP-3 and MMP-9
mRNAs were confirmed in Ets2(A72/A72) macrophages. Activation of Ets2 at Thr-72
acts in the stroma, downstream of vascular endothelial growth factor production, 
in part through the regulation of macrophage proteases to support the progression
of Neu- and polyomavirus middle-T-initiated mammary tumors.

PMCID: PMC262691
PMID: 14612405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Exp Mol Pathol. 2003 Dec;75(3):238-47.

Role of Ets/Id proteins for telomerase regulation in human cancer cells.

Xiao X(1), Athanasiou M, Sidorov IA, Horikawa I, Cremona G, Blair D, Barret JC,
Dimitrov DS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental and Computational Biology, NCI-Frederick, NIH,
Miller Drive, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA. xiaox@ncifcrf.gov

Most human cancers express telomerase but its activity is highly variable and
regulated by complex mechanisms. Recently, we have proposed that Ets proteins may
be important for regulation of telomerase activity in leukemic cells. Here we
provide further evidence for the role of Ets family members and related Id
proteins in telomerase regulation and characterize the underlying molecular
mechanisms. By using PCR-based and gel shift assays we demonstrated specific
binding to a core hTERT promoter of Ets2, Fli1, Id2, c-Myc, Mad1, and Sp1 in
lysates from subclones of U937 cells. Further analysis of binding of purified
proteins and various mutants of the hTERT promoter suggested the existence of a
trimolecular Ets-Id2-DNA complex, and Ets inhibitory activity mediated by c-Myc
and the Ets binding site on the core hTERT promoter at -293 bp from the
transcription initiation site as well as a positive Ets regulatory effect mediate
through another Ets binding site at -36 bp. This analysis provided evidence for
the existence of negative and positive Ets regulatory site and suggested a
complex interplay between Ets/Id family members and c-Myc that may be an
important determinant of the diversity of telomerase activity in leukemia and
other cancers.

PMID: 14611815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2003 Oct;17(3):685-91.

Mismatch negativity indexes auditory temporal resolution: evidence from
event-related potential (ERP) and event-related field (ERF) recordings.

Uther M(1), Jansen DH, Huotilainen M, Ilmoniemi RJ, Näätänen R.

Author information: 
(1)Cognitive Brain Research Unit, Department of Psychology, University of
Helsinki, PO Box 9, Finland FIN-00014. maria.uther@port.ac.uk

This study examined auditory temporal resolution as indexed by gap detection
using the mismatch negativity (MMN) component of the auditory event-related
potential (ERP) and its magnetic counterpart (MMNm). ERPs were recorded in 10
subjects who were presented with auditory stimuli. These stimuli were presented
in sequences of repetitive continuous 'standard' sinusoidal tones interspersed
with infrequently occurring 'deviant' stimuli that differed from standards only
in that they contained a silent gap midway in the stimulus. The gap size varied
in separate stimulus blocks and was either 3, 5 or 7 ms. The stimuli were
presented monaurally either to the left or the right ear. In a separate session, 
event-related magnetic fields (ERFs) were recorded from eight subjects using a
similar paradigm but with gap sizes of 3, 7 or 11 ms and with binaural
stimulation. Both ERP and ERF recordings showed that the smallest gap size (3 ms)
did not elicit as large or reliable MMN or MMNm as did the larger ones. There
were no differences in the laterality of the MMN as might be predicted on the
basis of previous behavioural studies, but this result is likely a reflection of 
differences in task requirements. Nonetheless, the findings suggest that MMN and 
MMNm successfully index auditory temporal resolution thresholds, as measures that
are independent of attention.

PMID: 14561455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2004;11(1):10-9.

Regulation of the human leukemia inhibitory factor gene by ETS transcription
factors.

Bamberger AM(1), Jenatschke S, Schulte HM, Ellebrecht I, Beil FU, Bamberger CM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
bamberger@uke.uni-hamburg.de

OBJECTIVES: Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) is a pleiotropic cytokine mainly
produced by activated T lymphocytes. We previously demonstrated that human Jurkat
T lymphoma cells represent a valid model of LIF gene expression. This study was
designed to identify regions critical for LIF promoter activation in Jurkat
cells.
METHODS: Luciferase constructs under the control of different portions of the
human LIF promoter were transfected into Jurkat cells, and promoter activity was 
determined by luminometry. Similar experiments were performed with constructs
bearing mutations in the putative ETS binding regions in the LIF promoter.
RT-PCR, Western blot and gelshift experiments were performed to study expression 
and DNA binding of ETS factors in lymphoid cells.
RESULTS: With the exception of the shortest construct not including the putative 
ETS binding sites, all wildtype LIF promoter constructs were strongly inducible
by phorbol ester/ionomycin. In contrast, the mutant constructs were significantly
less inducible. Cotransfection of the wild-type constructs with ETS expression
vectors resulted in significant enhancement of promoter activity. ets-1 and ets-2
mRNA and protein were shown to be expressed in Jurkat cells. Gelshift experiments
revealed that proteins present in nuclear extracts from Jurkat cells specifically
bind to both artificial ETS consensus sites and ETS binding sites present in the 
LIF promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that binding of ETS transcription factors to the ETS
binding sites in the human LIF promoter is critical for its inducibility in
response to T cell activators. ETS transcription factors thus play an important
functional role within the endocrine-immune network.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14557674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Hered. 2003 Sep-Oct;94(5):386-91.

Mapping of 53 loci in American mink (Mustela vison).

Kuznetsov SB(1), Matveeva NM, Murphy WJ, O'Brien SJ, Serov OL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Cytology and Genetics,
Novosibirsk-90, Russia.

Fifty-three genes were mapped in the American mink genome using polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR)-based analysis of a Chinese hamster-American mink somatic cell
hybrid panel. Heterologous primers designed for cat gene mapping were used in
this study. Forty-nine of these loci were localized into expected chromosome
regions according to Zoo-FISH data, whereas four loci--ALPL, CDC20, ERF-2, and
Fc(Mv)23617--were mapped out of expected conserved regions. PCR products
amplified with primers corresponding to these four markers were partly sequenced 
and verified using BLAST. The results showed the homology to be more than 90%
between mink and human or cat counterparts. At present, the gene map of American 
mink has expanded to 127 loci.

PMID: 14557391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Plant Cell. 2003 Nov;15(11):2707-18. Epub 2003 Oct 10.

Activation of a stress-responsive mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade
induces the biosynthesis of ethylene in plants.

Kim CY(1), Liu Y, Thorne ET, Yang H, Fukushige H, Gassmann W, Hildebrand D, Sharp
RE, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia,
Missouri 65211, USA.

Plants under stress from both biotic and abiotic sources produce increased levels
of ethylene, which is perceived by ethylene receptors and triggers cellular
responses further downstream. Protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation were 
implicated in the regulation of ethylene induction by stresses based on studies
using protein kinase and phosphatase inhibitors. However, the kinase(s) involved 
remains to be determined. Using a conditional gain-of-function transgenic system,
we demonstrate that the activation of SIPK, a tobacco mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK), by NtMEK2DD, an active mutant of the upstream kinase of SIPK,
resulted in a dramatic increase in ethylene production. The increase in ethylene 
after the activation of SIPK coincided with a dramatic increase in
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) synthase (ACS) activity, which was
followed by the activation of a subgroup of ACS and ACC oxidase (ACO) genes,
suggesting that either the activation of unidentified ACS(s) or
post-transcriptional regulation is involved. Infection with Tobacco mosaic virus 
(TMV), which is known to activate the SIPK cascade and induce ethylene
biosynthesis, also induced the same ACSs and ACOs. After ethylene production in
NtMEK2DD plants, strong activation of ETHYLENE-RESPONSE FACTOR (ERF) genes was
observed, similar to the effect in NN tobacco plants infected with TMV. In
contrast to previous reports, no major increase in jasmonic acid (JA) and methyl 
jasmonate (MJ) was detected after the activation of SIPK/WIPK in NtMEK2DD
transgenic plants. These results suggest that the induction of ethylene but not
JA/MJ is involved in plant defense responses mediated by the NtMEK2-SIPK/WIPK
pathway.

PMCID: PMC280573
PMID: 14555690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Ter Arkh. 2003;75(8):43-7.

[Efficacy and safety of different beta-blockers in patients with isolated
systolic hypertension associated with diabetes mellitus and obstructive pulmonary
diseases].

[Article in Russian]

Kukes VG, Ostroumova OD, Mamaev VI, Batutina AM, Abakumov IuE, Zykova AA.

AIM: To compare efficacy and safety of atenolol, methoprolol and bisoprolol, as
the most usable beta-blockers, in patients with isolated systolic arterial
hypertension (ISAH) and concomitant diabetes mellitus (DM) and/or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Forty tow patients with ISAH and coronary heart disease, 30
patients with these diseases associated with DM and 32 patients with associated
COPD were randomized into three groups. Group 1 received atenolol in a dose 25 mg
twice a day, group 2--metoprolol tartrate in a dose 25-50 mg twice a day, group
3--bisoprolol in a single dose 5-10 mg/day. All the patients were examined before
the treatment and in 8 weeks. Arterial pressure was assessed at 24-h monitoring
(ABPM-04 unit, Mediteck, Hungary) and quality of life (QL) was estimated by DISS 
Disability Scale. In addition, blood glucose was measured in patients with
concomitant DM, external respiration function (ERF) was studied before and after 
the treatment in patients with concomitant COPD.
RESULTS: In all ISAH patients there was a significant fall of systolic arterial
pressure and heart rate. 2 hours after intake of atenolol and methoprolol blood
glucose lowered significantly in diabetics as well as peak volume expiration
velocity in patients with COPD. In the bisoprolol group ERF and blood glucose in 
DM and COPD patients remained unchanged. Atenolol deteriorated QL by the "job"
and "social life" scales, methoprolol--by the scale "job" while bisoprolol
improved the above parameters.
CONCLUSION: The results of bisoprolol treatment are better than those of
methoprolol and atenolol treatment of hypertensive patients with concomitant DM
and COPD.

PMID: 14520850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Oct 15;290(1):132-43.

Ets2 is not required for Ras or Neu/ErbB-2 mediated cellular transformation in
vitro.

Hevér A(1), Oshima RG, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Ets2 is a widely expressed Ets family transcription factor which is activated by 
Ras signaling and has been reported to transform fibroblasts. Expression of a
dominant inhibitory Ets2 construct consisting of just the Ets2 DNA binding domain
(Ets2DBD), reverses Ras transformation of NIH3T3 cells and the transformed
characteristics of several human tumor cells. However, the Ets2DBD may interfere 
with multiple Ets family members. We have now utilized cell lines with a
disrupted ets2 gene to determine whether Ets2 is required to mediate oncogenic
signaling. Expression of the Ets2DBD in an Ets2-deficient cell line dramatically 
inhibited Ets-dependent (but not AP-1-dependent) reporter gene expression,
revealing that the Ets2DBD does inhibit additional Ets family members. The
transformation efficiency of Ets2-deficient cell lines by oncogenic Ras or
Neu/ErbB-2 was similar to that of control cells in several in vitro assays, and
was not enhanced by re-expression of Ets2. Finally, overexpression of Ets2 was
not sufficient to induce focus formation in NIH3T3 cells, nor to enhance
transformation by oncogenic Ras. Thus, Ets2 is not an essential mediator of Ras
or Neu/ErbB-2 transformation in these cells. Our results illustrate the
importance of utilizing specific approaches for analyzing the function of
individual members of large gene families.

PMID: 14516794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 5;278(49):49358-68. Epub 2003 Sep 24.

CD13/APN transcription is induced by RAS/MAPK-mediated phosphorylation of Ets-2
in activated endothelial cells.

Petrovic N(1), Bhagwat SV, Ratzan WJ, Ostrowski MC, Shapiro LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
Connecticut 06030, USA.

CD13/aminopeptidase N (CD13/APN) is a potent regulator of angiogenesis both in
vitro and in vivo and transcription of CD13/APN in endothelial cells is induced
by angiogenic growth factors via the RAS/MAPK pathway. We have explored the
nuclear effectors downstream of this pathway that are responsible for CD13/APN
induction. The response to serum/angiogenic growth factors mapped to a 38-bp
region of the CD13/APN promoter containing an Ets-core motif that specifically
binds a protein complex from nuclear lysates from activated endothelial cells.
This motif and the proteins that target it are functionally relevant because
mutation of this sequence abrogates CD13/APN transcription. Analysis of
endothelial Ets family members showed that Ets-2, and to a lesser extent Ets-1,
transactivate CD13/APN promoter activity via the Ets-core motif, whereas Fli,
Erg, and NERF are ineffective. We investigated the possibility that the induction
of CD13/APN is mediated by phosphorylation of Ets-2 via RAS/MAPK. A
phosphorylation-defective Ets-2 mutant, T72A, failed to transactivate CD13/APN,
suggesting that Ets-2 phosphorylation is obligatory for CD13/APN induction. To
confirm a role for endogenous Ets-2 in CD13/APN expression, we specifically
abrogated Ets-2 mRNA and protein by siRNA knockdown that significantly inhibited 
CD13/APN transcription. Finally, to assess the relevance of Ets-2 in endothelial 
cell function, we induced endothelial cells containing Ets-2 siRNA
oligonucleotides to form capillary networks. Cells containing the Ets-2
inhibitory small interfering RNAs were completely incapable of forming the
organized networks characteristic of endothelial morphogenesis. Thus, the
phosphorylation of Ets-2 by RAS/MAPK is a prerequisite for CD13/APN endothelial
induction and Ets-2 and its targets play essential roles in endothelial cell
function.

PMID: 14507917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. BMC Plant Biol. 2003 Sep 23;3:6.

Ds tagging of BRANCHED FLORETLESS 1 (BFL1) that mediates the transition from
spikelet to floret meristem in rice (Oryza sativa L).

Zhu QH(1), Hoque MS, Dennis ES, Upadhyaya NM.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Plant Industry, GPO Box 1600, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.
qianhao.zhu@csiro.au

BACKGROUND: The genetics of spikelet formation, a feature unique to grasses such 
as rice and maize, is yet to be fully understood, although a number of meristem
and organ identity mutants have been isolated and investigated in Arabidopsis and
maize. Using a two-element Ac/Ds transposon tagging system we have isolated a
rice mutant, designated branched floretless 1 (bfl1) which is defective in the
transition from spikelet meristem to floret meristem.
RESULTS: The bfl1 mutant shows normal differentiation of the primary
rachis-branches leading to initial spikelet meristem (bract-like structure
equivalent to rudimentary glumes) formation but fails to develop empty glumes and
florets. Instead, axillary meristems in the bract-like structure produce
sequential alternate branching, thus resulting in a coral shaped morphology of
the branches in the developing panicle. The bfl1 mutant harbours a single Ds
insertion in the upstream region of the BFL1 gene on chromosome 7 corresponding
to PAC clone P0625E02 (GenBank Acc No. message URL
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=nucleotide&list_uid
s=34395191&dopt=GenBank&term=ap004570AP004570). RT-PCR analyses revealed a
drastic reduction of BFL1 transcript levels in the bfl1 mutant compared to that
in the wild-type. In each of the normal panicle-bearing progeny plants, from
occasional revertant seeds of the vegetatively-propagated mutant plant, Ds was
shown to be excised from the bfl1 locus. BFL1 contains an EREBP/AP2 domain and is
most likely an ortholog of the maize transcription factor gene BRANCHED SILKLESS1
(BD1).
CONCLUSIONS: bfl1 is a Ds-tagged rice mutant defective in the transition from
spikelet meristem (SM) to floret meristem (FM). BFL1 is most probably a rice
ortholog of the maize ERF (EREBP/AP2) transcription factor gene BD1. Based on the
similarities in mutant phenotypes bfl1 is likely to be an allele of the
previously reported frizzy panicle locus.

PMCID: PMC270090
PMID: 14503923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. FEBS Lett. 2003 Aug 28;550(1-3):149-54.

New members of the tomato ERF family show specific expression pattern and diverse
DNA-binding capacity to the GCC box element.

Tournier B(1), Sanchez-Ballesta MT, Jones B, Pesquet E, Regad F, Latché A, Pech
JC, Bouzayen M.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 990 INRA/INP-ENSAT, Pole de Biotechnologie Végétale, 24 Chemin de Borde
Rouge, P.O. Box 107, 31326 Castanet Tolosan Cedex, France.

Four new members of the ERF (ethylene-response factor) family of plant-specific
DNA-binding (GCC box) factors were isolated from tomato fruit (LeERF1-4).
Phylogenetic analysis indicated that LeERF2 belongs to a new ERF class,
characterized by a conserved N-terminal signature sequence. Expression patterns
and cis/trans binding affinities differed between the LeERFs. Combining
experimental data and modeled three-dimensional analysis, it was shown that
binding affinity of the LeERFs was affected by both the variation of nucleotides 
surrounding the DNA cis-element sequence and the nature of critical amino acid
residues within the ERF domain.

PMID: 12935902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Autoimmun. 2003 Sep;21(2):149-60.

Melanocyte-specific cell mediated immune response in vitiliginous Smyth line
chickens.

Wang X(1), Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, 1260 Maple Street,
Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA.

Smyth line chickens (SL) are an animal model to study human autoimmune vitiligo. 
Vitiligo in SL chickens is characterized by a post-hatch loss of feather
melanocytes (MC) resulting in feather depigmentation. The etiopathology of this
disease remains unclear, however, a hypothesis that cell-mediated immunity (CMI) 
plays an important role in the destruction of melanocytes has been proposed based
on previous studies. To support this hypothesis, the delayed wattle response
(DWR) to MC lysates was examined in SL chickens and normally pigmented,
MHC-matched controls (Brown line, BL; Light Brown Leghorn, LBL) to determine
whether vitiliginous SL chickens have MC-specific CMI. Chickens were challenged
in one wattle with a lysate of either embryo- or feather-derived cultured MC.
Lysates of chick-embryo-fibroblasts (CEF) associated turkey herpesvirus (HVT)
vaccine and syngeneic CEF were used as positive and negative control,
respectively. Vitiliginous SL chickens exhibited a significantly greater DWR to
feather-MC but not to embryo-MC and CEF than nonvitiliginous SL chickens and
normally pigmented controls. The DWR to feather-MC peaked at 3 to 5 days post
feather-MC lysate injection. Immunohistochemical staining of DWR-positive wattle 
tissue revealed extensive lymphocyte infiltration at the site of feather-MC
injection consisting primarily of T cells (TCR2+, CD4+ or CD8+ T cells). These
observations support the presence of MC-specific CMI in SL chickens with
vitiligo. The anti-MC CMI activity appears to be specific to MC derived from
feathers. SDS-PAGE analysis of different sources of MC lysates revealed a 43 kDa 
missing band in the lysate of feather-MC established from SL chickens. No other
obvious protein pattern differences that could account for the feather
MC-specific CMI response in vitiliginous SL chickens were observed among the MC
lysates.

PMID: 12935784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Anticancer Res. 2003 May-Jun;23(3A):2173-8.

Ets-2 interacts with co-repressor BS69 to repress target gene expression.

Wei G(1), Schaffner AE, Baker KM, Mansky KC, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State
University, 484 W. 12th Ave., Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

BACKGROUND: The ETS-family of proteins consists of over 30 members that regulate 
the growth, differentiation and survival of both normal and tumor cells. How
specificity is achieved within this family remains largely unresolved. One
mechanism for attaining specificity is through the action of signaling pathways
on specific family members. For example, Ets-2 is an activator modulated by
ras-dependent phosphorylation of a single residue in the conserved pointed domain
of this factor. We hypothesized that phosphorylation of the pointed domain
regulates the proteins that can interact with ets-2 in the cell nucleus,
resulting in regulation of target genes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used a combination of biochemical assays, yeast
two-hybrid screens and transfection assays to identify and characterize proteins 
interacting with the pointed domain.
RESULTS: BS69, a known co-repressor, was identified in a yeast two hybrid screen 
as an ets-2 interacting partner. BS69 can interact with ets-2 in vivo and
phosphorylation of the ets-2 pointed domain decreased the interaction with BS69
in vitro. In transfection assays, co-expression of ets-2 and BS69 resulted in
repression of defined ets-2 target genes.
CONCLUSION: These results support a role for ets-2 as a repressor and indicate
that BS69 is required as co-repressor. Phosphorylation of ets-2 may switch its
activity from repressor to activator by interfering with formation of the BS69
complex.

PMID: 12894593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Anticancer Res. 2003 May-Jun;23(3A):2143-53.

ERF, an ETS-related transcriptional repressor, can induce erythroid
differentiation.

Athanasiou M(1), Blair DG, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., NCI-Frederick, Frederick, MD
21702, USA. athanasi@ncifcrf.gov

Ets-family genes have been implicated in leukemia, as well as in normal
hematopoiesis. ERF is an ets-related gene that represses transcription and is
regulated by MAPK phosphorylation through its effect on ERF sub-cellular
localization. Using pluripotent human cell lines, we studied the effect of ERF on
erythroid differentiation. K562 and HEL cells expressing ERF expressed elevated
levels of the erythroid-specific markers CD71 and Glycophorin A, as well as
hemoglobin and GATA1. Treatment with the Erk kinase inhibitor PD98058 further
enhanced the erythroid phenotype in ERF-expressing cells and cells expressing a
non-phosphorylatable ERF mutant exhibited an even more enhanced phenotype. These 
results are consistent with the fact that ERF function is regulated by MAPK, and 
suggest that the effect of the MAPK pathway in erythroid differentiation is
partially mediated by ERF. The effect of ERF is similar to the one shown for ETS1
and opposite to the FLI1 function in these cells, suggesting that several ets
genes may play key roles in hematopoietic differentiation.

PMID: 12894589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Jul 28;1628(2):105-10.

The chromosome 21 transcription factor ETS2 transactivates the beta-APP promoter:
implications for Down syndrome.

Wolvetang EW(1), Bradfield OM, Tymms M, Zavarsek S, Hatzistavrou T, Kola I,
Hertzog PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Monash Medical Center, 246
Clayton Road, 3168, Clayton, Australia. ernst.wolvetang@med.monash.edu.au

The gene that codes for beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta-APP), a protein
centrally involved in senile plaque formation in Down syndrome (DS) and
Alzheimer's disease (AD), is located on chromosome 21. In DS beta-APP expression 
is three- to fourfold higher than what is expected from the 1.5-fold increased
gene load, suggesting that other genes on chromosome 21 directly or indirectly
can further up-regulate beta-APP. Here we show that the chromosome 21
transcription factor ETS2 transactivates the beta-APP gene via specific Ets
binding sites in the beta-APP promoter and, in this respect, cooperates with the 
transcription factor complex AP1. We further show that brains and primary
neuronal cultures from Ets2 transgenic mice, as well as 3T3 fibroblasts that
overexpress ETS2, display molecular abnormalities also seen in DS, such as
elevated expression of beta-APP protein, an increase in presenilin-1 and
increased beta-amyloid production. We conclude that ETS2 is a transcriptional
regulator of beta-APP and that overexpression of ETS2 in DS may play a role in
the pathogenesis of the brain abnormalities in DS and possibly AD.

PMID: 12890557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Development. 2003 Aug;130(16):3841-50.

FRIZZY PANICLE is required to prevent the formation of axillary meristems and to 
establish floral meristem identity in rice spikelets.

Komatsu M(1), Chujo A, Nagato Y, Shimamoto K, Kyozuka J.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 
113-8657, Japan.

Inflorescences of grass species have a distinct morphology in which florets are
grouped in compact branches called spikelets. Although many studies have shown
that the molecular and genetic mechanisms that control floret organ formation are
conserved between monocots and dicots, little is known about the genetic pathway 
leading to spikelet formation. In the frizzy panicle (fzp) mutant of rice, the
formation of florets is replaced by sequential rounds of branching. Detailed
analyses revealed that several rudimentary glumes are formed in each ectopic
branch, indicating that meristems acquire spikelet identity. However, instead of 
proceeding to floret formation, axillary meristems are formed in the axils of
rudimentary glumes and they either arrest or develop into branches of higher
order. The fzp mutant phenotype suggests that FZP is required to prevent the
formation of axillary meristems within the spikelet meristem and permit the
subsequent establishment of floral meristem identity. The FZP gene was isolated
by transposon tagging. FZP encodes an ERF transcription factor and is the rice
ortholog of the maize BD1 gene. Consistent with observations from phenotypic
analyses, FZP expression was found to be restricted to the time of rudimentary
glumes differentiation in a half-ring domain at the base of which the rudimentary
glume primordium emerged.

PMID: 12835399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Poult Sci. 2003 May;82(5):771-80.

Pulmonary and hematological inflammatory responses to intravenous cellulose
micro-particles in broilers.

Wang W(1), Wideman RF Jr, Bersi TK, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 
72701, USA. wxw03@uark.edu

When injected intravenously, cellulose micro-particles become lodged in pulmonary
arterioles. The current study investigated the systemic and pulmonary
inflammatory responses triggered by cellulose micro-particles at 3, 24, and 48 h 
postinjection in 6-wk-old broilers. Proportions and concentrations of circulating
white blood cells were assessed in saline-injected (control group) and
cellulose-injected (particle group) birds. Hematoxylin-eosin (HE)-stained
cross-sections of the lungs were used to count the number of granuloma/lymphocyte
aggregates, which is indicative of the severity of the inflammatory response to
the trapped particles. The cellular components of the aggregates were identified 
by immunohistochemical staining of frozen cross sections of the lungs. Results
showed that cellulose micro-particles trapped in the pulmonary vasculature
initiated a dynamic, localized inflammatory response within the surrounding lung 
parenchyma. Monocytes and basophilic granulocytes closely surrounded the
particles. CD4, CD8, TCR1, TCR2, and TCR3 subsets of T cells and B cells were
present in the outer rim of the granuloma/lymphocyte aggregates. Circulating
total white blood cell (WBC, leukocytes) concentrations were similar in both
groups at all times postinjection, whereas at 48 h post-injection the percentages
of eosinophils and basophils among circulating WBC were higher in the particle
group than in the control group (P < or = 0.05). The circulating monocyte
concentration also increased within 24 h postinjection (P < or = 0.05). These
observations demonstrate that cellulose micro-particles trapped in the pulmonary 
vasculature initiated acute focal inflammatory responses in the lungs and that
the proportions of WBCs in the blood are modulated within 48 h postinjection.

PMID: 12762400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Mar;84(4):441-52.

Glucocorticoid regulation of human eosinophil gene expression.

Chauhan S(1), Leach CH, Kunz S, Bloom JW, Miesfeld RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.

Molecular analysis of steroid-regulated gene expression in freshly isolated human
eosinophils is difficult due to the inherent high rate of spontaneous apoptosis
and elevated levels of endogenous ribonucleases. To circumvent these limitations,
we determined if the human eosinophilic cell line EoL-1 could serve as an in
vitro model of glucocorticoid signaling. We found by optimizing growth conditions
in low serum-containing media that dexamethasone (Dex) treatment of EoL-1 cells
induced an apoptotic pathway that was inhibited by interleukin-5 (IL-5).
Moreover, gene expression profiling using RNA from untreated EoL-1 cells and from
freshly isolated human eosinophils identified 380 commonly expressed genes,
including the eosinophil markers granule major basic protein,
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 1 and arachidonate 15-lipoxygenase.
Expression profiling was performed using EoL-1 cells that had been treated with
dexamethasone for 0, 4, 12, 24 and 48h identifying 162 genes as differentially
expressed. Two of the most highly upregulated genes based on expression profiling
were the transcription factor Ets-2 and the MHC Class II genes (Q, R, and P).
Expression of these genes in EoL-1 cells was shown to be dexamethasone-induced at
the RNA and protein levels which is consistent with the known function of Ets-2
in controlling cell cycle progression and the role of MHC Class II antigens in
mediating eosinophil functions.

PMID: 12732289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Biochem J. 2003 Aug 1;373(Pt 3):775-83.

Complexes between the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway factor human upf1
(up-frameshift protein 1) and essential nonsense-mediated mRNA decay factors in
HeLa cells.

Schell T(1), Köcher T, Wilm M, Seraphin B, Kulozik AE, Hentze MW.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory Heidelberg, Gene Expression Programme,
Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Biochem J. 2003 Aug 1;373(Pt 3):e5-6.

mRNAs harbouring premature translation-termination codons are usually degraded by
the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway. Human up-frameshift protein 1
(Hupf1) is an NMD factor that is conserved between yeast and mammals. To isolate 
cellular complexes that are formed with Hupf1 and to explore the role of cellular
proteins in NMD, we generated a HeLa cell line that stably expresses Hupf1
bearing a double-affinity tag (termed Hupf1-2tag). Hupf1-2tag is localized in the
cytoplasm similar to the endogenous Hupf1 protein, and the Hupf1-2tag cell line
is fully NMD-competent. Using affinity chromatography, Hupf1-2tag-associated
proteins were isolated. MS and immunoblotting identified the NMD factors Hupf2
and Hupf3a/b as interaction partners of Hupf1. Size-exclusion chromatography
indicates that the NMD factors Hupf1, Hupf2 and the large isoform of Hupf3a might
exist in a stable, high-molecular-mass complex of approx. 1.3 MDa. Interestingly,
the poly(A)-binding protein was also identified by MS to be associated
specifically with Hupf1-2tag. In contrast with the interaction with Hupf2 and
Hupf3a/b, the association of poly(A)-binding protein with Hupf1 is highly
sensitive to treatment of the isolated complexes with RNase. Components of the
exon-exon junction complex or the translational eukaryotic release factor (eRF) 3
were not identified in complexes associated with Hupf1-2tag. We discuss these
findings in the context of current models of NMD.

PMCID: PMC1223536
PMID: 12723973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Brain Res. 2003 Apr 25;970(1-2):188-94.

Cross-inhibition of mechanoreceptive inputs in dorsal root ganglia of peripheral 
inflammatory cats.

Xu GY(1), Zhao ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biomedical Institute, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston
77555-1069, USA.

Primary afferent neurons in mammalian dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) normally
function as independent sensory communication elements. However, it has recently 
been shown that most DRG neurons are transiently activated when axons of
neighboring neurons of the same ganglion are stimulated repetitively and the
cross-depolarization contributes to this mutual cross-excitation. Here, we
reported the cross-inhibition of mechanoreceptive information in DRG under
peripheral inflammatory condition. Intracellular recordings were made in vivo
from A-type afferent neurons in cat L(6-7) DRGs. Among spontaneously firing
neurons both from control (Con) and carrageenan (Carg) injected cats, some A-type
afferent neurons showed to have two distinct receptive fields on the hindpaw.
Mechanical stimulation of one receptive field increased the ongoing activities,
while stimulation of the other receptive field led to a decrease of spontaneous
firings of the same neuron. These two distinct receptive fields are termed
excitatory receptive field (ERF) and inhibitory receptive field (IRF),
respectively. Peripheral inflammation significantly increased the prevalence of
Abeta and Adelta neurons with two distinct receptive fields (Abeta: Con, 1.34%,
n=149; Carg, 6.59%, n=182; P<0.05; Adelta: Con, 0%, n=138, Carg, 3.9%, n=102,
P<0.05). Most interestedly, ERF stimulation-induced enhancement of cell firings
can be suppressed by IRF stimulation. Similarly, IRF stimulation-induced decrease
of cell discharges can be reversed by ERF stimulation. This interaction was not
affected by cutting the dorsal roots at the place close to the recorded DRG.
Preapplication of naloxone and yohimbine did not block the interaction. Taken
together with previous reports, this intraganglionic cross-talking appears to be 
mediated by collision of retrograde spread of action potentials, or/and at least 
in part, by an activity-dependent diffusible excitatory substance released from
neuronal somata and/or adjacent axons, and detected by neighboring cell somata.

PMID: 12706260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Poult Sci. 2003 Mar;82(3):484-95.

Broiler survivors of intravenous micro-particle injections: evaluation of growth,
livability, meat quality, and arterial blood gas values during a cyclic heat
challenge.

Wideman RF Jr(1), Chapman ME, Owens CM, Devabhaktuni MK, Cavitt LC, Wang W, Erf
GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 
72701, USA. rwideman@uark.edu

When broilers are exposed to high ambient temperatures, their cardiac output can 
increase by 20 to 50%. Previously, we developed an intravenous micro-particle
injection technique to select broilers having a cardiopulmonary capacity capable 
of accommodating increases in cardiac output associated with fast growth and cool
temperatures. In the present study, male broilers were injected at 18 to 20 d of 
age with cellulose micro-particles sufficient to trigger >50% mortality by 35 d
of age. The survivors of micro-particle injections (cellulose survivors) and
saline-injected flock mates (control group) were exposed to a moderate cyclic
heat challenge (peak temperature of 35 to 37 degrees C) beginning on d 36 and
continuing through d 57. We tested the hypothesis that if the cellulose survivors
represent the population cohort having the most robust cardiopulmonary capacity, 
then during a subsequent heat challenge these survivorspotentially may perform
better than their unselected flock mates. Based on data combined from two
independent experiments, the cellulose survivors exhibited improved livability
and body weight gain when compared with their unselected flock mates during the
cyclic heat challenge. Meat quality characteristics did not differ between the
groups. In a third experiment, cellulose survivors and saline-injected male
broilers were reared at thermoneutral temperatures or were exposed to a cyclic
heat challenge beginning on d 36. Arterial blood samples were collected from
unanesthetized birds at 47 to 49 d of age and were analyzed for pH, partial
pressure of CO2, bicarbonate, partial pressure of O2, and saturation of
hemoglobin with O2. The blood gas values for the cellulose survivors and
saline-injected broilers did not differ within a temperature regimen, regardless 
of whether the broilers were chronically acclimated to heat or were exposed to an
acute heat challenge at the end of the experiment. The cellulose survivors did
not differ in susceptibility to panting-induced respiratory alkalosis or
hypoxemia when compared with their saline-injected flock mates. Overall, these
observations indicate that selection for a robust cardiopulmonary capacity can
confer advantages in growth and livability without affecting meat quality when
broilers are exposed to a moderate heat challenge.

PMID: 12705411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Reprod Dev. 2003 May;65(1):23-9.

Coactivator CBP in the regulation of conceptus IFNtau gene transcription.

Xu N(1), Takahashi Y, Matsuda F, Sakai S, Christenson RK, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, The University of
Tokyo, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Japan.

Studies of ovine interferon-tau (oIFNtau) gene regulation, an anti-luteolytic
factor produced by conceptuses of the ruminant ungulates, have been carried out, 
but a definitive mechanism for its spatial-temporal transcription has not been
elucidated. Recently, specific binding regions for transcription factors AP-1 and
Ets-2 on the oIFNtau gene were identified; however, a molecular mechanism by
which these factors regulate oIFNtau gene transcription has not been
characterized. In the present study, we investigated the potential relationship
between AP-1 and Ets-2, and their association with a coactivator, cAMP-response
element binding protein-binding protein (CBP), on oIFNtau gene transcription in a
transient transfection system using human choriocarcinoma JEG3 cells. The oIFNtau
gene promoter/enhancer (-654 to + 1 bases, wild type)-luciferase reporter
construct (pGL3-654) or its mutant at the AP-1 or Ets-2 site was cotransfected
with CBP (pRc/RSV-CBP) construct along with c-jun, c-fos, and/or Ets-2 expression
plasmid. CBP enhanced transcription of the wild type oIFNtau-reporter construct; 
however, this coactivator had no effect on the oIFNtau-reporter construct with
mutated AP-1 or Ets-2 site. Cotransfection of CBP with c-jun and/or Ets-2, but
not with c-fos, further increased oIFNtau gene transactivation although amounts
of c-jun and c-fos expression, resulting from expression vectors, were similar.
In addition, CBP inhibitor adenovirus 12S E1A (E1A), but not the mutant of E1A
without CBP binding domain (Delta2-36), suppressed oIFNtau gene transcription.
These observations suggest that c-jun and Ets-2 are the most probable binding
partners for CBP in the potentiation of oIFNtau gene transcription. Mol. Reprod. 
Dev. 65: 23-29, 2003.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12658630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Apr 1;31(7):1859-68.

AINTEGUMENTA utilizes a mode of DNA recognition distinct from that used by
proteins containing a single AP2 domain.

Krizek BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 
29208, USA. krizek@sc.edu

The Arabidopsis protein AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) is an important regulator of organ
growth during flower development. ANT is a member of the AP2 subclass of the
AP2/ERF family of plant-specific transcription factors. These proteins contain
either one or two copies of a DNA-binding domain called the AP2 domain. Here, it 
is shown that ANT can act as a transcriptional activator in yeast through binding
to a consensus ANT-binding site. This activity was used as the basis for a
genetic screen to identify amino acids that are critical for the DNA binding
ability of ANT. Mutants that showed reduced or no activation of a reporter gene
under the control of ANT-binding sites were identified. The mutations identified 
in the screen as well as additional site-directed mutations suggest that the mode
of DNA recognition by members of the AP2 subfamily is distinct from that of ERF
proteins. Surprisingly, it appears that each AP2 domain of ANT uses different
amino acids to contact DNA. Identification of several linker mutations argues
that this sequence acts in the positioning of each AP2 domain on the DNA or makes
direct DNA contacts.

PMCID: PMC152808
PMID: 12655002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Exp Bot. 2003 Apr;54(385):1175-81.

Isolation of tobacco ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme cDNA in a yeast two-hybrid
system with tobacco ERF3 as bait and its characterization of specific
interaction.

Koyama T(1), Okada T, Kitajima S, Ohme-Takagi M, Shinshi H, Sato F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied Life Sciences, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Tobacco ETHYLENE-RESPONSIVE FACTOR3 (ERF3) is a member of the ERF-domain
transcription factors and has a transcriptional repressor activity, whereas other
ERF proteins show activation activity. To understand the regulation of
ERF3-repressor activity, protein(s) were screened which interact with ERF3 in a
yeast two-hybrid system. A partial sequence (B8) of NtUBC2, a tobacco
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme was isolated. This B8 specifically interacted with
ERF3 in the yeast two-hybrid system. Further analyses revealed that the region
unique to ERF3 interacted with B8. The physiological functions of NtUBC2 and the 
stability of ERF3 are discussed in relation to the regulation of the repression
activity of ERF3.

PMID: 12654868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 28;303(1):190-5.

ETS2 is involved in protein kinase C-activated expression of
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in human non-small lung
carcinoma cell line, A549.

Lu Z(1), Kim KA, Suico MA, Uto A, Seki Y, Shuto T, Isohama Y, Miyata T, Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Kumamoto University, 5-1 Oe-honmachi, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) is a cytokine expressed
in the non-small lung carcinoma cells (NSCLC). However, transcriptional
regulation of GM-CSF is not well characterized in NSCLC. In this study we found
that two cis-acting ETS family consensus sites are important for transcriptional 
regulation of GM-CSF in A549 human lung carcinoma cells. These two sites are
located separately at around -40 and -100 bp from the transcription start site.
Results of transient transfection assays with A549 cells indicated that ETS2 had 
a strong positive effect on GM-CSF promoter activity. Furthermore, this activity 
was enhanced by protein kinase C activator, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(PMA), in an ETS consensus-dependent manner, while PMA could also enhance the
expression level of ETS2. The protein kinase C inhibitors decreased GM-CSF
promoter activity induced by the protein kinase C activator PMA. We also found
that antisense ETS2 mRNA decreased PMA-induced GM-CSF promoter activity,
supporting the possibility that ETS2 is involved in protein kinase C-induced
GM-CSF transcriptional function. Endogenous expression of GM-CSF mRNA was
increased by ETS2 transfection and the increased expression was further enhanced 
by PMA. These data indicate that GM-CSF is up-regulated by ETS2, a target of
protein kinase C.

PMID: 12646185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 16;278(20):17876-84. Epub 2003 Mar 10.

Ets-2 and components of mammalian SWI/SNF form a repressor complex that
negatively regulates the BRCA1 promoter.

Baker KM(1), Wei G, Schaffner AE, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and The Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Ets-2 is a transcriptional activator that can be modulated by ras-dependent
phosphorylation. Evidence is presented indicating that ets-2 can also act as a
transcriptional repressor. In the breast cancer cell line MCF-7, exogenous ets-2 
repressed the activity of a BRCA1 promoter-luciferase reporter dependent on a
conserved ets-2-binding site in this promoter. Conditional overproduction of
ets-2 in MCF-7 cells resulted in repression of endogenous BRCA1 mRNA expression. 
To address the mechanism by which ets-2 could act as a repressor, a biochemical
approach was used to identify proteins that interacted with the ets-2 pointed
domain. From this analysis, components of the mammalian SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex were found to interact with ets-2. Brg-1, the ATP-hydrolyzing 
component of the SWI/SNF complex, along with the BAF57/p50 and Ini1 subunits
could be co-immunoprecipitated from cells with ets-2. The pointed domain of ets-2
directly interacted in vitro with the C-terminal region of Brg-1 in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner. The combination of Brg-1 and ets-2 could
repress the BRCA1 promoter reporter in transfection assays. These results support
a role for ets-2 as a repressor and indicate that components of the mammalian
SNF/SWI complex are required as co-repressors.

PMID: 12637547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Circ Res. 2003 Apr 18;92(7):749-56. Epub 2003 Mar 13.

Ets-1 and Ets-2 transcription factors are essential for normal coronary and
myocardial development in chicken embryos.

Lie-Venema H(1), Gittenberger-de Groot AC, van Empel LJ, Boot MJ, Kerkdijk H, de 
Kant E, DeRuiter MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box
9602, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

In the development of a functional myocardium and formation of the coronary
vasculature, epicardium-derived cells play an essential role. The proepicardial
organ contributes to the developing coronary system by delivering mural cells to 
the endothelium-lined vessels. In search of genes that regulate the behavior of
(pro)epicardial cells, the Ets-1 and Ets-2 transcription factors stand out as
strong candidates. In the present study, the hypothesis that Ets transcription
factors have a role in proper coronary and myocardial development was tested via 
antisense technology, by targeting Ets-1 and Ets-2 mRNAs to downregulate protein 
expression in chicken embryos. The results suggest that hereby the development of
the coronary system is hampered, primarily by defects in the process of
epithelial-mesenchymal transformation of the mesothelia of the primary and
secondary heart fields. This was indicated by a lack of periarterial and
epicardial mesenchyme, of peripheral coronary smooth muscle cells, and changes in
myocardial morphology. A defect in myocardial perfusion caused by the absence of 
one or both coronary ostia seems to be "solved" by the development of numerous
small fistulae connecting the ventricular lumen with the subepicardially located 
coronary vessels. The presence of coronary vascular aberrations in the
antisense-Ets phenotype enabled us for the first time to study abnormal coronary 
development in a model that is not lethal to the embryo.

PMID: 12637368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Biochem J. 2003 Jun 15;372(Pt 3):787-97.

Ets2 and protein kinase C epsilon are important regulators of parathyroid
hormone-related protein expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Lindemann RK(1), Braig M, Hauser CA, Nordheim A, Dittmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Abteilung Molekularbiologie, Universität Tübingen, 
Auf der Morgenstelle 15, Germany.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) promotes the metastatic potential and
proliferation of breast cancer cells, and acts anti-apoptotically. In invasive
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, transforming growth factor beta-regulated PTHrP
synthesis is mediated by an Ets1/Smad3-dependent activation of the PTHrP P3
promoter. In the present study, we studied the regulation of PTHrP expression in 
non-invasive, Ets1-deficient and transforming growth factor beta-resistant MCF-7 
cells. We found PMA to be a strong stimulator of P3-dependent PTHrP expression in
MCF-7 cells. Mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) kinase 1 (MEK-1)/ERK1/2
inhibitor PD98059 interfered with this activity. Promoter studies revealed that
the PMA effect depended on the Ets and stimulating protein-1 (Sp1)-binding sites.
Of several Ets factors tested, Ets2, but not Ese-1, Elf-1 or Ets1, supported the 
PMA-dependent increase in promoter activity. PD98059 and a threonine to alanine
mutation of the ERK1/2-responsive Ets2 phosphorylation site at position 72
inhibited the Ets2/PMA effect. Activated protein kinase C (PKC) epsilon could
mimic PMA by stimulating the P3 promoter alone or in co-operation with Ets2 in an
MEK-1/ERK1/2-dependent manner. Activated PKC alpha, although capable of
co-operating with Ets2, failed to induce transcription from the P3 promoter on
its own. The Ets2/PKalpha synergistic effect was neither sensitive to PD98059 nor
to Thr(72)/Ala(72) mutation. PMA neither increased the expression of Sp1 nor
modulated the transcriptional activity of Sp1. However, it induced the
displacement of a yet unknown factor from the Sp1-binding site, which may result 
in Sp1 recruitment to the promoter. Our results suggest an ERK1/2-dependent
Ets2/PKC epsilon synergism to be involved in PTHrP expression in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC1223436
PMID: 12628005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Plant Cell. 2003 Mar;15(3):694-705.

The DORNROSCHEN/ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION1 gene of Arabidopsis acts in the
control of meristem ccll fate and lateral organ development.

Kirch T(1), Simon R, Grünewald M, Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Universität zu Köln, Gyrhofstrasse 17,
D-50923 Köln, Germany.

The two main tasks of a meristem, self-perpetuation and organ initiation, are
separated spatially. Slowly dividing cells in the meristem center act as
pluripotent stem cells, and only their derivatives in the meristem periphery
specify new organs. Meristem integrity and cellular proliferation are controlled 
in part by regulatory interactions between genes that are expressed in specific
subdomains of the meristem. Using transposon-mediated activation tagging, we have
identified Dornröschen (drn-D) mutants of Arabidopsis that prematurely arrest
shoot meristem activity with the formation of radialized lateral organs. The
mutated gene (DRN/ESR1), which encodes an AP2/ERF protein, is expressed in a
subdomain of meristem stem cells, in lateral organ anlagen, and transiently in
the distal domain of organ primordia. During the development of drn-D mutants,
expression of the homeobox gene SHOOTMERISTEMLESS is downregulated and later
reactivated in an altered domain. In addition, we found increased expression of
CLAVATA3 and WUSCHEL, two genes that antagonistically regulate stem cell fate in 
meristems. These findings suggest that the DRN/ESR1 gene product is involved in
the regulation of gene expression patterns in meristems. Furthermore, specific
misexpression of DRN in meristem stem cells affects organ polarity and outgrowth 
in the meristem periphery, indicating that DRN/ESR1 itself, or a process
regulated by DRN/ESR1, can act non-cell-autonomously. We elaborate on the role of
DRN/ESR1 in meristem and organ development and discuss its possible role in the
process of shoot regeneration.

PMCID: PMC150023
PMID: 12615942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Plant J. 2003 Feb;33(4):751-63.

OsDREB genes in rice, Oryza sativa L., encode transcription activators that
function in drought-, high-salt- and cold-responsive gene expression.

Dubouzet JG(1), Sakuma Y, Ito Y, Kasuga M, Dubouzet EG, Miura S, Seki M,
Shinozaki K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Resources Division, Japan International Research Center for
Agricultural Sciences (JIRCAS), 1-1 Ohwashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8686, Japan.

The transcription factors DREBs/CBFs specifically interact with the
dehydration-responsive element/C-repeat (DRE/CRT) cis-acting element (core motif:
G/ACCGAC) and control the expression of many stress-inducible genes in
Arabidopsis. In rice, we isolated five cDNAs for DREB homologs: OsDREB1A,
OsDREB1B, OsDREB1C, OsDREB1D, and OsDREB2A. Expression of OsDREB1A and OsDREB1B
was induced by cold, whereas expression of OsDREB2A was induced by dehydration
and high-salt stresses. The OsDREB1A and OsDREB2A proteins specifically bound to 
DRE and activated the transcription of the GUS reporter gene driven by DRE in
rice protoplasts. Over-expression of OsDREB1A in transgenic Arabidopsis induced
over-expression of target stress-inducible genes of Arabidopsis DREB1A resulting 
in plants with higher tolerance to drought, high-salt, and freezing stresses.
This indicated that OsDREB1A has functional similarity to DREB1A. However, in
microarray and RNA blot analyses, some stress-inducible target genes of the
DREB1A proteins that have only ACCGAC as DRE were not over-expressed in the
OsDREB1A transgenic Arabidopsis. The OsDREB1A protein bound to GCCGAC more
preferentially than to ACCGAC whereas the DREB1A proteins bound to both GCCGAC
and ACCGAC efficiently. The structures of DREB1-type ERF/AP2 domains in monocots 
are closely related to each other as compared with that in the dicots. OsDREB1A
is potentially useful for producing transgenic monocots that are tolerant to
drought, high-salt, and/or cold stresses.

PMID: 12609047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Immunol Lett. 2003 Mar 3;86(1):63-70.

Characterization of monoclonal antibodies specific to the transcription factor
ETS-2 protein.

Sanij E(1), Scott B, Wilson T, Xu D, Hertzog P, Wolvetang E.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Clayton, Vic. 3168, Australia.

ETS-2 is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. ETS-2 was initially
characterized as a nuclear oncogene and has been shown to play a role in
regulation of apoptosis and cell cycle progression. Members of the ETS family
display high sequence homology, thus, there is considerable controversy
concerning the specificity of existing ETS-2 polyclonal antibodies that have been
used to define ETS-2 function. We therefore embarked on the production of ETS-2
specific monoclonal antibodies. In this report, we describe the production and
characterization of six antibodies and the localization of their target epitopes 
to distinct domains of the ETS-2 protein. Four antibodies are ETS-2 specific and 
two antibodies cross-react with ETS-1, an ETS family member with the highest
amino acid sequence homology to ETS-2. This report provides a comprehensive
evaluation of ETS-2 specific monoclonal antibodies verified using ETS-2 null
cells. These antibodies can be used for EMSA, Western blotting,
immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence staining experiments. Collectively,
these reagents are invaluable molecular tools that should help better understand 
the biological function of ETS-2.

PMID: 12600747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Ter Arkh. 2002;74(12):27-9.

[External respiratory function in stages I and II arterial hypertension].

[Article in Russian]

Seisembekov TZ, Kozlova IIu, Smailova GT.

AIM: To examine external respiratory function (ERF) and pulmonary circulatory
hemodynamics in patients with Stages I and II arterial hypertension (AH).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 105 patients with AH were examined. In 43 of them,
spirography and echocardiography were performed with pulmonary pressure and
determined during elevated blood pressure (BP) and antihypertensive therapy.
RESULTS: ERF disorders that recovered with BP lowering were detected in 62.8% of 
patients with AH. There were also signs of elevated pulmonary pressure.
CONCLUSION: In patients with HF, pulmonary hemodynamic disorders, changes in ERF,
and the degree of AH are closely interrelated.

PMID: 12577835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Feb 1;31(3):833-43.

Selective inhibition of transcription of the Ets2 gene in prostate cancer cells
by a triplex-forming oligonucleotide.

Carbone GM(1), McGuffie EM, Collier A, Catapano CV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. carbonep@musc.edu

The transcription factor Ets2 has a role in cancer development and represents an 
attractive therapeutic target. In this study, we designed a triplex-forming
oligonucleotide (TFO) directed to a homopurine:homopyrimidine sequence in the
Ets2 promoter. Transcription factors of the Sp family bound to this sequence and 
mutation of the Sp1 site reduced Ets2 promoter activity. The Ets2-TFO had high
binding affinity for the target sequence and inhibited binding of Sp1/Sp3 to the 
overlapping site. This effect occurred with a high degree of sequence
specificity. Mismatched oligonucleotides did not inhibit Sp1/Sp3 binding and
mutations in the target sequence that abolished triplex formation prevented
inhibition of Sp1/Sp3 binding by the TFO. The Ets2-TFO inhibited Ets2 promoter
activity and expression of the endogenous gene in prostate cancer cells at
nanomolar concentrations. The TFO did not affect reporter constructs with
mutations in the TFO binding site and promoters of non-targeted genes. Expression
of non-targeted genes was also not affected in TFO-treated cells. Collectively,
these data demonstrated that the anti-transcriptional activity of the Ets2-TFO
was sequence- and target-specific, and ruled out alternative, non-triplex
mediated mechanisms of action. This anti-transcriptional approach may be useful
to examine the effects of selective downregulation of Ets2 expression and may
have therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC149218
PMID: 12560478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Feb 1;12(3):247-55.

ETS2 overexpression in transgenic models and in Down syndrome predisposes to
apoptosis via the p53 pathway.

Wolvetang EJ(1), Wilson TJ, Sanij E, Busciglio J, Hatzistavrou T, Seth A, Hertzog
PJ, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

ETS2 is a transcription factor encoded by a gene on human chromosome 21 and
alterations in its expression have been implicated in the pathophysiological
features of Down syndrome (DS). This study demonstrates that overexpression of
ETS2 results in apoptosis. This is shown in a number of circumstances, including 
ETS2-overexpressing transgenic mice and cell lines and in cells from subjects
with DS. Indeed we report for the first time that the ETS2 overexpression
transgenic mouse develops a smaller thymus and lymphocyte abnormalities similar
to that observed in DS. In all circumstances of ETS2 overexpression, the
increased apoptosis correlated with increased p53 and alterations in downstream
factors in the p53 pathway. In the human HeLa cancer cell line, transfection with
functional p53 enables ETS2 overexpression to induce apoptosis. Furthermore,
crossing the ETS2 transgenic mice with p53(-/-) mice genetically rescued the
thymic apoptosis phenotype. Therefore, we conclude that overexpression of human
chromosome 21-encoded ETS2 induces apoptosis that is dependent on p53. These
results have important consequences for understanding DS and oncogenesis and may 
provide new insights into therapeutic interventions.

PMID: 12554679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Plant Cell Physiol. 2003 Jan;44(1):10-5.

CIP353 encodes an AP2/ERF-domain protein in potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) and
responds slowly to cold stress.

Mine T(1), Hiyoshi T, Kasaoka K, Ohyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Breeding and Genetics Research Laboratory, Japan Tobacco Inc., 700
Higashibara, Toyoda, Iwata, Shizuoka, 438-0802 Japan.

We isolated the CIP353 cDNA, which encodes a novel cold-inducible protein, from
cold-stored tubers of potato (Solanum tuberosum L.). The level of CIP353
transcripts began to increase in tubers 2 weeks after storage at 3 degrees C and 
continued increasing for at least 3 months during storage. This increase was not 
observed in tubers stored at >or=9 degrees C. The increased level of transcripts 
in tubers stored at 3 or 6 degrees C decreased when the tubers were shifted to 20
degrees C. These data suggest that CIP353 is a temperature-dependent and slowly
responsive cold-inducible gene of potato. The middle of the deduced amino acid
sequence of CIP353 cDNA showed high similarity to the AP2/ERF domain, which
occurs in some plant regulatory factors. The deduced protein contained a putative
basic nuclear-localization signal and potential acidic activation domains. These 
data suggest that CIP353 protein is a transcription factor of genes expressed in 
tubers under long-term storage at low temperatures.

PMID: 12552142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Epilepsy Res. 2003 Jan;52(3):147-87.

Epilepsy and pregnancy: Report of an Epilepsy Research Foundation Workshop.

Barrett C(1), Richens A.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Research Foundation, W4 4XT, London, UK. info@erf.org.uk

Pregnancy in women with epilepsy (WWE) is known to be associated with a higher
risk of congenital malformations than is associated with pregnancy in
non-epileptic women. Several factors have been identified to account for the
increased risk, including the direct teratogenic effects of antiepileptic drug
(AED) therapy, indirect effects of these drugs by interfering with folate
metabolism, genetic abnormalities in drug or folate metabolism, and possibly an
arrhythmogenic effect of maternal drug therapy on the embryonic heart, leading to
ischaemia in developing tissues. A harmful effect of maternal seizures on the
developing embryo has not been proven, although seizures and status epilepticus
account for most of the excess maternal mortality in women with epilepsy. Abrupt 
withdrawal of drug therapy by the mother may be an important contributory factor.
Less is known about the psychomotor development of children born to mothers with 
epilepsy because few studies have been designed to follow their progress
throughout childhood. Retrospective studies suggest that impaired cognitive
development may be associated with maternal drug therapy, particularly valproate.
There is an urgent need to evaluate these risks and, with this in mind, several
prospective registers have been set up to collect data from pregnancies in women 
with epilepsy.

PMID: 12536051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Gen Virol. 2003 Jan;84(Pt 1):41-9.

Ets-2 Repressor Factor (ERF) mediates repression of the human cytomegalovirus
major immediate-early promoter in undifferentiated non-permissive cells.

Bain M(1), Mendelson M, Sinclair J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, PO Box 157, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.

The repression of human cytomegalovirus immediate-early (IE) lytic gene
expression is crucial for the maintenance of the latent viral state. By using
conditionally permissive cell lines, which provide a good model for the
differentiation state-dependent repression of IE gene expression, we have
identified several cellular factors that bind to the major immediate-early
promoter (MIEP) and whose expression is down-regulated after differentiation to a
permissive phenotype. Here we show that the cellular protein Ets-2 Repressor
Factor (ERF) physically interacts with the MIEP and represses MIEP activity in
undifferentiated non-permissive T2 embryonal carcinoma cells. This factor binds
to the dyad element and the 21 bp repeats within the MIEP - regions known to be
important for the negative regulation of MIEP activity. Finally, we show that
following differentiation to a permissive phenotype ERF's repressive effects are 
severely abrogated.

PMID: 12533699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. World J Gastroenterol. 2003 Feb;9(2):205-8.

Overexpression of ETS2 in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Li X(1), Lu JY, Zhao LQ, Wang XQ, Liu GL, Liu Z, Zhou CN, Wu M, Liu ZH.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy
of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China.

AIM: To study the expression pattern of ETS2 (erythroblastosis virus oncogene
homolog 2) in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).
METHODS: Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Northern
blot were performed to examine the expression level of ETS2 mRNA in 37 pairs of
ESCC tissue samples. Western blot and immunohistochemistry were carried out to
check the expression level of ETS2 protein in 30 pairs of ESCC tissue specimens.
RESULTS: RT-PCR and Northern blot analysis showed that ETS2 mRNA upregulated in
75.7 % (28/37) examined ESCC tissues relative to matched normal tissues. From
those 37 cases, 14 cases were randomly selected to perform Western blot and the
results revealed that ETS2 protein overexpressed in 71.4 % (10/14) checked ESCC
tissues compared with the corresponding normal tissues. Moreover, the expression 
patterns of ETS2 protein in those 14 cases were identical to those of ETS2 mRNA
displayed by RT-PCR or Northern Blot. Immunohistochemistry analysis showed that
the expression level of ETS2 protein rose in 75 % (12/16) tumor epithelial cells 
contrasted to the normal cells. Altogether the expression level of ETS2 protein
increased in 73.3 % (22/30) checked ESCC tissue samples contrary to their normal 
counterparts.
CONCLUSION: The results suggested that ETS2 overexpressed in paired human ESCC
tissue samples at both mRNA and protein levels and may be associated with the
tumorigenesis of esophagus.

PMCID: PMC4611312
PMID: 12532432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. BMC Mol Biol. 2003 Jan 16;4(1):1. Print 2003 Jan 16.

Phage annealing proteins promote oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis in
Escherichia coli and mouse ES cells.

Zhang Y(1), Muyrers JP, Rientjes J, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Program, EMBL, Meyerhofstr, 1, 69117, Heidelberg.
youming.zhang@genebridges.com <youming.zhang@genebridges.com>

BACKGROUND: The phage protein pairs, RecE/RecT from Rac or Redalpha/Redbeta from 
lambda, initiate efficient double strand break repair (DSBR) in Escherichia coli 
that has proven very useful for DNA engineering. These phage pairs initiate DSBR 
either by annealing or by another mechanism that is not defined.
RESULTS: Here we report that these proteins also mediate single strand
oligonucleotide repair (ssOR) at high efficiencies. The ssOR activity, unlike
DSBR, does not require a phage exonuclease (RecE or Redalpha) but only requires a
phage annealing protein (RecT or Redbeta). Notably, the P22 phage annealing
protein Erf, which does not mediate the same DSBR reactions, also delivers ssOR
activity. By altering aspects of the oligonucleotides, we document length and
design parameters that affect ssOR efficiency to show a simple relationship to
homologies either side of the repair site. Notably, ssOR shows strand bias.
Oligonucleotides that can prime lagging strand replication deliver more ssOR than
their leading complements. This suggests a model in which the annealing proteins 
hybridize the oligonucleotides to single stranded regions near the replication
fork. We also show that ssOR is a highly efficient way to engineer BACs and can
be detected in a eukaryotic cell upon expression of a phage annealing protein.
CONCLUSION: Phage annealing proteins can initiate the recombination of single
stranded oligonucleotides into endogenous targets in Escherichia coli at very
high efficiencies. This expands the repertoire of useful DNA engineering
strategies, shows promise for applications in eukaryotic cells, and has
implications for the unanswered questions regarding DSBR mediated by RecE/RecT
and Redalpha/Redbeta.

PMCID: PMC149363
PMID: 12530927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Jan;17(1):11-26.

A central role for Ets-2 in the transcriptional regulation and cyclic adenosine
5'-monophosphate responsiveness of the human chorionic gonadotropin-beta subunit 
gene.

Ghosh D(1), Ezashi T, Ostrowski MC, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri
65211-5300, USA.

Ets-2 has an important role in controlling the differentiation of the placenta.
Here we show by truncation and mutational analysis that two closely spaced Ets-2 
binding sites in the proximal promoter of the human chorionic gonadotropin beta5 
(hCGbeta5) gene constitute a major enhancer for hCGbeta gene expression in JAr
and JEG-3 human choriocarcinoma cells and in mouse NIH3T3 cells. Contrary to a
previous report, we also demonstrate that the ability of Ets-2 to enhance
transcription is subject to control by the Ras/MAPK pathway, although this
relationship is less easily demonstrable in JAr and JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells
than in the 3T3 cells because the former already possess a fully activated MAPK
pathway and contain Ets-2 phosphorylated at threonine residue at T72.
Coexpression of Ets-2 and activated Ras in 3T3 cells led to activation of
MAPK/ERK kinase 1/2, phosphorylation of Ets-2 at T72, and an approximately
120-fold up-regulation of reporter gene expression from a short (-175) hCGbeta
promoter. Fold activation in JAr and JEG-3 cells was rather less (20- to
30-fold), but basal activity was much higher. These effects on promoter activity 
were largely reversed in presence of the MAPK inhibitor PD98059, which prevents
ERK1/2 activation, and partially reversed by mutating T72 on Ets-2. We finally
show that the ability of 8-bromoadenosine-cAMP to stimulate hCGbeta promoter
activity in JAr and JEG-3 cells occurs with a short promoter lacking the upstream
elements previously considered to be essential for cAMP activation of the gene
and, through mutational analysis, confirm that the major cAMP effects on the
hCGbeta promoter are mediated through the proximal Ets-2 enhancer. The data are
consistent with the hypothesis that Ets-2 has a general and possibly essential
role in controlling the activity of genes associated with trophectoderm
differentiation.

PMID: 12511603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Croat Med J. 2002 Dec;43(6):685-9.

Elevated serum lipids in veterans with combat-related chronic posttraumatic
stress disorder.

Solter V(1), Thaller V, Karlovic D, Crnkovic D.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Psychiatry, Sisters of Mercy University Hospital,
Zagreb, Croatia. dalibor.karlovic@zg.hinet.hr

AIM: To assess possible differences in serum cholesterol, low density lipoprotein
cholesterol (LDL-C), high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), triglycerides,
arteriosclerosis index, established risk factor (ERF) of arteriosclerosis, and
10-year risk for coronary disease according to the Adult Treatment Panel III
(ATP-III) between veterans with combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) and a control group consisting of patients with major depressive disorder.
METHOD: We determined serum cholesterol, LDL-C, HDL-C, and triglycerides in the
patients with PTSD (n = 103) and patients with major depressive disorder (n =
92), using the enzyme-assay method. AI, ERF, and ATP-III were calculated from
cholesterol, LDL-C, and HDL-C levels. The groups were matched in age and body
mass index (BMI). Patients with major depressive disorder were chosen as a
control group because they do not have changes in serum lipids.
RESULTS: Patients with combat-related PTSD had higher mean concentration of
cholesterol (6.2+/-1.1 mmol/L vs 5.3+/-0.9 mmol/L; p<0.001), LDL-C (3.9+/-0.7
mmol/L vs 3.5+/-1.0 mmol/L; p = 0.005), and triglycerides (2.9+/-2.3 mmol/L vs
1.5+/-0.5 mmol/L; p<0.001), and lower HDL-C (1.0+/-0.3 mmol/L vs 1.3+/-0.2
mmol/L; p<0.001) than the control group. Arteriosclerosis index (4.2+/-1.2 vs
3.7+/-1.7; p = 0.050), ERF (6.4+/-1.9 vs 5.5+/-2.4; p = 0.010), and ATP-III
(12.1+/-3.3 vs 10.2+/-3.8; p<0.001) were higher in PTSD than in the control
group.
CONCLUSION: Elevated concentrations of serum lipids are associated with
combat-related PTSD. This may imply that patients with combat-related PTSD are
under a higher risk for arteriosclerosis.

PMID: 12476477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 14;278(7):5473-7. Epub 2002 Dec 4.

Essential role of the transcription factor Ets-2 in Xenopus early development.

Kawachi K(1), Masuyama N, Nishida E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies,
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

The fibroblast growth factor (FGF)/MAPK pathway plays an important role in early 
Xenopus developmental processes, including mesoderm patterning. The activation of
the MAPK pathway leads to induction of Xenopus Brachyury (Xbra), which regulates 
the transcription of downstream mesoderm-specific genes in mesoderm patterning.
However, the link between the FGF/MAPK pathway and the induction of Xbra has not 
been fully understood. Here we present evidence suggesting that Ets-2 is involved
in the induction of Xbra and thus in the development of posterior mesoderm during
early embryonic development. Overexpression of Ets-2 caused posteriorized embryos
and led to the induction of mesoderm in ectodermal explants. Expression of a
dominant-negative form of Ets-2 or injection of antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides against Ets-2 inhibited the formation of the trunk and tail
structures. Overexpression of Ets-2 resulted in the induction of Xbra, and
expression of the dominant-negative Ets-2 inhibited FGF- or constitutively active
MEK-induced Xbra expression. Moreover, overexpression of Ets-2 up-regulated the
transcription from Xbra promoter reporter gene constructs. Ets-2 bound to the
Xbra promoter region in vitro. These results taken together indicate that Xenopus
Ets-2 plays an essential role in mesoderm patterning, lying between the FGF/MAPK 
pathway and the Xbra transcription.

PMID: 12468533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Biomed Tech (Berl). 2002;47 Suppl 1 Pt 2:577-80.

MEG-analysis using the Hilbert transform.

Link A(1), Elster C, Sander T, Lueschow A, Curio G, Trahms L.

Author information: 
(1)Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, 10587 Berlin, Germany.

Event-related fields (ERFs) measured by magnetoencephalography (MEG) upon visual 
stimulation are analysed by Hilbert transformation. The Hilbert transform of
real-valued measured ERF is an analytic complex signal, represented by phase and 
amplitude. The temporal behaviour of the derivative of the phase, i.e. the
instantaneous frequency, allows to distinguish time intervals containing
meaningful signal from noise. On the basis of both phase and amplitude, energies 
and latencies of single event ERFs can be determined.

PMID: 12465242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Poult Sci. 2002 Nov;81(11):1728-37.

Effect of cage vs. floor litter environments on the pulmonary hypertensive
response to intravenous endotoxin and on blood-gas values in broilers.

Wang W(1), Erf GF, Wideman RF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas 
72701, USA. wxw03@mail.uark.edu

Intravenous endotoxin has been shown to trigger a delayed pulmonary hypertensive 
response that varies widely in magnitude and duration among individual broilers. 
It was proposed that this individual variability may reflect immunological
differences acquired during previous respiratory challenges that might have
subsequently altered the endotoxin-initiated biochemical cascade. In Experiment
1, we tested the hypothesis that, when compared with broilers reared in clean
stainless steel cages (Cage group), broilers reared on floor litter (Floor group)
should experience a greater respiratory challenge and therefore may consistently 
exhibit a more enhanced pulmonary hypertensive response to intravenous endotoxin.
Birds in the Cage group were grown in stainless steel cages at a low density (72 
birds/8 m2 chamber), and fecal and dander materials were removed daily. Birds in 
the Floor group were reared on wood-shavings litter at a higher density (110
birds/8 m2 chamber). Pulmonary and systemic mean arterial pressures and blood-gas
values were evaluated prior to and following the intravenous administration of 1 
mg Salmonella typhimurium endotoxin. Broilers in the Floor and Cage groups
exhibited pulmonary hypertensive responses to endotoxin that were very similar in
terms of time of onset, duration, and magnitude, as well as variability in the
response among individuals. Systemic hypotension also developed similarly in both
groups following endotoxin injection. Blood-gas values indicated that the partial
pressure of CO2 and the HCO3- concentration in arterial blood were higher (P <
0.05) in the Floor group than in the Cage group prior to and subsequent to the
endotoxin injection. In Experiment 2, we reevaluated the effect of a dirty vs. a 
clean environment on blood-gas values using a different strain of broilers, and
confirmed the negative impact of floor rearing on blood-gas values. We conclude
that broilers reared on the floor inhaled litter dust and noxious fumes, which
impaired pulmonary gas exchange and increased the arterial partial pressure of
CO2 when compared with broilers reared in clean stainless steel cages.
Nevertheless, the pulmonary hypertensive response to endotoxin did not differ
between broilers reared on the floor and those in cages.

PMID: 12455602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Science. 2002 Nov 8;298(5596):1238-41.

The control of spikelet meristem identity by the branched silkless1 gene in
maize.

Chuck G(1), Muszynski M, Kellogg E, Hake S, Schmidt RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Gene Expression Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture-Agricultural
Research Service, 800 Buchanan Street, Albany, CA 94710, USA.
gchuck@nature.berkeley.edu

Most of the world's food supply is derived from cereal grains that are borne in a
unique structure called the spikelet, the fundamental unit of inflorescence
architecture in all grasses. branched silkless1 (bd1) is a maize mutation that
alters the identity of the spikelet meristem, causing indeterminate branches to
form in place of spikelets. We show that bd1 encodes a putative ERF transcription
factor that is conserved in different grasses and is expressed in a distinct
domain of the spikelet meristem. Its expression pattern suggests that signaling
pathways regulate meristem identity from lateral domains of the spikelet
meristem.

PMID: 12424380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Acta Med Croatica. 2001;55(4-5):161-7.

Angiotensin-converting enzyme gene polymorphism, lipids, and apolipoproteins in
menopausal women on hormone replacement therapy.

Cubrilo-Turek M(1), Sertic J, Durakovic Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Sveti Duh General Hospital, Clinical Institute of
Laboratory Diagnosis, Sveti Duh 64, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia. mcubrilo@mef.hr

This study investigated the frequency of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
genotypes, concentrations of total cholesterol (T-C), triglycerides (TG),
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
(LDL-C), lipoprotein Lp (a), Established Risk Factor (ERF) ratio (total
cholesterol/HDL-C), apolipoproteins A-I, A-II, apoBand apoE in 134 menopausal
women aged 49.62 +/- 4.83 on oral hormone replacement therapy (HRT) (2 mg 17 beta
estradiol plus 1 mg norethisterone acetate/day), during (mean +/- SD) 15.77 +/-
9.94 months. ACE genotypes of 134 menopausal women showed DD genotype in 48
(36%), ID genotype in 59 (44%), and II genotype in 27 (20%) women, with the mean 
body mass index (BMI) (kg/m2) of 26.34 +/- 4.02, systolic blood pressure (mm Hg) 
of 145.71 +/- 23.32, diastolic blood pressure of 95.28 +/- 12.88, pulse rate of
77.76 +/- 13.81, positive family history of myocardial infarction (MI) (23%) and 
stroke (22%); 26% were smokers and 6% consumed alcohol regularly. The mean levels
of TC (mmol/l) were 5.72 +/- 1.25, TG (mmol/L) 1.63 +/- 0.82, HDL-C (mmol/L) 1.15
+/- 0.29, LDL-C (mmol/L) 3.98 +/- 1.31, lipoprotein Lp(a) (g/L) 0.16 +/- 0.24,
ERF ratio 5.35 +/- 1.90, apolipoproteins (g/L): A-I 1.83 +/- 0.39, A-II 0.57 +/- 
0.12, apoB 0.92 +/- 0.31, and apoE 0.08 +/- 0.04. The highest mean levels of T-C 
5.89 +/- 1.40, TG 1.67 +/- 0.96, LDL-C 4.15 +/- 1.60, lipoprotein Lp(a) 0.19 +/- 
0.25) apoB 0.95 +/- 0.32 and ERF ratio 5.46 +/- 2.24 were found in ID genotype,
while in DD genotype HDL-C 1.11 +/- 0.28 and apo A-I 1.78 +/- 0.34 were lowest.
In II genotype, the levels of apo A-II 0.56 +/- 0.11 were lowest and of apoE 0.09
+/- 0.05 highest. According to DD, ID and II genotypes and lipid, lipoprotein
Lp(a), ERF ratio and apolipoprotein concentrations, there were no statistically
significant differences between groups. ERF ratio in DD genotype showed a
positive correlation with TG (r = 0.59) and LDL-C (r = 0.57), a slight positive
correlation with apoB (r = 0.40), and a strong negative correlation with HDL-C (r
= -0.73). ERF in ID genotype showed a strong negative correlation with HDL-C (r =
-0.73), strong positive correlation with TG (r = 0.70), and T-C (r = 0.58), and
slight positive correlation with LDL-C (r = 0.36) and alcohol abuse (r = 0.34).
In II genotype, ERF ratio showed a strong positive correlation with LDL-C (r =
0.73), T-C (r = 0.70) and apoE (r = 0.58), slight positive correlation with apoB 
(r = 0.46) and TG (r = 0.36), and negative correlation with HDL-C (r = -0.54).
Matrix correlation of DD genotypes showed the highest positive correlation
between T-C and LDL-C (r = 0.91) and apoE (r = 0.45), and negative correlation
between HDL-C and ERF ratio (r = 77), and LDL-C and ERF ratio (r = 0.55). In ID
genotype, T-C showed a strong positive correlation between LDL-C (r = 0.75) and
ERF ratio (r = 0.63), TG and ERF ratio (r = 0.73), and negative with HDL-C (r =
0.53). In genotype II, T-C showed a strong positive correlation between LDL-C (r 
= 0.96), ERF ratio (r = 0.71), apoB (r = 0.66) and apoE (r = 0.46). LDL-C
correlated positively with ERF ratio (r = 0.72), apoB (r = 0.61) and apoE (r =
0.48). These findings indicated the frequency of ACE genotypes to differ within
the group of menopausal women. Analysis of ACE genotypes showed ID genotype to be
most common among menopausal women. This result indicated their intermediate risk
of coronary heart disease (CHD) and myocardial infarction (MI). It has been well 
established that an increased risk of MI is associated with high frequency of DD 
genotype, and a low risk with high frequencies of II genotype. In addition to ACE
polymorphism analysis, assessment of lipid, apolipoprotein, and lipoprotein Lp(a)
concentrations, and of ERF ratio provides further important parameters for better
understanding of the risk factors for CDH in women. In the present study,
assessment of the genetic, metabolic and environmental markers pointed to an
intermediate risk of CHD in menopausal women on HRT, although the mechanism
underlying the disease is not clear and well understood yet.

PMID: 12398019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. EMBO Rep. 2002 Nov;3(11):1075-81. Epub 2002 Oct 22.

Expression of mutant Ets protein at the neuromuscular synapse causes alterations 
in morphology and gene expression.

de Kerchove D'Exaerde A(1), Cartaud J, Ravel-Chapuis A, Seroz T, Pasteau F, Angus
LM, Jasmin BJ, Changeux JP, Schaeffer L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 2182 'Récepteurs et
Cognition' Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France.

The localized transcription of several muscle genes at the motor endplate is
controlled by the Ets transcription factor GABP. To evaluate directly its
contribution to the formation of the neuromuscular junction, we generated
transgenic mice expressing a general Ets dominant-negative mutant specifically in
skeletal muscle. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that the expression of
genes containing an Ets-binding site was severely affected in the mutant mice.
Conversely, the expression of other synaptic genes, including MuSK and Rapsyn,
was unchanged. In these animals, muscles expressing the mutant transcription
factor developed normally, but examination of the post-synaptic morphology
revealed marked alterations of both the primary gutters and secondary folds of
the neuromuscular junction. Our results demonstrate that Ets transcription
factors are crucial for the normal formation of the neuromuscular junction. They 
further show that Ets-independent mechanisms control the synaptic expression of a
distinct set of synaptic genes.

PMCID: PMC1307595
PMID: 12393756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Immunol. 2002 Nov 1;169(9):4873-81.

The role of the Ets2 transcription factor in the proliferation, maturation, and
survival of mouse thymocytes.

Zaldumbide A(1), Carlotti F, Pognonec P, Boulukos KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signaling, Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, Center de
Biochimie, Université de Nice, Parc Valrose, France.

In this study, we investigated the effects of Ets2 expression on the
proliferation, maturation, and survival of thymocytes by establishing transgenic 
mice that specifically express Ets2 or a dominant negative form of Ets2,
Deltaets2, in the thymus. We show that, in young animals, there are fewer T cells
in Deltaets2 transgenic thymi and that the maturation of these T cells is
affected at the CD4(-)CD8(-) double-negative to CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive
transition compared with wild-type littermate mice. Partial recovery in the
number of thymocytes and full T cell maturation are restored with increasing age 
of Deltaets2 transgenic animals. However, thymocytes from adult Deltaets2
transgenic mice cultured ex vivo are more sensitive to cell death and to
glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis than are T cells from control littermate mice.
We also show that T cells from adult ets2 transgenic mice proliferate faster than
their wild-type littermates. The proliferation and survival of these T cells are 
clearly affected upon apoptotic signals: glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis induces
T cells from ets2 transgenic mice to continue to proliferate in vivo and to
survive better ex vivo than T cells from control littermates. It has been shown
that c-Myc expression is required for thymic proliferation and improves thymocyte
survival of dexamethasone-treated animals. We show that the expression of c-Myc, 
an Ets2 target, is elevated in T cells freshly isolated from thymi of ets2
transgenic mice pretreated with dexamethasone. Together, these results show that 
Ets2 plays a role in the proliferation and survival of thymocytes, implicating a 
Myc-dependent pathway.

PMID: 12391198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Neurophysiol. 2002 Oct;88(4):1859-66.

Innervation territories of mechano-insensitive C nociceptors in human skin.

Schmidt R(1), Schmelz M, Weidner C, Handwerker HO, Torebjörk HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, University of Uppsala, 751 85 Uppsala,
Sweden. roland.schmidt@nc.uas.lul.se

Microneurographic recordings were obtained in the peroneal nerve from 20
mechano-insensitive units (CMi) and six mechano-heat responsive C units (CMH) in 
healthy human subjects. Their innervation territories in the skin of the leg or
foot were assessed by transcutaneous electrical stimulation with a pointed probe 
at intensities of 10 to 100 mA (0.2 ms) and, when applicable, by mechanical von
Frey hair stimulation. Electro-receptive fields (eRFs) of CMH units had a median 
area of 1.95 cm(2) when mapped with 10 mA that coincided approximately with
mechano-receptive fields (mRFs) as mapped with a 750-mN von Frey hair.
Fifty-milliampere stimuli increased the eRFs to 3.08 cm(2) in a concentric
manner. This was probably due to current spread since these units are known to
have low electrical thresholds. Further increase of the stimulus strength to 70
or 100 mA increased the eRFs only marginally. Mechano-insensitive units had much 
smaller eRFs (median: 0.35 cm(2)) than CMH units when mapped with the same
pointed probe at 10 mA (n = 13). The receptive territories consisted of one
distinct spot or of several spots separated by distances of more than 1 cm.
However, when mapping stimuli of 50 mA were applied, eRFs became continuous and
grew to a median area of 5.34 cm(2), i.e., larger than those of CMHs. The borders
of eRFs of CMi units were significantly more irregular compared with CMH units. A
further increase of the stimulus intensity to a maximum of 100 mA only marginally
enlarged the eRFs. The CMi units could be activated by heat or chemical
substances applied inside the 50-mA eRF, indicating that receptive nerve endings 
were mapped. Responsiveness to these stimuli was inhomogeneous within the eRFs.
It was concluded that innervation territories of CMi units in human skin exceed
those of CMH units in size by a factor of approximately 3. The widely branched
terminals underlying the large fields are consistent with a role of this
nociceptor class in axon reflex flare and preclude a role in exact spatial
discrimination of noxious stimuli.

PMID: 12364512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Epilepsy Res. 2002 Sep;51(1-2):1-4.

Clinical practice: antimalarial prophylaxis in patients with epilepsy
[corrected].

Richens A(1), Andrews C; Epilepsy Research Foundation.

Author information: 
(1)The Epilepsy Research Foundation, PO Box 3004, London W4 1XT, UK.
info@erf.org.uk

Erratum in
    Epilepsy Res. 2003 Mar;53(3):265.

PMID: 12350378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Methods Mol Biol. 2002;193:29-58.

Using the quantitative competitive RT-PCR technique to analyze minute amounts of 
different mRNAs in small tissue samples.

Greber-Platzer S(1), Balcz B, Fleischmann C, Lubec G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Vienna, Austria.

PMID: 12325518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Poult Sci. 2002 Aug;81(8):1231-5.

Immunohistochemical evidence of cytochrome C oxidase subunit II involvement in
pulmonary hypertension syndrome (PHS) in broilers.

Iqbal M(1), Freiburger JD, Erf GF, Botje WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, Center of Excellencefor Poultry Science,
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701, USA. iqbal@uark.edu

Defects and variation in the relative amount of protein subunits in the
mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) have been hypothesized to be
involved, in part, in the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension syndrome (PHS), 
a costly metabolic disease. Thus, the major objective of this study was to
determine whether differences in relative amounts of cytochrome c oxidase subunit
I and II (COX I and II) can be detected by immunohistochemistry and digital image
analysis in muscle tissue of broilers with PHS compared to control broilers.
Cross sections of the breast muscle (pectoralis major) were stained with
monoclonal antibodies for COX I and II. Relative areas of multiple microscope
viewing fields (400x) per tissue section of COX I and II were quantified by
counting immunopositive pixels on the digital images. Whereas the number of
immunopositive pixels for COX II was higher in PHS birds compared to controls,
there were no difference for COX I. The amount of COX II was positively
correlated with the right to total ventricular weight ratio (RV:TV), suggesting
that there may be increased expression of COX II associated with severity of
pulmonary arterial hypertension. Thus, it is possible that COX II expression in
PHS broiler may be involved in the pathogenesis of PHS.

PMID: 12211317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Poult Sci. 2002 Aug;81(8):1224-30.

Pulmonary hypertensive response to endotoxin in cellulose-primed and unprimed
broiler chickens.

Wang W(1), Wideman RF Jr, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)wxw03@mail.uark.edu

Previous studies indicate that individual broilers vary widely in their pulmonary
vascular responsiveness to i.v. injections of endotoxin. This individual
variability may reflect differences acquired during previous respiratory
challenges or genetic variability that may be associated with susceptibility to
pulmonary hypertension syndrome (ascites). In the present study, we compared the 
endotoxin responses of 4- to 5- wk-old control broilers (unprimed) and broilers
in which the pulmonary vasculature had been immunologically challenged 48 h
previously by an i.v. injection of cellulose micro-particles (primed). The
injected cellulose micro-particles are carried in the venous blood to the lungs, 
where they become trapped in the pulmonary vasculature and initiate acute focal
inflammatory responses within the surrounding lung parenchyma. Physiological
variables (respiratory rate, heart rate, pulmonary and systemic arterial
pressures) were evaluated prior to and following the i.v. administration of 1 mg 
of Salmonella typhimurium endotoxin. Prior to endotoxin injection, the
respiratory rate was higher in primed than in unprimed broilers; however, the
heart rate, pulmonary arterial pressure, and systemic arterial pressure did not
differ between groups. Broilers in both groups exhibited similar ranges of
individual variability in their endotoxin responses. The overall time of onset,
magnitude, and duration of the pulmonary hypertensive responses were similar for 
both groups. Accordingly, the initiation of a preexisting inflammatory response
within the lung parenchyma did not alter the timing, amplitude, or variability of
the subsequent pulmonary hypertensive response to endotoxin in broilers.

PMID: 12211316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Poult Sci. 2002 Aug;81(8):1203-17.

Intravenous micro-particle injections and pulmonary hypertension in broiler
chickens: acute post-injection mortality and ascites susceptibility.

Wideman RF Jr(1), Erf GF, Chapman ME, Wang W, Anthony NB, Xiaofang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA. rwideman@comp.uark.edu

Intravenously injected micro-particles become trapped within the pulmonary
vasculature where they increase the resistance to blood flow and trigger
pulmonary hypertension. We tested the hypothesis that i.v. micro-particle
injections can be used to trigger acute (24 to 48 h) post-injection mortality in 
broilers having the most limited pulmonary vascular capacity, or ascites in
broilers whose marginal cardiopulmonary capacity renders them susceptible to
pulmonary hypertension syndrome (PHS). Progressive inflammation-associated
responses were initiated within the lung parenchyma by 10 to 80 microm diameter
dextran polymer (Sephadex) and 30 microm diameter cellulose micro-particles,
leading to the scavenging of Sephadex micro-particles from the pulmonary
vasculature by <5 d post-injection, whereas the cellulose micro-particles
persisted for >7 d post-injection. The persistency and size of the cellulose
apparently facilitated chronic occlusion of blood flow through precapillary
arterioles, thereby triggering appreciable post-injection mortality and PHS at
relatively low injection volumes (0.3 to 0.6 mL at 0.02 g/mL). In contrast, the
small size of the polystyrene microspheres (15 microm), and the lack of
persistency of the Sephadex micro-particles, apparently precluded the reliable
occurrence of post-injection mortality or PHS until higher volumes (>0.8 mL at
0.02 g/mL) were injected. Values for the total susceptibility index (TSI: 24 to
48 h post-injection mortality + PHS mortality) following cellulose injections
were higher for broilers reared at cool temperatures than at thermoneutral
temperatures. The incidences of PHS induced by exposing broilers from different
genetic lines to constant cool temperatures qualitatively paralleled the
respective post-injection mortalities elicited by injecting the cellulose
micro-particle suspension into the same lines. These observations indicate the
micro-particle injection methodology potentially can replace unilateral pulmonary
artery occlusion as the technique of choice for genetically selecting broilers
that have a sufficiently robust pulmonary vascular capacity to resist the onset
of pulmonary hypertension and PHS. The functional importance of the relative
antigenicity of different micro-particle types, and the extent to which key
immune-mediated responses, either beneficial or detrimental, might be co-selected
by the micro-particle injection technology, remain to be clarified.

PMID: 12211314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Curr Drug Targets. 2002 Oct;3(5):359-67.

ETS proteins and MMPs: partners in invasion and metastasis.

Singh S(1), Barrett J, Sakata K, Tozer RG, Singh G.

Author information: 
(1)Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre, Ontario, Canada.

Binding sites for the ETS domain family of transcription factors are found in the
promoters of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family of matrix degrading
enzymes. Evidence is accumulating that both these groups of molecules are
important in the process of angiogenesis in addition to matrix degradation.
Furthermore, they are both expressed in tumor tissue as well as in the normal
surrounding stroma. These factors along with various sites at which they may be
regulated collectively makes them attractive targets to consider for therapeutic 
intervention in the processes of invasion and metastasis.

PMID: 12182227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Anticancer Res. 2002 Jul-Aug;22(4):2385-9.

Linkage of elevated ets-2 expression to hepatocarcinogenesis.

Ito Y(1), Miyoshi E, Takeda T, Nagano H, Sakon M, Noda K, Tsujimoto M, Monden M, 
Matsuura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kuma Hospital, Kobe, Japan. ito01@kuma-h.or.jp

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that ets-2, a transcription factor, is
linked to carcinoma progression. In the present study, we investigated the
expression and clinical significance of ets-2 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
and malignant transformation of the liver.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression of ets-2 was immunohistochemically
investigated with 91 HCC, 46 noncancerous lesions, 8 atypical adenomatous
hyperplasias and 14 normal liver controls.
RESULTS: The ets-2 labeling index (LI) in normal liver was significantly lower
than in noncancerous lesion (p<0.0001). The LI in atypical adenomatous
hyperplasia tended to be higher than in noncancerous lesion (p=.0779). In HCC,
the LI was significantly lower (p<0.0001) than that in noncancerous lesion and
atypical adenomatous hyperplasia. In HCC, the ets-2 expression level was
significantly lower in cases with advanced stage (p=0.0085), large size
(p=0.0441), high proliferating activity (p<0.0001), poor differentiation
(p=0.0005), the presence of portal invasion (p=0.0009) and intrahepatic
metastasis (p=0.0236) and shorter disease-free survival (p=0.0372).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that ets-2 plays an important role
predominantly in malignant transformation of the liver.

PMID: 12174931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Plant Cell. 2002 Aug;14(8):1737-49.

Ectopic expression of BABY BOOM triggers a conversion from vegetative to
embryonic growth.

Boutilier K(1), Offringa R, Sharma VK, Kieft H, Ouellet T, Zhang L, Hattori J,
Liu CM, van Lammeren AA, Miki BL, Custers JB, van Lookeren Campagne MM.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Research International, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
k.a.boutilier@plant.wag-ur.nl

The molecular mechanisms underlying the initiation and maintenance of the
embryonic pathway in plants are largely unknown. To obtain more insight into
these processes, we used subtractive hybridization to identify genes that are
upregulated during the in vitro induction of embryo development from immature
pollen grains of Brassica napus (microspore embryogenesis). One of the genes
identified, BABY BOOM (BBM), shows similarity to the AP2/ERF family of
transcription factors and is expressed preferentially in developing embryos and
seeds. Ectopic expression of BBM in Arabidopsis and Brassica led to the
spontaneous formation of somatic embryos and cotyledon-like structures on
seedlings. Ectopic BBM expression induced additional pleiotropic phenotypes,
including neoplastic growth, hormone-free regeneration of explants, and
alterations in leaf and flower morphology. The expression pattern of BBM in
developing seeds combined with the BBM overexpression phenotype suggests a role
for this gene in promoting cell proliferation and morphogenesis during
embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC151462
PMID: 12172019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Anticancer Res. 2002 May-Jun;22(3):1581-4.

Expression of ets-1 and ets-2 in colonic neoplasms.

Ito Y(1), Takeda T, Okada M, Matsuura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Osaka Seamen's Insurance Hospital, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Investigation of transcription regulators in carcinoma can contribute
greatly to clarifying the biological character of the carcinoma. In this study,
we examined the expression of ets-1 and ets-2, prominent transcription regulators
belonging to the ets family, in various colonic tissues.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated the expression of ets-1 and ets-2 in
normal colon, hyperplastic polyps, adenomas, carcinoma-in-adenoma and colonic
adenocarcinomas by means of immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Expression of ets-1 and ets-2 was not observed in normal colon and
hyperplastic polyp. The ets-1 labeling index significantly increased with the
successive events of colonic carcinogenesis. A similar tendency was observed for 
ets-2 expression in colonic neoplasms. In adenocarcinoma, ets-1 and ets-2
expression was directly linked to lymph node metastasis.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that ets-1 and ets-2 may act as transcription
regulators of the genes related to colonic carcinogenesis and the progression of 
colonic adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 12168840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Neuron. 2002 Aug 1;35(3):547-53.

Clustered organization of neurons with similar extra-receptive field properties
in the primary visual cortex.

Yao H(1), Li CY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Shanghai Institutes of Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200 031, China.

The primary visual cortex is organized into clusters of cells having similar
classical receptive field (CRF) properties. Nonclassical, extra-receptive fields 
(ERFs) can either inhibit or facilitate the response elicited by stimulation
within the CRF. Here, we report that in the primary visual cortex of cat, neurons
with similar inhibitory or facilitatory ERF properties are also grouped into
clusters. These clusters are randomly distributed in all cortical layers, with no
detectable relationship with orientation and ocular dominance columns. This
functional organization of neurons with respect to ERF properties may allow an
efficient processing of global visual information.

PMID: 12165475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mech Dev. 2002 Aug;116(1-2):165-8.

Ets2 is expressed during morphogenesis of the somite and limb in the mouse
embryo.

Ristevski S(1), Tam PP, Hertzog PJ, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168,
Australia. sika.ristevski@med.monash.edu.au

Ets2 is a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. In order to address 
the developmental function of Ets2, we have examined its expression pattern in
E8.5 to E13.5 embryos using RNA whole-mount in situ hybridization. In the
paraxial mesoderm, Ets2 is expressed uniformly in the presomitic mesoderm and
then restricted to the cells in the rostral portion of the segmenting and the
next two recently formed somites. In the developing limb, Ets2 expression in the 
mesenchyme reflects the progressive formation of the hand or foot plate and the
digital skeleton. In addition, Ets2 is expressed in the otic vesicle and its
derivatives, the dorsal (posterior) root ganglia, the neuroepithelium in the
dorsal part of the caudal neural tube and the inter-segmental vasculature.

PMID: 12128217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):35819-25. Epub 2002 Jul 16.

Activation of Go-coupled dopamine D2 receptors inhibits ERK1/ERK2 in pituitary
cells. A key step in the transcriptional suppression of the prolactin gene.

Liu JC(1), Baker RE, Sun C, Sundmark VC, Elsholtz HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Banting and Best Diabetes 
Centre, University of Toronto and the University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario
M5G 1L5.

In pituitary lactotrophs the prolactin gene is stimulated by neuropeptides and
estrogen and is suppressed by dopamine via D2-type receptors. Stimulatory signals
converge on activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinases ERK1/2, but
dopamine regulation of this pathway is not well defined. Paradoxically, D2
agonists activate ERK1/2 in many cell types. Here we show that in
prolactin-secreting GH4ZR7 cells and primary pituitary cells, dopamine treatment 
leads to a rapid, pronounced, and specific decrease in activated ERK1/2. The
response is blocked by D2-specific antagonists and pertussis toxin.
Interestingly, in stable lines expressing specific pertussis toxin-resistant
Galpha subunits, toxin treatment blocks dopamine suppression of MAPK in
Galpha(i2)- but not Galphao-expressing cells, demonstrating that G(o)-dependent
pathways can effect the inhibitory MAPK response. At the nuclear level, the MEK1 
inhibitor U0126 mimics the D2-agonist bromocryptine in suppressing levels of
endogenous prolactin transcripts. Moreover, a good correlation is seen between
the IC(50) values for inhibition of MEK1 and suppression of prolactin promoter
function (PD184352 > U0126 > U0125). Both dopamine and U0126 enhance the nuclear 
localization of ERF, a MAPK-sensitive ETS repressor that inhibits prolactin
promoter activity. In addition, U0126 suppression is transferred by tandem copies
of the Pit-1-binding site, consistent with mapping experiments for dopamine
responsiveness. Our data suggest that ERK1/2 suppression is an obligatory step in
the dopaminergic control of prolactin gene transcription and that bidirectional
control of ERK1/2 function in the pituitary may provide a key mechanism for
endocrine gene control.

PMID: 12121979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Jul 15;11(15):1687-96.

PTEN blocks insulin-mediated ETS-2 phosphorylation through MAP kinase,
independently of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway.

Weng LP(1), Brown JL, Baker KM, Ostrowski MC, Eng C.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cancer Genetics Program and Human Cancer Genetics Program, Division
of Human Cancer Genetics, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and
Medical Genetics, and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Aug 1;12(15):1943.

The tumor suppressor PTEN possesses lipid and protein phosphatase activities. It 
has been well established that the lipid phosphatase activity is essential for
its tumor-suppressive function via the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt
pathways. The precise role of the protein phosphatase activity is still unclear. 
In the current study, we demonstrate that overexpression of wild-type PTEN in the
MCF-7 breast cancer line results in phosphatase activity-dependent decreases in
the phosphorylation of ETS-2, which is a transcription factor whose DNA-binding
ability is controlled by phosphorylation. Exposure of MCF-7 cells to insulin,
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) or epidermal growth factor (EGF) can lead to
the phosphorylation of ETS-2, Akt and ERK1/2. The MEK inhibitor PD590089
abrogates insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of ETS-2. In contrast, the PI3K
inhibitor LY492002 has no effect on insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of ETS-2, 
despite the fact that it diminishes insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of Akt.
Interestingly, overexpression of PTEN in MCF-7 leads to blockade of
insulin-stimulated, but not EGF-stimulated, phosphorylation of ERK, accompanied
by dramatic decreases in ETS-2 phosphorylation. We further show that the
relationship of PTEN and ETS-2 has functional significance by demonstrating that 
PTEN abrogates activation of the uPA Ras-responsive enhancer, a target of ETS-2
action, in a phosphatase-dependent manner, irrespective of the presence or
absence of insulin. Our observations, therefore, suggest that PTEN blocks
insulin-stimulated ETS-2 phosphorylation through inhibition of the ERK members of
the MAP kinase family independently of PI3K, and that the PTEN effect on the
phosphorylation status of ETS-2 may be mediated through PTEN's protein
phosphatase activity.

PMID: 12095911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Plant Mol Biol. 2002 Jul;49(5):473-82.

Wounding activates immediate early transcription of genes for ERFs in tobacco
plants.

Nishiuchi T(1), Suzuki K, Kitajima S, Sato F, Shinshi H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Japan.

We have previously demonstrated that cutting induces the rapid response of genes 
for ethylene-responsive transcription factors (ERFs) in leaf strips of tobacco,
and that the induction was not interfered but enhanced in the presence of the
protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX). In this study, we analyzed the
expression of genes for ERFs in tobacco plants by injuring leaf tissues with a
hemostat. The results verified that mechanical damage is a trigger for rapid and 
concurrent induction of both the local and the systemic expression of genes for
ERFs in tobacco plants. Further studies on systemic response of ERF genes in
response to different severity and position of the wound on a leaf suggested that
a threshold value might exist for the magnitude of wound signal to induce
systemic activation of these genes. Then, we examined expression of genes for
ERFs by analysis in transgenic tobacco plants that harbored reporter genes in
which the promoter of the gene for NsERF2, NsERF3 or NsERF4 was fused to a gene
for beta-glucuronidase. The results suggested that the local and systemic
accumulation of ERF mRNAs after wounding was primarily mediated by the rapid
activation of transcription of the respective genes. In addition, we found that
cycloheximide triggered rapid activation of genes for ERFs which might be
mediated via activation of transcription of the genes for ERFs.

PMID: 12090623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Poult Sci. 2002 Jun;81(6):877-86.

Intravenous micro-particle injection and pulmonary hypertension in broiler
chickens: cardio-pulmonary hemodynamic responses.

Wideman RF Jr(1), Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA. rwideman@mail.uark.edu

Experiments were conducted to determine whether intravenous injections of
micro-particles, having a size suitable to be trapped by the pulmonary
precapillary arterioles, could be used to increase the pulmonary vascular
resistance and thereby trigger an acute increase in the pulmonary arterial
pressure (pulmonary hypertension). Anesthetized male broilers injected
intravenously with inorganic (silica gel, polystyrene) or organic (cellulose,
Sephadex) micro-particles developed an immediate pulmonary hypertension in
proportion to the cumulative quantities of micro-particles injected.
Micro-particle occlusion of a portion of the pulmonary arterioles forced the
cardiac output to flow at a higher rate through the remaining vascular channels, 
thereby exposing a diffusion limitation characterized by undersaturation of the
systemic arterial blood with oxygen (hypoxemia). The concurrent onset of systemic
hypotension (reduced systemic arterial blood pressure) was not due to a reduction
in cardiac output but rather was attributed to hypoxemic vasodilation of the
systemic vasculature (reduced total peripheral resistance). Preliminary
histological evaluations revealed micro-particles lodged in inter- and
intraparabronchial arterioles, surrounded by aggregates of thrombocytes and
mononuclear leukocytes within 30 min post-injection. These observations infer
that intravenously injected micro-particles are carried to the lungs by the
returning venous blood, where trapping of the micro-particles by the pulmonary
vasculature triggers acute responses (increased pulmonary vascular resistance,
pulmonary hypertension, systemic hypoxemia, systemic hypotension) that mirror
those previously observed following acute occlusion of one pulmonary artery.
Additional studies will be required to determine the extent to which the focal
immune response to trapped micro-particles promotes local vasoconstriction that
amplifies the pulmonary hypertension attributable to direct physical obstruction 
of precapillary arterioles.

PMID: 12079056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. FEBS Lett. 2002 Apr 24;517(1-3):167-71.

Identification of casein kinase Ialpha interacting protein partners.

Dubois T(1), Howell S, Zemlickova E, Aitken A.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Edinburgh, Division of Biomedical and Clinical Laboratory
Sciences, Hugh Robson Building, George Square, Edinburgh, UK.
thierry.dubois@curie.fr

Casein kinase Ialpha (CKIalpha) belongs to a family of serine/threonine protein
kinases involved in membrane trafficking, RNA processing, mitotic spindle
formation and cell cycle progression. In this report, we identified several
CKIalpha interacting proteins including RCC1, high mobility group proteins 1 and 
2 (HMG1, HMG2), Erf, centaurin-alpha1, synaptotagmin IX and CPI-17 that were
isolated from brain as CKIalpha co-purifying proteins. Actin, importin-alpha(1), 
importin-beta, PP2Ac, centaurin-alpha1, and HMG1 were identified by affinity
chromatography using a peptide column comprising residues 214-233 of CKIalpha. We
have previously shown that centaurin-alpha1 represents a CKIalpha partner both in
vitro and in vivo. The nuclear protein regulator of chromosome condensation 1
(RCC1) is a guanosine nucleotide exchange factor for Ran which is involved in
nuclear transport and mitotic spindle formation. Here we show that CKIalpha and
RCC1 interact in brain and in cultured cells. However, the interaction does not
involve residues 217-233 of CKIalpha which are proposed from X-ray structures to 
represent an anchoring site for CKI partners. Formation of the RCC1/CKIalpha
complex is consistent with the association of the kinase with mitotic spindles.
In conclusion, we have identified a number of novel CKIalpha protein partners and
their relations to CKI are discussed.

PMID: 12062430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jun;16(6):1417-27.

Identification of two novel ACTH-responsive genes encoding manganese-dependent
superoxide dismutase (SOD2) and the zinc finger protein TIS11b [tetradecanoyl
phorbol acetate (TPA)-inducible sequence 11b].

Chinn AM(1), Ciais D, Bailly S, Chambaz E, LaMarre J, Feige JJ.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM EMI 01-05, Department of Molecular and Structural Biology, Commissariat
à l'Energie Atomique, Grenoble, France F-38054.

ACTH is the major trophic factor regulating and maintaining adrenocortical
function, affecting such diverse processes as steroidogenesis, cell
proliferation, cell migration, and cell survival. We used differential display
RT-PCR to identify genes that are rapidly induced by ACTH in the bovine adrenal
cortex. Of 42 PCR products differentially amplified from primary cultures of
bovine adrenocortical cells treated with 10 nM ACTH, six identified mRNAs that
were confirmed by Northern blot analysis to be induced by ACTH. Four of these
amplicons encoded noninformative repetitive sequences. Of the other two sequenced
amplicons, one encoded a partial sequence for mitochondrial manganese-dependent
superoxide dismutase (SOD2), an enzyme that is likely to protect adrenocortical
cells from the cytotoxic effects of radical oxygen species generated during
steroid biosynthesis. The second was identified as TIS11b
(phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate-inducible sequence 11b)/ERF-1/cMG, a member of
the CCCH double-zinc finger protein family. SOD2 induction by ACTH was
independent of extracellular steroid concentration or oxidative stress. SOD2 and 
TIS11b mRNA expressions were rapidly induced by ACTH, reaching a maximal level
after 8 h and 3 h of treatment, respectively. These ACTH effects were mimicked by
forskolin but appeared independent of cortisol secretion. Upon ACTH treatment,
induction of TIS11b expression closely followed the previously characterized peak
of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression. Transfection of a TIS11b
expression plasmid into 3T3 fibroblasts induced a decrease in the expression of a
reporter gene placed upstream of the VEGF 3'-untranslated region, indicating that
TIS11b may be an important regulator of VEGF expression through interaction with 
its 3'-untranslated region.

PMID: 12040026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Plant Cell. 2002 Apr;14(4):817-31.

Tomato transcription factors pti4, pti5, and pti6 activate defense responses when
expressed in Arabidopsis.

Gu YQ(1), Wildermuth MC, Chakravarthy S, Loh YT, Yang C, He X, Han Y, Martin GB.

Author information: 
(1)Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

The Pti4, Pti5, and Pti6 proteins from tomato were identified based on their
interaction with the product of the Pto disease resistance gene, a Ser-Thr
protein kinase. They belong to the ethylene-response factor (ERF) family of
plant-unique transcription factors and bind specifically to the GCC-box cis
element present in the promoters of many pathogenesis-related (PR) genes. Here,
we show that these tomato ERFs are localized to the nucleus and function in vivo 
as transcription activators that regulate the expression of GCC box-containing PR
genes. Expression of Pti4, Pti5, or Pti6 in Arabidopsis activated the expression 
of the salicylic acid-regulated genes PR1 and PR2. Expression of jasmonic acid-
and ethylene-regulated genes, such as PR3, PR4, PDF1.2, and Thi2.1, was affected 
differently by each of the three tomato ERFs, with Arabidopsis-Pti4 plants having
very high levels of PDF1.2 transcripts. Exogenous application of salicylic acid
to Arabidopsis-Pti4 plants suppressed the increased expression of PDF1.2 but
further stimulated PR1 expression. Arabidopsis plants expressing Pti4 displayed
increased resistance to the fungal pathogen Erysiphe orontii and increased
tolerance to the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato. These results
indicate that Pti4, Pti5, and Pti6 activate the expression of a wide array of PR 
genes and play important and distinct roles in plant defense.

PMCID: PMC150684
PMID: 11971137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. EBRI Issue Brief. 2002 Mar;(243):1-17.

The ongoing growth of defined contribution and individual account plans: issues
and implications.

Miller L.

This Issue Brief discusses the implications of the growth of defined contribution
(DC) retirement plans and individual account plans and the subsequent impact on
employers, employees, and retirement planning. It also presents a look at data
regarding contributions to retirement plans, employer trends regarding retirement
plans, and the potential impact of changes to the federal Social Security
retirement system. The findings and data in this article are drawn from material 
presented at a policy forum sponsored by the Employee Benefit Research Institute 
Education and Research Fund (EBRI-ERF) Dec. 7, 2001, in Washington, DC. Today,
prospective retirees need to be able to generate about 75 percent of their
current income to maintain their standard of living in retirement, up from 63
percent of their income in 1997, according to the Replacement Ratio Study, by Aon
Corporation and Georgia State University. However, the most recent data show a
decline in the percentage of income that average employees are saving. While it
is too early to quantify, it does not appear that the retirement provisions in
the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA) are
strongly influencing the movement to DC plans. However, employers appear very
interested in the provisions of the new law with regard to both defined benefit
(DB) retirement plans and DC plans. The number of large employers offering DB
plans continues to decline, from 85 percent in 1990 to 73 percent in 2000,
according to the Hewitt study. Although employers may have little influence over 
some factors that affect participation rates in voluntary retirement plans, they 
have various options to increase participation rates, such as "matching" employee
contributions, offering loan features, and providing education to employees about
the plans.

PMID: 11951730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Plant Physiol. 2002 Apr;128(4):1313-22.

Identification of Arabidopsis ethylene-responsive element binding factors with
distinct induction kinetics after pathogen infection.

Oñate-Sánchez L(1), Singh KB.

Author information: 
(1)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Plant Industry, 
Private Bag #5, Wembley, Western Australia 6913, Australia.

Ethylene-responsive element binding factors (ERF) proteins are plant-specific
transcription factors, many of which have been linked to stress responses. We
have identified four Arabidopsis ERF genes whose expression was specifically
induced by avirulent and virulent strains of the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas
syringae pv tomato, with overlapping but distinct induction kinetics. However, a 
delay in ERF mRNA accumulation after infection with the virulent strain was
observed when compared with the avirulent strain. The induction of ERF gene
expression in most cases preceded the mRNA accumulation of a basic chitinase
gene, a potential downstream target for one or more of these ERFs. The expression
of the ERF genes was examined among different Arabidopsis tissues, in response to
the signaling molecules ethylene, methyl jasmonate, and salicylic acid (SA), and 
in Arabidopsis mutants with decreased or enhanced susceptibility to pathogens,
and significant differences were observed. For example, in seedlings, some of the
ERF genes were not induced by SA in the wild-type but were SA responsive in the
pad4-1 mutant, suggesting that PAD4-1, which acts upstream of SA accumulation, is
also involved in repressing the SA-induced expression of specific ERF genes. The 
four ERF proteins were shown to contain transcriptional activation domains. These
results suggest that transcriptional activation cascades involving ERF proteins
may be important for plant defense to pathogen attack and that some ERF family
members could be involved in the cross-talk between SA- and jasmonic
acid-signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC154259
PMID: 11950980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. BMC Genomics. 2002 Mar 21;3:8. Epub 2002 Mar 21.

Classification and evolutionary history of the single-strand annealing proteins, 
RecT, Redbeta, ERF and RAD52.

Iyer LM(1), Koonin EV, Aravind L.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20894, USA. lakshmin@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: The DNA single-strand annealing proteins (SSAPs), such as RecT,
Redbeta, ERF and Rad52, function in RecA-dependent and RecA-independent DNA
recombination pathways. Recently, they have been shown to form similar helical
quaternary superstructures. However, despite the functional similarities between 
these diverse SSAPs, their actual evolutionary affinities are poorly understood.
RESULTS: Using sensitive computational sequence analysis, we show that the RecT
and Redbeta proteins, along with several other bacterial proteins, form a
distinct superfamily. The ERF and Rad52 families show no direct evolutionary
relationship to these proteins and define novel superfamilies of their own. We
identify several previously unknown members of each of these superfamilies and
also report, for the first time, bacterial and viral homologs of Rad52.
Additionally, we predict the presence of aberrant HhH modules in RAD52 that are
likely to be involved in DNA-binding. Using the contextual information obtained
from the analysis of gene neighborhoods, we provide evidence of the interaction
of the bacterial members of each of these SSAP superfamilies with a similar set
of DNA repair/recombination protein. These include different nucleases or
Holliday junction resolvases, the ABC ATPase SbcC and the single-strand-binding
protein. We also present evidence of independent assembly of some of the
predicted operons encoding SSAPs and in situ displacement of functionally similar
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: There are three evolutionarily distinct superfamilies of SSAPs,
namely the RecT/Redbeta, ERF, and RAD52, that have different sequence
conservation patterns and predicted folds. All these SSAPs appear to be primarily
of bacteriophage origin and have been acquired by numerous phylogenetically
distant cellular genomes. They generally occur in predicted operons encoding one 
or more of a set of conserved DNA recombination proteins that appear to be the
principal functional partners of the SSAPs.

PMCID: PMC101383
PMID: 11914131  [PubMed]


444. Biochemistry. 2002 Apr 2;41(13):4202-8.

Determinants in the sequence specific binding of two plant transcription factors,
CBF1 and NtERF2, to the DRE and GCC motifs.

Hao D(1), Yamasaki K, Sarai A, Ohme-Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Discovery Research Centre, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science & Technology (AIST), Central 6, Tsukuba 305-8566, Japan.

Arabidopsis ERF proteins such as DREB1, DREB2, and CBF1 bind to the
dehydration-responsive element (DRE), which has the sequence TACCGACAT. Mutation 
analyses reveal that a central 5 bp CCGAC core of the DRE is the minimal sequence
motif (designated as the DRE motif in this paper), to which the ERF domain
fragment of CBF1 (CBF1-F) binds specifically with a binding K(d) at the nanomolar
level. In contrast, the ERF domain fragment of the tobacco ERF2 (NtERF2-F) does
not interact with the DRE motif, but restrictedly recognizes the sequence
containing a minimal 6 bp GCCGCC motif (designated as the GCC motif in this
paper). However, CBF1-F binds to the GCC motif with a binding activity similar to
its binding activity for the DRE motif. These in vitro binding variations were
further demonstrated through reporter cotransformation assays, suggesting that
the DRE and GCC motifs are two similar sequence motifs sharing a common core
region of CCGNC with a discriminating guanine base at the 5'-end of the GCC
motif. Binding analyses with the mutated ERF domain show that such a unique
binding of NtERF2-F to the GCC motif can be altered by the substitution of A14
with valine in beta-strand 2 of its ERF domain, the mutant NtERF2-F, ERFav,
acquiring a binding to the DRE motif with a K(d) comparable to that for CBF1-F
binding to the DRE motif. This demonstrates that A14 is an important determinant 
of the NtERF2-F binding specificity. A possible mechanism of the binding
specificity determination is discussed.

PMID: 11914065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. In Vivo. 2001 Nov-Dec;15(6):489-94.

In vivo modulation of ETS genes induced by electromagnetic fields.

Mucci N(1), Ianni A, Ursini CL, Arzani D, Bhat NK, Navarra P, Romano-Spica V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Medicine, I.S.P.E.S.L., Rome, Italy.

We have previously shown that electromagnetic field (EMF) exposure induces ETS1
oncogene overexpression in different cell lines. In order to investigate in vivo 
EMF effects, BALB/c mice were exposed at different times to 50 MHz radiation,
modulated (80%) at 16 Hz. The exposed and control animals were sacrificed and the
spleen excised for rt-pcr and western blot analysis. We observed an increase in
ETS1 mRNA and protein expression, but a decrease in ETS2 protein levels.
Preliminary results from this experimental model show in vivo evidence of the
effect of EMF on ETS oncogene expression.

PMID: 11887334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Exp Cell Res. 2002 Feb 15;273(2):127-37.

Identification of a candidate tumor-suppressor gene specifically activated during
Ras-induced senescence.

Barradas M(1), Gonos ES, Zebedee Z, Kolettas E, Petropoulou C, Delgado MD, León
J, Hara E, Serrano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Oncology, Spanish National Center of
Biotechnology (CSIC), Campus de Cantoblanco, Madrid E-28049, Spain.

Normal cells display protective responses against oncogenes. Notably, oncogenic
Ras triggers an irreversible proliferation arrest that is reminiscent of
replicative senescence and that is considered a relevant tumor-suppressor
mechanism. Here, we have used microarrayed filters to identify genes specifically
upregulated in Ras-senescent human fibroblasts. Among the initial set of genes
selected from the microarrays, we found the cell-cycle inhibitor p21(Cip1/Waf1), 
thus validating the potency of the screening to identify markers and mediators of
Ras-senescence. A group of six genes, formed by those more highly upregulated
during Ras-senescence, was analyzed in further detail to evaluate their
specificity. In particular, we examined their expression in cells overexpressing 
Ras but rendered resistant to Ras-senescence by the viral oncoprotein E1a; also, 
we have studied their expression during replicative senescence, organismal aging,
H(2)O(2)-induced senescence, and DNA damage. In this manner, we have identified a
novel gene, RIS1 (for Ras-induced senescence 1), which is not upregulated in
association to any of the above-mentioned processes, but exclusively during
Ras-senescence. Furthermore, RIS1 is also upregulated by the transcriptional
factor Ets2, which is a known mediator of Ras-induced senescence. Interestingly, 
RIS1 is located at chromosomal position 3p21.3 and, more specifically, it is
included in a short segment of just 1 Mb previously defined by other
investigators for its tumor-suppressor activity. In summary, we report the
identification of a novel gene, RIS1, as a highly specific marker of Ras-induced 
senescence and a candidate tumor-suppressor gene.

©2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11822868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Transgenic Res. 2001 Dec;10(6):513-21.

T-DNA activation tagging as a tool to isolate regulators of a metabolic pathway
from a genetically non-tractable plant species.

van der Fits L(1), Hilliou F, Memelink J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, Clusius Laboratory, Leiden University, 
The Netherlands.

T-DNA activation tagging is a method used to generate dominant mutations in
plants or plant cells by the insertion of a T-DNA which carries constitutive
enhancer elements that can cause transcriptional activation of flanking plant
genes. We applied this approach to the species Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don
(Madagascar periwinkle), in an attempt to isolate regulators of genes that are
involved in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites of the terpenoid indole
alkaloid (TIA) class. Several TIAs have pharmaceutically interesting activities, 
including the anti-tumour agents vincristine and vinblastine. The use of
suspension-cultured cells enabled us to screen in a relatively easy way hundreds 
of thousands of T-DNA-tagged cells for resistance to a toxic substrate of one of 
the TIA biosynthetic enzymes: tryptophan decarboxylase. This screening yielded
several interesting tagged cell lines. Further characterisation of one of the
tagged cell lines led to the isolation of Orca3, a gene encoding an
AP2/ERF-domain transcription factor that acts as a master regulator of primary
and secondary metabolism. The T-DNA activation tagging results described in
detail in this paper illustrate the usefulness of this approach to isolate
regulators of a complex metabolic pathway from a genetically non-tractable plant 
species.

PMID: 11817539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jan 25;290(3):998-1009.

DNA-binding specificity of the ERF/AP2 domain of Arabidopsis DREBs, transcription
factors involved in dehydration- and cold-inducible gene expression.

Sakuma Y(1), Liu Q, Dubouzet JG, Abe H, Shinozaki K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Resources Division, Japan International Research Center for
Agricultural Sciences (JIRCAS), 1-1 Ohwashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8686, Japan.

DRE/CRT is a cis-acting element that is involved in gene expression responsive to
drought and low-temperature stress in higher plants. DREB1A/CBF3 and DREB2A are
transcription factors that specifically bind to DRE/CRT in Arabidopsis. We
precisely analyzed the DNA-binding specificity of DREBs. Both DREBs specifically 
bound to six nucleotides (A/GCCGAC) of DRE. However, these proteins had different
binding specificities to the second or third nucleotides of DRE. Gel mobility
shift assay using mutant DREB proteins showed that the two amino acids, valine
and glutamic acid conserved in the ERF/AP2 domains, especially valine, have
important roles in DNA-binding specificity. In the Arabidopsis genome, 145
DREB/ERF-related proteins are encoded. These proteins were classified into five
groups-AP-2 subfamily, RAV subfamily, DREB subfamily, ERF subfamily, and others. 
The DREB subfamily included three novel DREB1A- and six DREB2A-related proteins. 
We analyzed expression of novel genes for these proteins and discuss their roles 
in stress-responsive gene expression.

PMID: 11798174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Plant Physiol. 2002 Jan;128(1):30-7.

Functional analysis of tomato Pti4 in Arabidopsis.

Wu K(1), Tian L, Hollingworth J, Brown DC, Miki B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia
26506-6057, USA.

Pti4 is a tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) transcription factor that belongs to
the ERF (ethylene-responsive element binding factor) family of proteins. It
interacts with the Pto kinase in tomato, which confers resistance to the
Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato pathogen that causes bacterial speck disease. To
study the function of Pti4, transgenic Arabidopsis plants were generated that
expressed tomato Pti4 driven by the strong constitutive promoters, cauliflower
mosaic virus 35S and tCUP. Global gene expression analysis by Affimetric GeneChip
indicated that expression of Pti4 in transgenic Arabidopsis plants induced the
expression of GCC box-containing PR genes. We also demonstrated that Pti4
enhanced GCC box-mediated transcription of a reporter gene. The data suggests
that tomato Pti4 could act as a transcriptional activator to regulate expression 
of GCC box-containing genes. Furthermore, we show that the expression of tomato
Pti4 in transgenic Arabidopsis plants produced a phenotype similar to that seen
in plants treated with ethylene, thus providing evidence that the Pti4 gene is
involved in the regulation of a subset of ethylene-responsive genes containing
the GCC box.

PMCID: PMC148941
PMID: 11788750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2001;(61):335-46.

Beta-amyloid precursor protein, ETS-2 and collagen alpha 1 (VI) chain precursor, 
encoded on chromosome 21, are not overexpressed in fetal Down syndrome: further
evidence against gene dosage effect.

Engidawork E(1), Baiic N, Fountoulakis M, Dierssen M, Greber-Platzer S, Lubec G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, AKH, University of Vienna, Austria.

Down syndrome (DS) is the most common human chromosomal abnormality caused by an 
extra copy of chromosome 21 and characterized clinically by somatic anomalies,
mental retardation and precocious dementia. The phenotype of DS is thought to
result from overexpression of a gene or genes located on the triplicated
chromosome or chromosome region. Reports that challenge this notion, however,
have been published. To add to this body of evidence, the expression of
beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP), ETS-2 and collagen alpha1 (VI) chain
precursor, encoded on chromosome 21, was investigated in fetal brain by western
blot and two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE). Western blot detected APP and
ETS-2 that migrated at approximately 75 and 50kDa, respectively. Subsequent
densitometric analysis of APP and ETS-2 immunoreactivity did not produce any
significant change between controls and DS. Since the metabolic fate of APP
determines the propensity of amyloid beta production, the expression of the
secreted forms of APP (sAPP) had been examined. Neither the expression of
sAPPalpha nor sAPPbeta showed any detectable changes among the two groups.
Collagen alpha1 (VI) chain precursor, a protein resolved as a single spot on 2D
gel was identified by matrix associated laser desorption ionization mass
spectroscopy. Quantitative analysis of this spot using the 2D Image Master
software revealed a significant decrease in fetal DS (P < 0.01) compared to
controls. Linear regression analysis did not show any correlation between protein
levels and age. The current data suggest that overexpression per se can not fully
explain the DS phenotype.

PMID: 11771756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Life Sci. 2001 Oct 19;69(22):2663-74.

Neuregulin-1 regulates expression of the Ets-2 transcription factor.

Sapru MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuroscience Laboratory, Department of Kinesiology, University of
Illinois at Chicago, 60608, USA. msapru@uic.edu

At the neuromuscular synapse, synapse-specific gene expression is regulated by
neuregulin, a motor neuron-derived factor, and involves participation of the
muscle Ets transcription factors. However, the molecular mechanisms regulating
expression and activity of the Ets transcription factors at the neuromuscular
synapse are largely unknown. This study provides evidence that neuregulin induces
expression of the skeletal muscle Ets-2 transcription factor. Recombinant
neuregulin (neuregulin-1) induced RNA and protein expression of the Ets-2
transcription factor in L6 myotube cultures. Gene transfer experiments indicated 
that this neuregulin-elicited increase in Ets-2 expression resulted from enhanced
transcription of the Ets-2 gene. Interestingly, electrophoretic mobility shift
assays revealed binding activity of the Ets-2 protein to the previously
identified neuregulin-response element of the synapse-specific nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor epsilon-subunit gene. Taken together, these results
identify skeletal muscle Ets-2 transcription factor as a novel target for
neuregulin-dependent gene regulation, and suggest a role for this regulation in
contributing to motor neuron-dependent control on synapse-specific gene
expression at the neuromuscular synapse.

PMID: 11712669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;21(23):7883-91.

Repression of Ets-2-induced transactivation of the tau interferon promoter by
Oct-4.

Ezashi T(1), Ghosh D, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences and Biochemistry, University of Missouri,
Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA.

Oct-4 is a POU family transcription factor associated with potentially totipotent
cells. Genes expressed in the trophectoderm but not in embryos prior to
blastocyst formation may be targets for silencing by Oct-4. Here, we have tested 
this hypothesis with the tau interferon genes (IFNT genes), which are expressed
exclusively in the trophectoderm of bovine embryos. IFNT promoters contain an
Ets-2 enhancer, located at -79 to -70, and are up-regulated about 20-fold by the 
overexpression of Ets-2 in human JAr choriocarcinoma cells, which are permissive 
for IFNT expression. This enhancement was reversed in a dose-dependent manner by 
coexpression of Oct-4 but not either Oct-1 or Oct-2. When cells were transfected 
with truncated bovine IFNT promoters designed to eliminate potential octamer
sites sequentially, luciferase reporter expression from each construct was still 
silenced by Oct-4. Full repression required both the N-terminal and POU domains
of Oct-4, but neither domain used alone was an effective silencer. Oct-4 and
Ets-2 formed a complex in vitro in the absence of DNA through binding of the POU 
domain of Oct-4 to a site located between the "pointed" and DNA binding domains
of Ets-2. The two transcription factors were also coimmunoprecipitated after
being expressed together in JAr cells. Oct-4, therefore, silences IFNT promoters 
by quenching Ets-2 transactivation. The POU domain most probably binds to Ets-2
directly, while the N-terminal domain inhibits transcription. These findings
provide further evidence that the developmental switch to the trophectoderm is
accompanied by the loss of Oct-4 silencing of key genes.

PMCID: PMC99954
PMID: 11689681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):46661-70.

Transforming growth factor beta regulates parathyroid hormone-related protein
expression in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells through a novel Smad/Ets synergism.

Lindemann RK(1), Ballschmieter P, Nordheim A, Dittmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Abteilung Molekularbiologie, Universität Tübingen, 
Auf der Morgenstelle 15, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.

The majority of breast cancers metastasizing to bone secrete parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP). PTHrP induces local osteolysis that leads to
activation of bone matrix-borne transforming growth factor beta (TGF beta). In
turn, TGF beta stimulates PTHrP expression and, thereby, accelerates bone
destruction. We studied the mechanism by which TGF beta activates PTHrP in
invasive MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. We demonstrate that TGF beta 1
up-regulates specifically the level of PTHrP P3 promoter-derived RNA in an
actinomycin D-sensitive fashion. Transient transfection studies revealed that TGF
beta 1 and its effector Smad3 are able to activate the P3 promoter. This effect
depended upon an AGAC box and a previously described Ets binding site. Addition
of Ets1 greatly enhanced the Smad3/TGF beta-mediated activation. Ets2 had also
some effect, whereas other Ets proteins, Elf-1, Ese-1, and Erf-1, failed to
cooperate with Smad3. In comparison, Ets1 did not increase Smad3/TGF beta-induced
stimulation of the TGF beta-responsive plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) 
promoter. Smad3 and Smad4 were able to specifically interact with the PTHrP
P3-AGAC box and to bind to the P3 promoter together with Ets1. Inhibition of
endogenous Ets1 expression by calphostin C abrogated TGF beta-induced
up-regulation of the P3 transcript, whereas it did not affect the TGF beta effect
on PAI expression. In TGF beta receptor II- and Ets1-deficient, noninvasive MCF-7
breast cancer cells, TGF beta 1 neither influenced endogenous PTHrP expression
nor stimulated the PTHrP P3 promoter. These data suggest that TGF beta activates 
PTHrP expression by specifically up-regulating transcription from the PTHrP P3
promoter through a novel Smad3/Ets1 synergism.

PMID: 11590145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Oct 5;287(4):1003-8.

Ets-2 is induced by oxidative stress and sensitizes cells to H(2)O(2)-induced
apoptosis: implications for Down's syndrome.

Sanij E(1), Hatzistavrou T, Hertzog P, Kola I, Wolvetang EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, 27-31 Wright Street, Clayton,
Victoria 3168, Australia.

An elevated production of hydrogen peroxide mediates the increased rate of
apoptosis of cells derived from individuals with Down's syndrome. The mechanism
via which this occurs is unknown. Here we show that Ets-2, a transcription factor
located on human chromosome 21 and already overexpressed in multiple tissues in
Down syndrome (DS, trisomy 21), is induced by low concentrations of hydrogen
peroxide. Moreover, cells with an imbalance in the antioxidant enzymes
SOD-1/GPX-1, such as occurs in DS through the overexpression of the chromosome 21
gene SOD-1, also results in increased Ets-2 expression. The increase in Ets-2
expression is dependent on mRNA transcription. Importantly, we further
demonstrate that 3T3 fibroblasts that overexpress Ets-2 are sensitized to
hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis. These data implicate Ets-2 in the regulation
of oxidant-induced apoptosis and provide a possible rationale for both the (5- to
7-) fold increase in Ets-2 protein level in DS tissues, above the expected gene
dosage of 1.5-fold, and the elevated rate of apoptosis in DS cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11573964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Biofactors. 2001;14(1-4):25-35.

A model for Sec incorporation with the regions upstream of the UGA Sec codon to
play a key role.

Goto C(1), Osaka T, Mizutani T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 
467-8603, Japan.

For eukaryotic selenoprotein mRNAs, it has been proposed that the SECIS element
in the 3'-UTR is required for recognition of UGA as a Sec codon. Some proteins
which bind to SECIS (SBP) have been reported. However, it is not clear how the
SECIS element in the 3'-UTR can mediate Sec insertion far at the in-frame UGA Sec
codons. The idea that there must be a signal near the UGA Sec codon is still
being considered. Therefore, we searched for a protein which binds to an RNA
sequence surrounding the UGA Sec codon on human GPx mRNA. We found a protein,
prepared from bovine brain microsomes, which strongly bound to the RNA fragment
upstream of the UGA Sec codon but not to the RNA sequence downstream of the UGA
codon. This protein also bound to the SECIS sequence in the 3'-UTR of human GPx, 
and this binding to SECIS was competed with the RNA fragment upstream of the UGA 
Sec codon. We also obtained the similar results with the RNA fragments of type I 
iodothyronine 5'-deiodinase (5'DI) mRNAs. Comparison of such RNA fragments with
SECIS fragments revealed similarities in the region upstream of the in-frame UGA 
Sec codon of several Se-protein mRNAs. The study thus favors a novel model of Sec
incorporation at the UGA Sec codon that involves the regions upstream of the UGA 
codon of mRNAs of mammalian selenoproteins. This model explains that the
stem-loop structure covering the UGA codon is recognized by SBP and how the UGA
Sec codon escapes from attack by eRF.

PMID: 11568437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Hum Brain Mapp. 2001 Nov;14(3):166-85.

Analysis and visualization of single-trial event-related potentials.

Jung TP(1), Makeig S, Westerfield M, Townsend J, Courchesne E, Sejnowski TJ.

Collaborators: Jung TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neural Computation, University of California San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093-0523, USA. jung@salk.edu

In this study, a linear decomposition technique, independent component analysis
(ICA), is applied to single-trial multichannel EEG data from event-related
potential (ERP) experiments. Spatial filters derived by ICA blindly separate the 
input data into a sum of temporally independent and spatially fixed components
arising from distinct or overlapping brain or extra-brain sources. Both the data 
and their decomposition are displayed using a new visualization tool, the "ERP
image," that can clearly characterize single-trial variations in the amplitudes
and latencies of evoked responses, particularly when sorted by a relevant
behavioral or physiological variable. These tools were used to analyze data from 
a visual selective attention experiment on 28 control subjects plus 22
neurological patients whose EEG records were heavily contaminated with blink and 
other eye-movement artifacts. Results show that ICA can separate artifactual,
stimulus-locked, response-locked, and non-event-related background EEG activities
into separate components, a taxonomy not obtained from conventional signal
averaging approaches. This method allows: (1) removal of pervasive artifacts of
all types from single-trial EEG records, (2) identification and segregation of
stimulus- and response-locked EEG components, (3) examination of differences in
single-trial responses, and (4) separation of temporally distinct but spatially
overlapping EEG oscillatory activities with distinct relationships to task
events. The proposed methods also allow the interaction between ERPs and the
ongoing EEG to be investigated directly. We studied the between-subject component
stability of ICA decomposition of single-trial EEG epochs by clustering
components with similar scalp maps and activation power spectra. Components
accounting for blinks, eye movements, temporal muscle activity, event-related
potentials, and event-modulated alpha activities were largely replicated across
subjects. Applying ICA and ERP image visualization to the analysis of sets of
single trials from event-related EEG (or MEG) experiments can increase the
information available from ERP (or ERF) data.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11559961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 Oct;60(2):137-46.

Gene for porcine pregnancy-associated glycoprotein 2 (poPAG2): its structural
organization and analysis of its promoter.

Szafranska B(1), Miura R, Ghosh D, Ezashi T, Xie S, Roberts RM, Green JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia,
Missouri 65211, USA.

The pregnancy-associated glycoproteins (PAG) are abundant secretory products of
the placental trophectoderm of ungulate species. They are structurally related to
pepsin, having the capability to bind peptides. However, many cannot function as 
enzymes due to amino acid substitutions in and around the catalytic site. Here,
we demonstrate that pigs, like cattle and sheep, but unlike equids, have multiple
PAG genes. One of the transcribed porcine PAG (poPAG) genes, the one for poPAG2, 
was cloned. It had a nine-exon organization similar to that of other mammalian
aspartic proteinase genes with an atypical TATA sequence. A total of 1.2 kbp
upstream from exon 1 was sequenced. This region shared identity (> 65%) with the 
promoter regions of the bovine (bo) PAG1, boPAG2 and equine (eq) PAG genes, but
not with other aspartyl proteinase genes, including that of pepsinogen A. Nor
were there clear similarities to the promoters of other genes with
trophoblast-specific expression. Of the different poPAG2 promoter constructs
tested in transfection experiments in two human (JAr and JEG3) and one rat (Rcho)
choriocarcinoma cell lines, only the shortest (-149 bp) was required to provide
full expression of a luciferase reporter. Although this short promoter was not
active in Cos-1 and L-929 cells, it was active in CHO cells, a transformed
non-trophoblast hamster ovarian cell line. Co-transfection of Ets2 elevated the
activity of this short promoter approximately six-fold in JAr cells, but,
disruption of the two putative Ets sites did not alter the ability of Ets2 to
transactivate the promoter. In the non-trophoblast cell lines, Ets2 failed to
elicit any response. Ets2 responsiveness may be a common feature of most or all
trophoblast-expressed genes, although in the case of poPAG2, the effect may be
indirect.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11553911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. PDA J Pharm Sci Technol. 2001 Jul-Aug;55(4):248-55.

Controlled release from an electrorheological fluid dosage form: experimental
results for a prototype system.

Kamal AK(1), Nutalapati SK, Jochsberger T, Plakogiannis FM, Bellantone RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pharmaceutics and Industrial Pharmacy, Arnold & Marie Schwartz
College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Long Island University, 75 DeKalb Ave., 
Brooklyn, NY 11201, USA.

A new controlled-release technology that is based on electrorheological fluids
(ERF) is described, and a model system is investigated. Humidified starch
(duration of humidification is 30-35 minutes) was used as a filler material
(approximately 20% w/w) in olive oil to make the ER system, and benzocaine (BZN) 
was used as the model drug. The average particle size of starch in the olive oil 
was approximately 200 nm. 1N HCl was used as the receiver medium and BZN was
assayed by UV spectroscopy at 226 nm. A series of studies was done at five
temperatures (25 degrees, 30 degrees, 35 degrees, 40 degrees, and 45 degrees C)
and two external electric fields (E-fields) that were generated by applying
potential drops across the diffusion apparatus of 0 V and 290 V. Control studies 
of BZN release from olive oil without filler showed little or no increase in
release rates resulting from application of E-fields. In addition, while
reversing the polarity for BZN in olive oil caused differences in release rates, 
these differences were too small to explain the results obtained for the ER
systems. It was found that release of BZN increased significantly with the
application of the electric field (approximately 53% increase at 25 degrees C). A
plot of the log of the release rate vs 1/T was linear for the 0 V data but
deviated from linearity for the 290 V data. The increase in release rates due to 
the E-field became smaller as the temperature was increased. The results are
consistent with (but are not sufficient to prove) the hypothesis that the
increased release rate is due to a small amount of ordering of the cornstarch
filler particles in response to the applied E-field, which results in a reduction
in the tortuosity of the system.

PMID: 11505558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2001 Aug;12(1):49-54.

Physiological evidence of gender differences in word recognition: a
magnetoencephalographic (MEG) study.

Walla P(1), Hufnagl B, Lindinger G, Deecke L, Lang W.

Author information: 
(1)University Clinic for Clinical Neurology, University of Vienna, Währinger
Gürtel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. peter.walla@akh-wien.ac.at

Magnetic field recordings were made in order to describe brain processes during a
word recognition experiment. We investigated 26 healthy young subjects (14
females) and focused on gender differences related to recognition performance and
brain activity. From about 200 ms to 350 ms after word onset the event-related
field (ERF) patterns differed significantly between women and men, although the
mean recognition performances did not. Differences were due to different
strengths of activation as well as due to the involvement of different neural
structures as underlined with statistical analysis. We interpret that our
physiological findings demonstrate that different mental strategies are used for 
correct word recognition in the brains of women and men as assessed with
magnetoencephalography (MEG). Our data might be linked to previous findings about
the hemispheric asymmetry in male subjects (left lateralized) compared to women
in whom both hemispheres seem to be equally involved in word processing.

PMID: 11489608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Plant Cell. 2001 Aug;13(8):1959-68.

Repression domains of class II ERF transcriptional repressors share an essential 
motif for active repression.

Ohta M(1), Matsui K, Hiratsu K, Shinshi H, Ohme-Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Discovery Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), Central 6, Tsukuba 305-8566, Japan.

We reported previously that three ERF transcription factors, tobacco ERF3
(NtERF3) and Arabidopsis AtERF3 and AtERF4, which are categorized as class II
ERFs, are active repressors of transcription. To clarify the roles of these
repressors in transcriptional regulation in plants, we attempted to identify the 
functional domains of the ERF repressor that mediates the repression of
transcription. Analysis of the results of a series of deletions revealed that the
C-terminal 35 amino acids of NtERF3 are sufficient to confer the capacity for
repression of transcription on a heterologous DNA binding domain. This repression
domain suppressed the intermolecular activities of other transcriptional
activators. In addition, fusion of this repression domain to the VP16 activation 
domain completely inhibited the transactivation function of VP16. Comparison of
amino acid sequences of class II ERF repressors revealed the conservation of the 
sequence motif (L)/(F)DLN(L)/(F)(x)P. This motif was essential for repression
because mutations within the motif eliminated the capacity for repression. We
designated this motif the ERF-associated amphiphilic repression (EAR) motif, and 
we identified this motif in a number of zinc-finger proteins from wheat,
Arabidopsis, and petunia plants. These zinc finger proteins functioned as
repressors, and their repression domains were identified as regions that
contained an EAR motif.

PMCID: PMC139139
PMID: 11487705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Klin Khir. 2001 Jan;(1):22-3.

[The evaluation of the external respiratory function in patients in late
follow-up period after pneumonectomy].

[Article in Russian]

Serbinenko GN, Makarov AV, Savenkov IuF, Kalabukha IA, Khmel' OV.

The external respiration function (ERF) indexes were studied in 215 patients in
25-40 years after performance of pneumonectomy. In 55.3% patients ventilation
indexes have exceeded the due values by 50% for two lungs, in 8.4%--significant
disorders of the ERF indexes were noted in connection with an early and late
complications occurrence and with presence of specific and metaphthisic changes
in a single lung as well.

PMID: 11475964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Mol Biol. 2001 Jul 20;310(4):699-707.

Interplay between termination and translation machinery in eukaryotic
selenoprotein synthesis.

Grundner-Culemann E(1), Martin GW 3rd, Tujebajeva R, Harney JW, Berry MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Termination of translation in eukaryotes is catalyzed by eRF1, the stop codon
recognition factor, and eRF3, an eRF1 and ribosome-dependent GTPase. In
selenoprotein mRNAs, UGA codons, which typically specify termination, serve an
alternate function as sense codons. Selenocysteine incorporation involves a
unique tRNA with an anticodon complementary to UGA, a unique elongation factor
specific for this tRNA, and cis-acting secondary structures in selenoprotein
mRNAs, termed SECIS elements. To gain insight into the interplay between the
selenocysteine insertion and termination machinery, we investigated the effects
of overexpressing eRF1 and eRF3, and of altering UGA codon context, on the
efficiency of selenoprotein synthesis in a transient transfection system.
Overexpression of eRF1 does not increase termination at naturally occurring
selenocysteine codons. Surprisingly, selenocysteine incorporation is enhanced.
Overexpression of eRF3 did not affect incorporation efficiency. Coexpression of
both factors reproduced the effects with eRF1 alone. Finally, we show that the
nucleotide context immediately upstream and downstream of the UGA codon
significantly affects termination to incorporation ratios and the response to eRF
overexpression. Implications for the mechanisms of selenocysteine incorporation
and termination are discussed.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11453681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2001 May;65(5):1270-3.

Expression of PR-5d and ERF genes in cultured tobacco cells and their NaCl
stress-response.

Koyama T(1), Kitajima S, Sato F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied Life Sciences, Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto
University, Japan.

The expression of pathogenesis-related protein-5d (PR-5d) and ethylene-responsive
transcriptional factors (ERF1-4) for basic PR-proteins was measured in cultured
tobacco cells. The PR-5d transcript markedly increased with culture, but only
constant levels of transcripts of ERF1 (trans-activator) and ERF3 (repressor)
were detected in cells. These different responses of PR-5d and ERF genes were
also observed under NaCl stress; PR-5d transcript decreased and ERF levels were
constant under NaCl stress. The effect of post-transcriptional regulation of ERF 
activity, especially ERF3, on the expression of basic PR genes including PR-5d is
discussed.

PMID: 11440157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Med Phys. 2001 Jun;28(6):925-37.

Modeling the output ratio in air for megavoltage photon beams.

Zhu TC(1), Bjärngard BE, Xiao Y, Yang CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.tzhu@mail.medupenn.edu

The output ratio in air, OR, for a high-energy x-ray beam describes how the
incident central axis photon fluence varies with collimator setting. For field
sizes larger than 3 x 3 cm2, its variation is caused by the scatter of photons in
structures in the accelerator head (primarily the flattening filter and the
wedge, if one is used) and by the backscatter of radiation into the monitor
ionization chamber. The objective of this study was to evaluate the use of an
analytical function to parametrize OR for square collimator setting c: OR = (1 + 
a1.c).[1 + a2.erf(c/lambda)2].H0. For open beams, these parameters can be
attributed to explicit physical meanings within the systematical uncertainty of
the model: a1 accounts for backscatter into the monitor, a2 is the maximum
scatter-to-primary ratio for head-scattered photons, and lambda represents the
effective width of the "source" of head-scatter photons. H0 is a constant that
sets OR = 1 for c = 10 cm. This formula also fits OR for wedge beams and a Co-60 
unit, although the fitting parameters lose their physical interpretations. To
calculate the output ratio for a rectangular field, cx x cy, an equivalent square
can be used: c = (1 + k).cy x cx/(k.cx + cy), where k is a constant. The study
included a number of different accelerators and a cobalt-60 unit. The fits for
square fields agreed with measurements with a standard deviation (SD) of less
than 0.5%. Using k = lx.(f - ly)/ly.(f - lx), where lx and ly are the
source-to-collimator distances and f is the source-to-detector distance,
measurements and calculations agreed within a SD of 0.7% for rectangular fields. 
Sufficient data for the three parameters are presented to suggest constraints
that can be used for quality assurance of the measured output ratio in air.

PMID: 11439489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Intellect Disabil Res. 2001 Jun;45(Pt 3):202-11.

Self-assessment of relationships with peers in children with intellectual
disability.

Zic A(1), Igric L.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Special Education and Rehabilitation, University of Zagreb,
Kuslanova 59a, 1000 Zagreb, Croatia. anis@erf.hr

Interaction with peers is important for the development of children, but children
with special needs may feel rejected by their peers. The present study examines
self-assessment of relationships with peers by children with intellectual
disability (ID; n = 20) and children from the general population (n = 20). All
participants attended a regular primary school and were aged between 7 and 10.5
years; both sexes were represented in the samples. The Behavior Rating Profile
was applied. The results of the children with ID on the "Student Rating Scale:
Peers" did not show statistically significant differences from the results of
children from general population, with both groups responding similarly to the
self-perception scale. However, the sociometric results obtained from their peers
clearly show that children with ID are not accepted by their classmates. Peers
frequently and more often refuse to study, sit together in class or socialize
after classes with children with ID than is the case for children without ID.
Despite the high frequency of rejection, it is concluded that children with ID of
younger primary school age have average confidence in their own abilities and in 
the success of their relationships with their peers. Further education among the 
children who reject them could have a negative impact on their self-esteem.

PMID: 11422644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Ter Arkh. 2001;73(3):48-51.

[Effectiveness of lasolvan in patients with chronic obstructive bronchitis and
non-atopic bronchial asthma].

[Article in Russian]

Aleksa VI, Prozorova VK, Mal'tseva NA, Shatikhina LN.

AIM: To define efficiency and mechanisms of action of mucoregulator lasolvan.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Lasolvan treatment was given to 50 patients with chronic
nonspecific pulmonary diseases (CNPD). External respiration function (ERF) and
viscosity of sputum were examined on Bodyscreen II and viscosimeter Reotest 2,
respectively.
RESULTS: Maximum effect was achieved on day 2-3 of lasolvan treatment: resistance
of airways decreased 1.5-fold, forced pulmonary capacity and peak expiration flow
increased. ERF improvement was associated with subjective improvement. Mean
sputum viscosity remained unchanged. Reduction of minimal viscosity was found
after the first intake of lasolvan. Later, maximal viscosity was higher in most
of the patients. By day 7-10 amount of the sputum discharged forn 24 hours rose
while maximal viscosity fell.
CONCLUSION: Lasolvan is an effective mucoregulator which perfectly improves
rheologic properties of bronchial secretion. Its ability to eliminate
pathological bronchial secretion from small bronchi is of special importance.
This allows to use lasolvan for prevention of cor pulmonale in CNPD patients.

PMID: 11417181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Ter Arkh. 2001;73(3):27-32.

[Chronic obstructive lung diseases in patients with ischemic heart disease: a
15-year study].

[Article in Russian]

Kozlova LI, Buzunov RV, Chuchalin AG.

AIM: To characterize acquired chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD) in
patients with ischemic heart disease (IHD).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Monitoring of external respiration function (ERF) was
performed for 15 years in 1552 IHD patients on combined drug treatment.
RESULTS: The 15-year follow-up has revealed that IHD patients treated with
beta-blockers develop pathological changes in respiration pattern manifesting
primarily with dyspnea, obstructive and mixed ventilatory disorders, syndrome of 
early expiratory obstruction in affected small airways due to subnormal lung
elasticity, defective diffuse function, signs of terminal respiratory failure.
CONCLUSION: IHD patients taking drugs need monitoring of ERF. Optimal treatment
consists in early diagnosis of IHD and COPD, adequate combined therapy with
beta-blockers and bronchodilating drugs.

PMID: 11417176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jun 8;284(2):443-9.

cDNA microarray analysis of Helicobacter pylori-mediated alteration of gene
expression in gastric cancer cells.

Maeda S(1), Otsuka M, Hirata Y, Mitsuno Y, Yoshida H, Shiratori Y, Masuho Y,
Muramatsu M, Seki N, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, 113-8655, Japan. MAEDA-2IM@h.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Helicobacter pylori infection stimulates several intracellular signaling pathways
and is accompanied by increased gene expression in gastric epithelial cells.
High-density cDNA microarray was used to characterize the mRNA expression profile
of genes in human gastric cancer cells (MKN45, AGS) cocultured with H. pylori.
Coculture with cag pathogenicity island (PAI)-positive H. pylori (wild-type)
significantly up-regulated mRNA expression in 8 of 2304 genes tested. In 6
(interleukin-8, I(kappaB)alpha, A20, ERF-1, keratin K7, glutathione peroxidase)
of the 8 genes, up-regulation was confirmed by RT-PCR. In coculture with isogenic
cagE-negative mutant ((Delta)cagE), which encodes a type IV secretion system with
other genes in the cag PAI, no significant up-regulation was found. We further
analyzed the role of A20. Transfection of expression vector encoding A20 resulted
in an inhibition of H. pylori-mediated NF-kappaB activation, indicating that H.
pylori-mediated A20 expression could be a negative regulator of NF-kappaB
activation. Taken together, these results indicate the importance of microarray
technology as a tool for analyzing the complex interplay between H. pylori and
the host.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11394899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001 May;71(5):1640-4.

Evolving management and outcome of esophageal cancer with airway involvement.

Alexander EP(1), Trachiotis GD, Lipman TO, Wadleigh RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Washington DC Veterans Administration
Medical Center, 20422, USA. epalexander@med.va.gov

BACKGROUND: Esophageal cancer with airway involvement, including patients with
esophagorespiratory fistula (ERF), has been associated with a poor prognosis.
Multimodality treatment, self-expanding metal stents, and improved supportive
therapy may be impacting outcome in these patients. There is concern for the
development of ERF during therapy.
METHODS: We retrospectively studied 74 consecutive male patients at a single
institution presenting between 1/85 to 12/98 with bronchoscopic, endoscopic or
radiographic confirmation of airway involvement with esophageal cancer, including
35 patients with ERF. Comparison was made between the first 35 patients (group I)
and the last 39 patients (group II) with regard to antineoplastic therapy, stent 
placement, and survival.
RESULTS: Treatment in group I included supportive care in 17 of 35 patients,
plastic stent in 7 of 35 patients, and radiation or chemotherapy in 9 of 35
patients. In group II, radiation or chemotherapy was offered to 33 patients, and 
self-expanding metal stents were placed in 10 of 39 patients. Surgical resection 
was possible after neoadjuvant therapy in 13 of 39 patients in group II,
including 2 initially presenting with ERF. Median survival in group I was 16
weeks and in group II was 37 weeks. Comparison of Kaplan-Meier survival estimates
using log rank testing demonstrated improved survival in group II (p = 0.0026).
Long-term survival in 4 group II patients initially presenting with ERF and
receiving multimodality treatment was observed. Development of ERF during
treatment occurred in 3 group II patients. Treatment failure was predominantly
local in group I and local and distant in group II.
CONCLUSIONS: More aggressive treatment may favorably influence outcome in
esophageal cancer with airway invasion. Long-term survival and the development of
ERF during therapy occurred at similar rates.

PMID: 11383814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Poult Sci. 2001 May;80(5):647-55.

Intravenous endotoxin triggers pulmonary vasoconstriction and pulmonary
hypertension in broiler chickens.

Wideman RF Jr(1), Erf GF, Chapman ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA. rwideman@mail.uark.edu

Bacterial endotoxins stimulate endothelin-mediated, thromboxane-dependent
increases in pulmonary vascular resistance in mammals, and thromboxane has been
shown to cause an immediate but transient pulmonary vasoconstriction in broiler
chickens. In the present study, i.v. injections of 1 mg endotoxin into
anesthetized male broilers caused a pulmonary vasoconstrictive response that was 
delayed in onset by 15 min and that elevated the pulmonary arterial pressure by
10 mm Hg within 25 min postinjection. Thereafter, pulmonary hemodynamic variables
gradually (> or = 15 min) returned toward pre-injection levels, and supplemental 
injections of 4 mg endotoxin during this recovery period failed to reinitiate
pulmonary hypertension. In contrast, injecting the thromboxane A2 mimetic U44069 
during the endotoxin recovery period triggered pulmonary vasoconstriction and
pulmonary hypertension similar in magnitude to the responses triggered by U44069 
before endotoxin had been administered. The time course and magnitude of the
pulmonary hemodynamic responses to endotoxin were highly variable among
individual broilers, whereas the individual responses to U44069 were more
consistent. Unanesthetized broilers resembled anesthetized broilers in the time
course, magnitude, and variability of their pulmonary hemodynamic responses to
endotoxin. Overall, these observations are consistent with the hypothesis that
endotoxin initiates a biochemical cascade, culminating in the delayed onset of
pulmonary vasoconstriction and pulmonary hypertension within 20 min
postinjection. Subsequently, the pulmonary vasculature remains responsive to
large bolus injections of exogenous thromboxane mimetic; however depletion of
endogenous vasoconstrictive components of the endotoxin-mediated cascade, a
compensatory increase in endogenous vasodilators, or the induction of a transient
cellular tolerance to endotoxin prevented fourfold higher doses of endotoxin from
reversing the return toward a normal pulmonary vascular tone. Individual
differences among broilers in their susceptibility to pulmonary hypertension
syndrome (ascites) may be related to innate or acquired variability in their
pulmonary vascular responsiveness to vasoactive mediators.

PMID: 11372717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Trends Plant Sci. 2001 May;6(5):212-9.

ORCAnization of jasmonate-responsive gene expression in alkaloid metabolism.

Memelink J(1), Verpoorte R, Kijne JW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, Clusius Laboratory, Wassenaarseweg 64, 
2333 AL Leiden, The Netherlands. memelink@rulbim.leidenuniv.nl

Jasmonic acid is an important plant stress signalling molecule. It induces the
biosynthesis of defence proteins and protective secondary metabolites. In
alkaloid metabolism, jasmonate acts by coordinate activation of the expression of
multiple biosynthesis genes. In terpenoid indole alkaloid metabolism and primary 
precursor pathways, jasmonate induces gene expression and metabolism via ORCAs,
which are members of the AP2/ERF-domain family of plant transcription factors.
Other jasmonate-regulated (secondary) metabolic pathways might also be controlled
by ORCA-like AP2/ERF-domain transcription factors. If so, such regulators could
be used to improve plant fitness or metabolite productivity of plants or cell
cultures.

PMID: 11335174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Oncogene. 2001 Apr 5;20(15):1832-8.

Cdk10, a Cdc2-related kinase, associates with the Ets2 transcription factor and
modulates its transactivation activity.

Kasten M(1), Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, PA 19107, USA.

Cdk10 is a Cdc2-related kinase that may play a role in regulating the G2/M phase 
of the cell cycle. However little is known about the proteins that interact with 
this putative kinase and contribute to its function in the cell. We report in
this study that Cdk10 interacts with the N-terminus of the Ets2 transcription
factor, which contains the highly conserved Pointed domain and transactivation
domain. The Pointed domain has been implicated in protein-protein interactions
and we find that Ets2 requires an intact Pointed domain to bind Cdk10. The
Pointed domain of Ets1 is highly similar to Ets2, however Cdk10 does not
recognize Ets1 in a two-hybrid assay thereby demonstrating significant binding
specificity on the part of Cdk10. We find that Cdk10 binds full length Ets2 in
vitro and in vivo and inhibits Ets2 transactivation in mammalian cells.

PMID: 11313931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2001 Mar;59(1):29-34.

Hemiparetic cerebral palsy: etiological risk factors and neuroimaging.

Piovesana AM(1), Moura-Ribeiro MV, Zanardi Vd, Gonçalves VM.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neurology Division, Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medical
Sciences, State University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. piovesag@fcm.unicamp.br

The purpose of this paper, which was conducted on 175 children with hemiparetic
cerebral palsy (H-CP), was to verify the etiological risk period for this
disease. Etiological risk factors (ERF) were detected through anamnesis: 23% in
the prenatal period, 18% in the perinatal period and 59% of the patients the
period was undefined (ERF in the prenatal and perinatal period was 41% and no ERF
was 18% of the cases. The computerized tomographic scan (CT) and MRI were
performed on all the patients, who were then classified according to their
etiopathogenic data: CT1= normal (18%); CT 2= unilateral ventricular enlargement 
(25%); CT 3= cortical/ subcortical cavities (28%); CT4= hemispheric atrophy and
other findings (14%); CT 5= malformations (15%). CT 5 was associated with
physical malformations beyond the central nervous system and with prenatal ERF's,
while CT 2 was associated with the perinatal ERF's, mainly in premature births.
Magnetic resonance imaging was performed on 57 patients and demonstrated a good
degree of concordance with the CT. Etiology remained undefined in only 37% of the
cases after neuroimaging was related to ERF. A high perinatal RF frequency (59%) 
was observed and emphasized the need for special care during this period.

PMID: 11299427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Cancer Res. 2001 Mar 1;61(5):2267-75.

Induction of ETS-1 and ETS-2 transcription factors is required for thyroid cell
transformation.

de Nigris F(1), Mega T, Berger N, Barone MV, Santoro M, Viglietto G, Verde P,
Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche c/o Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare,
Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy.

The proteins of the Ets family are transcription factors involved in signal
transduction, cell cycle progression, and differentiation. In this study, we
report that thyroid cell neoplastic transformation is associated with a dramatic 
increase in ETS transcriptional activity, which is dependent on the accumulation 
of Ets-1, Ets-2, and other Ets-related proteins. Inhibition of ETS
transactivation activity by the Ets-dominant negative construct (Ets-Z) induced
programmed cell death in human thyroid carcinoma cell lines but not in normal
thyroid cells. Apoptotic cell death induced by Ets-Z was dependent on the
reduction of c-MYC protein levels, because it was prevented by overexpression of 
c-myc. Taken together, these data indicate that the induction of Ets-1 and Ets-2 
transcription factors plays a pivotal role in thyroid cell neoplastic
transformation.

PMID: 11280797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 25;276(21):18007-17. Epub 2001 Feb 21.

Physical interaction and functional synergy between glucocorticoid receptor and
Ets2 proteins for transcription activation of the rat cytochrome P-450c27
promoter.

Mullick J(1), Anandatheerthavarada HK, Amuthan G, Bhagwat SV, Biswas G,
Camasamudram V, Bhat NK, Reddy SE, Rao V, Avadhani NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, Mari Lowe Center for Comparative Oncology,
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

We demonstrate that dexamethasone-mediated transcription activation of the
cytochrome P-450c27 promoter involves a physical interaction and functional
synergy between glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and Ets2 factor. Ets2 protein
binding to a "weak" Ets-like site of the promoter is dependent on GR bound to the
adjacent cryptic glucocorticoid response element. Coimmunoprecipitation and
chemical cross-linking experiments show physical interaction between GR and Ets2 
proteins. Mutational analyses show synergistic effects of Ets2 and GR in
dexamethasone-mediated activation of the cytochrome P-450c27 promoter. The
DNA-binding domain of GR, lacking the transcription activation and ligand-binding
domains, was fully active in synergistic activation of the promoter with intact
Ets2. The DNA-binding domain of Ets2 lacking the transcription activation domain 
showed a dominant negative effect on the transcription activity. Finally, a
fusion protein consisting of the GR DNA-binding domain and the transcription
activation domain of Ets2 fully supported the transcription activity, suggesting 
a novel synergy between the two proteins, which does not require the
transactivation domain of GR. Our results also provide new insights on the role
of putative weak consensus Ets sites in transcription activation, possibly
through synergistic interaction with other gene-specific transcription
activators.

PMID: 11279115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 25;276(21):17800-7. Epub 2001 Feb 15.

Bcl-XL expression correlates with primary macrophage differentiation, activation 
of functional competence, and survival and results from synergistic
transcriptional activation by Ets2 and PU.1.

Sevilla L(1), Zaldumbide A, Carlotti F, Dayem MA, Pognonec P, Boulukos KE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signalisation, Developmental Biology and Cancer, INSERM 470,
Centre de Biochimie, Université de Nice, Faculté des Sciences, 06108 Nice,
France.

Depriving primary bone marrow-derived macrophages of colony-stimulating factor-1 
(CSF-1) induces programmed cell death by apoptosis. We show that cell death is
accompanied by decreases in the expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-x(L) protein and
the Ets2 and PU.1 proteins of the Ets transcription factor family. Macrophages
require both priming and triggering signals independent of CSF-1 to kill
neoplastic cells or microorganisms, and this activation of macrophage competence 
is accompanied by increased expression of bcl-x(L), ets2, and PU.1. Furthermore, 
we show that only Ets2 and PU.1, but not Ets1, function in a synergistic manner
to transactivate the bcl-x promoter. The synergy observed between PU.1 and Ets2
is dependent on the transactivation domains of both proteins. Although other
transcription factors like Fos, c-Jun, Myc, STAT3, and STAT5a are implicated in
the activation of macrophage competence or in CSF-1 signaling, no synergy was
observed between Ets2 and these transcription factors on the bcl-x promoter. We
demonstrate that the exogenous expression of both Ets2 and PU.1 in macrophages
increases the number of viable cells upon CSF-1 depletion and that Ets2 and PU.1 
can functionally replace Bcl-x(L) in inhibiting Bax-induced apoptosis. Together, 
these results demonstrate that PU.1 and Ets2 dramatically increase bcl-x
activation, which is necessary for the cytocidal function and survival of
macrophages.

PMID: 11278399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Pigment Cell Res. 2001 Feb;14(1):40-6.

Herpesvirus connection in the expression of autoimmune vitiligo in Smyth line
chickens.

Erf GF(1), Bersi TK, Wang X, Sreekumar GP, Smyth JR Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Poultry Science Center, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701, USA.
gferf@mail.uark.edu

The Smyth line (SL) chicken is an animal model for human vitiligo, a common
acquired depigmentary disorder affecting about 1-2% of people worldwide. The
vitiligo-like depigmentation in SL chickens typically develops when the birds are
between 6 and 14 weeks of age and may affect 70-95% of hatch mates. The
development of SL vitiligo is considered to depend on two interacting components,
namely an inherent melanocyte defect and an autoimmune reaction to melanocytes.
Recently, a role for an environmental factor in the expression of vitiligo was
suggested by the observation that only 10% of SL chicks imported from the
University of Massachusetts (UM) and reared in isolation at biosecurity level 2
(BSL 2) at the University of Arkansas (UA) exhibited vitiligo. Following further 
assessment of environmental differences between UA and UM SL chickens, three
environmental factors that may have influenced the expression of SL vitiligo were
identified. Included were housing condition, status of Mycoplasma synoviae
infection, and turkey herpesvirus (HVT) vaccination status. Studies were
subsequently conducted at UA and UM to assess the role of these environmental
factors in the expression of SL vitiligo. M. synoviae infection was not found
necessary for vitiligo expression in SL chickens. However, HVT emerged as a
strong candidate for an important environmental factor in SL vitiligo. The
connection between HVT and SL vitiligo was confirmed for both BSL 2 and
conventional housing. Therefore, the observations reported here suggest a strong 
causative link between HVT infection and SL vitiligo.

PMID: 11277493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Mar;21(5):1540-51.

Grb2 and Shc adapter proteins play distinct roles in Neu (ErbB-2)-induced mammary
tumorigenesis: implications for human breast cancer.

Dankort D(1), Maslikowski B, Warner N, Kanno N, Kim H, Wang Z, Moran MF, Oshima
RG, Cardiff RD, Muller WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute for Molecular Biology and Biotechnology,
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8S 4K1.

Amplification of the Neu (ErbB-2 or HER-2) receptor tyrosine kinase occurs in 20 
to 30% of human mammary carcinomas, correlating with a poor clinical prognosis.
We have previously demonstrated that four (Y1144 Y1201, Y1227 and Y1253) of the
five known Neu autophosphorylation sites can independently mediate transforming
signals. The transforming potential of two of these mutants correlates with their
capacity to recruit Grb2 directly to Y1144 (YB) or indirectly through Shc to
Y1227 (YD). Here, we demonstrate that these transformation-competent neu mutants 
activate extracellular signal-regulated kinases and stimulate Ets-2-dependent
transcription. Although the transforming potential of three of these mutants (YB,
YD, and YE) was susceptible to inhibition by Rap1A, a genetic antagonist of Ras, 
the transforming potential of YC was resistant to inhibition by Rap1A. To further
address the significance of these ErbB-2-coupled signaling molecules in induction
of mammary cancers, transgenic mice expressing mutant Neu receptors lacking the
known autophosphorylation sites (NYPD) or those coupled directly to either Grb2
(YB) or Shc (YD) adapter molecules were derived. In contrast to the NYPD strains,
which developed focal mammary tumors after a long latency period with low
penetrance, all female mice derived from YB and YD strains rapidly developed
mammary tumors. Although female mice from several independent YB or YD lines
developed mammary tumors, the YB strains developed lung metastases at
substantially higher rates than the YD strains. These observations argue that
Grb2 and Shc play important and distinct roles in ErbB-2/Neu-induced mammary
tumorigenesis and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC86700
PMID: 11238891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Nature. 2001 Feb 22;409(6823):1067-70.

Opposing effects of Ets and Id proteins on p16INK4a expression during cellular
senescence.

Ohtani N(1), Zebedee Z, Huot TJ, Stinson JA, Sugimoto M, Ohashi Y, Sharrocks AD, 
Peters G, Hara E.

Author information: 
(1)Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Christie Hospital NHS Trust,
Manchester, UK.

The p16INK4a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor is implicated in replicative
senescence, the state of permanent growth arrest provoked by cumulative cell
divisions or as a response to constitutive Ras-Raf-MEK signalling in somatic
cells. Some contribution to senescence presumably underlies the importance of
p16INK4a as a tumour suppressor but the mechanisms regulating its expression in
these different contexts remain unknown. Here we demonstrate a role for the Ets1 
and Ets2 transcription factors based on their ability to activate the p16INK4a
promoter through an ETS-binding site and their patterns of expression during the 
lifespan of human diploid fibroblasts. The induction of p16INK4a by Ets2, which
is abundant in young human diploid fibroblasts, is potentiated by signalling
through the Ras-Raf-MEK kinase cascade and inhibited by a direct interaction with
the helix-loop-helix protein Id1 (ref. 11). In senescent cells, where the Ets2
levels and MEK signalling decline, the marked increase in p16INK4a expression is 
consistent with the reciprocal reduction of Id1 and accumulation of Ets1.

PMID: 11234019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Poult Sci. 2001 Feb;80(2):172-81.

Avian T helper one/two immune response balance can be shifted toward inflammation
by antigen delivery to scavenger receptors.

Vandaveer SS(1), Erf GF, Durdik JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA.

Whether immune responses are dominated by inflammation or antibody production is 
often key to surviving infections. Therefore, differential control of these
immune pathways determined by CD4 T cells is of fundamental interest for vaccine 
design. Little is known about how inflammatory [T helper cell (Th) type 1 (Th1)] 
versus antibody-inducing (Th2) choices are controlled in domestic fowl. To
address this, MHC-matched chickens were immunized to test whether
antibody-dominated Th2 or inflammatory Th1 responses could be preferentially
activated, and our findings subsequently extended to outbred broiler breeders.
Strategies used were known to shift the response in mice from Th2 to Th1 by
delivering the injected antigen preferentially to macrophages. The model antigen,
BSA, was maleylated to allow binding to scavenger receptors (SR) present on
mammalian macrophages. Maleyl-BSA bound well in receptor-specific fashion to a
chicken macrophage cell line. Compared with native BSA, immunization with
SR-binding, maleyl-BSA modulated the immune response toward the Th1 pathway, as
evident by increases in the magnitude of in vivo inflammatory reactions and
declines in antibody-making responses. Initiation of a maleyl-BSA Th1 pathway is 
further supported by the enhanced ability of splenocytes to express mRNA for
interferon-gamma in response to antigens. Together, these data establish the
presence and functional relevance of SR in domestic fowl as well as provide a
system for investigating the mechanisms controlling Th1/Th2 pathways in chickens.
Moreover, the ability to direct immune responses toward either pathway by antigen
maleylation will contribute significantly to the development of better vaccines
for poultry diseases.

PMID: 11233005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6524-32.

Proteins of the ETS family with transcriptional repressor activity.

Mavrothalassitis G(1), Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Crete and IMBB-FORTH, Voutes, Heraklion,
Crete 714-09, Greece.

ETS proteins form one of the largest families of signal-dependent transcriptional
regulators, mediating cellular proliferation, differentiation and tumorigenesis. 
Most of the known ETS proteins have been shown to activate transcription.
However, four ETS proteins (YAN, ERF, NET and TEL) can act as transcriptional
repressors. In three cases (ERF, NET and TEL) distinct repression domains have
been identified and there are indications that NET and TEL may mediate
transcription via Histone Deacetylase recruitment. All four proteins appear to be
regulated by MAPKs, though for YAN and ERF this regulation seems to be restricted
to ERKs. YAN, ERF and TEL have been implicated in cellular proliferation although
there are indications suggesting a possible involvement of YAN and TEL in
differentiation as well. Other ETS-domain proteins have been shown to repress
transcription in a context specific manner, and there are suggestions that the
ETS DNA-binding domain may act as a transcriptional repressor. Transcriptional
repression by ETS domain proteins adds an other level in the orchestrated
regulation by this diverse family of transcription factors that often recognize
similar if not identical binding sites on DNA and are believed to regulate
critical genes in a variety of biological processes. Definitive assessment of the
importance of this novel regulatory level will require the identification of ETS 
proteins target genes and the further analysis of transcriptional control and
biological function of these proteins in defined pathways.

PMID: 11175368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6503-13.

Signal transduction and the Ets family of transcription factors.

Yordy JS(1), Muise-Helmericks RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, SC 29403, USA.

Cellular responses to environmental stimuli are controlled by a series of
signaling cascades that transduce extracellular signals from ligand-activated
cell surface receptors to the nucleus. Although most pathways were initially
thought to be linear, it has become apparent that there is a dynamic interplay
between signaling pathways that result in the complex pattern of cell-type
specific responses required for proliferation, differentiation and survival. One 
group of nuclear effectors of these signaling pathways are the Ets family of
transcription factors, directing cytoplasmic signals to the control of gene
expression. This family is defined by a highly conserved DNA binding domain that 
binds the core consensus sequence GGAA/T. Signaling pathways such as the MAP
kinases, Erk1 and 2, p38 and JNK, the PI3 kinases and Ca2+-specific signals
activated by growth factors or cellular stresses, converge on the Ets family of
factors, controlling their activity, protein partnerships and specification of
downstream target genes. Interestingly, Ets family members can act as both
upstream and downstream effectors of signaling pathways. As downstream effectors 
their activities are directly controlled by specific phosphorylations, resulting 
in their ability to activate or repress specific target genes. As upstream
effectors they are responsible for the spacial and temporal expression or
numerous growth factor receptors. This review provides a brief survey of what is 
known to date about how this family of transcription factors is regulated by
cellular signaling with a special focus on Ras responsive elements (RREs), the
MAP kinases (Erks, p38 and JNK) and Ca2+-specific pathways and includes a
description of the multiple roles of Ets family members in the lymphoid system.
Finally, we will discuss other potential mechanisms and pathways involved in the 
regulation of this important family of transcription factors.

PMID: 11175366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6464-71.

Ets factors and regulation of the extracellular matrix.

Trojanowska M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
96 Jonathan Lucas Street, Charleston South Carolina, SC 29401, USA.

Ets factors are critical mediators of extracellular matrix (ECM) remodelling. As 
the spectrum of Ets-regulated target genes widens, so does their role in various 
pathological and physiological processes. Regulation of matrix degrading
proteases by Ets factors in tumor invasion and metastasis is well established.
Emerging evidence suggests that they may also play a role in the pathology of
autoimmune diseases. Newly characterized Ets target genes such as tenascin-C and 
collagen type I suggest their role in diseases characterized by aberrant collagen
deposition (fibrosis). Ets function is also critical in bone and cartilage
development. There is increasing knowledge of the complex regulatory mechanisms
involved in transcription of Ets target genes. Ets factors may function as
activators or as repressors via association with specific cofactors depending on 
the promoter context. Signaling pathways can modulate the activation status of
Ets factors and their transcriptional partners. Precise understanding of the role
of Ets factors in the complex cellular network governing the expression of ECM
proteins and the enzymes that degrade them will be a focus of future studies.

PMID: 11175362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6455-63.

Ets transcription factors and targets in osteogenesis.

Raouf A(1), Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, MRC group in Periodontal
Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Bone formation in vivo is a complex phenomenon whereby recruitment and
replication of mesenchymal precursors of osteoblasts, differentiation into
preosteoblasts, osteoblasts, and mature osteoblasts ultimately result in the
accumulation and mineralization of the extracellular matrix. MC3T3-E1, a clonal
osteoblastic cell line, was derived from mouse calvaria and undergoes an ordered 
and time dependent developmental sequence leading to formation of multilayered
bone nodules over a 30 - 35 day period. This developmental pattern is
characterized by the replication of preosteoblasts followed by growth arrest and 
expression of mature osteoblastic characteristics such as matrix maturation and
eventual formation of multilayered nodules with a mineralized extracellular
matrix. We have found that Ets1 is expressed in proliferating preosteoblastic
cells whereas Ets2 is expressed by differentiating and mature osteoblasts. In
addition, the expression of Ets1 can be induced in MC3T3-E1 and fetal rat
calvaria cells by retinoic acid (RA) which is known to exert profound effects on 
skeletal growth and development, bone turnover, and induce specific cellular
responses in bone cells. Thus the multiple functions of RA in bone cells are
likely to be mediated in part by Ets1. Also, Ets2 transgenic mice develop
multiple neurocranial, viserocranial, and cervical skeletal abnormalities.
Significantly, these abnormalities are similar to the skeletal anomalies found in
trisomy-16 mice and in humans with Down's syndrome, wherein the dosage of Ets2 is
known to be increased. These results indicate that Ets2 has an important role in 
skeletal development and that Ets2 overexpression in transgenics is responsible
for the genesis of the same type of skeletal abnormalities that are seen in
Down's syndrome. Thus the genetic programs regulated by Ets1 and Ets2 may
significantly affect the development and differentiation of osteoblasts, and in
fact, Ets1 has been shown to interact with the 'quintessential' osteoblast
transcription factor CbfA1. This review will examine in detail the role and
possible targets of Ets1 and Ets2 in osteoblast differentiation and bone
formation.

PMID: 11175361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6443-54.

Mouse models in the study of the Ets family of transcription factors.

Bartel FO(1), Higuchi T, Spyropoulos DD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, SC 29425, USA.

The Ets family of transcription factors is one of a growing number of master
regulators of development. This family was originally defined by the presence of 
a conserved DNA binding domain, the Ets domain. To date, nearly 30 members of
this family have been identified and implicated in a wide range of physiological 
and pathological processes. Despite the likely importance of Ets-family members, 
each of their precise roles has not been delineated. Herein, we describe the
elucidation of essential functions of a few of these family members in vivo using
knockout mouse models. Of the knockouts generated to date, the majority shows
important functions in hematopoiesis, ranging from PU.1, a principle regulator of
myelo-lymphopoiesis, to Spi-B which regulates the proper function of terminally
differentiated cells. Ets1 was shown to be of intermediate importance as a
regulator of pan-lymphoid development. Other Ets family members such as Fli1 and 
TEL1 display distinct and/or overlapping functions in vasculo/angiogenesis,
hemostasis and hematopoiesis. The remaining knockouts generated, Ets2 and Er81,
show non-hematopoietic defects related to extraembryonic development and
neurogenesis, respectively. The pioneering group of knockout models described
reveals only the most distinct functions of each of these Ets family members. A
better understanding of the roles and hierarchies of Ets family members in
cellular differentiation will come with the generation of new null alleles in
previously untargeted family members, more mutant alleles in members already
disrupted, double knockouts, ES cell differentiation and chimera rescue
experiments, and tissue-specific inducible knockouts.

PMID: 11175360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6417-31.

The Ets-transcription factor family in embryonic development: lessons from the
amphibian and bird.

Remy P(1), Baltzinger M.

Author information: 
(1)FRE 2168 du CNRS, IPCB, 21 rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg cedex, France.

This chapter reviews the expression and role of Ets-genes during embryogenesis of
amphibians and birds. In addition to overlapping expression domains, some of them
exhibit cell type-specific expression. Many of them are expressed in migratory
cells: neural crest, endothelial, and pronephric duct cells for instance. They
are also transcribed in embryonic areas affected by epithelio-mesenchymal
transitions. Both processes involve modifications of cellular adhesion.
Ets-family genes appear to coordinate changes in the expression of adhesion
molecules and degradation of the extracellular matrix upon regulation of matrix
metalloproteinases and their specific inhibitors. These functions are essential
for physiological processes like tissue remodelling during embryogenesis or wound
healing. Unfortunately they also play a harmful role in metastasis. Recent
studies in the nervous system showed that Ets-genes contribute to the
establishment of a cellular identity. This identity could rely on definite
cell-surface determinants, among which cadherins could play an important role. In
addition to cell-type specific expression, other factors contribute to the
specificity of function of Ets-genes. These genes have a broad specificity of
recognition of target sequences in gene promoters, insufficient for accurate
control of gene expression. A fine tuning could arise from combinatorial
interactions with other Ets- or accessory proteins.

PMID: 11175358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Plant J. 2001 Jan;25(1):43-53.

The jasmonate-inducible AP2/ERF-domain transcription factor ORCA3 activates gene 
expression via interaction with a jasmonate-responsive promoter element.

van der Fits L(1), Memelink J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, Clusius Laboratory, Leiden University, 
Wassenaarseweg 64, 2333 AL Leiden, The Netherlands.

The AP2/ERF-domain transcription factor ORCA3 is a master regulator of primary
and secondary metabolism in Catharanthus roseus (periwinkle). Here we demonstrate
that ORCA3 specifically binds to and activates gene expression via a previously
characterized jasmonate- and elicitor-responsive element (JERE) in the promoter
of the terpenoid indole alkaloid biosynthetic gene Strictosidine synthase (Str). 
Functional characterization of different domains in the ORCA3 protein in yeast
and plant cells revealed the presence of an N-terminal acidic activation domain
and a serine-rich C-terminal domain with a negative regulatory function. Orca3
mRNA accumulation was rapidly induced by the plant stress hormone methyljasmonate
with biphasic kinetics. A precursor and an intermediate of the jasmonate
biosynthetic pathway also induced Orca3 gene expression, further substantiating
the role for ORCA3 in jasmonate signaling. The protein synthesis inhibitor
cycloheximide did not inhibit jasmonate-responsive expression of Orca3, nor of
its target genes Str and Tryptophan decarboxylase (Tdc). In conclusion, ORCA3
regulates jasmonate-responsive expression of the Str gene via direct interaction 
with the JERE. The activating activities of ORCA proteins do not seem to depend
on jasmonate-induced de novo protein synthesis, but presumably occur via
modification of pre-existing ORCA protein.

PMID: 11169181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Oncogene. 2000 Nov 16;19(48):5507-16.

Altered Ets transcription factor activity in prostate tumor cells inhibits
anchorage-independent growth, survival, and invasiveness.

Foos G(1), Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Center, The Burnham Institute, California 92037, USA.

The Ets family of transcription factors are important downstream targets in
cellular transformation, as altering Ets activity has been found to reverse the
transformed phenotype of Ras transformed mouse fibroblasts and of several human
tumor cell lines. To determine whether Ets factors are important targets in the
largely uncharacterized aberrant signaling in prostate cancer, we have altered
Ets activity in the prostate tumor cell line PPC-1, by stable expression of
either full-length Ets2, or a dominant inhibitor of Ets activity, the Ets2 DNA
binding domain (Ets2DBD). Analysis of multiple independent clonal cell lines
revealed that expression of either Ets2 or the Ets2DBD inhibited the
anchorage-independent growth of PPC-1 cells up to 20-fold. In contrast to our
previous findings with Ras-transformed NIH3T3 cells, PPC-1 cell lines expressing 
either Ets2 or the EtsDBD exhibited slower attached cell growth, increased
Ets-dependent gene expression, and up to a 10-fold increase in apoptotic cell
death. The p21cip gene was identified as a potential target of altered Ets
signaling. Interestingly, the two distinct Ets2 constructs had strikingly
different effects on in vitro invasiveness. Expression of the Ets2DBD almost
completely blocked PPC-1 cell invasion through Matrigel, whereas over-expression 
of full-length Ets2 did not inhibit invasion. Overall, these results demonstrate 
that the balance of Ets factor activity can regulate multiple aspects of the
transformed phenotype of PPC-1 prostate tumor cells, including
anchorage-independent growth, survival, and invasiveness.

PMID: 11114728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Mol Biol Rep. 2000 Jun;27(2):99-105.

SBP, SECIS binding protein, binds to the RNA fragment upstream of the Sec UGA
codon in glutathione peroxidase mRNA.

Mizutani T(1), Fujiwara T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan.
mizutani@phar.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

In mammals, most of the selenium contained in the body is present as an unusual
amino acid, selenocysteine (Sec), whose codon is UGA. Because the UGA codon is
typically recognized as a translation stop signal, it is intriguing how a cell
recognizes and distinguishes a UGA Sec codon from a UGA stop codon. For
eukaryotic selenoprotein mRNAs, it has been proposed that a conserved stem-loop
structure designated the Sec insertion sequence (SECIS) in the 3'-untranslated
(3'-UTR) region is required for recognition of UGA as a Sec codon. Some proteins 
which bind to SECIS (SBP) have been reported. However, it is not clear how the
SECIS element in the 3'-UTR can mediate Sec insertion far at the in-frame UGA Sec
codons. The idea that there must be a signal near the UGA Sec codon is still
considered. Therefore, we searched for a protein which binds to an RNA sequence
surrounding the UGA Sec codon on human glutathione peroxidase (GPx) mRNA. We
found a protein which strongly bound to the RNA fragment upstream of the UGA Sec 
codon. However, this protein did not bind to the RNA sequence downstream of the
UGA codon. This protein also bound to the SECIS sequence in the 3'-UTR of human
GPx, and this binding to SECIS was competed with the RNA fragment upstream of the
UGA Sec codon. Comparison of the RNA fragment with the SECIS fragment identified 
the conserved regions, which appeared in the region upstream of the in-frame UGA 
Sec codon of Se-protein mRNAs. Thus, this study proposes a novel model to
understand the mechanisms of Sec incorporation at the UGA Sec codon, especially
the regions upstream of the UGA codon of mRNAs of mammalian selenoproteins. This 
model explains that the stem-loop structure covering the UGA codon is recognized 
by SBP and how the UGA Sec codon escapes from attack by eRF of the peptide
releasing factor.

PMID: 11092556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Nov;20(21):8026-34.

ets-2 is a target for an akt (Protein kinase B)/jun N-terminal kinase signaling
pathway in macrophages of motheaten-viable mutant mice.

Smith JL(1), Schaffner AE, Hofmeister JK, Hartman M, Wei G, Forsthoefel D, Hume
DA, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and the Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The transcription factor ets-2 was phosphorylated at residue threonine 72 in a
colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1)- and mitogen-activated protein
kinase-independent manner in macrophages isolated from motheaten-viable (me-v)
mice. The CSF-1 and ets-2 target genes coding for Bcl-x, urokinase plasminogen
activator, and scavenger receptor were also expressed at high levels independent 
of CSF-1 addition to me-v cells. Akt (protein kinase B) was constitutively active
in me-v macrophages, and an Akt immunoprecipitate catalyzed phosphorylation of
ets-2 at threonine 72. The p54 isoform of c-jun N-terminal
kinase-stress-activated kinase (JNK- SAPK) coimmunoprecipitated with Akt from
me-v macrophages, and treatment of me-v cells with the specific
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor LY294002 decreased cell survival, Akt and
JNK kinase activities, ets-2 phosphorylation, and Bcl-x mRNA expression.
Therefore, ets-2 is a target for phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt-JNK action,
and the JNK p54 isoform is an ets-2 kinase in macrophages. Constitutive ets-2
activity may contribute to the pathology of me-v mice by increasing expression of
genes like the Bcl-x gene that promote macrophage survival.

PMCID: PMC86413
PMID: 11027273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Nucl Med. 2000 Sep;41(9):17N, 24N.

Blahds recognized for efforts in support of ERF. Education and Research
Foundation.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 10994718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cancer Gene Ther. 2000 Aug;7(8):1188-95.

Suppression of the Ewing's sarcoma phenotype by FLI1/ERF repressor hybrids.

Athanasiou M(1), LeGallic L, Watson DK, Blair DG, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, Science Applications International
Corporation, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Fusion of the 5' half of the Ewing's sarcoma (ES) gene EWS with the DNA-binding
domain of several transcription factors has been detected in many human tumors.
The t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal translocation is specifically linked to ES and 
primitive neuroectodermal tumors and results, in the majority of cases, in the
fusion of the amino terminus of the EWS gene to the carboxyl-terminal DNA-binding
domain of the FLI1 gene. The chimeric protein has been shown to be oncogenic, a
potent transcriptional activator, and necessary for the maintenance of the
Ewing's phenotype, making it an attractive target for gene therapy. In this
study, we demonstrate that the ES transformed phenotype can be suppressed by
chimeric transcriptional repressors containing the DNA-binding domain of FLI1 and
the regulatory and repressor domain of ERF, a transcription suppressor and member
of the ets gene family. The hybrid repressor is expressed at levels comparable
with EWS/FLI1, does not affect EWS/FLI1 expression, and exhibits similar
DNA-binding specificity but suppresses transcriptional activity. The FLI1/ERF
repressor, like the wild-type ERF, is regulated by mitogen-activated protein
kinase-dependent subcellular localization. Our data suggest that transformation
by EWS/FLI1 may partially be due to activation of specific EWS/FLI1-regulated
genes involved in cell proliferation.

PMID: 10975680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2000 Jul 25;165(1-2):17-24.

Role of Ets2 in cyclic AMP regulation of the human chorionic gonadotropin beta
promoter.

Johnson W(1), Jameson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School, Tarry Building 15-709, 303 East Chicago Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Activation of the human chorionic gonadotropin beta (hCGbeta) by the protein
kinase A (PKA) pathway has been shown to occur through an activating protein-2
(AP-2)-dependent mechanism. However, in HepG2 cells, which are deficient in AP-2,
the PKA catalytic subunit is still able to stimulate the hCGbeta promoter. Ets2
plays a critical role in placental development as revealed by placental
abnormalities in Ets2 knockout mice. Transfection of Ets2 into JEG-3 placental
cells causes a slight, but reproducible, increase in hCGbeta promoter basal
activity. However, cotransfection with the PKA catalytic subunit causes a strong 
synergistic increase in hCGbeta promoter activity. Ets2 synergistic activation of
the hCGbeta promoter is specific for the PKA pathway, as activation of the ras
pathway, which also acts through Ets2, does not activate the hCGbeta promoter.
c-Jun-mediated repression of hCGbeta is inhibited by Ets2 cotransfection,
indicating that protein-protein interactions may be responsible for Ets2
activation of the hCGbeta promoter.

PMID: 10940479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Anal Biochem. 2000 Aug 15;284(1):107-13.

Hybridization assay at a disposable electrochemical biosensor for the attomole
detection of amplified human cytomegalovirus DNA.

Azek F(1), Grossiord C, Joannes M, Limoges B, Brossier P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie Médicale et Moléculaire, Faculté de Médecine et
Pharmacie, 7 Boulevard Jeanned'Arc, Dijon, 21033, France.

A disposable electrochemical biosensor for the detection of DNA sequences related
to the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is described. The sensor relies on the
adsorption of an amplified human cytomegalovirus DNA strand onto the sensing
surface of a screen-printed carbon electrode, and to its hybridization to a
complementary single-stranded biotinylated DNA probe. The extent of hybrids
formed was determined with streptavidin conjugated to horseradish peroxidase. The
peroxidase label was indirectly quantified by measuring the amount of the
chromophore and electroactive product 2,2'-diaminoazobenzene generated from the
o-phenylenediamine substrate. The intensity of differential pulse voltammetric
peak currents resulting from the reduction of the enzyme-generated product was
related to the number of target HCMV-amplified DNA molecules present in the
sample, and the results were compared to those obtained with standard methods,
i.e., agarose gel electrophoresis quantification and colorimetric hybridization
assay in a microtiter plate. A detection limit of 0.6 amol/ml of HCMV-amplified
DNA fragment was obtained with the electrochemical DNA biosensor. The
electrochemical method was 23,000-fold more sensitive than the gel
electrophoresis technique and 83-fold more sensitive than the colorimetric
hybridization assay in a microtiter plate.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10933863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Biochemistry. 2000 Aug 1;39(30):8917-28.

Ets domain transcription factor PE1 suppresses human interstitial collagenase
promoter activity by antagonizing protein-DNA interactions at a critical AP1
element.

Bidder M(1), Loewy AP, Latifi T, Newberry EP, Ferguson G, Willis DM, Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

In MC3T3E1 calvarial osteoblasts, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)
signaling elicits multiple transcriptional responses, including upregulation of
the interstitial collagenase/matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) promoter. FGF
responsiveness maps to a bipartite Ets/AP1 element at base pairs -123 to -61 in
the human MMP1 promoter. Under basal conditions, the MMP1 promoter is repressed
in part via protein-DNA interactions at the Ets cognate, and minimally two
mechanisms convey MMP1 promoter upregulation by FGF2: (a) transcriptional
activation via Fra1/c-Jun containing DNA-protein interactions at the AP1 cognate 
and (b) derepression of promoter activity regulated by the Ets cognate. To
identify osteoblast Ets repressors that potentially participate in gene
expression in the osteoblast, we performed reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of mRNA isolated from MC3T3E1 cells, using
degenerative amplimers to the conserved Ets DNA binding domain to survey the Ets 
genes expressed by these cells. Six distinct Ets mRNAs were identified: Ets2,
Fli1, GABPalpha, SAP1, Elk1, and PE1. Of these, only PE1 has extensive homology
to the known Ras-regulated Ets transcriptional repressor, ERF. Therefore, we
cloned and characterized PE1 cDNA from a mouse brain library and performed
functional analysis of this particular Ets family member. A 2 kb transcript was
isolated from brain that encodes a approximately 57 kDa protein; the predicted
protein contains the known N-terminal Ets domain of PE1 and a novel C-terminal
domain with signficant homology to murine ERF. The murine PE1 open reading frame 
(ORF) is much larger than the previously reported human PE1 ORF. Consistent with 
this, affinity-purified rabbit anti-mouse PE1 antibody specifically recognizes an
approximately 66 kDa protein present only in the nuclear fraction of MC3T3E1
osteoblasts. Recombinant PE1 binds authentic AGGAWG Ets DNA cognates, and
transient transfection studies demonstrate that PE1 represses MMP1 promoter
activity. Surprisingly, although deletion of the MMP1 Ets cognate at nucleotides 
-88 to -83 abrogates FGF2 induction, it does not prevent suppression of the
AP1-dependent MMP1 promoter by PE1. PE1 regulation maps to the MMP1 promoter
region -75 to -61, suggesting that PE1 suppresses transcription via
protein-protein interactions with AP1. Consistent with this, recombinant GST-PE1 
specifically inhibits the formation of protein-DNA interactions on the MMP1 AP1
site (-72 to -66) when present in an admixture with MC3T3E1 crude nuclear
extract. In toto, these data indicate that PE1 participates in the
transcriptional regulation of the MMP1 promoter in osteoblasts. As observed with 
other transcriptional repressors of MMP1 gene expression, transcriptional
suppression by PE1 occurs via inhibition of AP1-dependent promoter activity.

PMID: 10913304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Exp Hematol. 2000 Jul;28(7):802-14.

Functional conservation of platelet glycoprotein V promoter between mouse and
human megakaryocytes.

Sato N(1), Kiyokawa N, Taguchi T, Suzuki T, Sekino T, Ohmi K, Itagaki M, Sato T, 
Lepage A, Lanza F, Fujimoto J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Children's Medical Research Center, Tokyo,
Japan.

OBJECTIVE: In an attempt to clarify the megakaryo-specific regulatory mechanism
of GPV gene transcription, we characterized the 5'-flanking region of the mouse
GPV gene.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The promotor activity of a -481/+22 5'-fragment of the
mouse GPV gene was examined in normal mouse bone marrow cells (BMC) and various
human cell lines using two distinct reporter gene assay systems, luciferase and
green fluorescence protein (GFP).
RESULTS: When a DNA construct consisting of this fragment and a GFP reporter gene
were transiently expressed in thrombopoietin-supported mouse BMC culture, GFP was
identified only in megakaryocytes. The same construct expressed high levels of
GFP in the human megakaryocytic Dami line. When assessed by dual luciferase
assay, the full -481/+22 fragment could drive variable promoter activity in human
as well as mouse megakaryocytic lines but did not work in non-megakaryocytic
cells. Sufficient transcriptional activation of this fragment was restricted to
the cells expressing apparent GPV mRNA. A deletion and point mutation study
indicated that GATA and Ets motifs, typical cis-acting elements for
platelet-specific genes, located of -75 and -46, respectively, were essential for
promoter function.
CONCLUSION: The GPV promoter has the general characteristics found in
platelet-specific genes, and the mechanism for megakaryocyte-specific,
maturation-dependent regulation of GPV gene transcription is highly conserved
between mouse and human. Analysis of GPV transcription mechanism utilizing human 
lines as well as BMC should provide new information on the final maturational
process of megakaryocytes.

PMID: 10907642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Ergonomics. 2000 Jun;43(6):764-70.

Dual displays.

Tlauka M(1), Stanton D, McKenna FP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Leicester, UK. mt16@leicester.ac.uk

The study examined whether the simultaneous presentation of different map
displays can aid situational awareness in spatial tasks relying on ego-centred
and world-centred reference frames. Two commonly used aircraft displays, track-up
and north-up maps, were compared with a dual aircraft display consisting of both 
track-up and north-up maps. Participants took part in two tasks: one relied on an
ego-centred reference frame (ERF) and the other on a world-centred reference
frame (WRF). The ERF task involved left/right judgements with respect to the
aircraft's current heading while in the WRF task participants were asked to
identify the compass heading associated with a landmark. A moderate amount of
training resulted in a significant improvement with the dual maps in both the WRF
task (relative to track-up maps) and the ERF task (relative to north-up maps).
The findings are discussed with reference to how attention is allocated to visual
displays.

PMID: 10902886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Blood. 2000 Jul 15;96(2):655-63.

Analysis of genes under the downstream control of the t(8;21) fusion protein
AML1-MTG8: overexpression of the TIS11b (ERF-1, cMG1) gene induces myeloid cell
proliferation in response to G-CSF.

Shimada H(1), Ichikawa H, Nakamura S, Katsu R, Iwasa M, Kitabayashi I, Ohki M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan.

The AML1-MTG8 fusion transcription factor generated by t(8;21) translocation is
thought to dysregulate genes that are crucial for normal differentiation and
proliferation of hematopoietic progenitors to cause acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML). Although AML1-MTG8 has been shown to repress the transcription of AML1
targets, none of the known targets of AML1 are probably responsible for
AML1-MTG8-mediated leukemogenesis. In this study, 24 genes under the downstream
control of AML1-MTG8 were isolated by using a differential display technique.
Analysis with deletion mutants of AML1-MTG8 demonstrated that the regulation of
the majority of these genes requires the region of 51 residues (488-538)
containing the Nervy homology region 2 (NHR2), through which AML1-MTG8 interacts 
with MTGR1. Among the 24 genes identified, 10 were considered to be genes under
the control of AML1, because their expression was altered by AML1b or AML1a or
both. However, the other 14 genes were not affected by either AML1b or AML1a,
suggesting the possibility that AML1-MTG8 regulates a number of specific target
genes that are not normally regulated by AML1. Furthermore, an up-regulated gene,
TIS11b (ERF-1, cMG1), was highly expressed in t(8;21) leukemic cells, and the
overexpression of TIS11b induced myeloid cell proliferation in response to
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. These results suggest that the high-level 
expression of TIS11b contributes to AML1-MTG8-mediated leukemogenesis. (Blood.
2000;96:655-663)

PMID: 10887131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 29;275(39):30432-8.

The small GTPases Ras, Rac, and Cdc42 transcriptionally regulate expression of
human fibroblast growth factor 1.

Chotani MA(1), Touhalisky K, Chiu IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
43210-1228, USA.

Four distinct promoters (1A, 1B, 1C, and 1D) of fibroblast growth factor 1
(FGF1), spaced up to 70 kilobase pairs apart, direct the expression of
alternatively spliced transcript variants (FGF1.A, -1. B, -1.C, and -1.D) that
encode FGF1. These FGF1 transcripts can be detected in cultured cells as well as 
in normal and diseased tissues. These transcripts are differentially regulated in
a cell-specific manner. To further delineate the biological function of multiple 
promoter usage by a single gene, we investigated the transcriptional regulation
of these promoters by defined signaling pathways associated with cell
proliferation and cell survival. Here we show a specific association of two of
the FGF1 promoters, 1C and 1D, with signaling cascades of the Ras superfamily of 
GTPases. A serum-response element, comprised of the Ets and CArG motifs, present 
in promoter 1D was shown to be the target of distinct signaling cascades; the Ets
motif target of Ras, Rac1, and Cdc42 regulation; and the CArG motif target of de 
novo protein synthesis-independent cascade. Ras and Rac1 also activated the FGF2 
promoter. Further, the transcription factor Ets2 synergistically activated FGF1
gene, but not FGF2, in a Ras- and Rac1-dependent signaling pathway. In support of
these conclusions high levels of intracellular FGF1 were detected in cells
undergoing cytokinesis. Altogether, our results suggest that FGF1 may play a
fundamental role in cell division, spreading, and migration, in addition to cell 
proliferation.

PMID: 10849427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Oncogene. 2000 Apr 20;19(17):2086-97.

IL-2 and long-term T cell activation induce physical and functional interaction
between STAT5 and ETS transcription factors in human T cells.

Rameil P(1), Lécine P, Ghysdael J, Gouilleux F, Kahn-Perlès B, Imbert J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U119, Marseille, France.

Activation of Stat5 by many cytokines implies that it cannot alone insure the
specificity of the regulation of its target genes. We have evidenced a physical
and functional interaction between members of two unrelated transcription factor 
families, Ets-1, Ets-2 and Stat5, which could contribute to the proliferative
response to interleukin 2. Competition with GAS- and EBS-specific
oligonucleotides and immunoassays with a set of anti-Stat and anti-Ets families
revealed that the IL-2-induced Stat5-Ets complex recognizes several GAS motifs
identified as target sites for activated Stat5 dimers. Coimmunoprecipitation
experiments evidenced that a Stat5/Ets-1/2 complex is formed in vivo in absence
of DNA. GST-pull down experiments demonstrated that the C-terminal domain of
Ets-1 is sufficient for this interaction in vitro. Cotransfection experiments in 
Kit225 T cells resulted in cooperative transcriptional activity between both
transcription factors in response to a combination of IL-2, PMA and ionomycin. A 
Stat5-Ets protein complex was the major inducible DNA-binding complex bound to
the human IL-2rE GASd/EBSd motif in long-term proliferating normal human T cells 
activated by CD2 and CD28. These results suggest that the inducible Stat5-Ets
protein interaction plays a role in the regulation of gene expression in response
to IL-2 in human T lymphocytes.

PMID: 10815800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Healthc Exec. 2000 Mar-Apr;15(2):50-1.

Can physician unionization succeed?

Anthony MF(1), Erf S.

Author information: 
(1)McDermott, Will & Emery, Chicago, IL 60606-5096, USA.

PMID: 10787697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Plant Cell. 2000 Mar;12(3):393-404.

Arabidopsis ethylene-responsive element binding factors act as transcriptional
activators or repressors of GCC box-mediated gene expression.

Fujimoto SY(1), Ohta M, Usui A, Shinshi H, Ohme-Takagi M.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Molecular Biology Laboratory, National Institute of Bioscience and
Human-Technology, Tsukuba 305-8566, Japan.

Ethylene-responsive element binding factors (ERFs) are members of a novel family 
of transcription factors that are specific to plants. A highly conserved DNA
binding domain known as the ERF domain is the unique feature of this protein
family. To characterize in detail this family of transcription factors, we
isolated Arabidopsis cDNAs encoding five different ERF proteins (AtERF1 to
AtERF5) and analyzed their structure, DNA binding preference, transactivation
ability, and mRNA expression profiles. The isolated AtERFs were placed into three
classes based on amino acid identity within the ERF domain, although all five
displayed GCC box-specific binding activity. AtERF1, AtERF2, and AtERF5
functioned as activators of GCC box-dependent transcription in Arabidopsis
leaves. By contrast, AtERF3 and AtERF4 acted as repressors that downregulated not
only basal transcription levels of a reporter gene but also the transactivation
activity of other transcription factors. The AtERF genes were differentially
regulated by ethylene and by abiotic stress conditions, such as wounding, cold,
high salinity, or drought, via ETHYLENE-INSENSITIVE2 (EIN2)-dependent or
-independent pathways. Cycloheximide, a protein synthesis inhibitor, also induced
marked accumulation of AtERF mRNAs. Thus, we conclude that AtERFs are factors
that respond to extracellular signals to modulate GCC box-mediated gene
expression positively or negatively.

PMCID: PMC139839
PMID: 10715325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Ter Arkh. 2000;72(1):51-5.

[Clinicofunctional features of arterial hypertension in chronic
broncho-obstructive syndrome].

[Article in Russian]

Zadionchenko VS, Kuz'micheva NV, Sviridov AA, Ol'kha RP, Kashcheeva EV.

AIM: To describe clinicofunctional features of essential and pulmogenic
hypertension in chronic bronchoobstructive syndrome, 24-h profile of arterial
pressure (AP), intracardiac hemodynamics and to propose differential diagnostic
criteria for these hypertension forms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 24-h monitoring of arterial pressure (MAP),
cardiohemodynamics, external respiration function (ERF) and blood gases
examinations were made in 100 hypertensive subjects with chronic obstructive
bronchitis and bronchial asthma.
RESULTS: Significant differences were found between the groups of essential and
pulmogenic hypertension by major values of MAP, echo-CG and ERF. Early
disturbances in diastolic function of both the ventricles in essential and
pulmonary hypertension in chronic bronchial obstruction arise long before
clinical, x-ray and ECG signs of chronic pulmonary heart.
CONCLUSION: The findings enable formulation of criteria of differential diagnosis
of essential and pulmogenic hypertension and identify the latter as an
independent nosological entity.

PMID: 10687208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1999;57:269-81.

Expression of the transcription factor ETS2 in brain of patients with Down
syndrome--evidence against the overexpression-gene dosage hypothesis.

Greber-Platzer S(1), Schatzmann-Turhani D, Cairns N, Balcz B, Lubec G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna, Austria.

Overexpression of the transcription factor ETS2 and other genes localized in the 
socalled critical Down Syndrome region of chromosome 21 due to a gene dosage
effect, is an attractive hypothesis for the explanation of the Down Syndrome
phenotype. The overexpression of ETS2, however, has never been demonstrated in a 
human organ. We therefore challenged this hypothesis determining ETS2 levels in
several brain regions of patients with Down Syndrome as compared to controls. We 
used a highly sensitive and quantitative RT-PCR method for the determination of
ETS2 mRNA steady state levels in frontal, parietal, temporal, occipital lobe and 
cerebellum of 9 adult Down Syndrome patients and 9 adult controls. Significantly 
decreased ETS2 mRNA steady state levels (16.9 +/- 26.7 attogram mRNA ETS2/10 ng
total RNA versus 87.7 +/- 92.9 in controls) in frontal lobe of Down Syndrome
brain and decreased ETS2 mRNA steady state levels (6.99 +/- 6.4 attogram mRNA
ETS2/100 pg beta-actin versus 19.8 +/- 15.7 in controls) in temporal lobe of Down
Syndrome brain were found. In the other brain regions no statistically
significant difference was detected. Our data provide evidence against the
overexpression hypothesis for the development of the Down Syndrome phenotype.
Decreased ETS2 transcripts found in temporal and frontal lobe of patients with
Down Syndrome, however, may be involved in the pathogenesis of Down Syndrome
including specific neurodegenerative processes and deteriorated plasticity of the
brain taking place in Down Syndrome brain, as the concerted action of
transcription factors may be seriously impaired.

PMID: 10666682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genomics. 1999 Dec 15;62(3):529-32.

Chromosomal localization of phospholipase A2 activating protein, an Ets2 target
gene, to 9p21.

Beatty BG(1), Qi S, Pienkowska M, Herbrick JA, Scheidl T, Zhang ZM, Kola I,
Scherer SW, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Ontario Cancer Institute, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1L5, Canada. barbara@beatty5.com

A murine Ets2 target gene isolated by differential display cloning was identified
as the phospholipase A2 activating protein (PLAA) gene. A 2.7-kb human cDNA
demonstrating high homology to mouse and rat Plaa genes was then isolated and
characterized. Human PLAA contains six WD-40 repeat motifs and three different
protein kinase consensus domains. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
mapping placed PLAA on chromosome 9p21, a region frequently deleted in various
cancers. A comprehensive mapping strategy was employed to define further the
chromosomal localization of PLAA relative to CDKN2A within the 9p21 locus.
Radiation hybrid mapping placed the gene 7.69 cR from WI-5735 (LOD >3.0), a
marker in close proximity to CDKN2A and CDKN2B. Yeast artificial chromosome (YAC)
mapping localized PLAA proximal to the CDKN2A/CDKN2B genes and to a region
flanked by D9S171 and INFA commonly deleted in many neoplasms. Two YACs contained
both PLAA and D9S259, a marker present in a second more proximal minimal deleted 
region observed in cutaneous melanoma and squamous cell lung carcinoma.
Double-color fiber FISH mapping confirmed the location of PLAA centromeric to
D9S171 and CDKN2A/CDKN2B. The mapping data suggest a possible tumor suppressor
role for this gene.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10644453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Poult Sci. 1999 Dec;78(12):1699-702.

Research on the probable cause of an outbreak of field rickets in turkeys.

Huff WE(1), Huff GR, Clark FD, Moore PA Jr, Rath NC, Balog JM, Barnes DM, Erf GF,
Beers KW.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, Agricultural Research Service, Poultry Production and Product Safety
Research Unit, Poultry Science Center, Fayetteville, Arkansas, USA.
huff@comp.uark.edu

An outbreak of field rickets in turkeys prompted studies on the cause. In
Experiment 1, there were four treatments with two replicate pens of 10 poults per
pen. The treatments consisted of poults fed newly manufactured feed (control),
poults fed a diet containing control feed and 5% clean litter, poults fed control
feed and 5% litter from the pens of affected poults, and poults challenged with
an intestinal homogenate by gavage. Field rickets did not develop with these
treatments. The feed was suspect, and, in Experiment 2, poults were either fed
the suspect feed or newly manufactured feed. There were four replicate pens of 25
poults per pen. Poults fed the suspect feed had a decrease (P < or = 0.05) in BW 
at 1, 2, 3, and 4 wk of age; an increase in the relative weight of the liver,
pancreas, kidney, and bursa of Fabricius; and a decrease in bone ash. There were 
changes in clinical chemistries. In the third study, there were five dietary
treatments with two replicate pens of 25 poults per treatment. The treatments
consisted of poults fed newly manufactured feed; new feed mixed with 25, 50, or
75% suspect feed; or 100% suspect feed. Body weights of poults fed 100% suspect
feed were decreased at 2, 3, and 4 wk as was the relative weight of the liver,
pancreas, and bursa of Fabricius. The relative weight of the kidney increased.
Lameness, a decrease in bone ash, and changes in hematology and blood chemistry
were observed in the poults consuming 100% suspect feed. These data demonstrate
that feed from the original outbreak could induce field rickets and was toxic.
Because the feed contained adequate vitamin D, calcium, and phosphorus, the cause
of this outbreak of field rickets is thought to be a toxic feed contaminant
affecting bone development.

PMID: 10626644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 1999 Sep;18(3):347-55.

Expression of epidermal growth factor receptor in breast cancer, from early
stages to advanced disease.

Neskovic-Konstantinovic Z(1), Nikolic-Vukosavljevic D, Brankovic-Magic M, Kanjer 
K, Gavrilovic D, Mitrovic L, Borojevic N, Vukotic D, Spuzic I.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Medical Oncology, Institute for Oncology and Radiology of Serbia,
Belgrade, Jugoslavia. konsta@eunet.yu

Epidermal growth factor receptor was determined in 106 newly diagnosed breast
cancer patients, using the biochemical method. The group consisted of 58 patients
in stage I-II, and 48 patients in stage III-IV. Although a significant inverse
correlation was found between EGF-R status, and ER or PR status, quantitative
content of EGF-R did not correlate either with quantitative ER, or PR levels. The
ER/PR content was similar in all clinical stages, suggesting their stability
during the clinical course of the disease. EGF-R content was significantly higher
in stage IV, compared to stage I, while intermediate clinical stages and all
substages did not differ according to the EGF-R content. EGF-R was confirmed as a
weak prognostic factor within clinical stages. However, in a whole group, the
overall survival was significantly better in patients whose tumors EGF-R content 
was lower than 26 fmol/mg, compared to those with higher ERF-R content. EGF-R
content was highly predictive for the response to systemic endocrine treatment,
in metastatic breast cancer patients. In locally advanced breast cancer a trend
towards higher levels of EGF-R was found in inflammatory breast cancers, compared
to non-inflammatory ones. Slightly higher levels were found in responders to
local non-endocrine primary treatments (radiotherapy with or without
chemotherapy), compared to non-responders, suggesting the possible predictive
role of EGF-R for the response to such treatments. Our results emphasized the
usefulness of quantitative receptor determination suggesting the relative
stability of EGF-R content during the clinical course of breast cancer, its
independence from ER, its significant predictive and weak prognostic values, and 
a possible correlation with the aggressiveness of the disease, and response to
non-endocrine treatments.

PMID: 10606181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. FEBS Lett. 1999 Dec 10;463(1-2):39-42.

Hypertrophic stimuli augment expression of cMG1/ERF-1, a putative zinc-finger
motif transcription factor, in rat cardiomyocytes.

Manabe T(1), Fukuda K, Pan J, Nagasaki K, Yamaguchi K, Ogawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiopulmonary Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Keio University
School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

We isolated the gene for cMG1/ERF-1, a known putative zinc-finger transcription
factor, by differential display of mRNA extracted from cardiomyocytes with and
without leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) stimulation. LIF induced cMG1/ERF-1 mRNA
at 15 min, and levels peaked at 10-fold initial levels at 30 min. cMG1/ERF-1
expression was inhibited by AG490 (JAK2 inhibitor) and genistein, but was
unaffected by PD98059 or wortmannin. Phenylephrine, angiotensin II and
endothelin-1 also induced cMG1/ERF-1 expression. Mechanical stretch in vitro and 
acute pressure overload in vivo increased cMG1/ERF-1 expression. To our
knowledge, this is the first report showing that the cMG1/ERF-1 gene can be
induced by various hypertrophic stimuli, and that Janus kinase 2 is involved in
this process.

PMID: 10601634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Manag Care Interface. 1999 Jun;12(6):96-9.

Physician organizing: a convergence of interests.

Erf SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)McDermott, Will, and Emery, Chicago, IL, USA.

Economic forces and professional ideals are colliding to create further unrest in
the health care industry in the form of organizing physicians into unions.
Whereas self-employed or independent contractor physicians are barred from
joining together to bargain collectively with third-party payers and HMOs,
employed physicians may be able to avoid antitrust problems because they are
eligible for protection under the National Labor Relations Act. Consequently, as 
the number of employed physicians has grown and the frustrations they encounter
increase, unions (generally suffering a decrease in membership and political
influence) are finding a receptive audience for their message of solidarity.
However, will organizing into unions solve or aggravate the physicians' problems?

PMID: 10538466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Sep 3;1446(3):243-52.

Myb and Ets transcription factors cooperate at the myb-inducible promoter of the 
tom-1 gene.

Burk O(1), Klempnauer KH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Germany.

Transformation of myeloid cells by the retroviral oncogene v-myb is thought to be
caused by deregulated expression of specific cellular genes that act as targets
of v-Myb in myeloid cells. Recently, we have identified the chicken tom-1 gene as
a direct target for v-Myb. tom-1 has two promoters, only one of which (the tom-1A
promoter) is activated by v-Myb. Here, we show that v-Myb activates the tom-1A
promoter by cooperating with Ets-2, a member of the Ets transcription factor
family. Interestingly, we find that the ability of v-Myb to cooperate with Ets
proteins differs from that of its non-oncogenic cellular counterpart c-Myb. c-Myb
cooperates with Ets-1 and Ets-2, whereas v-Myb only cooperates with Ets-2.
Truncation of the N-terminus of c-Myb, which is known to activate the oncogenic
potential of c-Myb, specifically abrogates the ability of the protein to
cooperate with Ets-1. Our findings, therefore, reveal a novel function for the
N-terminus of c-Myb and raise the possibility that oncogenic activation of c-Myb 
is linked to the loss of cooperation between Myb and c-Ets-1.

PMID: 10524199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 15;274(42):30273-9.

The Raf-1/MEK/ERK pathway regulates the expression of the p21(Cip1/Waf1) gene in 
chondrocytes.

Beier F(1), Taylor AC, LuValle P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1,
Canada.

The gene encoding the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(Cip1/Waf1) is
up-regulated in many differentiating cells, including maturing chondrocytes.
Since strict control of chondrocyte proliferation is essential for proper bone
formation and since p21 is likely involved in this control, we initiated analyses
of the mechanisms regulating expression of p21 in chondrocytes. p21 expression
and promoter activity was strongly increased during the differentiation of
chondrogenic MCT cells. We have identified a 68-base pair fragment conferring
transcriptional up-regulation of the p21 gene in chondrocytes. The activity of
this fragment required active Raf-1 in MCT cells as well as in primary mouse
chondrocytes. Inhibition of downstream factors of Raf-1 (MEK1/2, ERK1/2, and
Ets2) also repressed the activity of the 68-base pair fragment in MCT cells. The 
chemical MEK1/2 inhibitor PD98059 reduced protein levels of p21 in MCTs and
primary mouse chondrocytes. These data suggest that signaling through the Raf-1
pathway is necessary for the optimal expression of p21 in chondrocytes and may
play an important role in the control of bone formation.

PMID: 10514521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cancer Res. 1999 Sep 1;59(17):4242-6.

A single targeted Ets2 allele restricts development of mammary tumors in
transgenic mice.

Neznanov N(1), Man AK, Yamamoto H, Hauser CA, Cardiff RD, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Heterozygous female mice carrying a targeted mutation of the Ets2 transcription
factor gene were mated with a mouse strain that develops mammary tumors due to
the expression of the polyoma virus middle T oncogene. Tumors from females with
only one wild-type Ets2 gene were approximately one-half the size of tumors from 
controls. The smaller size of the tumors was correlated with a more
differentiated state of early hyperplastic growths and not to differential growth
of the frank tumors or to decreased middle T gene expression. Ets2 may regulate
the progression of these aggressive mammary tumors.

PMID: 10485465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Hum Mol Genet. 1999;8(10):1839-46.

Osteopetrosis and osteoporosis: two sides of the same coin.

Lazner F(1), Gowen M, Pavasovic D, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Institute of Reproduction
and Development, Monash University, Monash Medical Centre, Clayton, Victoria,
Australia.

Together, osteoporosis and osteopetrosis comprise a substantial proportion of the
bone diseases that severely affect humans. In order to understand and effectively
treat these disorders, an understanding of the mechanisms controlling bone
remodelling is essential. While numerous animal models of bone disease have been 
generated, the lack of correlation between these animal models and human disease 
has limited their utility in terms of defining therapeutic strategies. The
generation and analysis of cathepsin K knockout mice has resulted in a model for 
pycnodysostosis, a rare human osteopetrotic disease, and is now providing
considerable insights into both osteoclast function and potential therapeutic
strategies for the treatment of bone disease. This review highlights the
importance of genes such as cathepsin K in understanding bone remodelling and
illustrates a new trend towards understanding bone disease as a complete entity
rather than as a series of unrelated disorders.

PMID: 10469835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):6240-52.

Role of distinct mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways and cooperation
between Ets-2, ATF-2, and Jun family members in human urokinase-type plasminogen 
activator gene induction by interleukin-1 and tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate.

Cirillo G(1), Casalino L, Vallone D, Caracciolo A, De Cesare D, Verde P.

Author information: 
(1)International Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, CNR, 80125 Naples, Italy.

We have investigated the in vivo and in vitro regulation of the human
urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) gene by interleukin-1 (IL-1) and
analyzed the transcription factors and signalling pathways involved in the
response of the -2.0-kb uPA enhancer to IL-1 induction and to tetradecanoyl
phorbol acetate (TPA) induction. Mutational analysis showed the cooperative
activity of the Ets-binding site (EBS) and the two AP-1 elements of the enhancer.
The results reveal that the EBS is required for the response to both inducers
mediated by Ets-2, which is regulated at a level subsequent to DNA binding, by an
IL-1- and phorbol ester-inducible transactivation domain. Both the IL-1 and the
TPA-mediated induction result in a drastic increase of AP-1 binding to the
downstream site of the enhancer (uPA 3' TPA-responsive element), while a mostly
qualitative change, resulting from the interplay between ATF-2 homodimers and
c-Jun-ATF-2 heterodimers, takes place at the upstream AP-1 element. The analysis 
of two distinct mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways shows that
stress-activated protein kinase-Jun N-terminal kinase activation, resulting in
the phosphorylation of ATF-2, c-Jun, and JunD, is required not only for the IL-1-
but also for the TPA-dependent induction, while the extracellular signal-related 
kinase 1 (ERK-1) and ERK-2 activation is involved in the TPA- but not in the
IL-1-dependent stimulation of the uPA enhancer.

PMCID: PMC84576
PMID: 10454570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Probl Tuberk. 1999;(3):16-9.

[External respiratory function and pulmonary capillary blood flow in patients
with postoperative recurrent pulmonary tuberculosis].

[Article in Russian]

El'kin AV, Savin IB.

To clarify criteria for functional operability, external respiratory function
(ERF) and pulmonary capillary blood flow (PCBF) were studied in 116 patients with
postoperative recurrent pulmonary tuberculosis who had been admitted to the
resurgery unit. Moderate ERF impairments (stages I and II) were identified in 65%
of cases, 23% had stage III ventilation disorders (VD), and 11% were found to
have stages IV and V VD. In focal recurrences, overall PCBF ranged 19 to 36% of
the total pulmonary blood flow with is decrease from 11 to 0.3% in the total
number of recurrences. Preoperative preparation improved ERF in 54% of patients. 
Contraindications for surgery were found in 9% due their low functional reserves.
A total of 105 patients were operated on, postoperative mortality was 11.4%.
Cardiopulmonary insufficiency was a cause of death in 4 cases, of them 3 patients
underwent repeated resection of the lung as pneumonectomy in baseline stage III
VD, which allows these patients to refer to as a high surgical risk group.

PMID: 10420759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Biol Reprod. 1999 Jul;61(1):120-6.

Transcription factors Ets1, Ets2, and Elf1 exhibit differential localization in
human endometrium across the menstrual cycle and alternate isoforms in cultured
endometrial cells.

Kilpatrick LM(1), Kola I, Salamonsen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, 3168,
Australia Institute of Reproduction and Development, Monash Medical Centre,
Clayton, Victoria, Australia. lynette.kilpatrick@med.monash.edu.au

To better understand the transcriptional regulation of human endometrial
remodeling, the localization of three members of the Ets family of transcription 
factors was examined at different stages of the menstrual cycle. Elf1 was found
by immunohistochemistry to be predominantly localized to the glandular
epithelium. In contrast, Ets1 and Ets2 were found at lower intensities in both
glandular epithelial and stromal cells. Low expression during the menstrual phase
of the cycle, and high expression and intensity of staining in decidualized
stromal cells of the late secretory phase were common to Ets1, Ets2, and Elf1.
These localization patterns were confirmed in cultured human endometrial stromal 
and epithelial cells by Western blotting, which also demonstrated different
isoforms and phosphorylation products of Ets1 and Ets2 in the two cell types.
This study has shown for the first time that members of the Ets family of
transcription factors, previously found predominantly during development and in
hematopoietic cells, are expressed in the human endometrium and display cell and 
cycle-stage specificity. Expression of Elf1 predominantly in the glandular
epithelium may indicate that Elf1 plays a unique role in epithelium-specific gene
regulation in the endometrium.

PMID: 10377039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3131-48.

Precise developmental regulation of Ets family transcription factors during
specification and commitment to the T cell lineage.

Anderson MK(1), Hernandez-Hoyos G, Diamond RA, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.
evroth@its.caltech.edu

Ets family transcription factors control the expression of a large number of
genes in hematopoietic cells. Here we show strikingly precise differential
expression of a subset of these genes marking critical, early stages of mouse
lymphocyte cell-type specification. Initially, the Ets family member factor Erg
was identified during an arrayed cDNA library screen for genes encoding
transcription factors expressed specifically during T cell lineage commitment.
Multiparameter fluorescence-activated cell sorting for over a dozen cell surface 
markers was used to isolate 18 distinct primary-cell populations representing
discrete T cell and B cell developmental stages, pluripotent lymphoid precursors,
immature NK-like cells and myeloid hematopoietic cells. These populations were
monitored for mRNA expression of the Erg, Ets-1, Ets-2, Fli-1, Tel, Elf-1,
GABPalpha, PU.1 and Spi-B genes. The earliest stages in T cell differentiation
show particularly dynamic Ets family gene regulation, with sharp transitions in
expression correlating with specification and commitment events. Ets, Spi-B and
PU.1 are expressed in these stages but not by later T-lineage cells. Erg is
induced during T-lineage specification and then silenced permanently, after
commitment, at the beta-selection checkpoint. Spi-B is transiently upregulated
during commitment and then silenced at the same stage as Erg. T-lineage
commitment itself is marked by repression of PU.1, a factor that regulates B-cell
and myeloid genes. These results show that the set of Ets factors mobilized
during T-lineage specification and commitment is different from the set that
maintains T cell gene expression during thymocyte repertoire selection and in all
classes of mature T cells.

PMID: 10375504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 11;274(24):17342-52.

p300/cAMP-responsive element-binding protein interactions with ets-1 and ets-2 in
the transcriptional activation of the human stromelysin promoter.

Jayaraman G(1), Srinivas R, Duggan C, Ferreira E, Swaminathan S, Somasundaram K, 
Williams J, Hauser C, Kurkinen M, Dhar R, Weitzman S, Buttice G, Thimmapaya B.

Author information: 
(1)Lurie Cancer Center and Microbiology and Immunology Department, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

In this paper we show that transcription factors Ets-1 and Ets-2 recruit
transcription adapter proteins p300 and CBP (cAMP-responsive element-binding
protein) during the transcriptional activation of the human stromelysin promoter,
which contains palindromic Ets-binding sites. Ets-2 and p300/CBP exist as a
complex in vivo. Two regions of p300/CBP between amino acids (a.a.) 328 and 596
and a. a. 1678 and 2370 independently can interact with Ets-1 and Ets-2 in vitro 
and in vivo. Both these regions of p300/CBP bind to the transactivation domain of
Ets-2, whereas the C-terminal region binds only to the DNA binding domain of
Ets-2. The N- and the C-terminal regions of CBP (a.a. 1-1097 and 1678-2442,
respectively) which lack histone acetylation activity independently are capable
of coactivating Ets-2. Other Ets family transcription factors failed to cooperate
with p300/CBP in stimulating the stromelysin promoter. The LXXLL sequence,
reported to be important in receptor-coactivator interactions, does not appear to
play a role in the interaction of Ets-2 with p300/CBP. Previous studies have
shown that the stimulation of transcriptional activation activity of Ets-2
requires phosphorylation of threonine 72 by the Ras/mitogen-activated protein
kinase signaling pathway. We show that mutation of this site does not affect its 
capacity to bind to and to cooperate with p300/CBP.

PMID: 10358095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4121-33.

Transcriptional repressor ERF is a Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase target
that regulates cellular proliferation.

Le Gallic L(1), Sgouras D, Beal G Jr, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)IMBB-FORTH, University of Crete, Voutes, Heraklion, Crete 714-09, Greece.

A limited number of transcription factors have been suggested to be regulated
directly by Erks within the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling
pathway. In this paper we demonstrate that ERF, a ubiquitously expressed
transcriptional repressor that belongs to the Ets family, is physically
associated with and phosphorylated in vitro and in vivo by Erks. This
phosphorylation determines the ERF subcellular localization. Upon mitogenic
stimulation, ERF is immediately phosphorylated and exported to the cytoplasm. The
export is blocked by specific Erk inhibitors and is abolished when residues
undergoing phosphorylation are mutated to alanine. Upon growth factor
deprivation, ERF is rapidly dephosphorylated and transported back into the
nucleus. Phosphorylation-defective ERF mutations suppress Ras-induced
tumorigenicity and arrest the cells at the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle. Our
findings strongly suggest that ERF may be important in the control of cellular
proliferation during the G0/G1 transition and that it may be one of the effectors
in the mammalian Ras signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC104371
PMID: 10330152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Ter Arkh. 1999;71(3):28-32.

[Clinico-functional effect of a course of interval normobaric hypoxic therapy in 
patients with chronic obstructive bronchitis and bronchial asthma].

[Article in Russian]

Aleksandrov OV, Struchkov PV, Vinitskaia RS, Tykotskaia MA, Polunova VM,
Shcherbatykh OV, Zinova IL, Togoev EM.

AIM: To study short- and long-term clinicofunctional effects of primary and
secondary courses of interval normobaric hypoxia (INH) in patients with chronic
obstructive bronchitis (COB) and bronchial asthma (BA).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study group of 45 COB and BA patients were exposed to 
INH. The control group of 20 COB and BA patients received conventional drugs. The
INH patients were examined using the acute hypoxia test, return respiration test,
peak-flowmetry, assessment of external respiration function (ERF), immune status,
heart rate, blood pressure. Stange test ERF and the disease course within the
last 2-3 years were analyzed.
RESULTS: INH proved more beneficial for COB and BA patients than the standard
drugs. Bronchial obstruction reduced by 10-15%, exercise tolerance, general
condition, ventilation, hemodynamic and immunological parameters improved,
frequency of bronchopulmonary infection exacerbations dropped 2-fold.
CONCLUSION: An INH course is effective in the majority of COB and BA patients. It
is recommended for treatment and rehabilitation once or twice a year.

PMID: 10234760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Apr 13;96(8):4279-84.

Rings and filaments of beta protein from bacteriophage lambda suggest a
superfamily of recombination proteins.

Passy SI(1), Yu X, Li Z, Radding CM, Egelman EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroanatomy, University of Minnesota Medical
School, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The beta protein of bacteriophage lambda acts in homologous genetic recombination
by catalyzing the annealing of complementary single-stranded DNA produced by the 
lambda exonuclease. It has been shown that the beta protein binds to the products
of the annealing reaction more tightly than to the initial substrates. We find
that beta protein exists in three structural states. In the absence of DNA, beta 
protein forms inactive rings with approximately 12 subunits. The active form of
the beta protein in the presence of oligonucleotides or single-stranded DNA is a 
ring, composed of approximately 15-18 subunits. The double-stranded products of
the annealing reaction catalyzed by the rings are bound by beta protein in a
left-handed helical structure, which protects the products from nucleolytic
degradation. These observations suggest structural homology for a family of
proteins, including the phage P22 erf, the bacterial RecT, and the eukaryotic
Rad52 proteins, all of which are involved in homologous recombination.

PMCID: PMC16323
PMID: 10200253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 May;8(5):923-33.

Transchromosomal mouse embryonic stem cell lines and chimeric mice that contain
freely segregating segments of human chromosome 21.

Hernandez D(1), Mee PJ, Martin JE, Tybulewicz VL, Fisher EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurogenetics, Imperial College School of Medicine, Norfolk
Place, London W2 1PG, UK.

At least 8% of all human conceptions have major chromosome abnormalities and the 
frequency of chromosomal syndromes in newborns is >0.5%. Despite these disorders 
making a large contribution to human morbidity and mortality, we have little
understanding of their aetiology and little molecular data on the importance of
gene dosage to mammalian cells. Trisomy 21, which results in Down syndrome (DS), 
is the most frequent aneuploidy in humans (1 in 600 live births, up to 1 in 150
pregnancies world-wide) and is the most common known genetic cause of mental
retardation. To investigate the molecular genetics of DS, we report here the
creation of mice that carry different human chromosome 21 (Hsa21) fragments as a 
freely segregating extra chromosome. To produce these 'transchromosomal' animals,
we placed a selectable marker into Hsa21 and transferred the chromosome from a
human somatic cell line into mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells using irradiation
microcell-mediated chromosome transfer (XMMCT). 'Transchromosomal' ES cells
containing different Hsa21 regions ranging in size from approximately 50 to
approximately 0.2 Mb have been used to create chimeric mice. These mice maintain 
Hsa21 sequences and express Hsa21 genes in multiple tissues. This novel use of
the XMMCT protocol is applicable to investigations requiring the transfer of
large chromosomal regions into ES or other cells and, in particular, the
modelling of DS and other human aneuploidy syndromes.

PMID: 10196383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Coll Antropol. 1998 Jun;22(1):149-55.

Apolipoprotein E genotypes and metabolic risk factors for coronary heart disease 
in middle-aged women.

Cubrilo-Turek M(1), Stavljenic-Rukavina A, Sertic J, Zrinski R, Turek S, Grgac G,
Ljubojevic N.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Clinics, General Hospital Sveti Duh, Zagreb, Croatia.

Apo E genotypes and plasma metabolic risk factors (total cholesterol,
triglycerides, HDL and LDL cholesterol, total/HDL cholesterol ratio, lipoprotein 
Lp (a), apolipoprotein A-I, A-II, apo B, and apo E) were determined in 134
healthy middle-aged (X +/- SD 49.62 +/- 4.83) women. The aim of this study was to
investigate metabolic risk markers according to various apo E genotypes, and to
evaluate a possible risk for coronary heart disease. The results revealed that
the frequencies of apo E3/3 are the most frequent (46%), followed by E4/4 (2%),
E3/4 (14%), E2/3 (14%), and E2/4 (2%) in the middle-aged women. Higher mean
triglycerides, LDL-C and apo B levels were found with apo E3/4, and lower mean
levels of HDL-C i.e. apo A-I than in other analyzed genotypes. Greater mean of
total/HDL ratio and lower levels of apo A-II were seen with E2/4. Serum
lipoprotein Lp (a) concentration was higher in women with genotypes E3/3. Apo E
concentration was the lowest with genotypes E4/4, i.e. the highest with E2/3.
Serum total cholesterol tended to be higher in women with genotypes E4/4.
Genotype E3/4 is connected with the highest concentrations of (X +/- SD)
triglycerides (1.74 +/- 0.78), LDL (4.28 +/- 1.88), apo B (1.03 +/- 0.32) and
with the lowest concentrations of HDL cholesterol (1.11 +/- 0.21) in the relation
to the other analyzed genotypes. This group of women could possibly represent
high risk women for CHD. Genotype E3/3 is associated with the highest
concentration of independent genetic risk marker for CHD, lipoprotein Lp (a)
(0.19 +/- 0.27). The genotype E4/4 has the highest concentration of total
cholesterol (5.93 +/- 1.01), and has to be taken in account for risk evaluation
in women. High level of apo E (0.11 +/- 0.05) and low level of apo A-I (1.80 +/- 
0.44) were associated with E2/3 genotypes. The significance of E3/4 with the high
total/HDL ratio (5.52 +/- 2.21) and low apo A-II (0.53 +/- 0.09) is important
indicator, because total/HDL cholesterol ratio represents independent Established
Risk Factor (ERF) for CHD. Apolipoprotein E genotypes as genetic markers and
investigation of serum metabolic risk markers appear to be important in view for 
further evaluation of high risk women for CHD in our population.

PMID: 10097431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Apr;19(4):2624-34.

The Ets2 transcription factor inhibits apoptosis induced by colony-stimulating
factor 1 deprivation of macrophages through a Bcl-xL-dependent mechanism.

Sevilla L(1), Aperlo C, Dulic V, Chambard JC, Boutonnet C, Pasquier O, Pognonec
P, Boulukos KE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biochimie, Université de Nice, Faculté des Sciences, 06108 Nice,
France.

Bcl-xL, a member of the Bcl-2 family, inhibits apoptosis, and its expression is
regulated at the transcriptional level, yet nothing is known about the
transcription factors specifically activating this promoter. The bcl-x promoter
contains potential Ets binding sites, and we show that the transcription factor, 
Ets2, first identified by its sequence identity to v-ets of the E26 retrovirus,
can transactivate the bcl-x promoter. Transient expression of Ets2 results in the
upregulation of Bcl-xL but not of Bcl-xS, an alternatively spliced gene product
which induces apoptosis. Ets2 is ubiquitously expressed at low levels in a
variety of cell types and tissues but is specifically induced to abundant levels 
during macrophage differentiation. Since Bcl-xL is also upregulated during
macrophage differentiation, we asked whether the bcl-x could be a direct
downstream target gene of Ets2 in macrophages. BAC1.2F5 macrophages, which are
dependent on macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1) for their growth and 
survival, were used in these studies. We show that CSF-1 stimulation of BAC1.2F5 
macrophages results in the upregulation of expression of ets2 and bcl-xL with
similar kinetics of induction. In the absence of CSF-1, these macrophages undergo
cell death by apoptosis, whereas constitutive expression of Ets2 rescues these
cells from cell death, and bcl-xL is upregulated. These results strongly suggest 
a novel role of Ets2 in affecting apoptosis through its regulation of Bcl-xL
transcription.

PMCID: PMC84055
PMID: 10082528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Amino Acids. 1999;16(1):13-9.

Determination of the protooncogene ets-2 gene transcript in human brain at the
atto-gram-level by the use of competitive RT/PCR.

Schatzmann-Turhani D(1), Greber-Platzer S, Cairns N, Lubec G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna, Austria.

Protooncogenes (PO) play a crucial role for brain biology and pathology. Only the
concerted action of protooncogenes enables normal brain development. The reliable
and sensitive quantification of brain PO is still holding centre stage in
neurobiological research. The aim of our study was therefore the determination of
PO in minute amounts of brain areas. For this purpose we decided to apply the
most sensitive detection principle of competitive reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction using capillary electrophoresis and laser-induced
fluorescence detection. We selected the PO ets-2 for our studies as this
transcription factor was shown to be involved in neurodegenerative disease. As
little as 10 ng of total RNA each were extracted from 5 different regions of
human postmortem brain and used in the assay system. Our results revealed that
the ets-2 gene transcript was detectable at the atto-gram level in the brain
(54.5 +/- 17.7 ag/ 10 ng RNA in the occipital lobe, 34.2 +/- 7.5 in temporal
lobe, 40.2 +/- 15.6 in the frontal lobe, 31.4 +/- 15.7 in the cerebellum, and
undetectably low in the parietal lobe). This is the first report at this
sensitivity level providing neurobiology with a powerful analytical tool.

PMID: 10078330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Mar;13(3):385-99.

Identification of a placental-specific enhancer in the rat placental lactogen II 
gene that contains binding sites for members of the Ets and AP-1 (activator
protein 1) families of transcription factors.

Sun Y(1), Duckworth ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

We previously identified a 3-kb proximal 5'-flanking region of the rat placental 
lactogen (rPLII) gene that is important for reporter gene transcription in the
rat trophoblast cell line, Rcho, and targets expression to the placentas of
transgenic mice. In our current studies we have used further deletion analysis
and transfection studies in Rcho and GC cells to map more precisely the locations
of regulatory elements involved in this placental expression. We show that
sequences between - 1435 and -765 are necessary for minimal expression in Rcho
cells and that there are negative regulatory elements between -3031 to -2838 and 
-1729 to -1435. Most importantly, we have identified a fragment between -1793 to 
-1729 that is essential for expression levels characteristic of the complete 3-kb
5'-region. When linked to the herpes simplex thymidine kinase minimal promoter,
this fragment acts as an enhancing element in Rcho but not GC cells.
Deoxyribonuclease I (DNAse I) protection and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays with nuclear extracts and in vitro translated proteins identify binding
sites for members of the activator protein-1 (AP-1) and Ets families of
transcription factors. Site-directed mutagenesis of the individual AP-1- and
Ets-binding sites leads to a partial loss of the enhancing activity; a double
AP-1/Ets mutation leads to a complete loss of activity, demonstrating the
functional importance of these sites. By these criteria, putative GATA-binding
sites located within the enhancing fragment are not active. These new data
suggest an important role for this enhancing fragment in rPLII placental giant
cell expression and are the first to implicate a member of the Ets family in the 
regulation of this gene family.

PMID: 10076996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Gene. 1999 Mar 4;228(1-2):133-45.

Identification of four CCCH zinc finger proteins in Xenopus, including a novel
vertebrate protein with four zinc fingers and severely restricted expression.

De J(1), Lai WS, Thorn JM, Goldsworthy SM, Liu X, Blackwell TK, Blackshear PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Office of Clinical Research and Laboratory of Signal Transduction, National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
USA.

Tristetraprolin (TTP), the prototype of a class of CCCH zinc finger proteins, is 
a phosphoprotein that is rapidly and transiently induced by growth factors and
serum in fibroblasts. Recent evidence suggests that a physiological function of
TTP is to inhibit tumor necrosis factor alpha secretion from macrophages by
binding to and destabilizing its mRNA (Carballo, E., Lai, W.S., Blackshear, P.J.,
1998. Science, 281, 1001-1005). To investigate possible functions of CCCH
proteins in early development of Xenopus, we isolated four Xenopus cDNAs encoding
members of this class. Based on 49% overall amino acid identity and 84% amino
acid identity within the double zinc finger domain, one of the Xenopus proteins
(XC3H-1) appears to be the homologue of TTP. By similar analyses, XC3H-2 and
XC3H-3 are homologues of ERF-1 (cMG1, TIS11B) and ERF-2 (TIS11D). A fourth
protein, XC3H-4, is a previously unidentified member of the CCCH class of
vertebrate zinc finger proteins; it contains four Cx8Cx5Cx3H repeats, two of
which are YKTEL Cx8Cx5Cx3H repeats that are closely related to sequences found in
the other CCCH proteins. Whereas XC3H-1, XC3H-2, and XC3H-3 were widely expressed
in adult tissues, XC3H-4 mRNA was not detected in any of the adult tissues
studied except for the ovary. Its expression appeared to be limited to the ovary,
oocyte, egg and the early embryonic stages leading up to the mid-blastula
transition. Its mRNA was highly expressed in oocytes of all ages, and was
enriched in the animal pole cytosol of mature oocytes. Maternal expression was
also seen with the other three messages, suggesting the possibility that these
proteins are involved in regulating mRNA stability in oocyte maturation and/or
early embryogenesis.

PMID: 10072766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Biol Reprod. 1999 Mar;60(3):664-73.

Involvement of polyomavirus enhancer activator 3 in the regulation of expression 
of gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase messenger ribonucleic acid-IV in the rat
epididymis.

Lan ZJ(1), Lye RJ, Holic N, Labus JC, Hinton BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) mRNA-IV and polyomavirus enhancer activator 3
(PEA3) mRNA are highly expressed in the initial segment of the rat epididymis,
and both are regulated by testicular factors. PEA3 protein in rat initial segment
nuclear extracts has been shown to bind to a PEA3/Ets binding motif, which is
derived from the partially characterized GGT mRNA-IV promoter region. This
suggests that PEA3 may be involved in regulating transcription from the rat GGT
mRNA-IV gene promoter in the initial segment. Using DNA oligonucleotide primers
and DNA sequencing analysis, an approximately 1500-basepair (bp) DNA sequence at 
the 5' region of the promoter was obtained. Using transient transfection, PEA3
activated transcription of the rat GGT mRNA-IV promoter only in cultured
epididymal cells from the rat initial segment, but not in Cos-1 or NRK-52E cells.
Promoter deletion analysis indicated that a PEA3/Ets binding motif between
nucleotides -22 and -17 is the functional site for PEA3 to activate transcription
of GGT promoter IV and that an adjacent Sp1 binding motif is also required to
maintain promoter IV activity in epididymal cells. Transcriptional activation of 
promoter IV was shown to be epididymal cell-specific and PEA3-specific. In
addition, PEA3 may act as a weak repressor for transcription of promoter IV,
probably using a PEA3/Ets binding motif(s) distal to the transcription start
site. A model of how PEA3 is involved in the regulation of transcription of GGT
promoter IV in epididymal cells is proposed.

PMID: 10026114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Oncogene. 1999 Feb 11;18(6):1351-9.

Molecular phylogeny of the ETS gene family.

Laudet V(1), Hänni C, Stéhelin D, Duterque-Coquillaud M.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 49 du CNRS, ENS de Lyon, France.

We have constructed a molecular phylogeny of the ETS gene family. By distance and
parsimony analysis of the ETS conserved domains we show that the family
containing so far 29 different genes in vertebrates can be divided into 13 groups
of genes namely ETS, ER71, GABP, PEA3, ERG, ERF, ELK, DETS4, ELF, ESE, TEL, YAN, 
SPI. Since the three dimensional structure of the ETS domain has revealed a
similarity with the winged-helix-turn-helix proteins, we used two of them (CAP
and HSF) to root the tree. This allowed us to show that the family can be divided
into five subfamilies: ETS, DETS4, ELF, TEL and SPI. The ETS subfamily comprises 
the ETS, ER71, GABP, PEA3, ERG, ERF and the ELK groups which appear more related 
to each other than to any other ETS family members. The fact that some members of
these subfamilies were identified in early metazoans such as diploblasts and
sponges suggests that the diversification of ETS family genes predates the
diversification of metazoans. By the combined analysis of both the ETS and the
PNT domains, which are conserved in some members of the family, we showed that
the GABP group, and not the ERG group, is the one most closely related to the ETS
group. We also observed that the speed of accumulation of mutations in the
various genes of the family is highly variable. Noticeably, paralogous members of
the ELK group exhibit strikingly different evolutionary speed suggesting that the
evolutionary pressure they support is very different.

PMID: 10022817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jan 19;254(2):395-9.

Evidence against the current hypothesis of "gene dosage effects" of trisomy 21:
ets-2, encoded on chromosome 21" is not overexpressed in hearts of patients with 
Down Syndrome.

Greber-Platzer S(1), Schatzmann-Turhani D, Wollenek G, Lubec G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18, Vienna,
A1090, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The major current concept for the pathogenesis of the Down Syndrome
(DS) phenotype including congenital heart disease (CHD) is the so-called "gene
dosage effect." According to this hypothesis, genes encoded by chromosome 21 at
the "critical region" (which is thought to be crucial for the development of the 
DS phenotype) are overexpressed in the trisomic state, thus leading to an
imbalance of genes as, e.g., the protooncogene ets-2, superoxide dismutase, etc.
METHODS: We studied heart biopsies obtained at surgery from 6 patients with DS
and 7 patients with congenital heart disease. ets-2-mRNA steady state levels were
determined by a competitive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) technique which allowed the determination of this gene at the attomol
level.
RESULTS: ets-2 mRNA in total ventricular tissue of DS patients showed
concentrations of 0.60 +/- 0.42 fg/10 ng total RNA (mean, +/- SD). When
normalized versus the housekeeping gene beta-actin to rule out general
transcriptional changes in that disorder, the ratio of 0.56 +/- 0.28 (mean, +/-
SD) was calculated. ets-2 mRNA in total ventricular tissue of patients with
non-DS CHD showed concentrations of 0.45 +/- 0.22 fg/10 ng total RNA (mean,
+/-SD) and ratios of 0.48 +/- 0.35 (mean, +/-SD). No differences could be found
at the p<0.05 level.
CONCLUSION: No absolute quantification of a gene incriminated in the "gene dosage
effect-hypothesis" was performed so far and the only approach to (semi-)
quantitative determination of the ets-2 gene using northern blotting was
published on one individual DS sample only. This is the first report to clearly
show that no overexpression of ets-2 can be found in heart of patients with DS,
thus providing evidence against the current gene dosage effect-hypothesis.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9918849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Oncogene. 1998 Dec 3;17(22):2883-8.

ETS2 function is required to maintain the transformed state of human prostate
cancer cells.

Sementchenko VI(1), Schweinfest CW, Papas TS, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

The contribution of the ETS2 transcription factor to the transformed state in
prostate cancer cells has been assessed. Northern blot analysis easily detects
ETS2 in DU145 and PC3, high grade human prostate cell lines, but ETS2 is not
present in lower grade LNCaP cells. Stable transfection of PC3 and DU145 prostate
cell lines with an antisense ETS2 vector or with a dominant negative ETS2 mutant 
significantly reduced the ability of DU145 and PC3 cells to form large colonies
in soft agar. Thus, the presence of ETS2 is positively correlated with a more
transformed phenotype and blockage of ETS2 function can reduce transformed
properties of prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 9879994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 27;273(48):31909-15.

Selective inhibition of prolactin gene transcription by the ETS-2 repressor
factor.

Day RN(1), Liu J, Sundmark V, Kawecki M, Berry D, Elsholtz HP.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Cell Biology, National Science Foundation
Center for Biological Timing, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia
22908, USA. rnd@virginia.edu

Regulation of prolactin gene transcription requires cooperative interactions
between the pituitary-specific POU domain protein Pit-1 and members of the ETS
transcription factor family. We demonstrate here that the ETS-2 repressor factor 
(ERF) is expressed in pituitary tumor cells and that overexpression of
recombinant ERF inhibits prolactin promoter activity, but not the closely related
growth hormone promoter. In non-pituitary cell lines, coexpression of ERF
disrupts the cooperative interactions between Pit-1 and ETS-1 and blocks the
induction of Pit-1-dependent prolactin promoter activity by cAMP. The potential
role of ERF in the inhibitory response of the prolactin promoter to dopamine was 
examined using pituitary tumor cells stably expressing dopamine D2 receptors. The
inhibitory responses of the prolactin promoter to ERF and dopamine are additive, 
suggesting that ERF has a complementary role in this hormonal response. A single 
Pit-1 DNA-binding element from the prolactin promoter is sufficient to
reconstitute the inhibitory response to ERF. DNA binding analysis using either a 
composite Pit-1/ETS protein-binding site or a Pit-1 element with no known
affinity for ETS proteins revealed that ERF interferes with Pit-1 binding.
Together, these results demonstrate that ERF is a specific inhibitor of basal and
hormone-regulated transcription of the prolactin gene and suggest a new level of 
complexity for the interaction of ETS factors with Pit-1 target genes.

PMID: 9822660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Ter Arkh. 1998;70(9):73-6.

[Complex assessment of inhacort effectiveness in bronchial asthma].

[Article in Russian]

Kakhnovskii IM, Marinin VF, Arkhipova SV, Sorokina LA, Makhnach GK.

AIM: To investigate efficiency of inhacort in long-term (6 months to 2 years)
treatment of bronchial asthma (BA).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 67 inpatients and 65 outpatients with moderate BA were
divided into two groups. 96 patients of group 1 had received standard combined
treatment without glucocorticosteroids (GCS), 36 patients of group 2 had received
GCS. Inpatients were given inhacort in a dose 1000 micrograms/day, outpatients
took inhacort in a daily dose 500 micrograms/day. The examination scheme included
assessment of external respiration function (ERF), blood hydrocortisone, sputum
rheology and diagnosis of candidosis.
RESULTS: Inhacort treatment has reduced frequency of asphyxia attacks 2.5-fold 30
and 25% of the patients stopped taking sympathomimetics and GCS, respectively.
None of the patients had asphyxia as a status. ERF, sputum viscosity improved,
hydrocortisone secretion was unchanged. Only 3.8% of the patients developed oral 
candidosis.
CONCLUSION: Inhacort in a dose 1 mg controls BA. 73% of the patients treated
outpatiently had no need in hospitalization.

PMID: 9821234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Oncogene. 1998 Oct 22;17(16):2087-93.

The her-2/neu oncogene stimulates the transcription of
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V and expression of its cell surface
oligosaccharide products.

Chen L(1), Zhang W, Fregien N, Pierce M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Complex Carbohydrate
Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens 30602, USA.

Malignant transformation is associated with changes in the glycosylation of cell 
surface proteins. For example, the N-linked oligosaccharides containing the
[GlcNAc beta(1,6)Man] branch are increased after transformation of many cell
types by a number of tumor viruses and oncogenes which induce the expression of
N-acetylglucosaminyl-transferase V (GlcNAc-T V), the enzyme that adds this
branch. A large percentage of human breast carcinomas have increased N-linked
beta(1,6) branches on glycoproteins, while up to 30% of breast carcinomas have
amplified the oncogene her-2/neu (erb-B2). We tested the hypothesis that
expression of her-2/neu stimulates GlcNAc-T V gene expression and increases the
beta(1,6) branching of N-linked oligosaccharides. We found that neu-transformed
NIH3T3 cells have a threefold increase in GlcNAc-T V enzyme activity and
increased beta(1,6) branching on a specific set of glycoproteins.
Promoter/reporter experiments showed that her-2/neu stimulates transcription from
the human GlcNAc-T V promoter and that the her-2/neu response element was located
about 400 bp 5' of the transcription initiation site and includes three Ets
transcription factor binding sequences. Co-transfections with dominant-negative
Raf and Ets expression plasmids demonstrated that the transcriptional activation 
of the GlcNAc-T V promoter by neu is mediated by the Ras-Raf-Ets signal
transduction pathway.

PMID: 9798679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 9;273(41):26857-61.

Unique mode of GCC box recognition by the DNA-binding domain of
ethylene-responsive element-binding factor (ERF domain) in plant.

Hao D(1), Ohme-Takagi M, Sarai A.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Life Science Center, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research
(RIKEN), 3-1-1 Koyadai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan.

Ethylene-responsive element-binding proteins (EREBPs)have novel DNA-binding
domains (ERF domains), which are widely conserved in plants, and interact
specifically with sequences containing AGCCGCC motifs (GCC box). Deletion
experiments show that some flanking region at the N terminus of the conserved
59-amino acid ERF domain is required for stable binding to the GCC box. Three ERF
domain-containing fragments of EREBP2, EREBP4, and AtERF1 from tobacco and
Arabidopsis, bind to the sequence containing the GCC box with a high binding
affinity in the pM range. The high affinity binding is conferred by a monomeric
ERF domain fragment, and DNA truncation experiments show that only 11-base pair
DNA containing the GCC box is sufficient for stable ERF domain interaction.
Systematic DNA mutation analyses demonstrate that the specific amino acid
contacts are confined within the 6-base pair GCCGCC region of the GCC box, and
the first G, the fourth G, and the sixth C exhibit highest binding specificity
common in all three ERF domain-containing fragments studied. Other bases within
the GCC box exhibit modulated binding specificity varying from protein to
protein, implying that these positions are important for differential binding by 
different EREBPs. The conserved N-terminal half is likely responsible for
formation of a stable complex with the GCC box and the divergent C-terminal half 
for modulating the specificity.

PMID: 9756931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Gen Genet. 1998 Jul;259(1):39-45.

The P22 Erf protein and host RecA provide alternative functions for
transductional segregation of plasmid-borne duplications.

Garzón A(1), Cano DA, Casadesús J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Sevilla, Spain.

A tandem DNA duplication carried on a ColE1-derived plasmid segregates at high
frequency upon generalized transduction by phage P22 HT. Transductional
segregation of the plasmid-borne duplication can be promoted either by RecA or by
the Erf function of P22, indicating that transductional segregation is a
consequence of the recombination events that re-circularize the plasmid in the
recipient cell. RecA-mediated and Erf-mediated transduction give similar
frequencies of duplication segregation and yield the same types of segregation
products, indicating that two distinct recombination machineries (RecA + RecBCD
and Erf + RecBCD) perform similar or identical recombination reactions on plasmid
DNA substrates transduced by bacteriophage P22 HT.

PMID: 9738878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 28;273(35):22254-9.

Molecular cloning of a novel member of the eukaryotic polypeptide chain-releasing
factors (eRF). Its identification as eRF3 interacting with eRF1.

Hoshino S(1), Imai M, Mizutani M, Kikuchi Y, Hanaoka F, Ui M, Katada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. hoshino@mol.f.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yeast GST1 gene, whose product is a GTP-binding protein structurally related to
polypeptide chain elongation factor-1alpha (EF1alpha), was first described to be 
essential for the G1 to S phase transition (GSPT) of the cell cycle, and the
product was recently reported to function as a polypeptide chain release factor 3
(eRF3) in yeast. Although we previously cloned a human homologue (renamed as
GSPT1) of the yeast gene, it has remained to be determined whether GSPT1 also
functions as eRF3 or if another GSPT may have such a function in mammalian cells.
In the present study, we isolated two mouse GSPT genes, the counterpart of human 
GSPT1 and a novel member of the GSPT gene family, GSPT2. Both the mouse GSPTs had
a two-domain structure characterized as an amino-terminal no-homologous region
(approximately 200 amino acids) and a carboxyl-terminal conserved eukaryotic
elongation factor-1alpha-like domain (428 amino acids). Messenger RNAs of the two
GSPTs could be detected in all mouse tissues surveyed, although the level of
GSPT2 message appeared to be relatively abundant in the brain. The mouse GSPT1
was expressed in a proliferation-dependent manner in Swiss 3T3 cells, whereas the
expression of GSPT2 was constant during the cell-cycle progression.
Immunoprecipitation assays in COS-7 cells expressing flag epitope-tagged proteins
demonstrated that not only GSPT1 but also GSPT2 was capable of interacting with
eRF1. Such interaction between GSPT2 and eRF1 was also confirmed by yeast
two-hybrid analysis. Taken together, these data indicated that the novel GSPT2
may interact with eRF1 to function as eRF3 in mammalian cells.

PMID: 9712840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Sep;18(9):5148-56.

Persistent activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases p42 and p44 and ets-2 
phosphorylation in response to colony-stimulating factor 1/c-fms signaling.

Fowles LF(1), Martin ML, Nelsen L, Stacey KJ, Redd D, Clark YM, Nagamine Y,
McMahon M, Hume DA, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Biochemistry and the Centre for Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, University of Queensland, Queensland Q4072, Australia.

An antibody that specifically recognized phosphothreonine 72 in ets-2 was used to
determine the phosphorylation status of endogenous ets-2 in response to
colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1)/c-fms signaling. Phosphorylation of ets-2 was
detected in primary macrophages, cells that normally express c-fms, and in
fibroblasts engineered to express human c-fms. In the former cells, ets-2 was a
CSF-1 immediate-early response gene, and phosphorylated ets-2 was detected after 
2 to 4 h, coincident with expression of ets-2 protein. In fibroblasts, ets-2 was 
constitutively expressed and rapidly became phosphorylated in response to CSF-1. 
In both cell systems, ets-2 phosphorylation was persistent, with maximal
phosphorylation detected 8 to 24 h after CSF-1 stimulation, and was correlated
with activation of the CSF-1 target urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) gene.
Kinase assays that used recombinant ets-2 protein as a substrate demonstrated
that mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases p42 and p44 were constitutively
activated in both cell types in response to CSF-1. Immune depletion experiments
and the use of the MAP kinase kinase inhibitor PD98059 indicate that these two
MAP kinases are the major ets-2 kinases activated in response to CSF-1/c-fms
signaling. In the macrophage cell line RAW264, conditional expression of raf
kinase induced ets-2 expression and phosphorylation, as well as uPA mRNA
expression. Transient assays mapped ets/AP-1 response elements as critical for
basal and CSF-1-stimulated uPA reporter gene activity. These results indicate
that persistent activation of the raf/MAP kinase pathway by CSF-1 is necessary
for both ets-2 expression and posttranslational activation in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC109100
PMID: 9710599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Chromosome Res. 1998 Jun;6(4):333-5.

Cloning and chromosomal localization of MX1 and ETS2 to chromosome 26 of the
horse (Equus caballus)

Lear TL(1), Breen M, Ponce de Leon FA, Coogle L, Ferguson EM, Chambers TM, Bailey
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, M. H. Gluck Equine Research Center,
University of Kentucky, Lexington 40546, USA. eqigene@pop.uky.edu

Comment on
    Chromosome Res. 1996 Apr;4(3):218-25.

PMID: 9688525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 24;273(30):18871-80.

Elevated expression of Ets2 or distinct portions of Ets2 can reverse Ras-mediated
cellular transformation.

Foos G(1), García-Ramírez JJ, Galang CK, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Center, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Ets transcription factors are important downstream targets of oncogenic Ras. The 
transcriptional activity of several Ets family members is regulated by Ras, and
interfering with Ets-dependent transcription by expression of just the Ets2 DNA
binding domain can inhibit or reverse Ras-mediated cellular transformation. To
better understand the role of Ets proteins in Ras transformation, we have now
analyzed the effects of stably expressing a variety of Ets2 constructs in
Ras-transformed NIH3T3 (DT) cells. Expression of only the Ets2 transactivation
domains, which also inhibits Ras or Neu/ErbB-2-mediated activation of
Ets-dependent transcription, strongly inhibited anchorage-independent growth, but
did not revert the transformed DT cell morphology. Unexpectedly, high expression 
of full-length Ets2, a transcriptional activator, broadly reversed the
transformed properties of DT cells, including anchorage-independent growth,
transformed morphology, and tumorigenicity, but did not impair attached cell
growth. Increasing full-length Ets2 transcriptional activity by fusing it to the 
VP16 transactivation domain enhanced its ability to reverse DT cell
transformation. Mutational analysis revealed that the mitogen-activated protein
kinase phosphorylation site required for Ras-mediated activation, Ets2(T72), was 
not essential for Ets2 reversion activity. The distinct reversion activities of
the highly expressed Ets2 transactivation domains or full-length Ets2, along with
the specific reversion activity by Ets2 constructs that either inhibit or
activate Ets-dependent transcription, suggests multiple roles for Ets factors in 
cellular transformation. These results indicate that several distinct approaches 
for modulating Ets activity may be useful for intervention in human cancers.

PMID: 9668063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Inflamm. 1998;48(2):67-83.

Involvement of Ets, rel and Sp1-like proteins in lipopolysaccharide-mediated
activation of the HIV-1 LTR in macrophages.

Sweet MJ(1), Stacey KJ, Ross IL, Ostrowski MC, Hume DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.

The HIV-1 promoter was used as a model to identify transcription factors involved
in LPS-dependent transcription in RAW 264 murine macrophages. Expression plasmids
for Ets-2 and PU.1 trans-activated the HIV-1 LTR and recombinant PU.1 and an
Ets-2 DNA binding domain/GST fusion protein bound to the 5' kappa B site of the
HIV-1 enhancer. Ets-2 mRNA was LPS-inducible in RAW 264 cells and LPS stimulated 
phosphorylation of threonine 72 residue within the Ets-2 pointed domain.
Induction of Ets-2 and other LPS-responsive transcription factors was also
observed upon addition of plasmid DNA, which complicates interpretation of
transient transfections. The proximal promoter region, containing two Sp1 sites, 
was also LPS-responsive. We propose that the kappa B elements and the tandem Sp1 
sites act as LPS response elements and that kappa B-mediated LPS action involves 
Ets and rel factors.

PMID: 9656143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jul 7;95(14):7882-7.

Control of interferon-tau gene expression by Ets-2.

Ezashi T(1), Ealy AD, Ostrowski MC, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211,
USA.

Expression of the multiple interferon-tau (IFN-tau) genes is restricted to
embryonic trophectoderm of ruminant ungulate species for a few days in early
pregnancy. The promoter regions of these genes are highly conserved. A proximal
(bp -91 to -69) sequence has been implicated in controlling trophoblast-specific 
expression. Here it was used as a target for yeast one-hybrid screening of a day 
13 conceptus cDNA library. Two transcription factors of the Ets family, Ets-2 and
GABPalpha, were identified, consistent with the observation that active ovine
IFN-tau genes contain a single 10-bp Ets motif (core: GGAA) in the proximal
segment, whereas three known inactive ovine genes contain a mutated core motif
(TGAA). Cotransfection of a promoter- (-126 to +50) luciferase reporter construct
from an active gene (bovineIFN-tau1; boIFNT1) and an Ets-2 expression plasmid in 
human JAr cells provided up to a 30-fold increase in reporter expression, whereas
promoters from inactive genes were not transactivated. GABPalpha alone was
ineffective and had only a approximately 2-fold positive effect when coexpressed 
with its partner GABPbeta. Other Ets-related transcription factors, which were
not detected in the genetic screen, also provided a range of lesser
transactivation effects. Coexpression of Ets-2 and activated Ras failed to
transactivate the IFNT promoter greater than Ets-2 alone in JAr cells. The
presence of Ets-2 in nuclei of embryonic trophectoderm was confirmed
immunocytochemically. Together, these data suggest that Ets-2 plays a role in the
transient expression of the nonvirally inducible IFNT genes.

PMCID: PMC20898
PMID: 9653109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1998 Apr 30;62(4):339-48.

CD4, CD8 and TCR defined T-cell subsets in thymus and spleen of 2- and 7-week old
commercial broiler chickens.

Erf GF(1), Bottje WG, Bersi TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA. gferf@comp.uark.edu

To better understand immune development and function in meat-type chickens
(broilers), the proportions of T-cells expressing CD4, CD8, and T-cell receptors 
(TCR) in the thymus and spleen were determined by three-color fluorescence and
flow cytometry in 2- and 7-week old broilers raised in commercial growing
conditions. Broiler thymocytes consisted of single-(CD4+CD8- and CD4-CD8+) and
double-(CD4+CD8+) positive subpopulations. Within these CD4+ and/or CD8+
thymocyte populations, all types of TCR (y delta, V beta 1 alpha beta, and V beta
2 alpha beta) could be identified. In the thymus, percentages of CD4+CD8- cells
increased, CD4-CD8+ cells remained unchanged, and CD4+CD8+ cells decreased
between 2 and 7 weeks of age. In the spleen, in addition to single-positive
lymphocytes, double-positive populations were identified, expressing either y
delta or alpha beta TCR. The percentage of CD4+CD8- splenocytes decreased, and
the percentages of both CD4-CD8+ and CD4+CD8+ splenocytes increased between 2 and
7 weeks of age. Age-associated shifts in TCR usage (the proportion of cells
expressing a certain type of TCR) were observed in the single-positive, but not
in the double-positive, T-cell populations of both thymus and spleen. This
multiparameter cell population analysis in broilers demonstrates thymic and
splenic T-cell subsets similar to those previously described in layers.
Differences in the proportions among T-cell subsets between 2- and 7-week old
broilers likely reflect a more competent immune system in the older birds.

PMID: 9646438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Int J Cancer. 1998 Jul 3;77(1):128-37.

The Ets-1 and Ets-2 transcription factors activate the promoters for
invasion-associated urokinase and collagenase genes in response to epidermal
growth factor.

Watabe T(1), Yoshida K, Shindoh M, Kaya M, Fujikawa K, Sato H, Seiki M, Ishii S, 
Fujinaga K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University, School of Medicine, Japan.

Urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) has been associated with invasion and
metastasis in breast cancer. The expression of uPA and 92 kDa type IV collagenase
(gelatinase B/MMP-9) is regulated by growth factors, receptor-type tyrosine
kinases and cytoplasmic oncoproteins. Here, we have identified transcriptional
requirements for the induction of uPA and 92 kDa type IV collagenase by epidermal
growth factor (EGF). EGF stimulates the motile and invasive activities
specifically in the ErbB-2-overexpressing SK-BR-3 cells. Expression of
extracellular matrix-degrading proteases including type I collagenase/MMP-1, 92
kDa type IV collagenase/MMP-9, uPA and uPA receptor were induced. EGF also
transiently stimulated expression of the transcription factors Ets-1 and Ets-2.
Reporter transfection assays revealed the activation of uPA and MMP-9 collagenase
promoters by EGF and the requirement of each of the composite Ets and AP-1
transcription factor binding sites for an EGF response. Most notably,
transfections with the Ets-1 and Ets-2 expression vectors potentiated uPA and
MMP-9 promoter activation in response to EGF. Mutation of the threonine 75
residue of chicken Ets-2 conserved in the Pointed group of the Ets family
proteins abrogated the ability of Ets-2 to collaborate with EGF. Ets-1 and Ets-2 
were highly expressed in invasive breast tumor cell lines. Our results suggest
that Ets-1 and Ets-2 provide the link connecting EGF stimuli with activation of
uPA and 92 kDa type IV collagenase promoters and may contribute to invasion
phenotypes.

PMID: 9639404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Poult Sci. 1998 Apr;77(4):529-37.

Effects of dietary vitamin E on the immune system in broilers: altered
proportions of CD4 T cells in the thymus and spleen.

Erf GF(1), Bottje WG, Bersi TK, Headrick MD, Fritts CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, Center of Excellence for Poultry Science,
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701, USA. gferf@comp.uark.edu

To gain insight into the immunomodulatory effects of vitamin E (VE), immune cell 
population analyses were conducted using thymus and spleen from male broilers fed
diets with various levels of VE supplementation (0, 17, 46, and 87 mg
dl-alpha-tocopherol acetate/kg of feed). At 2 and 7 wk of age, the percentages of
B cells, macrophages, and T cell subsets, delineated by the expression of CD4,
CD8, and T cell receptor (TCR) isotype, in thymus and spleen were determined by
flow cytometry. The percentages of thymic and splenic B cells and macrophages
from 2- and 7-wk-old chickens, as well as the percentage of thymic T cells in
2-wk-old chickens, were unaffected by VE treatment. However, 7-wk-old broilers
maintained on 87 mg VE/kg feed had a higher percentage of CD4+CD8- thymocytes, a 
higher CD4+CD8- to CD4-CD8+ thymocyte ratio, and a lower percentage of CD4+CD8+
thymocytes than chickens receiving no dietary VE supplementation. The VE-induced 
increase in the percentage of CD4+CD8- thymocytes was due to an increase in the
TCR2+CD4+CD8- thymocyte subset, whereas the decrease in the percentage of
CD4+CD8+ thymocytes involved all TCR defined T cell subsets. In the spleen, the
percentage of CD4+CD8- T cells was lower in 2-wk-old chickens and higher in
7-wk-old chickens maintained on 87 mg/kg feed than in chickens receiving no
dietary VE supplementation. The decrease in CD4+CD8- splenocytes at 2 wk of age
was due to a decline in the percentage of TCR2+CD4+CD8- splenocytes, whereas the 
increase in CD4+CD8- splenocytes in 7-wk-old chicks was due to an increase in the
percentages of all TCR defined CD4+CD8- T cell subsets. These data support an
immunomodulatory effect of VE on CD4+CD8- T cells.

PMID: 9565234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 1998 Apr;6(4):285-94.

Magnetic fields elicited by a tone onset time continuum in humans.

Simos PG(1), Breier JI, Zouridakis G, Papanicolaou AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas, Houston Medical School,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. asimos@heart.med.uth.tmc.edu

Event-related Fields (ERFs) were recorded in eleven normal volunteers in response
to four two-tone stimuli selected from a tone onset time (TOT) continuum. The
latter has been used extensively in the past as an analog of voice onset-time, an
important cue for making voicing distinctions (e.g., ¿pa¿ versus ¿ba¿). TOT
values ranged from 0 to 60 ms in 20-ms steps. Three components of the ERF (P50m, 
N1m, and P2m) in the hemisphere contralateral to the stimulated ear were
analyzed. The most significant finding was an abrupt reduction in the peak field 
amplitude of N1m (bilaterally) as TOT values increased from +20 to +40 ms. No
systematic differences were noted between the 0 and +20 ms stimuli or between the
+40 and +60 ms tokens. On the other hand, peak component latencies rose steadily 
with increasing TOT values. The discontinuity in the change of peak RMS as a
function of TOT is in close agreement with behavioral evidence of categorical
perception of similar non-speech as well as speech stimuli.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9593945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genes Dev. 1998 May 1;12(9):1315-26.

Defective trophoblast function in mice with a targeted mutation of Ets2.

Yamamoto H(1), Flannery ML, Kupriyanov S, Pearce J, McKercher SR, Henkel GW, Maki
RA, Werb Z, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. rgoshima@ljcrf.edu

Members of the Ets family of transcription factors mediate transcriptional
responses of multiple signaling pathways in diverse cell types and organisms.
Targeted deletion of the conserved DNA binding domain of the Ets2 transcription
factor results in the retardation and death of homozygous mouse embryos before
8.5 days of embryonic development. Defects in extraembryonic tissue gene
expression and function include deficient expression of matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9, gelatinase B), persistent extracellular matrix, and
failure of ectoplacental cone proliferation. Mutant embryos were rescued by
aggregation with tetraploid mouse embryos, which complement the developmental
defects by providing functional extraembryonic tissues. Rescued Ets2-deficient
mice are viable and fertile but have wavy hair, curly whiskers, and abnormal hair
follicle shape and arrangement, resembling mice with mutations of the EGF
receptor or its ligands. However, these mice are not deficient in the production 
of TGFalpha or the EGF receptor. Homozygous mutant cell lines respond
mitogenically to TGFalpha, EGF, FGF1, and FGF2. However, FGF fails to induce
MMP-13 (collagenase-3) and MMP-3 (stromelysin-1) in the Ets2-deficient
fibroblasts. Ectopic expression of Ets2 in the deficient fibroblasts restores
expression of both matrix metalloproteinases. Therefore, Ets2 is essential for
placental function, mediating growth factor signaling to key target genes
including MMP-3, MMP-9, and MMP-13 in different cell types, and for regulating
hair development.

PMCID: PMC316781
PMID: 9573048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Probl Tuberk. 1998;(2):13-6.

[External respiratory function in patients before and after saving lung
resections].

[Article in Russian]

Sokolova VS, Strel'tsov VP, Bronskaia LK, Semenov GI, Latyshev AN.

External respiratory function (ERF) was studied in 129 patients with restrictive 
pulmonary processes (tuberculomas, infiltrative and cavernous tuberculosis)
before and after surgery. All the patients underwent saving lung resections.
Changes in ERF were examined by conventional and the new method telespirography. 
This technique detects general and individual pulmonary ventilation disorders,
which underlie criteria for assessing whether patients with pulmonary
tuberculosis can be operated on. The authors show that the outcomes of surgical
treatment are determined by the baseline status of the respiratory apparatus
generally and each lung specifically. Distinctive features of complicated and
uncomplicated postoperative periods are identified. The benefits of the new
method are demonstrated.

PMID: 9613176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Apr 17;1377(2):F1-11.

Ets transcription factors and human disease.

Dittmer J(1), Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Molekularbiologie, Universität Tübingen, Germany.

PMID: 9606973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cancer Res. 1998 May 15;58(10):2253-9.

Activation of the ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway and
phosphorylation of ets-2 at position threonine 72 in human ovarian cancer cell
lines.

Patton SE(1), Martin ML, Nelsen LL, Fang X, Mills GB, Bast RC Jr, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27710, USA.

The activation status of the ras pathway was studied in eight ovarian tumor cell 
lines. Three biochemical parameters indicative of ras activation were tested: (a)
the ratio of the ras-GTP:ras-GDP complex; (b) the activity of mitogen-activated
protein kinases p42/p44; and (c) ets-2 phosphorylation at position threonine 72, 
a mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation site in vivo. Four of the
ovarian tumor cell lines had an activated ras pathway by these three parameters, 
whereas only one of these contained a mutated ras gene. In addition, ras/ets-2
responsive genes such as the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) were activated
in these four cell lines. Transient transfection assays indicated that the
compound ets-AP1 oncogene responsive enhancer present in the uPA gene was the
target of ras signaling in ovarian tumor cells and that the combination of
activated ras and ets-2 could superactivate the uPA enhancer element.
Coexpression of the dominant-negative ras-Asn17 cDNA gene abrogated activity of
this uPA element in ovarian tumor cells. These data indicate that ets-2 is a
nuclear target of ras action in ovarian tumor cell lines and that ras signaling
pathways may be activated in ovarian cancer by mechanisms independent of direct
genetic damage to ras genes.

PMID: 9605774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. An Esp Pediatr. 1998 Jan;48(1):33-8.

[A survey on the inclusion criteria in pediatric dialysis and transplantation
programs in terminal renal failure].

[Article in Spanish]

Riaño Galán I(1), Málaga Guerrero S.

Author information: 
(1)Sección de Nefrología Pediátrica, Hospital Central de Asturias, Oviedo.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to know the current practices of Spanish
pediatric nephrologists concerning the inclusion or not of children with
end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in programs of dialysis and transplantation in
order to open a discussion on the topic that would allow a consensus to be
reached.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A descriptive and prospective study using an anonymously
mailed survey to 90 members of the Spanish Pediatric Nephrology Association was
carried out.
RESULTS: The index of response was 43%. In 90% of the physicians polled they
believe that some situations exist where it is advisable not to include a child
with ERF in dialysis and, although all assure that there are no written
procedures, a large majority (85%) think that they should exist, at least in the 
most representative cases. Serious physical and/or intellectual handicap and poor
prognosis constitute the most important factors for making a decision. The
expressed desire of the parents is considered the third most important factor by 
56%. Of the answers, 82% placed economic cost of the substituting treatments as
least important. Ninety-two percent think that not always and not in all cases is
it necessary to turn to all possible technical means to extend the life. More
than half (54%) think that the last decision must be taken by the physician and
the family, although 44% confer this power to the Ethical Committee.
CONCLUSIONS: It would be useful to develop guidelines to help pediatric
nephrologists and/or ethical committees to decide, with the family of the
patient, about the inclusion of the child in ESRD in programs of dialysis and
transplantation.

PMID: 9580397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Oncogene. 1998 Apr 23;16(16):2065-73.

The transcription of the intercellular adhesion molecule-1 is regulated by Ets
transcription factors.

de Launoit Y(1), Audette M, Pelczar H, Plaza S, Baert JL.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 319 CNRS - Institut Pasteur de Lille, Institut de Biologie, France.

The Ets family of transcription factors comprises several members which are
involved to regulate gene transcription. Although several consensus binding sites
for Ets proteins can be found in a wide series of promoter, only a limited number
of them are indeed activated by these transcription factors. The human
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) plays a crucial role in immune
responses by enabling the binding of effector cells to various target cell types.
ICAM-1 is constitutively expressed at different levels in the absence of stimuli 
in different cell types, and its expression is upregulated by several
proinflammatory cytokines. We have here examined the transcriptional regulation
of human ICAM-1 expression by Ets proteins, and more particularly by ERM, a
member of this family of transcription factors. Transient transfection assays
revealed that Ets-2 and ERM significantly activate the transcription of ICAM-1
promoter, whereas the less-related Ets family member, Spi-1/Pu.1, failed to do
so. Transfection of a series of ICAM-1 promoter deletion mutants together with
ERM expression plasmids have shown that an Ets responsive element is located
within the first 176 bp upstream from the translational start site.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and DNase I footprinting analysis have
enabled us to identify two Ets binding sites at positions -158 and -138 from the 
ATG, respectively. Site directed mutagenesis of these elements has shown that the
distal site is the major element required for the ERM-mediated activation of the 
ICAM-1 promoter. We can thus conclude that expression of ICAM-1 can be regulated 
by Ets transcription factors.

PMID: 9572487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Exp Brain Res. 1998 Jan;118(2):279-85.

Receptive field properties of visual neurons in the avian nucleus lentiformis
mesencephali.

Fu YX(1), Gao HF, Guo MW, Wang SR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Visual Information Processing, Institute of Biophysics,
Academia Sinica, Beijing, PR China.

The receptive field (RF) properties of visual neurons extracellularly recorded
from the nucleus lentiformis mesencephali (nLM) in pigeons (Columba livia) were
quantitatively analyzed using a workstation computer. These cells were actively
spontaneous, and direction-and velocity-selective. Using spatial gratings as
visual stimuli, these cells could be divided into three groups: uni- (74%), bi-
(17%), and omnidirectional (9%) cells in terms of their directionality. On the
basis of their velocity selectivity, they could be named slow cells (84%),
preferring low velocity (0.1-11 degrees/s), and fast cells (14%), preferring
rapid motion (34-67 degrees/s), with one cell (2%) responding maximally to an
intermediate velocity of 18 degrees/ s. These two properties were correlated in
the way that all unidirectionals were slow cells, omnidirectionals were fast
cells, and bidirectionals were either slow or fast cells including the
intermediate cell. Using small targets as visual stimuli, it was found that the
majority of cells examined had RFs that each consisted of an excitatory RF (ERF) 
and an inhibitory RF (IRF) that overlapped. The unidirectionals were mainly of
this type of RF structure, whereas the omnidirectionals apparently had ERFs
alone. The direction preference of ERF was opposite to that of IRF for
unidirectional cells tested, whereas they were perpendicular to each other for
one bidirectional cell. The overall responses of these cells resulted from
interaction between excitation and inhibition induced by directionally different 
motion. Under certain conditions, visual responses of a particular cells to a
small target moving through its ERF were equal in responsive strength to those to
whole-field gratings swept over the screen. It was suggested that optokinetic
nystagmus produced by wholefield gratings results from population activity of
large group(s) of neurons in some optokinetic nuclei, at least one of which is
nLM.

PMID: 9547098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 13;273(11):6431-8.

Synergistic regulation of the human interleukin-12 p40 promoter by NFkappaB and
Ets transcription factors in Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B cells and
macrophages.

Gri G(1), Savio D, Trinchieri G, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104,
USA.

Monocytes/macrophages produce interleukin-12 (IL-12) in response to pathogenic
stimulation, whereas most Epstein-Barr virus-transformed (EBV+) B cells
constitutively secrete IL-12. The molecular mechanism regulating the constitutive
IL-12 gene expression in EBV+ B cells has not been addressed. In this study,
using the EBV+ B cell line RPMI-8866, we localized to the human IL-12 p40
promoter two essential cis elements, the NFkappaB site and the Ets site. The
NFkappaB site was shown to interact with members of the NFkappaB family: p50 and 
c-Rel. The Ets site constitutively bound a multi-component Ets-2-containing
complex. While the NFkappaB and Ets sites appear equally critical for inducible
p40 promoter activity in macrophage cell lines, NFkappaB plays a more dominant
role in the constitutive p40 promoter activity in EBV+ B cells. Transient
expression of Ets-2 and c-Rel in B, T, and monocytic cell lines synergistically
activated the IL-12 p40 promoter, apparently overcoming the requirement for cell 
type- or stimulant-specific transcription factors. These data provide new
evidence that full activation of the human IL-12 p40 promoter may result
primarily from the interplay between NFkappaB and Ets family members.

PMID: 9497375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Blood. 1998 Mar 15;91(6):1934-46.

Myb and ets proteins are candidate regulators of c-kit expression in human
hematopoietic cells.

Ratajczak MZ(1), Perrotti D, Melotti P, Powzaniuk M, Calabretta B, Onodera K,
Kregenow DA, Machalinski B, Gewirtz AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Kit is a tyrosine kinase receptor that plays an important role in human
hematopoietic cell growth. The promoter elements that modulate the gene's
expression have not been extensively studied. Because of c-kit's acknowledged
importance in hematopoiesis, we sought to address this issue in more detail. To
perform these studies we analyzed a human c-kit 5' flanking fragment
approximately 1 kilobase in length. Deletion constructs showed a region
approximately 139 nucleotides upstream from the translation initiation site that 
was critical for promoter activity. A region containing a potential silencing
element was also identified. Sequence analysis indicated several potential Myb-
and Ets-binding sites. The functional significance of these sites was explored by
showing that both wild-type Myb and Ets-2 protein, but not a DNA
binding-deficient Myb mutant protein, bound to distinct 5' flanking fragments
that included these sites. Furthermore, binding of recombinant Myb and Ets-2
protein to these fragments could be competed with an excess of double stranded
oligodeoxynucleotides containing canonical, but not mutated, Myb- or Ets-binding 
sites. We also showed that the 5' flanking region of c-kit exhibited promoter
activity in nonhematopoietic cells only when the cells were transfected with
c-myb or ets-2 expression vectors. Moreover, Myb and Ets-2 coexpression in such
cells augmented transactivation of c-kit promoter constructs in comparison to
that observed in cells transfected with either construct alone. Promoter
constructs lacking various Myb and Ets sites deleted were much less effective in 
this same system. Finally, Myb and Ets-2 mRNA expression was detected in CD34+,
Kit low as well as CD34+, Kit bright cells. In aggregate, these data further
define the human c-kit promoter's functional anatomy and suggest that Myb and Ets
proteins play an important, perhaps cooperative, role in regulating expression of
this critical hematopoietic cell receptor.

PMID: 9490676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cancer Res. 1998 Mar 1;58(5):1027-33.

Ets-2 transdominant mutant abolishes anchorage-independent growth and macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor-stimulated invasion by BT20 breast carcinoma cells.

Sapi E(1), Flick MB, Rodov S, Kacinski BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520-8040, USA. eva.sapi@yale.edu

Activation of the macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor (CSF-1R) by its
cognate ligand CSF-1 dramatically increases the tumorigenicity and invasive
potential of both normal and neoplastic mammary epithelial cells. Recent studies 
have suggested that the Ets2 transcription factor plays a central role in
mediating CSF-1R-induced mitogenesis in fibroblasts. To determine whether the
Ets2 transcription factor can also mediate CSF-1- and CSF-1R-stimulated signaling
pathways in mammary epithelial cells, we expressed a dominant negative mutant,
Ets2, in the CSF-1R- and Ets2-positive BT20 breast carcinoma cell line and
examined its effects on CSF-1-induced cellular invasion and on colony formation
in soft agar. Our data show that stable expression of the mutant Ets2 in BT20
cells completely inhibits the formation of soft agar colonies and abolishes the
CSF-1-stimulated invasion of these cells through a barrier of reconstituted
basement membrane (Matrigel). We have also demonstrated that the expression of
this Ets2 mutant is capable of interrupting the CSF-1R-regulated intracellular
signaling pathways by inhibiting CSF-1-induced c-myc, c-fos, and c-jun expression
in BT20 cells. Our results are the first demonstration of an important role for
the Ets2 transcription factor in the regulation of the anchorage-independent
growth and cellular invasiveness of neoplastic mammary epithelial cells.

PMID: 9500466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Feb 15;26(4):1116-23.

Differential screening and suppression subtractive hybridization identified genes
differentially expressed in an estrogen receptor-positive breast carcinoma cell
line.

Kuang WW(1), Thompson DA, Hoch RV, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Differences in gene expression are likely to explain the phenotypic differences
between hormone-responsive and hormone-unresponsive breast cancer. We have
identified differentially expressed cDNAs in the estrogen receptor (ER)-positive 
MCF7 breast carcinoma cell line compared with the ER-negative MDA-MB-231 breast
carcinoma cell line. Differential screening isolated four differentially
expressed genes: cytokeratin 8, cytokeratin 18, Hsp27 and GPCR -Br. To identify
differentially expressed genes of lower abundance, suppression subtractive
hybridization was utilized and 29 differentially expressed clones were isolated. 
Sequence analysis revealed that 11 clones were from previously described genes:
HEK8, neuropeptide Y receptor Y1, p21 WAF-1, p55 PIK, cytokeratin 18 (cloned
twice), fructose-1,6-biphosphatase, cytokeratin 8, TGFbeta1 binding protein,
elongation factor 1alpha2 and pS2. The remaining 18 clones did not match
sequences in the GenBank/EMBL database, indicating that they may be novel genes. 
Expression of pS2, neuropeptide Y receptor Y1 and three novel clones was induced 
by estradiol, indicating estrogen-responsiveness. The expression pattern of one
novel gene, DEME -6, correlated with expression of ER and ERF -1/ AP -2gamma in a
panel of breast carcinoma cell lines. A 2.6 kb cDNA of DEME -6 was sequenced and 
contains an open reading frame of 574 amino acids that demonstrates 62.4%
similarity with a gene from Caenorhabditis elegans chromosome III. Expression of 
DEME -6 was also detected in primary breast carcinomas but not in normal breast
tissue, as determined by RT-PCR. These findings support the hypothesis that a set
of genes coordinately regulated with ER , but not necessarily
estradiol-responsive, are characteristic of the hormone-responsive breast cancer 
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC147366
PMID: 9461476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Feb 3;95(3):1289-94.

Identification of a neuregulin and protein-tyrosine phosphatase response element 
in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor epsilon subunit gene: regulatory role of 
an Rts transcription factor.

Sapru MK(1), Florance SK, Kirk C, Goldman D.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Research Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

At the neuromuscular synapse, innervation induces endplate-specific expression of
adult-type nicotinic acetylcholine receptors by selective expression of their
subunit-encoding genes (alpha2betaepsilondelta) in endplate-associated myonuclei.
These genes are specifically regulated by protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTPase)
activity. In addition, neuregulin/acetylcholine-receptor-inducing activity, a
nerve-derived factor that stimulates nicotinic acetylcholine receptor synthesis, 
induces adult-type specific epsilon subunit gene expression via activation of a
Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. However, the DNA regulatory
elements and the binding proteins that mediate PTPase and neuregulin-dependent
gene expression remain unknown. Herein we report that PTPase, neuregulin, and
Ras-dependent regulation of the epsilon subunit gene map to a 15-bp promoter
sequence. Interestingly, this same 15-bp sequence appears to be necessary for low
epsilon subunit gene expression in extrajunctional regions of the muscle fiber.
Site-directed mutagenesis of a putative Ets binding site located within this
15-bp sequence, reduced PTPase, neuregulin, and Ras-dependent regulation.
Overexpression of the rat muscle Ets-2 transcription factor resulted in a
sequence-specific induction of epsilon subunit promoter activity. Further, a
dominant negative mutant of Ets-2 abolished neuregulin-dependent induction of
epsilon subunit gene expression. Thus, these results indicate a crucial role for 
the 15-bp element in determining synapse-specific and neuregulin-mediated motor
neuron control of epsilon subunit gene expression and suggest the participation
of Ets transcription factor(s) in this control.

PMCID: PMC18748
PMID: 9448324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Artif Intell Med. 1998 Jan;12(1):43-60.

Disease diagnosis validation in TROPIX using CBR.

Ochi-Okorie AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Computer Studies, University of Southwestern Louisiana,
Lafayette 70504, USA. sunny.okorie@inference.com

TROPIX is a practical application project initially designed to help improve
health care delivery in the rural/semi urban clinics and public hospitals in
Nigeria due largely to limited laboratory facilities, medical doctors, and
expertise. This paper is devoted to the use of case-based reasoning (CBR)
paradigm in concert with statistical association-based reasoning (ABR) for
disease diagnosis, validation and therapy selection components of the research.
Essentially, tentative disease diagnosis arrived at by some classification method
using similarity and dissimilarity aggregate functions, the matched vector
functions (MVF), aided by the application of evidence ratio factors (ERF) for
tied match cases is passed to the CBR model for validation by reusing past
similar cases. The design and organization of the case-library using singular
value decomposition (SVD) technique on the disease-attribute decision matrix to
generate primary/secondary storage key clusters, as well as the use of
domain-specific case-object properties that help to build a good case-base are
described in some detail. The paper presents a disease case validation algorithm 
for appropriate data filtering and therapy selection enhancement from the new
case-base.

PMID: 9475951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mech Dev. 1997 Nov;68(1-2):127-37.

Regulation of urokinase expression in the developing avian heart: a role for the 
Ets-2 transcription factor.

Majka SM(1), McGuire PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of New Mexico, School of
Medicine, Albuquerque 87131, USA.

During heart development, cells of the endocardial cushions undergo an
epithelial-mesenchymal transformation and migrate into the surrounding
extracellular matrix. This event is required for the normal formation of valves
and chamber septation. Coincident with this phenotypic change is the expression
of the serine protease urokinase by the mesenchymal cells. This protease plays an
important role in remodeling of the matrix, promotion of cell migration by
regulating cell-matrix interactions, and the activation of growth factors. To
understand the mechanisms underlying the expression of urokinase during heart
development, studies were designed to analyze the role of the Ets transcription
factors in the regulation of the avian urokinase gene promoter. Deletion or
mutagenesis of the Ets consensus sites significantly decreased the activity of
the promoter in isolated cushion tissue cells. Proteins were identified by
electrophoretic mobility shift analysis and UV-crosslinking which bound to a
specific region of the promoter shown to be required for full transcriptional
activity. Analyses based upon protein molecular weight and interaction with
specific antibodies suggest a role for the Ets-2 protein in promoter binding and 
activity. The expression of Ets-2 in the cushion tissue cells was confirmed by
RT-PCR analysis and in situ hybridization. The mRNA levels and the DNA binding
activity of the Ets-2 protein were found to change during development paralleling
the increase in urokinase activity. Overexpression of the full-length Ets-2
protein or a dominant-negative form of the protein altered the activity of the
promoter and significantly affected the production of urokinase in these cells.
The results from these studies suggest an important role for the Ets-2 protein in
heart development and may contribute to a better understanding of the inductive
factors present in the heart which facilitate the normal morphogenesis of this
organ.

PMID: 9431810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1997 Sep 19;58(3-4):335-43.

Lymphocyte populations in dermal lymphoid aggregates of vitiliginous Smyth line
and normally pigmented light brown Leghorn chickens.

Erf GF(1), Trejo-Skalli AV, Poulin M, Smyth JR Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701,
USA. gferf@comp.uark.edu

Smyth line (SL) chickens develop a spontaneous, autoimmune loss of melanocytes
(vitiligo) from the feather. To determine whether lymphocyte infiltration into
two-week-old regenerating feathers of vitiliginous chickens was accompanied by
lymphocyte infiltration into the skin, skin biopsies were conducted in SL
chickens at two-week intervals throughout the development of vitiligo (SLV) when 
the chicks were 6 to 14 weeks of age. Control skin samples were obtained from
age-matched, normally-pigmented Light Brown Leghorn (LBL) chickens. Frozen skin
sections were labelled with a panel of mouse mAb to identify various lymphocyte
populations. There was no lymphocyte infiltration into the skin of SL or control 
chickens. However, in both lines of chickens, dermal lymphoid aggregates (DLA),
consisting primarily of T cells, were observed. In the DLA of SL chickens, the
ratio between CD4+ and CD8+ T cells was lower (P = 0.005) and the percentage of
gamma delta T cells higher (P = 0.027) than in the controls. Additionally, in SL 
chickens the lymphocyte populations in the DLA varied depending on the
developmental stage of vitiligo. These data suggest a relationship between the
DLA and autoimmune vitiligo in the SL model.

PMID: 9436276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Gene. 1997 Nov 12;201(1-2):179-87.

Cooperation of two PEA3/AP1 sites in uPA gene induction by TPA and FGF-2.

D'Orazio D(1), Besser D, Marksitzer R, Kunz C, Hume DA, Kiefer B, Nagamine Y.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

We have previously shown in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts that treatment with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) or fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) 
activates the Ras/Erk signaling pathway in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, leading to the
induction of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) gene. In this study, 
we characterize cis-acting elements involved in this induction. DNase I
hypersensitive (HS) site analysis of the uPA promoter showed that two regions
were enhanced after TPA and FGF-2 treatment. One was located 2.4kb upstream of
the transcription start site (-2.4kb), where a known PEA3/AP1 (AGGAAATGAGGTCAT)
element is located. The other was located in a previously undefined far upstream 
region. Sequencing of this region revealed a similar AP1/PEA3 (GTGATTCACTTCCT)
element at -6.9 kb corresponding to the HS site. Deletion analysis of the uPA
promoter in transient transfection assays showed that both PEA3/AP1 elements are 
required for full inducibility, suggesting a synergism between the two elements. 
When the two sites were inserted together upstream of a minimal promoter derived 
from the thymidine kinase gene, expression of the reporter gene was more strongly
induced by TPA and FGF-2 than with either of the two elements alone. Alone, the
-6.9 element was more potent than the -2.4 element. The involvement of AP1 as
well as Ets transcription factors was confirmed by examining different promoter
constructs containing deletions in either the AP-1 or the PEA3 element, and by
using an expression plasmid for dominant negative Ets-2. Electromobility shift
analyses using specific antibodies showed that c-Jun and, JunD bind to both
elements with or without induction. In addition, ATF-2 binds to the -2.4-kb
element even without induction and c-Fos to the -6.9-kb element only after
induction. Accordingly, overexpression of c-Fos caused induction from the -6.9-kb
element, but reduced induction from the -2.4-kb element. The involvement of the
Ets-2 transcription factor was shown by using expression plasmids for wild-type
and dominant negative Ets-2.

PMID: 9409785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cereb Cortex. 1997 Oct-Nov;7(7):662-77.

The spatial distribution of the antagonistic surround of MT/V5 neurons.

Xiao DK(1), Raiguel S, Marcar V, Orban GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorium voor Neuro- en Psychofysiologie, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 
School of Medicine, Campus Gasthuisberg, Belgium.

The majority (217/325, 66%) of the neurons in the middle temporal (MT) area/V5
show strong antagonistic surrounds, defined here by a decrease of at least 50% in
the summation curve. We mapped the antagonistic surround in 145 such cells, using
eight circularly distributed surround stimulus patches (Surround Asymmetry Test, 
SAT) and also mapped the surround in 51 of these 145 cells using a grid
consisting of 25 square patches (Surround Mapping Test, SMT). Both tests showed
that the angular surround distribution was non-uniform in the majority of these
neurons. In half the neurons, the antagonistic surround was asymmetric, and arose
from a single region on one side of the excitatory receptive field (ERF). In
another quarter of the sample the surround was bilaterally symmetric, and arose
from a pair of regions on opposite sides of the ERF. Only the remaining 20%
showed a circularly symmetric surround distribution. These three groups differed 
in their laminar distribution. The SMT showed that, radially, the surround
antagonism reached a maximum, on average, at 1.5 times the ERF radius. Detailed
comparisons of the spatial relationships of excitatory and inhibitory regions of 
the RF components shows that non-homogeneity of the surround influence appears to
be an intrinsic property of the surround. Such a property may underly the
extraction of the surface orientation and curvature from speed patterns.

PMID: 9373021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Poult Sci. 1997 Nov;76(11):1506-12.

Effect of dietary dl-alpha-tocopherol on tissue alpha- and gamma-tocopherol and
pulmonary hypertension syndrome (ascites) in broilers.

Bottje WG(1), Erf GF, Bersi TK, Wang S, Barnes D, Beers KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA.

The objectives of this experiment were to determine the effects of high dietary
levels of vitamin E on growth performance and pulmonary hypertension syndrome
(PHS) mortality. Male broiler chicks (Cobb 500) were randomly assigned to one of 
four dietary treatments consisting of standard starter and grower diets
supplemented with 0, 17, 46, and 87 mg dl-alpha-tocopherol acetate/kg. To
encourage the development of PHS, air temperature in the house was 32 and 28 C
for Weeks 1 and 2, dropped to 18 C during Week 3, and kept between 10 and 15 C
during Weeks 4 through 7. Also, chicks were placed in floor pens on litter used
for five previous flocks and ventilation reduced to increase dust and ammonia in 
the house. Ammonia levels increased from an initial 18 to 36 ppm on Day 42 with
the increase in ammonia corresponding to an obvious increase in dust in the air. 
Lung and liver tissue obtained at 2, 5, and 7 wk of age were analyzed for tissue 
alpha- and gamma-tocopherol by liquid chromatography. Dietary vitamin E had no
effect on body weight, feed intake, or feed efficiency. Cumulative PHS mortality 
through 7 wk of age was 21% and was also unaffected by dietary treatment. Liver
and lung alpha-tocopherol concentrations exhibited a dose-response increase to
dietary tocopherol and there was a high correlation between lung and liver tissue
alpha-tocopherol (r = 0.72, P < 0.05). Whereas gamma-tocopherol concentrations in
lung and liver were unaffected by dietary treatment, liver and lung exhibited
age-dependent increases in both alpha- and gamma-tocopherol. Despite
dose-dependent increases in tissue alpha-tocopherol, supplementation of diets
with up to 87 mg dl-alpha-tocopherol acetate had no effect on growth performance 
or PHS mortality in broilers under the conditions used in this study.

PMID: 9355143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 31;272(44):27549-57.

A regulatory element within a coding exon modulates keratin 18 gene expression in
transgenic mice.

Neznanov N(1), Umezawa A, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Multiple tissue-specific, DNase-hypersensitive sites are correlated with known or
potential regulatory regions of the human keratin 18 (K18) gene. One of these
sites is found within exon 6, close to a potential AP-1 binding site. Footprint
analysis confirmed that this site is capable of binding c-Jun and c-Fos in vitro.
However, exon 6 can stimulate expression of a reporter gene driven by the K18
proximal promoter independent of AP-1 in F9 cells and additionally modulates AP-1
responsiveness when in combination with an intron enhancer. Analysis in
transgenic mice and by transient transfections of mutant forms of the K18 gene
showed that exon 6 contributes to the expression of the K18 gene. However,
substitution of part of exon 6 with the corresponding part of the keratin 19 gene
which lacks an AP-1 site decreased but did not destroy the regulatory activity of
the exon. Furthermore, this mutation did not alter either the tissue specificity 
or the position-independent and copy number-dependent behavior of the K18 gene.
In contrast, a frameshift mutation within exon 6 dramatically decreased the
expression of the gene. K18 RNA expression from the frameshift mutation was less 
than 10% of the wild type K18 transgene. This decline in expression was the
result of a combination of decreased stability of mutant K18 RNA and the creation
of a negative regulatory element that can interact with the first intron
regulatory elements and actively suppress K18 expression. These results
demonstrate that a protein-coding portion of the K18 gene also has a regulatory
function.

PMID: 9346889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):4885-94.

Methylation of an ETS site in the intron enhancer of the keratin 18 gene
participates in tissue-specific repression.

Umezawa A(1), Yamamoto H, Rhodes K, Klemsz MJ, Maki RA, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The activities of ETS transcription factors are modulated by posttranscriptional 
modifications and cooperation with other proteins. Another factor which could
alter the regulation of genes by ETS transcription factors is DNA methylation of 
their cognate binding sites. The optimal activity of the keratin 18 (K18) gene is
dependent upon an ETS binding site within an enhancer region located in the first
intron. The methylation of the ETS binding site was correlated with the
repression of the K18 gene in normal human tissues and in K18 transgenic mouse
tissues. Neither recombinant ETS2 nor endogenous spleen ETS binding activities
bound the methylated site effectively. Increased expression of the K18 gene in
spleens of transgenic mice by use of an alternative, cryptic promoter 700 bp
upstream of the enhancer resulted in modestly decreased methylation of the K18
ETS site and increased RNA expression. Expression in transgenic mice of a mutant 
K18 gene, which was still capable of activation by ETS factors but was no longer 
a substrate for DNA methylation of the ETS site, was fivefold higher in spleen
and heart. However, expression in other organs such as liver and intestine was
similar to that of the wild-type gene. This result suggests that DNA methylation 
of the K18 ETS site may be functionally important in the tissue-specific
repression of the K18 gene. Epigenetic modification of the binding sites for some
ETS transcription factors may result in a refractory transcriptional response
even in the presence of necessary trans-acting activities.

PMCID: PMC232341
PMID: 9271368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Oncogene. 1997 Aug 28;15(9):1103-10.

Cellular and viral trans-acting factors modulate N-myc2 promoter activity in
woodchuck liver tumors.

Flajolet M(1), Gegonne A, Ghysdael J, Tiollais P, Buendia MA, Fourel G.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique (INSERM U163), Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.

Activation of the N-myc2 oncogene by integration of woodchuck hepatitis virus
(WHV) DNA is a central event in woodchuck liver oncogenesis. In this study, we
have evaluated the influence of several cellular and viral trans-acting factors
and mediators of inflammation on N-myc2 promoter activity in hepatoma cell lines.
Ets oncoproteins, including Ets1, Ets2 and PEA3 efficiently activated a chimeric 
N-myc2 promoter/luciferase reporter gene. By electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, we show that Etsl and Ets2 proteins can efficiently bind two consensus
Ets sites located within a 59 bp sequence upstream of the N-myc2 transcription
start site. Site-directed mutagenesis of these Ets-binding motifs abolished
transactivation of the N-myc2 promoter by Ets proteins. Addition of interleukin-6
(IL-6) induced a weak but reproducible activation of the N-myc2 promoter, while
IL-1 was ineffective. We further show that the N-myc2 promoter can be
transactivated by the hepadna-virus X protein, and that distal promoter sequences
are required for both IL-6 and X responsiveness. Similar effects of these factors
were observed in the context of the N-myc2 promoter activated by WHV
cis-regulatory elements. In view of the high-level expression of the N-myc2
oncogene in most woodchuck liver tumors, the Ets oncoproteins,
inflammation-associated cytokine IL-6 and the viral X transactivator might play
important roles in hepadnavirus-associated tumorigenesis.

PMID: 9285565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 22;272(34):21432-43.

Murine A-myb gene encodes a transcription factor, which cooperates with Ets-2 and
exhibits distinctive biochemical and biological activities from c-myb.

Oh IH(1), Reddy EP.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

The myb gene family consists of three members, named A-, B-, and c-myb, which
encode nuclear proteins that bind to DNA and function as regulators of
transcription. Our results show that murine A-myb is a poor transactivator of
transcription compared with murine c-myb. Deletion of the COOH-terminal domain of
A-Myb, or co-expression with Ets-2 resulted in increased transactivation
potential. While ectopic overexpression of c-myb in 32Dcl3 cells results in a
block to the ability of these cells to undergo terminal differentiation resulting
in indefinite growth in granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), similar
overexpression of A-myb results in growth arrest and concomitant terminal
differentiation of 32D cells into granulocytes. Co-expression of A-myb and ets-2 
in these cells results in the restoration of the proliferative activity of the
cells in G-CSF, but fails to induce a block to G-CSF-induced terminal
differentiation. However, overexpression of the COOH-terminal deletion mutant of 
A-myb results in a block to G-CSF-induced differentiation of 32D cells,
suggesting that the distinctive biological phenotypes produced by A-myb and c-myb
genes are mediated by their COOH-terminal domains.

PMID: 9261159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Leukemia. 1997 Aug;11(8):1224-33.

ETS-1 induces increased expression of erythroid markers in the pluripotent
erythroleukemic cell lines K562 and HEL.

Clausen PA(1), Athanasiou M, Chen Z, Dunn KJ, Zhang Q, Lautenberger JA,
Mavrothalassitis G, Blair DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201, USA.

Members of the ETS gene family are known to be expressed in hematopoietic tissues
and cell lines, and there is increasing evidence that ETS proteins may play a
role in normal hematopoietic cell development. We demonstrate that ETS-1 can
contribute to the development of an erythroid phenotype in vitro. The pluripotent
erythroleukemic K562 and HEL cell lines express messages for a number of ETS
genes, but only c-ETS-1 levels are elevated in response to treatment with hemin
or cytosine arabinofuranoside (Ara-C), agents which induce erythroid
differentiation. Furthermore, ETS-1 antisense oligonucleotides inhibit
hemoglobinization of cells treated with Ara-C or hemin, and K562 and HEL cells
infected with retrovirus expressing the c-ETS-1 gene exhibit a significant
increase in erythroid character (as indicated by benzidine staining for
hemoglobin (Hb) and surface marker analysis), a dramatic increase in
responsiveness to hemin or Ara-C, and a decreased rate of proliferation (20-40%
of control rates). In contrast, infection with virus expressing ETS-2 or vector
sequences only causes no detectable changes in the proliferation or erythroid
character of either the HEL or K562 cell lines. These data indicate a role for
ETS-1 in erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 9264374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Aug;11(9):1319-31.

Human estrogen receptor (ER) gene promoter-P1: estradiol-independent activity and
estradiol inducibility in ER+ and ER- cells.

Treilleux(1), Peloux N, Brown M, Sergeant A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire, Unité INSERM U412, Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Lyon, France.

Estrogen receptor (ER) is expressed at a low level in normal tissues such as
breast and uterus but at a high level in breast and endometrial carcinomas. A
proximal element (ERF-1) located between positions +133 and +204 relative to the 
promoter P1 major initiation site has been recently identified in ER+ cells and
contributes to the differential promoter activity between ER+ and ER- cells. In
this study, MCF7 and HeLa cells were transfected with chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase constructs containing ER gene promoter P1 sequences. We show
here that the sequences lying between nucleotides +13 to +212 are also essential 
for transcription at the ER gene promoter P1 in ER- cells, which do not express
ERF-1. Interestingly, on gel shift experiments, a complex specific to ER- cells
forms in the region spanning nucleotides +123 to +210. We also show that promoter
P1 is responsive to estradiol in cells expressing endogenous (MCF7) or exogenous 
ER. We further demonstrate, using mutational analysis and gel retardation assays,
that the three half-estrogen response elements located between nucleotides -420
and -892 are responsible for the estradiol inducibility of promoter P1. Because
estradiol has a mitogenic effect on both breast and endometrial epithelial cells,
our data would give an insight into the role of estrogens in the occurrence of
breast and endometrial carcinomas.

PMID: 9259322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Prostate. 1997 Jun 15;32(1):27-34.

Elastic system of the rat ventral prostate and its modifications following
orchiectomy.

de Carvalho HF(1), Vilamaior PS, Taboga SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, State University at Compinas, São Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The extracellular matrix (ECM) has important roles in prostatic
development, and marked stromal changes take place in the rat ventral prostate
(VP) after androgen deprivation. However, little knowledge exists about
individual ECM components.
METHODS: The distribution of elastic fibers (EF) and elastic-related fibers (ERF)
in the VP of castrated and control rats was investigated, using histochemistry
and transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
RESULTS: EF are barely detected in the prostatic stroma, but ERF are relatively
abundant. Castration results in a relative increase in the number and thickness
of ERF. TEM showed an open network of ECM microfibrils throughout, the stroma and
thin and short EF, which increase in number and thickness after orchiectomy.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of elastic system components in the rat VP warrants the
deformability required for the secretion exclusion under the action of smooth
muscle cells, and the castration-induced modification may be related to the
contraction of the tissue and maintenance of peculiar arrangements of other ECM
components.

PMID: 9207954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genomics. 1997 Jun 1;42(2):227-35.

Genomic structure and chromosomal localization of the novel ETS factor, PE-2
(ERF).

de Castro CM(1), Rabe SM, Langdon SD, Fleenor DE, Slentz-Kesler K, Ahmed MN,
Qumsiyeh MB, Kaufman RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27710, USA.

The members of the ETS family of transcription factors are grouped because they
share a highly conserved DNA binding domain. These factors are involved in growth
factor pathways and regulate both proliferation and differentiation. To identify 
ETS factors that may be involved in early hematopoietic progenitor regulation, we
isolated a novel member of the ETS family by reverse transcriptase-PCR of the
conserved DNA binding domain using degenerate oligonucleotides. This gene directs
the synthesis of a 2704-nucleotide transcript whose largest open reading frame
encodes a 548-amino-acid protein. Northern blot analysis reveals ubiquitous
expression in all human tissues and cell lines tested, with highest levels in the
testis, ovary, pancreas, and heart. Comparison of this gene with the available
databases reveals very significant homology to the ETS factor PE-1 and probable
near-identity with the recently cloned factor ERF. The PE-2 gene is composed of
four exons spanning over 9 kb of genomic DNA. Sequence analysis of the promoter
region reveals a GC-rich sequence without a TATA motif and with putative binding 
motifs for CREB, c-myb, and AP-1 factors. Using mouse-human somatic hybrids and
FISH analysis, the PE-2 gene is localized to human chromosome 19q13.2, a region
involved in translocations and deletions in leukemias and several solid tumors,
suggesting that this novel ETS factor may play a role in carcinogenesis.

PMID: 9192842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Oncogene. 1997 May 8;14(18):2149-57.

Altered expression of Erg and Ets-2 transcription factors is associated with
genetic changes at 21q22.2-22.3 in immortal and cervical carcinoma cell lines.

Simpson S(1), Woodworth CD, DiPaolo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Human Papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 is the most frequently detected HPV in
cervical cancer. Although epidemiologic and experimental evidence indicates a
prominent role for HPV infection in the development of this disease, other
factors are also involved. Altered expression of the ets family transcription
factors erg and ets-2 was found associated with the development of cervical
carcinoma. Overexpression also occurred in a HPV-16-immortalized cervical cell
line, CX16-2, which has HPV integrated at a translocation breakpoint t(19;21)
involving 21q22.2-22.3, where these genes have been mapped. Six of 10 cervical
carcinoma cell lines overexpressed ets-2 RNA suggesting an association of
overexpression with cervical cell neoplasia. A clonally related pair of cervical 
carcinoma cell lines, C-4I and C-4II, showed differential expression of erg and
ets-2. C-4I overexpressed ets-2 RNA compared to normal cervical cells and C-4II. 
C-4II expressed a 5.3 kb erg transcript not seen in C-4I, ectocervical cells or
other cervical carcinoma cell lines examined. Pulsed field gel electrophoresis
was used to analyse changes in DNA fragments related to structural changes and to
construct a physical map encompassing erg and ets-2. Alterations in erg and ets-2
RNA expression in each of three different cell lines examined were associated
with translocations. Association between altered expression of erg and ets-2 and 
altered regional structural suggests that these genes are important targets in
cervical carcinogenesis.

PMID: 9174050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2401-12.

Rapid phosphorylation of Ets-2 accompanies mitogen-activated protein kinase
activation and the induction of heparin-binding epidermal growth factor gene
expression by oncogenic Raf-1.

McCarthy SA(1), Chen D, Yang BS, Garcia Ramirez JJ, Cherwinski H, Chen XR,
Klagsbrun M, Hauser CA, Ostrowski MC, McMahon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Signaling, DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto, California
94304, USA.

Heparin-binding epidermal growth factor (HB-EGF) gene transcription is rapidly
activated in NIH 3T3 cells transformed by oncogenic Ras and Raf and mediates the 
autocrine activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) observed in these
cells. A 1.7-kb fragment of the promoter of the murine HB-EGF gene linked to a
luciferase reporter was strongly induced following activation of deltaRaf-1:ER, a
conditionally active form of oncogenic human Raf-1. Promoter activation by
deltaRaf-1:ER required a composite AP-1/Ets transcription factor binding site
located between bp -974 and -988 upstream of the translation initiation site. In 
vivo genomic footprinting indicated that the basal level of occupancy of this
composite AP-1/Ets element increased following deltaRaf-1:ER activation.
Cotransfection of Ets-2 and p44 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase expression
vectors strongly potentiated HB-EGF promoter activation in response to
deltaRaf-1:ER. Potentiated activation required both p44 MAP kinase catalytic
activity and threonine 72 in the Pointed domain of Ets-2. Biochemical assays
demonstrated the ability of the p42 and p44 MAP kinases to phosphorylate Ets-2 on
threonine 72. Importantly, in intact cells, the kinetics of phosphorylation of
Ets-2 on this residue closely mirror the activation of the p42 and p44 MAP
kinases and the observed onset of HB-EGF gene transcription following
deltaRaf-1:ER activation. These data firmly establish Ets-2 as a direct target of
the Raf-MEK-MAP kinase signaling pathway and strongly implicate Ets-2 in the
regulation of HB-EGF gene expression.

PMCID: PMC232089
PMID: 9111309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 29;94(9):4342-7.

Identification of ERF-1 as a member of the AP2 transcription factor family.

McPherson LA(1), Baichwal VR, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

The ERF-1 transcription factor was previously shown to be involved in the
regulation of estrogen receptor (ER) gene transcription in hormonally responsive 
breast and endometrial carcinomas. In this study we sought to identify the gene
for ERF-1. ERF-1 activates ER gene transcription by binding to the imperfect
palindrome CCCTGCGGGG within the promoter of the ER gene. ERF-1 protein was
purified from the ER-positive breast carcinoma cell line, MCF7, utilizing ion
exchange and DNA affinity chromatography. Peptide sequence analysis was used to
isolate a 2.7 kb cDNA clone from an MCF7 cDNA library. This cDNA encodes a
protein of 48 kDa previously identified as the AP2gamma transcription factor. By 
gel-shift analysis, in vitro synthesized ERF-1 comigrates with MCF7 native ERF-1 
complex and demonstrates identical sequence binding specificity as native ERF-1. 
In addition, AP2 polyclonal antisera supershifts both in vitro synthesized and
native ERF-1 complexes. These results show that ERF-1 is a member of the AP2
family of developmentally regulated transcription factors. Given the central role
of ER expression in breast carcinoma biology, ERF-1 is likely to regulate
expression of a set of genes characteristic of the hormonally-responsive breast
cancer phenotype.

PMCID: PMC20724
PMID: 9113991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 18;272(16):10389-95.

Identification and characterization of a novel Ets-2-related nuclear complex
implicated in the activation of the human interleukin-12 p40 gene promoter.

Ma X(1), Neurath M, Gri G, Trinchieri G.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a proinflammatory cytokine produced by
antigen-presenting cells in response to many microbial infections. IL-12 plays an
important role in the generation of T helper type-1 cells, which favor
cell-mediated immune response. IL-12 is composed of two different subunits, p40
and p35, whose expression can be regulated concomitantly or differentially.
Monocytic cells, the major producers of IL-12, can be primed by interferon-gamma 
(IFN-gamma) to produce optimal amounts of IL-12 in response to LPS stimulation as
a consequence of bacterial infection. The priming effect is exerted primarily at 
the transcriptional level on the p40 promoter in conjunction with the effects of 
LPS, possibly by inducing specific transcription factors, which individually have
no direct effect but which cooperatively can activate the promoter. We examined
in detail one of these DNA-protein interactions observed around an Ets-2 element 
situated at -211/-207 of the p40 promoter, which is known to be a functionally
critical site. This region interacts with a nuclear complex termed F1 that
appears to be highly inducible by either IFN-gamma treatment for 16 h or
lipopolysaccharide stimulation for 8 h. F1 binding to the Ets-2 site requires a
considerable amount of spacing around the Ets-2 site, as revealed by gel mobility
shift and in vitro methylation assays. Supershift experiments and DNA affinity
purification indicated that both Ets-2 and a novel, antigenically related protein
with an approximate molecular mass of 109 kDa are part of the F1 complex,
together with additional components including IRF-1 and c-Rel. This novel protein
is designated GLp109 for its inducibility by IFN-gamma or lipopolysaccharide. Its
possible role in the activation of the IL-12 p40 promoter is discussed.

PMID: 9099678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Am J Kidney Dis. 1997 Apr;29(4):496-502.

The importance of dietary calcium and phosphorous in the secondary
hyperparathyroidism of patients with early renal failure.

Martinez I(1), Saracho R, Montenegro J, Llach F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio Nefrologia, Hospital de Galdakao, Vizcaya, Spain.

Secondary hyperparathyroidism (HPT) was evaluated in 157 patients with chronic
renal failure (CRF). It was noted that HPT developed early in CRF at a time when 
plasma calcium and phosphorous were within normal limits. As creatinine clearance
decreased below 80 mL/m, there was a significant decrease in plasma calcitriol
and a slow and progressive significant increment in plasma parathyroid hormone
(PTH). The effect of dietary intake of calcium and phosphorous was evaluated in
these patients with early renal failure (ERF). They were divided into two groups.
Group A was placed on a protein- and phosphorous-restricted diet (10 days)
followed by a daily phosphorous-load diet (10 days). Group B had similar
sequential diets plus a calcium supplement throughout the study. Dietary protein 
and phosphorous restriction resulted in an amelioration of the HPT only in the
group of patients receiving calcium supplementation. The phosphate-load diet
resulted in worsening of HPT in both groups. In summary, a deficit of calcitriol 
occurs early in CRF, which in turn leads to a significant increase in PTH.
Phosphorous restriction, together with calcium supplementation, ameliorated the
HPT of patients with ERF.

PMID: 9100037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Oncogene. 1997 Mar 27;14(12):1445-51.

ERF: genomic organization, chromosomal localization and promoter analysis of the 
human and mouse genes.

Liu D(1), Pavlopoulos E, Modi W, Moschonas N, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)SAIC, National Cancer Institute-FCRDC, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

ERF (Ets2 Repressor Factor) is a ubiquitously expressed ets-domain protein that
exhibits strong transcriptional repressor activity, has been shown to suppress
ets-induced transformation and has been suggested to be regulated by MAPK
phosphorylation. We report here the sequence of the mouse gene, the genomic
organization of the human and the mouse genes, their chromosomal position and the
analysis of the promoter region. Genomic clones encompassing either the human ERF
or the mouse Erf gene were isolated and utilized to define their molecular
organization. The gene in both species consists of 4 exons over a 10 kb region.
Utilizing FISH, somatic cell hybrids and linkage analysis, we identified the
chromosomal position of ERF on human chromosome 19q13.1 and on its syntenic
region in the mouse, on chromosome 7. Sequence analysis of the mouse gene
indicated a 90% identity to the human gene within the coding and promoter
regions. The predicted Erf protein is 98% identical to the human protein and all 
of the identifiable motifs are conserved between the two proteins. However, the
mouse protein is three amino acids longer (551 versus 548 aa). The area
surrounding the region that is homologous to the 5' end of the human cDNA can
serve as a promoter in transfection into eukaryotic cells. This region is highly 
conserved between the mouse and the human genes. A number of conserved
transcription factor binding sites can be identified in the region including an
ets binding site (EBS). Interestingly, removal of a small segment that includes
the EBS, seriously hampers promoter function, suggesting the ERF transcription
may be regulated by ets-domain proteins.

PMID: 9136988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1274-80.

A transcriptional enhancer required for the differential expression of the human 
estrogen receptor in breast cancers.

Tang Z(1), Treilleux I, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neoplastic Disease Mechanisms, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Breast cancers lacking estrogen receptor (ER) expression have an adverse
prognosis and fail to respond to endocrine therapy. We have identified a
transcriptional enhancer in the human ER gene which is differentially active in
ER-positive (ER+) and ER-negative (ER-) human breast cancer cell lines. Enhancer 
function was mapped to a 35-bp element located from -3778 to -3744 upstream of
the major human ER mRNA start site, which we have termed ER-EH0 (for estrogen
receptor enhancer). Gel retardation assays with ER+ and ER- cell lines identified
multiple DNA-protein complexes which specifically form on this enhancer. One of
these complexes could be supershifted by anti-Jun or anti-Fos antibodies,
identifying it as an AP-1-containing complex. Methylation interference assays
suggest binding of factors to both the AP-1 site and adjacent base pairs.
Enhancer activity requires both the AP-1 site and these adjacent sequences.
Mutations introduced into ER-EH0 and the recently described proximal promoter
element ERF-1 in the context of the full-length promoter confirm ER-EH0 as the
dominant cis-acting element involved in differential ER expression.

PMCID: PMC231852
PMID: 9032254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1065-74.

Interaction of Ets-1 and the POU-homeodomain protein GHF-1/Pit-1 reconstitutes
pituitary-specific gene expression.

Bradford AP(1), Wasylyk C, Wasylyk B, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 
80262, USA.

The pituitary-specific, POU-homeodomain factor GHF-1/Pit-1 is necessary, but not 
sufficient, for cell-specific expression of prolactin (PRL), growth hormone (GH),
and thyrotropin. Combinatorial interactions of GHF-1 with other factors are
likely to be required; however, such factors and their mechanisms of action
remain to be elucidated. Here we identify Ets-1 as a factor that functionally and
physically interacts with GHF-1 to fully reconstitute proximal PRL promoter
activity. In contrast, Ets-2 has no effect, and the alternatively spliced
GHF-2/Pit-1beta variant fails to synergize with Ets-1. The Ets-1-GHF-1 synergy
requires a composite Ets-1-GHF-1 cis element and is dependent on an
Ets-1-specific protein domain. Furthermore, the ancestrally related and
GHF-1-dependent GH promoter, which lacks this composite element, does not exhibit
this response. Finally, Ets-1, but not Ets-2, binds directly to GHF-1 and GHF-2. 
These data show that a functional interaction of GHF-1 and Ets-1, acting via a
composite DNA element, is required to establish lactotroph-specific PRL gene
expression, thus providing a molecular mechanism by which GHF-1 can discriminate 
between the GH and PRL genes. These results underscore the importance of
transcription factors that are distinct from, but interact with, homeobox
proteins to establish lineage-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC231831
PMID: 9032233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Prostate. 1997 Feb 15;30(3):145-53.

Identification of differentially expressed prostate genes: increased expression
of transcription factor ETS-2 in prostate cancer.

Liu AY(1), Corey E, Vessella RL, Lange PH, True LD, Huang GM, Nelson PS, Hood L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the genetic events in the malignant
transformation of prostatic cells. This is due in large measure to the cellular
heterogeneity of the prostate.
METHODS: An amplification method was devised to synthesize cDNA from small
samples of cancer and benign tissues of the same resected glands. Differential
gene expression of candidate informative markers between cancer and benign was
screened by the polymerase chain reaction with gene-specific oligonucleotide
primers.
RESULTS: The expression of a transcription factor, ETS-2, was shown to be
elevated in some cancer specimens. Elevated expression was also noted for
neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and another transcription factor, SEF2.
CONCLUSIONS: Our method can be used to identify quickly genes that are
differentially expressed between benign and cancerous prostate cells.
Transcription factors, such as ETS-2, may play a significant role in cancer
progression.

PMID: 9122038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Gene Expr. 1997;6(6):333-47.

Identification of a second promoter in the human c-ets-2 proto-oncogene.

Bègue A(1), Crepieux P, Vu-Dac N, Hautefeuille A, Spruyt N, Laudet V, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1160, Oncologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

We localized and characterized a new regulatory element with promoter activity in
the human c-ets-2 intron 1. This promoter governs the expression of 5' divergent 
c-ets-2 transcripts through multiple start sites dispersed within 300 bp. Among
the multiple start sites detected, three are major transcriptional initiation
points. We detected transcripts initiated from this new promoter in various cell 
lines such as COLO 320, NBE, or HepG2 cells. This promoter exhibits
transcriptional activity when linked to the CAT gene, and deletion constructs
reveal that it contains activating and repressing elements. The sequence of the
promoter reveals putative binding sites for ETS, MYB, GATA, and Oct factors. In
addition, we show that this promoter is functionally conserved in the chicken.

PMID: 9495315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Autoimmunity. 1997;25(4):193-201.

Profiles of pulp infiltrating lymphocytes at various times throughout feather
regeneration in Smyth line chickens with vitiligo.

Shresta S(1), Smyth JR Jr, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts
01063, USA.

Smyth line (SL) chickens develop a spontaneous, autoimmune, posthatch loss of
pigment cells (vitiligo) in regenerating feather tissue. Smyth line vitiligo
(SLV) is associated with lymphocyte infiltrations prior to and throughout the
development of the disorder. It was the purpose of this study to determine the
type, relative amounts, and proportions of pulp-infiltrating lymphocytes at
various times throughout the growth of regenerating feathers. Feathers were
plucked from 8-week-old chickens with and without SLV. Feather pulp cell
suspensions were prepared when the regenerating feathers were 2, 3, 4, and 6
weeks of age. Cells were fluorescently labeled using a panel of mouse monoclonal 
antibodies specific for chicken lymphocytes. Both T and B cells infiltrated the
feather pulp of chickens with SLV. T cell levels remained elevated throughout the
6 weeks of feather growth, while B cell levels steadily declined to control
levels over the same time. The pulp-infiltrating cells were primarily T cells
with an alphabeta T cell receptor expressing the Vbeta1 gene (TCR2+). The ratio
between CD4+ and CD8+ cells was 1.42 and 0.75 in 2- and 6-week-old regenerating
feathers from chickens with autoimmune SLV, respectively. In non-vitiliginous
chickens this ratio was always near 1. These data suggest that TCR2+ T cells play
an important role in SLV. CD4+ cells may play a recruiting/activating role,
whereas CD8+ cells may have cytotoxic activity specifically directed against
melanocytes. Additionally, this is the first report demonstrating the
infiltration of B cells into the feather pulp of vitiliginous chickens. These B
cells may directly/indirectly contribute to melanocyte destruction in SLV.

PMID: 9344327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Adv Immunol. 1997;64:65-104.

The role of Ets transcription factors in the development and function of the
mammalian immune system.

Bassuk AG(1), Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

PMID: 9100980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Genetics. 1997 Jan;145(1):17-27.

A Salmonella phage-P22 mutant defective in abortive transduction.

Benson NR(1), Roth J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.
nickphage@aol.com

In the course of a lytic infection the Salmonella phage P22 occasionally
encapsulates bacterial DNA instead of phage DNA. Thus, phage lysates include two 
classes of viral particles. Phage particles carrying bacterial DNA are referred
to as transducing particles and deliver this DNA to a host as efficiently as
particles carrying phase DNA. Once injected, the transduced DNA can either
recombine with the recipient chromosome to form a "complete" transductant, or it 
can establish itself as an expressible, nonreplicating genetic element and form
an "abortive" transductant. In this work, we describe a P22-phage mutant with
reduced ability to form abortive transductants. The mutation responsible for this
phenotype, called tdx-1, was found as one of two mutations contributing to the
high-transducing pheno-type of the P22-mutant HT12/4. In addition, the tdx-1
mutation is lethal when combined with an erf am mutation. The tdx-1 mutation has 
been mapped to a region of the P22 genome that encodes several injected proteins 
and may involve more than one mutant locus. The phenotypes of the tdx-l mutation 
suggest that the Tdx protein(s) normally assist in the circularization of the P22
genome and also contribute to the formation of DNA circles thought to be required
for abortive transduction.

PMCID: PMC1207775
PMID: 9017386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 5;13(11):2331-7.

TATA-less promoters of some Ets-family genes are efficiently repressed by
wild-type p53.

Iotsova V(1), Crépieux P, Montpellier C, Laudet V, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

p53 has been reported to repress a number of TATA-containing promoters in
transient transfection assays. TATA-less promoters are generally believed to be
refractive to p53 repression. We report here that the TATA-less promoters of
Ets-family genes (Ets-1 and Ets-2) are efficiently repressed by wild-type but not
mutant p53 in transient co-transfection assays. Moreover, p53 was immunologically
detected in protein complexes formed on oligonucleotides from both the
TATA-containing and TATA-less promoters. Our data suggest that p53 is involved in
the regulation of the expression of both promoter types, most probably by
protein-protein interaction. A model for p53 function in promoter repression is
proposed.

PMID: 8957074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 5;13(11):2297-306.

Erg, an Ets-family member, differentially regulates human collagenase1 (MMP1) and
stromelysin1 (MMP3) gene expression by physically interacting with the Fos/Jun
complex.

Butticè G(1), Duterque-Coquillaud M, Basuyaux JP, Carrère S, Kurkinen M, Stéhelin
D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
France.

Collagenase1 (MMP1) and stromelysin1 (MMP3) are extracellular proteolytic enzymes
that degrade connective tissue macromolecules and basement membranes. Both genes 
are regulated by the Ets and Fos/Jun families of transcription
factors/oncoproteins. Here, we show that two members of the Ets-family, Ets2 and 
Erg and their combinations differentially regulate collagenase1 and stromelysin1 
promoter activity. In transiently transfected cells, Ets2 activates both
promoters whereas Erg induces collagenase1 but not stromelysin1 promoter
activity. Moreover, Erg completely inhibits stromelysin1 promoter activation by
Ets2. In gel shift assays however, the Erg protein bound little or not to the
collagenase1 promoter, whereas it bound to the stromelysin1 promoter. By
site-specific mutagenesis, we identified one major site at -88 that abolished
collagenase1 promoter activation by Erg. Surprisingly, mutation of the
collagenase1 AP1 site at -73 also abolished the activation by Erg suggesting that
Erg cooperates with Fos/Jun in collagenase1 promoter regulation. Indeed, gel
shift and in vitro protein interaction studies showed that Erg binds to the
Fos/Jun complex. Thus, Erg represents the first example of a transcription factor
that can distinguish between the collagenase1 and stromelysin1 promoters in that 
when Erg is recruited by Fos/Jun at the promoter, it transcriptionally activates 
collagenase1 gene but not stromelysin1 expression.

PMID: 8957070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8590-605.

Synergistic interactions between overlapping binding sites for the serum response
factor and ELK-1 proteins mediate both basal enhancement and phorbol ester
responsiveness of primate cytomegalovirus major immediate-early promoters in
monocyte and T-lymphocyte cell types.

Chan YJ(1), Chiou CJ, Huang Q, Hayward GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is nonpermissive or persistent in many lymphoid
and myeloid cell types but can be activated in differentiated macrophages. We
have shown elsewhere that both the major immediate-early gene (MIE) and lytic
cycle infectious progeny virus expression can be induced in otherwise
nonpermissive monocyte-like U-937 cell cultures infected with either human CMV
(HCMV) or simian CMV (SCMV) by treatment with the phorbol ester
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Two multicopy basal enhancer motifs
within the SCMV MIE enhancer, namely, 11 copies of the 16-bp cyclic AMP response 
element (CRE) and 3 copies of novel 17-bp serum response factor (SRF) binding
sites referred to as the SNE (SRF/NFkappaB-like element), as well as four
classical NFkappaB sites within the HCMV version, contribute to TPA
responsiveness in transient assays in monocyte and T-cell types. The SCMV SNE
sites contain potential overlapping core recognition binding motifs for SRF,
Rel/NFkappaB, ETS, and YY1 class transcription factors but fail to respond to
either serum or tumor necrosis factor alpha. Therefore, to evaluate the mechanism
of TPA responsiveness of the SNE motifs and of a related 16-bp SEE (SRF/ETS
element) motif found in the HCMV and chimpanzee CMV MIE enhancers, we have
examined the functional responses and protein binding properties of multimerized 
wild-type and mutant elements added upstream to the SCMV MIE or simian virus 40
minimal promoter regions in the U-937, K-562, HL-60, THP-1, and Jurkat cell
lines. Unlike classical NFkappaB sites, neither the SNE nor the SEE motif
responded to phosphatase inhibition by okadaic acid. However, the TPA
responsiveness of both CMV elements proved to involve synergistic interactions
between the core SRF binding site (CCATATATGG) and the adjacent inverted ETS
binding motifs (TTCC), which correlated directly with formation of a bound
tripartite complex containing both the cellular SRF and ELK-1 proteins. This
protein complex was more abundant in U-937, K-562, and HeLa cell extracts than in
Raji, HF, BALB/c 3T3, or HL-60 cells, but the binding activity was altered only
twofold after TPA treatment. A 40-fold stimulation of chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase activity mediated by four tandem repeats of the SNE could be
induced within 2 h (and up to 250-fold within 6 h) after addition of TPA in
DNA-transfected U-937 cells, indicating that the stimulation appeared likely to
be a true protein kinase C-mediated signal transduction event rather than a
differentiation response. Slight differences in the sequence of the core SRF
binding site compared with that of the classical c-Fos promoter serum response
element, together with differences in the spacing between the SRF and ETS motifs,
appear to account for the inability of the SCMV SNEs to respond to serum
induction.

PMCID: PMC190952
PMID: 8970984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;16(12):6851-8.

Constitutive c-ets2 expression in M1D+ myeloblast leukemic cells induces their
differentiation to macrophages.

Aperlo C(1), Pognonec P, Stanley ER, Boulukos KE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biochimie, Faculté des Sciences, Nice, France.

The expression of c-ets2 is rapidly induced in a variety of myelomonocytic cell
lines as they differentiate into macrophages. We find that constitutive
expression of c-ets2 in the M1D+ myeloblast leukemic cell line (M1ets2) is
sufficient to push these cells to a more differentiated state. The expression of 
several differentiation-specific genes is upregulated in M1ets2 cells, including 
those encoding macrophage-specific lysozyme M and tumor necrosis factor alpha,
which are involved in bacteriolytic and inflammatory processes, respectively.
Transcription factors c-jun and junB, previously shown to induce partial
macrophage differentiation when overexpressed in myelomonocytic leukemia cell
lines, are also upregulated in M1ets2 cells. The upregulation of junB is the
result of a direct interaction of Ets2 with ets binding sites of the junB
promoter, since transient or constitutive Ets2 expression in M1D+ cells activates
junB transcription via ets binding sites. In addition, transfection of a dominant
negative mutant of Ets2, devoid of its transcriptional activation domain, greatly
reduces transcriptional activities of the junB promoter in M1ets2 cells. Finally,
unlike their parental M1D+ counterparts, M1ets2 cells secrete the macrophage
colony-stimulating factor, CSF-1, and are able to phagocytize. Taken together,
these results show that when the immature myeloid M1D+ cell line constitutively
expresses c-ets2, these cells acquire different functions of mature macrophages.

PMCID: PMC231688
PMID: 8943340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Gene. 1996 Nov 14;179(2):219-23.

Comparison of human and Xenopus GATA-2 promoters.

Fleenor DE(1), Langdon SD, deCastro CM, Kaufman RE.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Department of Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

GATA proteins comprise a family of transcription factors that are required for
appropriate development of hematopoietic lineages. In order to understand the
transcriptional regulation of GATA genes, we have cloned the human GATA-2 gene
and identified and characterized its promoter. Comparison with the Xenopus GATA-2
promoter demonstrates highly conserved CCAAT box elements, which are essential
for appropriate Xenopus expression. Unlike the Xenopus gene, the human GATA-2
gene lacks GATA binding motifs within the first 800 bp of 5' flanking sequence.
In addition, the human GATA-2 promoter has two highly conserved ets sites that
resemble the binding site for a recently described ets repressor factor, ERF.
These conserved DNA sequence motifs provide strong candidate regions for the
regulation of GATA-2.

PMID: 8972903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1996 Nov;81(2):136-44.

5-azacytidine treatment induces autoimmune vitiligo in parental control strains
of the Smyth line chicken model for autoimmune vitiligo.

Sreekumar GP(1), Erf GF, Smyth JR Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst 01003, USA.

The effect of 5-Azacytidine (5-AzaC) on melanization was examined in two sublines
of the Smyth line (SL) chicken model for autoimmune vitiligo, in two MHC-matched 
vitiligo-susceptible but normally pigmented controls (BL), and in nonsusceptible 
controls (LBL). 5-AzaC was administered ip every 3 days from day of hatch to 18
weeks at levels of 1 or 3 mg/kg body wt. Both treatments increased (P < 0.01) the
incidence of autoimmune vitiligo in BL controls. In contrast, treatment
significantly depressed (P < 0.01) the expected high incidence of vitiligo in one
SL subline, but not in the other. There were no apparent pigmentation changes in 
5-AzaC-treated LBL controls. 5-AzaC had dose-dependent depressing effects (P <
0.01) on body and lymphoid organ weights. Histological and mitogen assay data
suggest negative effects on lymphocyte number and function. The data show that
5-AzaC can initiate autoimmune disease in genetically susceptible but
phenotypically normal individuals.

PMID: 8906744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1996 Oct 31;795:357-60.

A novel ets-2-related nuclear factor is involved in transcriptional activation of
the human interleukin-12 p40 gene promoter in response to interferon-gamma and
LPS stimulation of monocytic cells.

Ma X(1), Gri G, Trinchieri G.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

PMID: 8958954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Blood. 1996 Oct 15;88(8):2917-26.

PU.1 but not ets-2 is essential for macrophage development from embryonic stem
cells.

Henkel GW(1), McKercher SR, Yamamoto H, Anderson KL, Oshima RG, Maki RA.

Author information: 
(1)Burnham Institute, La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, CA 92037, USA.

Transcription factors play an important role choreographing lineage commitment
and expansion of blood cells. Nuclear factors that are expressed primarily or
exclusively in hematopoietic cells are likely candidates for regulating blood
cell development. The transcription factor PU.1 is found only in hematopoietic
cells, whereas ets-2, a related family member, is ubiquitously expressed. To
compare the role of these two transcription factors in macrophage development,
embryonic stem (ES) cells with a homozygous disruption of either the PU.1 or the 
ets-2 gene were generated. The ability of both knockout ES cells to differentiate
to macrophages was tested. Normal development of macrophages, as determined by
histochemical and immunohistochemical analysis, from PU.1 knockout ES cells was
significantly blocked. Furthermore, the expression of known markers associated
with macrophages, such as c-fms, CD11b, CD18 and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor receptor, were not detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. In contrast to the PU.1 knockout ES
cells, macrophages, development from the ets-2 knockout ES cells was normal.
Although both PU.1 and ets-2 are found in macrophages, these data show a distinct
role for the lineage-restricted PU.1 transcription factor in macrophage
development.

PMID: 8874188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Surg Clin North Am. 1996 Oct;76(5):1123-35.

Surgical management and treatment of esophageal fistula.

Fernando HC(1), Benfield JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, USA.

Esophageal fistula may involve the respiratory or cardiovascular system. Fistulas
involving the respiratory system which originate from esophageal cancers are the 
most common. Diagnosis is best made with barium esophagogram. ERF of any cause
usually leads to repetitive contamination of the respiratory tract, resulting in 
sepsis and death of the patient if untreated. In the case of MERF, whether from
esophageal or lung cancer, only palliative treatment is usually possible. Better 
results, including cure, may be expected when a MERF is caused by lymphoma.
Curative operation with closure of the fistula is usually possible for BERF if
the fistula is identified and treated before irreversible damage has been done by
infection, sepsis, and malnutrition. Esophagocardiovascular fistulas occur
infrequently in comparison with ERF. These may involve the aorta, usually as a
result of a thoracic aneurysm. Rarely one may encounter esophageal fistula to the
pericardium or heart. Few survivors have been reported, but successful management
is possible if early diagnosis is made and prompt surgical management is
undertaken.

PMID: 8841367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mech Dev. 1996 Sep;59(1):29-40.

Function of ets genes is conserved between vertebrates and Drosophila.

Albagli O(1), Klaes A, Ferreira E, Leprince D, Klämbt C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U124, IRCL, Lille, France.

The Drosophila pointed gene encodes two ETS transcriptional activators, pointedP1
and pointedP2, sharing a common C-terminal ETS domain. In the embryonic central
nervous system pointedP2 is required for midline glial cell differentiation,
whereas, in the eye, pointedP2 is essential for photoreceptor cell
differentiation. Both vertebrate c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 gene ETS domains are highly 
homologous to the one of pointed. In addition, the N-terminal region of pointedP2
and vertebrate ets products share another homologous domain, the so-called
RII/pointed box which appears to mediate the ras-dependent
phosphorylation/stimulation. Here, we show that the vertebrate ets genes are
functionally homologous to the Drosophila pointed gene. pointedP2 efficiently
binds to an optimized c-Ets-1/c-Ets-2 probe in vitro, and stimulates two distinct
c-Ets-1/c-Ets-2-responsive sequences when transiently expressed in vertebrate
cells. Conversely, when vertebrate ets transgenes are expressed during fly
development, they are capable of rescuing the pointed mutant phenotype in both
midline glia and photoreceptor development. As ectopically expressed pointedP1
can also rescue pointedP2 deficiency in photoreceptor development, it appears
that the ability of ets products to phenocopy each other in vivo does not require
the conserved RII/pointed box, but rather, primarily relies on the presence of
the highly conserved ETS domain.

PMID: 8892230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Sep;10(9):1084-94.

Stimulation of the P-450 side chain cleavage enzyme (CYP11A1) promoter through
ras- and Ets-2-signaling pathways.

Pestell RG(1), Albanese C, Watanabe G, Lee RJ, Lastowiecki P, Zon L, Ostrowski M,
Jameson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Expression of the ovine P-450 side-chain cleavage enzyme gene (CYP11A1) is
stimulated by epidermal growth factor (EGF) through a pathway that involves c-Jun
in JEG-3 placental cells. Growth factor signaling involves ras-dependent and
ras-independent signaling pathways, which in turn regulate gene transcription
through related but distinct mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways (MAPKs)
including the extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) and the
stress-activated protein kinases (SAPKs). We investigated the intracellular
signaling pathways governing EGF induction of the CYP11A1 promoter. EGF
stimulation of the CYP11A1 promoter (4-fold) was reduced 60% by a dominant
negative mutant of ras (N17), and 30-40% by antisense ras. EGF induced both ERK
and SAPK activity in JEG-3 cells. EGF-induced CYP11A1 promoter activity was
reduced 60% by the MEK1 inhibitor PD098059 and 50% by a dominant negative mutant 
of the ERK-specific regulator MEK1. In contrast, dominant negative mutants of the
SAPK-specific activator, SEK1, induced a further increase in EGF-induced CYP11A1 
promoter activity. Constitutively active mutants of ras (V12 or L61) increased
CYP11A1 promoter activity 6- to 8-fold. Deletion of the EGF response element
(EGF-RE) between -92 and -77 bp reduced ras induction by 60%; however, a residual
3-fold induction remained through the proximal -77 bp. Mutation of the EGF-RE
AP-1-like sequence in the context of the native promoter reduced CYP11A1 promoter
activation by ras 60%. The EGF-RE sequence was sufficient for 6-fold activation
by ras in the context of an heterologous thymidine kinase promoter. Candidate
transcription factor targets (c-Jun, c-Ets-2) for the ras-signaling cascade were 
examined for their effects on CYP11A1 promoter activity. Overexpression of c-Jun 
induced the CYP11A1 promoter through the EGF-RE; however, c-Ets-2 activation of
the CYP11A1 promoter (12-fold) required the proximal ras-responsive promoter
sequences that are distinct from the EGF/MEK/c-Jun-responsive element. Induction 
of the CYP11A1 promoter by EGF involves a ras/MEK1/AP-1-dependent pathway that is
distinct from induction by ras/c-Ets-2.

PMID: 8885243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Aug 20;93(17):8863-7.

The [(G/C)3NN]n motif: a common DNA repeat that excludes nucleosomes.

Wang YH(1), Griffith JD.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill 27599-7295, USA.

Nucleosomes, the basic structural elements of chromosomes, consist of 146 bp of
DNA coiled around an octamer of histone proteins, and their presence can strongly
influence gene expression. Considerations of the anisotropic flexibility of
nucleotide triplets containing 3 cytosines or guanines suggested that a [5'(G/C)3
NN3']n motif might resist wrapping around a histone octamer. To test this, DNAs
were constructed containing a 5'-CCGNN-3' pentanucleotide repeat with the Ns
varied. Using in vitro nucleosome reconstitution and electron microscopy, a
plasmid with 48 contiguous CCGNN repeats strongly excluded nucleosomes in the
repeat region. Competitive reconstitution gel retardation experiments using DNA
fragments containing 12, 24, or 48 CCGNN repeats showed that the propensity to
exclude nucleosomes increased with the length of the repeat. Analysis showed that
a 268-bp DNA containing a (CCGNN)48 block is 4.9 +/- 0.6-fold less efficient in
nucleosome assembly than a similar length pUC19 fragment and approximately
78-fold less efficient than a similar length (CTG)n sequence, based on results
from previous studies. Computer searches against the GenBank database for matches
with a [(G/C)3NN]48 sequence revealed numerous examples that frequently were
present in the control regions of "TATA-less" genes, including the human ETS-2
and human dihydrofolate reductase genes. In both cases the (G/C)3NN repeat,
present in the promoter region, co-maps with loci previously shown to be nuclease
hypersensitive sites.

PMCID: PMC38559
PMID: 8799118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1996 Aug;99(2):191-7.

Comparison of late components in simultaneously recorded event-related electrical
potentials and event-related magnetic fields.

Siedenberg R(1), Goodin DS, Aminoff MJ, Rowley HA, Roberts TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0114,
USA.

We have attempted to define the late components of the event-related magnetic
field (ERF) and to relate them to the late components of the event-related
electrical potential (ERP). Simultaneous multichannel electroencephalogram (EEG) 
and magnetoencephalogram (MEG) were recorded in 13 subjects during an auditory
oddball paradigm in two series of experiments. EEG responses to frequent tones
consisted of the N1 and P2 components of the auditory vertex potential. Responses
to rare tones consisted of N1, apparent P2, N2 and P3 components. All EEG
components were best seen in the midline and were highly reproducible for all
subjects. MEG responses to frequent tones consisted of N1m and P2m components
that were highly reproducible only when recorded over the temporal region. By
contrast, the ERF to rare tones was less well defined and only the N1m component 
could be identified satisfactorily. There was little consistent activity in the
MEG at the time of occurrence of the N2 and P3 components of the ERP.

PMID: 8761055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Ann Rheum Dis. 1996 May;55(5):298-304.

Constitutive expression of c-fos and c-jun, overexpression of ets-2, and reduced 
expression of metastasis suppressor gene nm23-H1 in rheumatoid arthritis.

Dooley S(1), Herlitzka I, Hanselmann R, Ermis A, Henn W, Remberger K, Hopf T,
Welter C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universität des Saarlandes, Homburg, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: To identify genes that are involved in the development and
progression of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: We used a multiple gene analysis system and a set of available genes
participating in processes such as proliferation, differentiation, tumour
progression, and metastasis, to identify their RA related expression. Synovial
tissues from 22 patients with RA were evaluated in comparison with those from six
patients with osteoarthritis and two patients with non-inflamed joints as
controls, using northern blot and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
experiments.
RESULTS: Our data confirm the role of c-fos and c-jun as constitutive signal
transmitters in solid RA tissues, thus demonstrating the potential of the
approach. Activation of both genes persisted through multiple passages of the
cells in tissue cultures derived from the synovial lining of RA tissues. There
was an increased expression of ets-2 in 30% of RA samples and an up to 30-fold
decreased expression of the potential metastasis suppressor gene nm23-H1 in 90%
of RA tissues, compared with control tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: The data presented show for the first time a significant decrease of
nm23-H1 expression in RA, which is possibly involved in local invasiveness, and a
strong activation of the ets-2 nuclear oncogene in about one third of RA tissues,
which may also be part of a pathway leading to advanced disease stages. The
constitutive expression of c-fos and c-jun in RA tissue most probably results
from a continuing inflammatory stimulus. These findings with cell cultures
suggest an intrinsic activation mechanism of these early response genes in RA.

PMCID: PMC1010166
PMID: 8660103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 5;271(14):7992-8.

Oncogenic Neu/ErbB-2 increases ets, AP-1, and NF-kappaB-dependent gene
expression, and inhibiting ets activation blocks Neu-mediated cellular
transformation.

Galang CK(1), García-Ramírez J, Solski PA, Westwick JK, Der CJ, Neznanov NN,
Oshima RG, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, La Jolla, California, 92037-1063, USA.

Overexpression of Neu (ErbB-2/HER2) is found in approximately 20% of breast
tumors. Activation of Neu by a point mutation (NeuT) causes constitutive tyrosine
kinase activity of this transmembrane receptor and transforming activity in
fibroblasts. To identify downstream targets of Neu, we have analyzed the ability 
of Neu to activate gene expression. Expression of NeuT, but not normal Neu,
caused transcriptional activation of Ets, AP-1, or NF-kappaB-dependent reporter
genes. Dominant inhibitory Ras or Raf mutants blocked the Neu-mediated
transcriptional activation, confirming that Ras signaling pathways were required 
for this activation. Analysis with Ets2 mutants indicated that activation of Ets2
transcriptional activity mediated by NeuT or oncogenic Ras required
phosphorylation of the same Ets2 residue, threonine 72. Cotransfection of
dominant inhibitory Ets2 mutants specifically blocked NeuT-mediated activation of
Ets-dependent reporter genes. Furthermore, in focus formation assays using NIH
3T3 cells, the transforming activity of NeuT was inhibited 5-fold when NeuT was
cotransfected with a dominant negative Ets2 mutant. However, parallel colony
formation assays showed that the Ets2 dominant negative mutant did not inhibit
the growth of normal cells. Together, these data show that NeuT activates a
variety of transcription factor families via the Ras signaling pathway and that
Ets activation is required for NeuT-mediated cellular transformation. Thus,
downstream targets of Neu, including Ets transcription factors, may be useful
points for therapeutic intervention in Neu/ErbB-2-associated cancers.

PMID: 8626480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Apr;7(4):429-37.

EWS/FLI-1 antagonists induce growth inhibition of Ewing tumor cells in vitro.

Kovar H(1), Aryee DN, Jug G, Henöckl C, Schemper M, Delattre O, Thomas G, Gadner 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria.

Among primitive neuroectodermal tumors, Ewing tumors are characterized by a gene 
rearrangement recombining the 5'-EWS gene portion with one of two ETS-related
proto-oncogenes, FLI-1 or ERG, in roughly 90 and 10% of cases, respectively. We
attempted to antagonize EWS/FLI-1 function in Ewing tumor cell lines. As a
control, a cell line derived from another small round cell tumor of
neuroectodermal origin, neuroblastoma, was used. This cell line was found to
express almost identical patterns of ETS proteins except for EWS/FLI-1 and a
novel, ELF-related gene product. Stable expression of antisense EWS/FLI-1 cDNA
resulted in decreased endogenous EWS/FLI-1 RNA levels and growth reduction of ET 
cells but not of neuroblastoma cells. DNA-binding FLI-1 derivatives localizing to
the nucleus in which the 5'-EWS regulatory domain was replaced by bacterial
beta-galactosidase dominantly modulated transcriptional transactivation from a
degenerate ETS-binding motif. Transient transfection of these dominant-negative
recombinants resulted in a significant decrease in the relative number of mitoses
in four Ewing tumor cell lines tested but not in the neuroblastoma cell line. The
presented evidence for modulation of tumor cell proliferation by EWS/FLI-1
antagonists suggests a causal role for EWS/FLI-1-mediated gene activation in the 
malignant transformation of the enigmatic Ewing tumor-precursor cell.

PMID: 9052984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Oncogene. 1996 Mar 21;12(6):1199-1204.

ETS1 and ETS2 in p53 regulation: spatial separation of ETS binding sites (EBS)
modulate protein: DNA interaction.

Venanzoni MC(1), Robinson LR, Hodge DR, Kola I, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute-FCRDC, Frederick, 
Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

p53 is an extensively studied tumor suppressor gene implicated in the genesis of 
a large number of varied tumors. However, the pathways of regulation for the
wild-type p53 gene and its product are as yet unknown. In situ hybridization
analyses of ETS1 and ETS2 expression during mouse embryogenesis, have shown a
pattern similar to that of p53 gene expression. Significantly, we have identified
several ETS-binding sites (EBS) in the promoter regions of the human and mouse
p53 genes. In the human promoter two of these EBS are present in the form of a
palindrome, with the two EBS cores being separated by four nucleotides. This
report shows that the EBS palindrome of the human p53 promoter has a high
affinity for ETS1 and ETS2 and that such binding interaction intracellularly is
able to activate the transcription of a CAT reporter gene by 5-10-fold using COS 
cells. To investigate whether the spacing between the two EBS cores influences
the DNA binding activity, we synthesized oligonucleotides with increasing
distances (4,12,16, and 20 bases respectively) between the two EBS cores of the
palindrome. We observed an inverse correlation between an increasing distance in 
the two EBS cores of the palindrome and the ETS1 and ETS2 DNA binding activity
respectively. Interestingly, optimal DNA binding activity was observed when the
distance between the two EBS cores was four bases, identical to that which occurs
in the natural promoter. Furthermore we show that the p53 mRNA is expressed at
higher levels in NIH3T3 cells overexpressing ETS2 gene product, suggesting that
the ETS2 transcription factor is a likely candidate for regulating the expression
of p53 in vivo.

PMID: 8649821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Poult Sci. 1996 Mar;75(3):351-6.

Alterations in blood leukocyte populations in Smyth line chickens with autoimmune
vitiligo.

Erf GF(1), Smyth JR Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville 72701,
USA.

Smyth line (SL) chickens spontaneously develop a posthatch autoimmune loss of
pigment cells (vitiligo) in the feather. Concurrent with the development of Smyth
line vitiligo (SLV), mononuclear cell infiltration and altered T cell profiles
can be observed in the pulp of developing feathers. To determine whether the
development of SLV is preceded by or associated with alterations in blood
lymphocyte and leukocyte populations, blood leukocyte profiles were established
at various times prior to and throughout the spontaneous development of SLV. The 
proportions among various blood leukocyte populations (percentage of lymphocytes,
monocytes, heterophils, eosinophils, and basophils) were determined by
immunofluorescence and flow cytometric analyses. Lymphocyte markers included
fluorescence-conjugated monoclonal antibodies to identify T cells (CD3), T helper
cells (CD4), cytotoxic T cells (CD8), and B cells (IgM). The proportions among
blood lymphocyte populations examined did not differ between SL and MCH-matched
parental Brown line (BL) control chickens prior to and throughout the development
of SLV. Compared to BL controls, SL chickens had, however, increased proportions 
of inflammatory leukocytes in the blood, particularly at the time when most
hatchmates developed SLV. Examination of leukocyte alterations with respect to
first observation of SLV revealed that inflammatory leukocyte levels were
elevated early in SLV. Although altered leukocyte profiles in the blood were
observed during the development of SLV, blood from SL chickens did not reflect
alterations in lymphocyte populations known to occur at the site of melanocyte
destruction. The role of inflammatory blood leukocytes in the development of SLV 
needs to be further investigated.

PMID: 8778729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cancer Lett. 1996 Feb 27;100(1-2):215-21.

Expression of the c-jun, jun-B, ets-2 and liver regeneration factor-1 (LRF-1)
genes during promotion and progression of rat liver carcinogenesis in the
resistant hepatocyte model.

Liao DZ(1), Blanck A, Gustafsson JA, Hällström IP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge University
Hospital, Sweden.

During promotion in the RH-model, the mRNA expression of c-jun and LRF-1 was 2-
to 8-fold elevated in both initiated and uninitiated rats receiving 2-AAF. The
increase was more pronounced in male than in female rats, and GH treatment of
male rats down-regulated the expression towards the level in females. The level
in uninitiated 2-AAF-treated livers was as high as in isolated early nodules.
jun-B also showed 3- to 8-fold increased expression, but without sex differences.
An increased nuclear transcription of the LRF-1 and jun-B genes but not of c-jun 
was observed. During progression, LRF-1 and ets-2 showed a 2- to 3-fold higher
expression in persistent nodules and hepatocellular carcinomas than in the
corresponding surrounding liver tissues, whereas the expression of the jun genes 
was 3- to 4-fold increased both in lesions and in surrounding livers when
compared to age-matched control rats. In conclusion, while the changes during
promotion might not be connected with control of early focal growth, the
increased levels of LRF-1 and ets-2 in advanced lesions might indicate that these
genes could contribute to the growth advantage for persistent nodules during
progression.

PMID: 8620444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Nature. 1996 Feb 8;379(6565):534-7.

Down's syndrome-like skeletal abnormalities in Ets2 transgenic mice.

Sumarsono SH(1), Wilson TJ, Tymms MJ, Venter DJ, Corrick CM, Kola R, Lahoud MH,
Papas TS, Seth A, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Development Group, Monash University, Monash Medical
Centre, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Expression of Ets2, a proto-oncogene and transcription factor, occurs in a
variety of cell types. During murine development it is highly expressed in newly 
forming cartilage, including in the skull precursor cells and vertebral
primordia. Ets2 is located on human chromosome 21 (ref. 8) and is overexpressed
in Down's syndrome (trisomy 21). Here we generate transgenic mice to investigate 
the consequences of overexpression of Ets2. We find that mice with less than
2-fold Ets2 overexpression in particular organs develop neurocranial,
viscerocranial and cervical skeletal abnormalities. These abnormalities have
similarities with the skeletal anomalies found in trisomy-16 mice and humans with
Down's syndrome, in which the gene dosage of Ets2 is increased. Our results
indicate that Ets2 has a role in skeletal development and implicate the
overexpression of Ets2 in the genesis of some skeletal abnormalities that occur
in Down's syndrome.

PMID: 8596630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Feb;16(2):538-47.

Ras-mediated phosphorylation of a conserved threonine residue enhances the
transactivation activities of c-Ets1 and c-Ets2.

Yang BS(1), Hauser CA, Henkel G, Colman MS, Van Beveren C, Stacey KJ, Hume DA,
Maki RA, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

The Ras oncogene products regulate the expression of genes in transformed cells, 
and members of the Ets family of transcription factors have been implicated in
this process. To determine which Ets factors are the targets of Ras signaling
pathways, the abilities of several Ets factors to activate Ras-responsive
enhancer (RRE) reporters in the presence of oncogenic Ras were examined. In
transient transfection assay, reporters containing RREs composed of Ets-AP-1
binding sites could be activated 30-fold in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts and 80-fold in
the macrophage-like line RAW264 by the combination of Ets1 or Ets2 and Ras but
not by several other Ets factors that were tested in the assay. Ets2 and Ras also
superactivated an RRE composed of Ets-Ets binding sites, but the Ets-responsive
promoter of the c-fms gene was not superactivated. Mutation of a threonine
residue to alanine in the conserved amino-terminal regions of Ets1 and Ets2
(threonine 38 and threonine 72, respectively) abrogated the ability of each of
these proteins to superactivate reporter gene expression. Phosphoamino acid
analysis of radiolabeled Ets2 revealed that Ras induced normally absent
threonine-specific phosphorylation of the protein. The Ras-dependent increase in 
threonine phosphorylation was not observed in Ets2 proteins that had the
conserved threonine 72 residue mutated to alanine or serine. These data indicate 
that Ets1 and Ets2 are specific nuclear targets of Ras signaling events and that 
phosphorylation of a conserved threonine residue is a necessary molecular
component of Ras-mediated activation of these transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC231032
PMID: 8552081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 1996;11 Suppl 3:22-8.

A deficit of calcitriol synthesis may not be the initial factor in the
pathogenesis of secondary hyperparathyroidism.

Martinez I(1), Saracho R, Montenegro J, Llach F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio Nefrologia, Hospital de Galdakao, Vizcaya, Spain.

Secondary hyperparathyroidism (HPT) develops early in chronic renal failure (CRF)
at a time when plasma calcitriol levels are normal. At this time, PTH are higher 
than normal controls and serum phosphorous levels are lower. A decrement in total
serum Ca is noted, after an oral phosphate load, only in patients with ERF. These
data suggest that factors, other than a decrease in calcitriol synthesis, may be 
involved in the pathogenesis of HPT. A hypothesis is forwarded suggesting that an
alteration in the newly cloned calcium sensor receptor may be the earliest
abnormality in the HPT, preceding a decrease in plasma calcitriol levels.

PMID: 8840307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Indian J Med Res. 1995 Dec;102:281-6.

Defective lymphoproliferative responses & interleukin-2 production in chronic
renal failure patients.

Krishnamurthy G(1), Kher V, Naik S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow.

Cellular immune responses were evaluated in 12 early renal failure (ERF) patients
who were not on maintenance haemodialysis, 43 end stage renal disease (ESRD)
patients on haemodialysis (HD) and 25 healthy volunteers. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) of ERF and ESRD patients on HD had a significantly
diminished lymphoproliferative responses to phytohaemagglutinin and a monoclonal 
antibody to the CD3 (anti-CD3) receptor on T-cells as compared to normals. The
interleukin-2 (IL-2) production by the PBMC was also significantly reduced in
renal failure patients as compared to normals. These data suggest that both IL-2 
dependent and IL-2 independent T-cell functions are defective in renal failure
patients.

PMID: 8557322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biochem Cell Biol. 1995 Nov-Dec;73(11-12):1079-86.

Termination of translation in eukaryotes.

Kisselev LL(1), Frolova LYu.

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences.
Moscow, Russia.

Termination of translation is governed in ribosomes by polypeptide chain release 
factors (pRF and eRF in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, respectively). In
prokaryotes, three pRF have been indentified and sequenced, while in eukaryotes, 
only a single eRF has been identified to date. Recently, we have characterized a 
highly conserved protein family called eRF1. At least, human and Xenopus laevis
proteins from this family are active as eRFs in the in vitro assay with any of
the three stop codons. No structural similarity has been revealed between any of 
the three pRFs and eRF1 family. Furthermore, GTP-binding motifs have not been
revealed, although translation termination in eukaryotes is a GTP-dependent
process. We have demonstrated that in eukaryotes a second eRF exists in addition 
to eRF1, called eRF3. The eRF3 family has two features in common: presence of
GTP-binding motifs and high conservation of the C-terminal domain structure. The 
C-terminal domain of the X. laevis eRF3 has no RF activity although it stimulates
the eRF1 activity considerably at low concentration of the stop codons,
conferring GTP dependence to the termination reaction. Without eRF3, the eRF1
activity is entirely GTP independent. Some features of X. laevis eRF3 (C-terminal
domain) resemble those of pRF3. The newly identified eRF1 and eRF3 are
structurally conserved and distinct from the respective pRF1/2 and pRF3 proteins,
pointing to the possibility of different evolution of translation termination
machinery in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Bipartition of the translation
termination apparatus probably provides high rate and accuracy of translation
termination.

PMID: 8722024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Neurosci Res. 1995 Nov;23(4):419-22.

Event-related magnetic fields at latencies of over 400 ms in silent reading of
Japanese Katakana meaningless words.

Fujimaki N(1), Hirata Y, Kuriki S, Nakajima H.

Author information: 
(1)Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd., Atsugi, Japan.

Event-related magnetic fields (ERFs) were recorded when subjects were presented
with meaningless readable words or unreadable words. The ERF averages for
readable words and those for unreadable words showed a large difference at
latencies of over 400 ms. The equivalent current dipoles were obtained only for
readable words, and were located near the cingulate gyrus and the supplementary
motor area whose functions are considered to be related to attention and motor
planning.

PMID: 8602282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 6;270(40):23589-97.

Transforming p21ras mutants and c-Ets-2 activate the cyclin D1 promoter through
distinguishable regions.

Albanese C(1), Johnson J, Watanabe G, Eklund N, Vu D, Arnold A, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Several different oncogenes and growth factors promote G1 phase progression.
Cyclin D1, the regulatory subunit of several cyclin-dependent kinases, is
required for, and capable of shortening, the G1 phase of the cell cycle. The
present study demonstrates that transforming mutants of p21ras (Ras Val-12, Ras
Leu-61) induce the cyclin D1 promoter in human trophoblasts (JEG-3), mink lung
epithelial (Mv1.Lu), and in Chinese hamster ovary fibroblast cell lines.
Site-directed mutagenesis of AP-1-like sequences at -954 abolished
p21ras-dependent activation of cyclin D1 expression. The AP-1-like sequences were
also required for activation of the cyclin D1 promoter by c-Jun. In
electrophoretic mobility shift assays using nuclear extracts from cultured cells 
and primary tissues, several AP-1 proteins (c-Jun, JunB, JunD, and c-Fos) bound
the cyclin D1 -954 region. Cyclin D1 promoter activity was stimulated by
overexpression of mitogen-activated protein kinase (p41MAPK) or c-Ets-2 through
the proximal 22 base pairs. Expression of plasmids encoding either dominant
negative MAPK (p41MAPKi) or dominant negatives of ETS activation (Ets-LacZ),
antagonized MAPK-dependent induction of cyclin D1 promoter activity. Epidermal
growth factor induction of cyclin D1 transcription, through the proximal promoter
region, was antagonized by either p41MAPKi or Ets-LacZ, suggesting that ETS
functions downstream of epidermal growth factor and MAPK in the context of the
cyclin D1 promoter. The activation of cyclin D1 transcription by p21ras provides 
evidence for cross-talk between the p21ras and cell cycle regulatory pathways.

PMID: 7559524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. EBRI Issue Brief. 1995 Nov;(167):1-19.

ERISA and health plans.

Schmidt P(1), Mazo J, Ladenheim K.

Author information: 
(1)Arnold & Porter, USA.

This Issue Brief is designed to provide a basic understanding of the relationship
of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) to health plans.
It is based, in part, on an Employee Benefit Research Institute-Education and
Research Fund (EBRI-ERF) educational briefing held in March 1995. This report
includes a section by Peter Schmidt of Arnold & Porter, a section about
multiemployer plans written by Judy Mazo of The Segal Company; and a section
about ERISA and state health reform written by Kala Ladenheim of the
Intergovernmental Health Policy Project. Starting in the late 1980s, three trends
converged to make ERISA a critical factor in state health reforms: increasingly
comprehensive state health policy experimentation; changes in the makeup of the
insurance market (including the rise in self-insurance and the growth of managed 
care); and increasingly expansive interpretations of ERISA by federal courts. The
changing interpretations of ERISA's relationship to three categories of state
health initiatives--insurance mandates, medical high risk pools, and
uncompensated care pools--illustrate how these forces are playing out today.
ERISA does have a very broad preemptive effect. Federal statutes do not need to
say anything about preemption in order to preempt state law. For example, if
there is a direct conflict, it would be quite clear under the Supremacy Clause
[of the U.S. Constitution] that ERISA, or any federal statue, would preempt a
directly conflicting state statute. States can indirectly regulate health care
plans that provide benefits through insurance contracts by establishing the terms
of the contract. And they also raise money by imposing premium taxes. But they
cannot do the same with respect to self-funded plans. That is one of the factors 
that has caused a great rise in the number of self-funded plans. State regulation
[of employee benefits] can create three kinds of problems: cost of taxes, fees,
or other charges; cost of dealing with substantive, possibly inconsistent,
benefit standards; and cost of identifying, understanding, and complying with the
regulations themselves.

PMID: 10152752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. EMBO J. 1995 Oct 2;14(19):4781-93.

ERF: an ETS domain protein with strong transcriptional repressor activity, can
suppress ets-associated tumorigenesis and is regulated by phosphorylation during 
cell cycle and mitogenic stimulation.

Sgouras DN(1), Athanasiou MA, Beal GJ Jr, Fisher RJ, Blair DG, Mavrothalassitis
GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201, USA.

ERF (ETS2 Repressor Factor) is a novel member of the ets family of genes, which
was isolated by virtue of its interaction with the ets binding site (EBS) within 
the ETS2 promoter. The 2.7 kb ubiquitously expressed ERF mRNA encodes a 548 amino
acid phosphoprotein that exhibits strong transcriptional repressor activity on
promoters that contain an EBS. The localization of the DNA-binding domain of the 
protein at the N-terminus and th repression domain at the C-terminus is
reminiscent of the organization of ELK1-like members of the ets family; however, 
there is no significant homology between ERF and ELK1 or any other ets member
outside the DNA-binding domain. The repressor activity of ERF can antagonize the 
activity of other ets genes that are known transcriptional activators.
Furthermore, ERF can suppress the ets-dependent transforming activity of the
gag-myb-ets fusion oncogene of ME26 virus. Although ERF protein levels remain
constant throughout the cell cycle, the phosphorylation level of the protein is
altered as a function of the cell cycle and after mitogenic stimulation. The ERF 
protein is also hyperphosphorylated in cells transformed by the activated Ha-ras 
and v-src genes and the transcription repressor activity of ERF is decreased
after co-transfection with activated Ha-ras or the kinase domain of the c-Raf-1
gene, indicating that ERF activity is probably regulated by the ras/MAPK pathway.
Consistent with the in vivo phosphorylation and inactivation by ras, ERF is
efficiently phosphorylated in vitro by Erk2 and cdc2/cyclin B kinases, at sites
similar to those detected in vivo. Furthermore, a single mutation at position 526
results in the loss of a specific phosphopeptide both in in vivo and in vitro (by
Erk2) labeling. Substitution of Thr526 for glutamic acid also decreases the
repression ability of ERF. Our data suggest a model in which modulation of ERF
activity is involved in the transcriptional regulation of genes activated during 
entry into G1 phase. Obstruction of the ERF repressor function by the
transactivating members of the ets family of genes (i.e.gag-myb-ets) may be
essential for the control of genes involved in cell proliferation and may also
underlie their tumorigenic effects.

PMCID: PMC394576
PMID: 7588608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1995 Oct;14(2):97-105.

Genetic instability of chromosome 3 in HPV-immortalized and tumorigenic human
keratinocytes.

Montgomery KD(1), Tedford KL, McDougall JK.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Group, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98104, USA.

The HPV-1811 cell line is derived from primary human foreskin keratinocytes that 
have been transfected with human papilloma virus type 18. At late passage, these 
cells produce invasive squamous cell carcinomas when injected into nude mice. A
striking, but unstable, aberration of chromosome 3 occurs very early after
establishment of the culture; a consistent rearrangement is observed concomitant 
with tumorigenicity. Using molecular cytogenetic techniques, we characterized the
complex development of this aberration. A whole chromosome probe to this
chromosome was made by linker-adapter PCR amplification of a single flow-sorted
chromosome. Hybridization of this probe to normal metaphase chromosomes revealed 
the der (3) to be composed of chromosome 3, distal 13q, and 21q22. Hybridization 
of a 3q subtelomeric probe and a glycoprotein V probe which maps to 3qter
indicated that this locus is duplicated in the final form of the chromosome, but 
that much instability occurs prior to its establishment. The ETS2 oncogene, which
maps to 21q22, is translocated to the der(3) when the cell line becomes
tumorigenic, but not prior to this time. Early-passage cells which have been
induced to become tumorigenic by exposure to the carcinogen nitrosomethylurea
also have the localization of the ETS2 at 3qter.

PMID: 8527399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. EMBO J. 1995 Aug 15;14(16):4065-72.

Termination of translation in eukaryotes is governed by two interacting
polypeptide chain release factors, eRF1 and eRF3.

Zhouravleva G(1), Frolova L, Le Goff X, Le Guellec R, Inge-Vechtomov S, Kisselev 
L, Philippe M.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie et Génétique du Développement, CNRS URA 256,
Université de Rennes, France.

Termination of translation in higher organisms is a GTP-dependent process.
However, in the structure of the single polypeptide chain release factor known so
far (eRF1) there are no GTP binding motifs. Moreover, in prokaryotes, a GTP
binding protein, RF3, stimulates translation termination. From these observations
we proposed that a second eRF should exist, conferring GTP dependence for
translation termination. Here, we have shown that the newly sequenced GTP binding
Sup35-like protein from Xenopus laevis, termed eRF3, exhibits in vitro three
important functional properties: (i) although being inactive as an eRF on its
own, it greatly stimulates eRF1 activity in the presence of GTP and low
concentrations of stop codons, resembling the properties of prokaryotic RF3; (ii)
it binds and probably hydrolyses GTP; and (iii) it binds to eRF1. The structure
of the C-domain of the X.laevis eRF3 protein is highly conserved with other
Sup35-like proteins, as was also shown earlier for the eRF1 protein family. From 
these and our previous data, we propose that yeast Sup45 and Sup35 proteins
belonging to eRF1 and eRF3 protein families respectively are also yeast
termination factors. The absence of structural resemblance of eRF1 and eRF3 to
prokaryotic RF1/2 and RF3 respectively, may point to the different evolutionary
origin of the translation termination machinery in eukaryotes and prokaryotes. It
is proposed that a quaternary complex composed of eRF1, eRF3, GTP and a stop
codon of the mRNA is involved in termination of polypeptide synthesis in
ribosomes.

PMCID: PMC394485
PMID: 7664746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Clin Immunol Immunopathol. 1995 Aug;76(2):120-6.

T cells in regenerating feathers of Smyth line chickens with vitiligo.

Erf GF(1), Trejo-Skalli AV, Smyth JR Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts
01063, USA.

Smyth line (SL) chickens exhibit a spontaneous, autoimmune, depigmentation (SL
vitiligo, SLV) in regenerating feather tissue due to the death of pigment cells
(melanocytes). It was the purpose of this study to characterize mononuclear
leukocytes which infiltrate the feather as SLV develops. Frozen sections of
regenerating features from SL and control chickens were labeled with a panel of
mAbs specific for chicken mononuclear leukocytes. SL chickens were found to have 
significantly greater numbers of T cells in the feather pulp prior to, and
throughout, the development of SLV. Initially, both SL and control chickens had a
CD4/CD8 ratio near 1.0 in their feather pulp. Following the onset of SLV, the
CD4/CD8 ratio in SL chickens dropped below 0.4. Throughout the development of
SLV, SL chickens had greater proportions of T cells with alpha/beta T cell
receptors than controls. Histological evidence strongly supports an important
role for T cells in the pathology of SLV.

PMID: 7614730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 1995 Aug;15(4 Suppl 2):60S-67S.

Health-related quality of life in patients with major depression who are treated 
with moclobemide.

Walker V(1), Streiner DL, Novosel S, Rocchi A, Levine MA, Dean DM.

Author information: 
(1)Innovus Inc., Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

A total of 651 depressed patients completed self-administered health-related
quality-of-life (HRQOL) questionnaires during treatment with moclobemide in order
to evaluate whether general and psychopathology-specific HRQOL questionnaires
could detect changes in depressed patients receiving treatment. Patients were
treated with moclobemide on an outpatient basis over an 8-week period;
questionnaires were completed at weeks 0, 2, 4, and 8. At each assessment,
patients completed one of two HRQOL questionnaires: namely, the General Health
Questionnaire (GHQ), a psychopathology-specific HRQOL questionnaire, or the
Short-Form 36 (SF-36), a general HRQOL instrument. Physicians were randomized to 
one of the two HRQOL questionnaires for all of their patients. Because the French
version of the SF-36 was not available in the public domain, the patients of all 
Francophone physicians completed the GHQ, whereas the patients enrolled by
Anglophone physicians completed either the SF-36 or the GHQ. The GHQ provides an 
overall score that measures the emotional dimensions of HRQOL, whereas the SF-36 
provides scores in the following eight domains: physical functioning (PF),
physical role functioning (PRF), emotional role functioning (ERF), social
functioning (SF), bodily pain (BP), mental health (MH), vitality (VT), and
general health perceptions (GHP). The GHQ and seven domains of the SF-36 detected
a statistically significant linear trend (improvement) over time (p < 0.05). The 
change in the BP domain of the SF-36 was not statistically significant (p =
0.29).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7593733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Poult Sci. 1995 Jun;74(6):951-6.

Immune response to sheep red blood cells in two Smyth line populations homozygous
for different major histocompatibility complex haplotypes.

Sreekumar GP(1), Smyth JR Jr, Erf GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst 01003, USA.

The Smyth line (SL) chicken is characterized by a high incidence of spontaneous, 
posthatch, selective destruction of melanocytes, caused by an autoimmune
phenomenon. It has been shown that the MHC is associated with the development and
severity of the disease. To clarify further the role of MHC haplotypes and other 
factors leading to an autoimmune response, mean antibody titers to SRBC were
determined for 37-wk-old females from 2 SL sublines (SL101 and SL102), each
homozygous for a different MHC haplotype, their MHC-matched parental control
sublines (BL101 and BL102), and a normally pigmented control, LBL. Although total
incidence of amelanosis is approximately the same for both SL sublines,
amelanosis occurs earlier and is more severe in SL101 birds. Within sublines,
chickens were further classified as to the extent of the feather amelanosis.
Neither SL MHC subline had a mean SRBC titer that differed significantly from
unrelated LBL controls. Although the secondary response of the two sublines
differed from each other (P < .05), neither differed from its MHC-matched
parental control; therefore, the differences in immune response appear to be
largely MHC-related and not closely related to melanocyte destruction. When SRBC 
titers were related to amelanotic severity, no differences were found within the 
SL101 subline, although, SL102 birds that became amelanotic at a later age had a 
lower primary response to SRBC (P < .05) than the more severely affected group.
Birds simultaneously producing both pigmented and amelanotic feather tissue had
higher (P < .05) primary and secondary anti-SRBC titers than did the complete
amelanotics.

PMID: 7644424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Genetics. 1995 Jun;140(2):427-34.

Role of Erf recombinase in P22-mediated plasmid transduction.

Garzón A(1), Cano DA, Casadesús J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Universidad de Servilla, Spain.

In the absence of host RecA function, plasmid transduction by bacteriophage P22
can be mediated by Erf recombinase. Erf is not carried on the infecting particle 
but synthesized upon infection. In the recipient cell, Erf can promote both
generalized plasmid transduction (which requires the circularization of plasmids 
transduced as linear multimers) and specialized plasmid transduction (which
requires the release of plasmid DNA from linear plasmid-phage cointegrates). Both
processes of Erf-mediated plasmid transduction require host RecBCD function. In
contrast, RecBCD is not required for Erf-mediated circularization of P22 DNA.

PMCID: PMC1206623
PMID: 7498725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cell Immunol. 1995 May;162(2):185-93.

Identification and kinetics of two recently bone marrow-derived B cell
populations in peripheral lymphoid tissues.

Kroese FG(1), de Boer NK, de Boer T, Nieuwenhuis P, Kantor AB, Deenen GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Cell Biology, University of Groningen, The
Netherlands.

In rats, the glycoprotein Thy-1 is expressed on recently bone marrow
(BM)-generated B cells but not on mature recirculating follicular (RF) B cells.
Here we demonstrate that Thy-1+ B cells consist of two phenotypically distinct,
but developmentally related, populations: a population of newly formed (NF) B
cells (IgMbr-IgDdu) that give rise to the second, less immature, Thy-1+
population of so-called early recirculating follicular (ERF) B cells
(Thy-1+IgMduIgDbr) cells. These cells ultimately develop to RF-B cells
(Thy-1-IgMbrIgDdu). Kinetic studies reveal that in absolute numbers per day most 
cells die at the transition of NF-B cells in the BM and those in the periphery:
less cells die at later stages of B cell differentiation. Given the notion that
this cell loss is not random, we speculate that NF-B cells and ERF-B cells may
represent crucial steps during peripheral B cell development and their selection.
Identification of their unique phenotype makes it possible to evaluate their
roles in development of the antibody repertoire.

PMID: 7743545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Apr;15(4):2191-6.

Transcriptional regulation of estrogen receptor in breast carcinomas.

deConinck EC(1), McPherson LA, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University, California.

An important transcriptional regulatory element of the estrogen receptor (ER)
gene that binds a protein expressed in ER-positive breast carcinomas has been
identified. Using a transient expression assay, we identified a 75-bp region of
the 5' untranslated leader of the ER gene which augments expression from the ER
promoter. This region contains two binding sites for a protein, estrogen receptor
factor 1 (ERF-1), which is expressed in ER-positive breast carcinomas. A
concatenated ERF-1 binding site probe identified a 30,000-Da protein. Low-level
ERF-1 expression was detected in normal human mammary epithelial cells. Abundant 
ERF-1 expression was also found in endometrial carcinoma cell lines that express 
the ER-positive phenotype. These results indicate that ERF-1 expression
represents a common mechanism of ER regulation in hormonally responsive
carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC230447
PMID: 7891714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Mar 25;23(6):901-9.

CpG methylation has differential effects on the binding of YY1 and ETS proteins
to the bi-directional promoter of the Surf-1 and Surf-2 genes.

Gaston K(1), Fried M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol,
UK.

The divergently transcribed Surf-1 and Surf-2 housekeeping genes are separated by
a bi-directional, TATA-less promoter which lies within a CpG-rich island. Here we
show that CpG methylation severely reduces transcription in the direction of both
Surf-1 and Surf-2. Previous work has identified three promoter elements (Su1, Su2
and Su3) which are conserved between the human and mouse Surf-1/Surf-2 promoters.
These elements bind transcription factors present in human and mouse cell nuclear
extracts in vitro and mutations which prevent factor binding also reduce promoter
activity in vivo. Transcription initiation factor YY1 binds to the Su1 site and
stimulates transcription in the direction of Surf-1 and, to a lesser extent,
Surf-2. Here we show that members of the ETS family of transcription factors bind
to the Su2 site. Although the Su1 factor binding site contains three CpG
dinucleotides, the binding of YY1 is not affected by CpG methylation. In
contrast, CpG methylation abolishes the binding of ETS proteins to the Su2 site; 
methylation of a single cytosine, at position 3 of the consensus ETS site, is
sufficient to prevent factor binding. This direct effect on the binding of ETS
proteins is, however, not in itself sufficient to explain the repression of this 
promoter by CpG methylation. A mutation of the Su2 site which removes the
sequence CpG, but which does not prevent ETS factor binding, fails to relieve
this promoter from repression by CpG methylation.

PMCID: PMC306783
PMID: 7731802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Talanta. 1995 Mar;42(3):311-6.

Extractive spectrophotometric determination of some fluoroquinolone derivatives
in pure and dosage forms.

Sastry CS(1), Rao KR, Prasad DS.

Author information: 
(1)Foods and Drugs Analysis Laboratories, School of Chemistry, Andhra University,
Visakhapatnam 530 003, India.

Two simple and sensitive extractive spectrophotometric methods for the
determination of some fluoroquinolone derivatives (norfloxacin, NRF;
ciprofloxacin, CPF; ofloxacin, OFL; and enrofloxacin, ERF) with Supracene Violet 
3B (SV 3B, method A) and tropaeolin 000 (TP 000, method B) are described. The
methods are based on the formation of ion-association complexes of
fluoroquinolones with these dyes, which are extracted into chloroform and have
absorption maxima at 575 nm (SV 3B) and 485 nm (TP 000). The methods obey Beer's 
law and the precision and accuracy of the methods were checked by UV reference
methods. The detection limits were 5.0 mug/ml for NRF and 2.5 mug/ml for CPF in
method A and 2.5 mug/ml for OFL and ERF in methods A and B.

PMID: 18966231  [PubMed]


124. Exp Cell Res. 1995 Mar;217(1):8-14.

ets-2 regulates cdc2 kinase activity in mammalian cells: coordinated expression
of cdc2 and cyclin A.

Wen SC(1), Ku DH, De Luca A, Claudio PP, Giordano A, Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107.

ets-2 is a member of a family of transcription factors implicated in the
regulation of gene expression during cell proliferation, cell differentiation,
and development. We report that the ets-2 protein transactivates the promoter of 
the cdc2 gene which encodes a 34-kDa serine-threonine kinase required for mitotic
initiation in mammalian cells. Transactivation occurs via specific interaction
with multiple ets binding sites in the 5' flanking region of the gene. In
BALB/c3T3 rodent fibroblasts constitutively expressing ets-2 and cultured in
either 10 or 0.5% serum, cdc2 expression and its associated histone H1 kinase
activity are increased, compared to control cells. Such increased activity
correlates with elevated levels of cyclin A but not cyclin B1. Furthermore,
ets-2-transfected, but not parental, BALB/c3T3 cells, grow under low serum
conditions, albeit at a reduced rate. These data demonstrate that ets-2 plays a
direct role in the regulation of cdc2 expression and raise the possibility that
ets-2 participates in the coordinated regulation of cdc2 cyclin A expression
which is essential for the modulation of cdc2-regulated processes.

PMID: 7867724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Gene. 1995 Jan 23;152(2):285-6.

ERF-2, the human homologue of the murine Tis11d early response gene.

Nie XF(1), Maclean KN, Kumar V, McKay IA, Bustin SA.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Unit, London Hospital Medical College, University of London, UK.

A human cDNA specifying a member of the Tis11 early response gene family was
cloned and sequenced. The human gene differs from its mouse homologue by encoding
an additional 97 amino acids at its C-terminal end. The sequence has
transactivation-like motifs, an unusual Cys-Ser-Ala-rich motif and displays
sequence similarity at the extreme C-terminal end with another Tis11 family
member, ERF-1.

PMID: 7835719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dev Biol Stand. 1995;85:561-7.

Molecular biology of lactococcal bacteriophage c2.

Jarvis AW(1), Lubbers MW, Beresford TP, Ward LJ, Waterfield NR, Collins LJ,
Jarvis BD.

Author information: 
(1)New Zealand Dairy Research Institute, Palmerston North, New Zealand.

The 22163 bp genome of the lytic prolate-headed lactococcal phage c2 was fully
sequenced. Mapping of restriction sites and RNA transcripts demonstrated the
presence of early and late genes. Early and late promoters were identified. The
early region contained 21 ORFs, with predicted protein products of 4.4-32.9 kDA, 
all reading right to left. Significant similarity was found between a putative
protein encoded by an early region ORF and the erf (essential recombination
function) gene product of Salmonella phage P22. The late genes for which a
function has been identified, all of which read from left to right, included a
possible holin gene, and genes encoding three major and six minor phage
structural proteins. Analysis of the cohesive termini revealed complementary,
non-symmetrical, 9-base single-stranded 3' extended DNAs. The exploitation of
phage sequence data and analysis of phage genomes to find ways of inhibiting
phage replication is discussed.

PMID: 8586233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Vestn Ross Akad Med Nauk. 1995;(5):30-4.

[Endothelial relaxation factor in the development of diabetic nephropathy].

[Article in Russian]

Shestakova MV, Severina IS, Dedov II, Ragozin AK, Belushkina NN, Riaposova IK.

Progression of diabetic nephropathy is now associated with intrarenal hemodynamic
disorders (renal hyperperfusion, hyperfiltration, intraglomerular hypertension). 
The cause of these disorders is unclear. It is supposed that the relaxation
factor which is produced by the vascular endothelium (endothelial relaxation
factor-ERF) and an endogenous nitrogen oxide (NO) can cause the above intrarenal 
hemodynamic alterations in diabetes mellitus. The production of ERF/NO in 35
patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus who had varying severities of
diabetic nephropathies were examined. These included the following groups: 1)
patients without diabetic nephropathy (n = 9); 2) those with incipient diabetes
mellitus (n = 12), 3) those with severe diabetes mellitus (n = 14). From groups 1
and 2, 5 patients with hyperfiltration were identified, their glomerular
filtration rate were more than 140 ml/ml. The ability of the cells to produce
ERF/NO was indirectly estimated, by determining the levels of human platelet
guanylate cyclase in the presence of L-arginine, a NO precursor, the accumulation
of cGMP in the cells and plasma. When L-arginine was present, the activity of
guanylate cyclase was virtually unchanged in Group 1, but it was substantially
increased in Groups 2 and 3, by reaching its peak in patients with
hyperfiltration (Group 4). The platelet and plasma levels of cGMP corresponded to
the enhancement of guanylate cyclase activity in the presence of L-arginine and
increased as diabetic nephropathy progressed. Thus, it is suggested that there is
ERF/NO hyperproduction in patients at a high risk for diabetic nephropathy (those
having hyperfiltration). ERF/NO is likely to promote the dilation of glomerular
arterioles, which results in the development of hyperfiltration and
intraglomerular hypertension, causing diabetic nephropathy progression.

PMID: 7626982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 1995 Jan;73(1):153-8.

Selective increase of rat lung cytochrome P450 1A1 dependent monooxygenase
activity after acute sodium arsenite administration.

Albores A(1), Sinal CJ, Cherian MG, Bend JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

Arsenic is a known pulmonary, hepatic, and skin carcinogen in humans and a known 
inducer of stress proteins. Consequently, the ability of arsenite (As3+) to
modulate isozyme-selective cytochrome P450 (P450) dependent monooxygenase
activities was investigated in microsomes prepared from lung, liver, and kidney
of male, adult Sprague-Dawley rats treated subcutaneously (s.c.) with sodium
arsenite (75 mumol/kg body weight) 24 h before death. In the lung, the activity
of P450 1A1 catalyzed 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation (ERFD) was markedly
(approximately 5-fold) increased in treated versus control rats, whereas the
activity of P450 2B catalyzed 7-pentoxyresorufin O-depentylation (PRFD) was
unchanged. Pulmonary ERF activity remained elevated for at least 48 h after As3+ 
treatment. In contrast, As3+ inhibited hepatic microsomal ERFD and PRFD activity 
by approximately 20 and 35%, respectively, 24 h after treatment. ERFD activity
was also decreased in kidney microsomes of As(3+)-treated rats, but the
inhibition was greater than in liver (50 vs. 35%) 24 h after injection. These
effects are almost certainly not due to a direct action of As3+ on P450-dependent
catalysis, as in vitro addition of sodium As3+ at concentrations up to 1 mM had
no effect on ERFD activity of control rat lung microsomes. In addition,
pretreatment of rats with Zn (153 mumol.kg-1.day-1 for 2 days, s.c.) had no
effect on control or As(3+)-mediated changes in P450-dependent ERFD activity of
rat lung or kidney microsomes. These results demonstrate that As3+ is an
isozyme-selective modulator of P450 monooxygenase activity (i.e., significant
increase of P450 1A1 catalyzed activity but not P450 2B catalyzed activity) in
rat lung.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7600446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Exp Brain Res. 1995;104(3):376-84.

Magnocellular and parvocellular divisions of pigeon nucleus isthmi differentially
modulate visual responses in the tectum.

Wang SR(1), Wang YC, Frost BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Visual Information Processing, Institute of Biophysics,
Academia Sinica, Chaoyang District, Beijing, PR, China.

The electrophysiological responses of 162 tectal cells to computer-generated
visual stimuli were extracellularly recorded from 24 homing pigeons before and
after injecting either lidocaine or N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) into the nucleus 
isthmi pars magnocellularis (Imc) or the nucleus isthmi pars parvocellularis
(Ipc). Micro-injections of lidocaine into Imc resulted in a significant reduction
of firing rate in 80% of tectal cells, whose excitatory receptive fields (ERFs)
were localized within the ERF of the Imc cell where the lidocaine was injected.
In contrast, when lidocaine was injected into Ipc under identical circumstances
it had no effect on the visually driven activity of 68% of tectal cells. However,
when the excitatory amino acid NMDA was injected into Ipc it produced a
significant reduction in the visually driven firing of 75% of tectal neurons when
their ERFs were within the isthmic ERF, while similar application of NMDA into
Imc had no effect on the visually driven response of 94% of tectal neurons. When 
the ERFs of tectal cells were localized outside the ERF of the isthmic cell where
the chemical was injected, Imc-injected lidocaine had no effect in 9 out of 10
tectal cells, whereas Ipc-injected NMDA increased firing in 7 out of 17 tectal
cells. Therefore, it is suggested that the Imc-tectal fibers participate in a
positive feedback pathway and the Ipc-tectal fibers are involved in a negative
feedback pathway.

PMID: 7589290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Nature. 1994 Dec 15;372(6507):701-3.

A highly conserved eukaryotic protein family possessing properties of polypeptide
chain release factor.

Frolova L(1), Le Goff X, Rasmussen HH, Cheperegin S, Drugeon G, Kress M, Arman I,
Haenni AL, Celis JE, Philippe M, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Aarhus, Denmark.

Comment in
    Nature. 1994 Dec 15;372(6507):614-5.

The termination of protein synthesis in ribosomes is governed by termination
(stop) codons in messenger RNAs and by polypeptide chain release factors (RFs).
Although the primary structure of prokaryotic RFs and yeast mitochrondrial RF is 
established, that of the only known eukaryotic RF (eRF) remains obscure. Here we 
report the assignment of a family of tightly related proteins (designated eRF1)
from lower and higher eukaryotes which are structurally and functionally similar 
to rabbit eRF. Two of these proteins, one from human and the other from Xenopus
laevis, have been expressed in yeast and Escherichia coli, respectively, purified
and shown to be active in the in vitro RF assay. The other protein of this
family, sup45 (sup1) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is involved in omnipotent
suppression during translation. The amino-acid sequence of the eRF1 family is
highly conserved. We conclude that the eRF1 proteins are directly implicated in
the termination of translation in eukaryotes.

PMID: 7990965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;14(12):7744-57.

AP-1, ETS, and transcriptional silencers regulate retinoic acid-dependent
induction of keratin 18 in embryonic cells.

Pankov R(1), Neznanov N, Umezawa A, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, California 92037.

The differentiation of both embryonal carcinoma (EC) and embryonic stem (ES)
cells can be triggered in culture by exposure to retinoic acid and results in the
transcriptional induction of both the endogenous mouse keratin 18 (mK18)
intermediate filament gene and an experimentally introduced human keratin 18
(K18) gene as well as a variety of other markers characteristic of extraembryonic
endoderm. The induction of K18 in EC cells is limited, in part, by low levels of 
ETS and AP-1 transcription factor activities which bind to sites within a complex
enhancer element located within the first intron of K18. RNA levels of ETS-2,
c-Jun, and JunB increase upon the differentiation of ES cells and correlate with 
increased expression of K18. Occupancy of the ETS site, detected by in vivo
footprinting methods, correlates with K18 induction in ES cells. In somatic
cells, the ETS and AP-1 elements mediate induction by a variety of oncogenes
associated with the ras signal transduction pathway. In EC cells, in addition to 
the induction by these limiting transcription factors, relief from negative
regulation is mediated by three silencer elements located within the first intron
of the K18 gene. These silencer elements function in F9 EC cells but not their
differentiated derivatives, and their activity is correlated with proteins in F9 
EC nuclei which bind to the silencers and are reduced in the nuclei of
differentiated F9 cells. The induction of K18, associated with the
differentiation of EC cells to extraembryonic endoderm, is due to a combination
of relief from negative regulation and activation by members of the ETS and AP-1 
transcription factor families.

PMCID: PMC359315
PMID: 7526151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Oncogene. 1994 Nov;9(11):3259-71.

A model for gene evolution of the ets-1/ets-2 transcription factors based on
structural and functional homologies.

Albagli O(1), Soudant N, Ferreira E, Dhordain P, Dewitte F, Begue A, Flourens A, 
Stehelin D, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

The chicken c-ets-1 locus encodes two transcription factors, p54c-ets-1 and
p68c-ets-1 that differ in their N-termini, encoded respectively by the I54 and
alpha beta exons. p68c-ets-1 equivalents are only found in birds and reptiles
while p54c-ets-1 is widely conserved in vertebrates, from amphibians to mammals. 
Thus, the classical view concerning the evolution of the c-ets-1 gene has been to
consider that I54 is of ancient origin whereas alpha and beta, which provide an
additional activating domain in p68c-ets-1, would have been acquired much more
recently. Sequencing the alpha and beta exons in various species pinpointed a
highly conserved region of 13 amino acids which is rich in acidic and hydrophobic
residues, a feature of some other transactivating domains. Strikingly, this
subdomain is also present in the otherwise unrelated N-terminal activating region
of p58c-ets-2 and was thus named BEC for Ets-1-beta/Ets-2-Conserved sequence.
Moreover, the two N-termini share the BEC sequence at a homologous position in
their highly similar genomic organization indicating a common origin. This
structural homology underlies a functional similarity since fusion of the
heterologous GAL4 DNA-binding domain with either of the two isolated domains
demonstrates that BEC is essential in both cases for the transactivating
activity. The function of the alpha beta domain in the context of p68c-ets-1 also
strictly depends on the presence of the BEC sequence. Finally, the whole
N-terminus of p58c-ets-2 can functionally substitute for its counterpart in
p68c-ets-1 further demonstrating that p68c-ets-1 and p58c-ets-2 are structurally 
and functionally more closely related than previously thought. Besides, we also
found BEC in the N-terminus of the Drosophila pointed gene which may be
considered as closely related to the uncommitted 'ets1/2' common ancestor. These 
data demonstrate that the alpha and beta exons are not a recent and specific
acquisition but stem, like the p58c-ets-2 N-terminus, from the invertebrate
unduplicated 'ets 1/2' gene. This work unravels a new model for the ets-1/ets-2
gene's evolution, based for the first time on both structural and functional
evidences. Accordingly, p68c-ets-1 and p58c-ets-2 are the direct descendants of
the ancestral 'ets1/2' gene whereas I54 may have been acquired as a second
promoter in the c-ets-1 gene after the duplication. Indeed, I54 is not found in
the Drosophila pointed gene. The high degree of similarity, and hence of
functional redundancy, between p68c-ets-1 and p58c-ets-2 may have led to the
rapid divergence (and even loss in mammals) of alpha and beta during evolution
whereas I54, which provided a novel function unique to c-ets-1, was maintained
within the presently widespread p54c-ets-1 version.

PMID: 7936650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Physiol. 1994 Oct 15;480 ( Pt 2):389-94.

Sensitization of insensitive branches of C nociceptors in human skin.

Schmelz M(1), Schmidt R, Ringkamp M, Handwerker HO, Torebjörk HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.

1. Eighteen cutaneous mechanosensitive C nociceptors were recorded from the
peroneal nerves of healthy human subjects. Their identity was continuously
monitored by intracutaneous electrical stimulation, and their activation by
mechanical or transcutaneous electrical stimulation was detected by slowing of
conduction velocity during the relative refractory period. 2. Mechanoreceptive
fields (mRFs) mapped with suprathreshold von Frey hair stimuli covered an area of
99 +/- 21 mm2 (mean +/- S.E.M.). Two of the units had separate mRFs, with borders
about 0.5-1.5 cm apart from each other and the largest of these units had a
maximal diameter of 4.5 cm. 3. Successive topical application of mustard oil and 
capsaicin induced expansions of mRFs by 57 +/- 14 mm2 in eight of fifteen units. 
4. In twelve units transcutaneous electrical stimulation delivered through a
pointed electrode was used for mapping the electroreceptive fields (eRFs). The
borders of the eRFs and the mRFs were identical for two of twelve units only. In 
the other ten units additional mechano-insensitive areas (55 +/- 22 mm2) were
detected from which transcutaneous electrical stimuli could activate the
respective unit. 5. Application of mustard oil and capsaicin to these
mechano-insensitive areas sensitized five of eight units to mechanical stimuli.
In these cases the mRF after sensitization exactly corresponded to the eRF. 6. It
is concluded that there are insensitive branches in human mechanosensitive
cutaneous C nociceptors that can be detected by transcutaneous electrical
stimulation and sensitized by topical application of chemical irritants.
Activation of those branches in the course of inflammatory processes may
contribute to spatial summation at central synapses and hence to hyperalgesia.

PMCID: PMC1155854
PMID: 7869253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Biol Chem. 1994 Oct 14;269(41):25303-9.

Ets-2 and c-Myb act independently in regulating expression of the hematopoietic
stem cell antigen CD34.

Melotti P(1), Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107.

CD34 is currently the only well defined human hematopoietic stem cell marker and 
is expressed on 1-4% of normal bone marrow cells. Putative binding sites for Ets 
proteins, a family of transcription factors involved in the regulation of cell
differentiation and proliferation in many cell systems, are present in the
5'-flanking region of the CD34 gene. Some of these sites are in close proximity
to binding sequences of the encoded product of the proto-oncogene c-myb, which
regulates CD34 expression by interacting with the Myb binding sites. Here we
demonstrate that Ets-2 (i) transactivates the CD34 promoter in rodent fibroblasts
upon interaction with Ets binding sites and (ii) induces expression of CD34 mRNA 
and protein in the CD34- human glioblastoma T98G cells. Ets-2 and c-Myb
transactivate the CD34 promoter independently because specific transactivation is
abrogated by site-specific mutations of the binding sites or by competition with 
oligomers that include wild type but not mutated Myb or Ets binding sites. Ets-2 
and c-Myb appear to have addictive effects on transactivation of the CD34
promoter and on induction of CD34 mRNA. Instead, CD34 surface protein levels
might be induced synergistically, raising the possibility of a posttranslational 
mechanism of CD34 expression in cells constitutively expressing c-Myb and Ets-2.

PMID: 7523384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Oncogene. 1994 Oct;9(10):2913-21.

Oncogenic Ras can induce transcriptional activation through a variety of promoter
elements, including tandem c-Ets-2 binding sites.

Galang CK(1), Der CJ, Hauser CA.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, La Jolla Cancer Research Foundation, California 92037.

Oncogenic Ras activates the transcription of a variety of viral and cellular
genes through promoter elements consisting of two closely linked binding sites
for transcription factors from several distinct families. To better understand
what constitutes a promoter oncogene response element (ORE), various
transcription factor binding site configurations were inserted into a reporter
gene, and transactivation by oncogenic Ras was measured by cotransfection assays 
in NIH3T3 cells. We show that a single copy of two closely linked binding sites
for either AP-1, Ets, NF-kappa B, or single closely linked Ets and AP-1 binding
sites, are sufficient to confer at least 10-fold transactivation by similar
amounts of oncogenic Ras. Single binding sites for these factors, or several
other pairings of binding sites, are not sufficient to confer Ras responsiveness.
The effect of altered ORE binding site spacing and orientation was systematically
analysed, and limited flexibility was observed. The novel observation that two
adjacent c-Ets-2 binding sites are sufficient to act as an ORE, indicates that
Ets family proteins are a target of the Ras pathway distinct from AP-1. This ORE 
also mediates equivalent transactivation by c-Ets-2, and mutant OREs show a
parallel decrease in Ras and c-Ets-2 responsiveness. Together, these data help to
define transcriptional targets of the Ras signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 8084596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Reprod Dev. 1994 Oct;39(2):208-14.

Regulation of gene expression by transcription factors Ets-1 and Ets-2.

Tymms MJ(1), Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Birth Defects Laboratory, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

The ETS family of transcription factors have a DNA-binding domain in common that 
binds a core GGA(A/T) DNA sequence. A large number of proteins have now been
identified that contain an ETS DNA-binding domain (see review by Wasylyk et al., 
1993). Ets-1 was first described as the cellular homolog of v-ets. which is
translated as a 135-kDa gag-myb-ets fusion protein from the replication-deficient
retrovirus E26 in chickens. Ets-2 was subsequently described as a closely related
protein that contains the highly conserved ETS DNA-binding domain. This paper
considers the manner by which the two closely related genes, Ets-1 and Ets-2,
apparently play distinct roles in embryo development and in the immune system of 
adult mice. Although both Ets-1 and Ets-2 transform fibroblasts (Seth et al.,
1989), the temporal and tissue-specific expression patterns suggest that these
two proteins play distinct biological roles and consequently transactivate
different downstream cellular target genes.

PMID: 7826624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Sep 25;22(19):3871-9.

A residue of the ETS domain mutated in the v-ets oncogene is essential for the
DNA-binding and transactivating properties of the ETS-1 and ETS-2 proteins.

Soudant N(1), Albagli O, Dhordain P, Flourens A, Stéhelin D, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Moléculaire, CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille,
France.

The c-ets-1 locus encodes two transcription factors, p54c-ets-1 and p68c-ets-1
that recognize purine-rich motifs. The v-ets oncogene of the avian retrovirus E26
differs from its cellular progenitor p68c-ets-1 by two amino acid substitutions
(alanine 285 and isoleucine 445 in c-ets-1 both substituted by valine in v-ets,
mutations A and B respectively) and its carboxy-terminal end (mutation C). The B 
mutation affects a well conserved residue in the carboxy-terminal 85 amino acids,
ETS DNA-binding domain. To address the biological relevance of the B mutation
found between v-ets and c-ets-1, we have randomly mutagenized isoleucine 445 of
p68c-ets-1 by polymerase chain reaction. Using in vitro gel mobility shift
assays, we show that this residue is crucial for the binding properties of
c-ets-1 since the 12 mutations we have generated at this position, all diminish
or even abolish the binding, to the 'optimized' Ets-1 binding site (EBS), of 35
kDa proteins corresponding to the 311 carboxy-terminal residues of c-ets-1. Among
them, substitutions of isoleucine to glutamic acid, glycine or proline have the
highest inhibitory effects. Similar results were obtained when the same mutations
were introduced either in full-length p68c-ets-1 protein or into a
carboxy-terminal polypeptide of 109 amino acids encompassing the ETS-domain which
has previously been shown to display a very high binding activity as compared
with the full-length protein. Consistent with the in vitro results, point
mutations in p68c-ets-1 that decrease binding activity to EBS abrogate its
ability to transactivate reporter plasmids carrying either the TPA Oncogene
Response Unit of the Polyoma virus enhancer (TORU) or a sequence derived from the
HTLV-1 LTR. Furthermore, as this isoleucine residue is rather well-conserved
within the ETS gene family, we show that mutation of the corresponding isoleucine
of c-ets-2 into glycine also abrogates its DNA-binding and hence, transactivating
properties. Thus, the v-ets B mutation highlights the isoleucine 445 as an
essential amino acid of the c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 DNA-binding domains.

PMCID: PMC308383
PMID: 7937106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Am J Med Sci. 1994 Sep;308(3):152-6.

Nonsurgical closure of esophago-respiratory fistulas: role for the somatostatin
analogue octreotide acetate?

Nylen ES(1), Hall JL, Krasnow SH, Becker KL, Wadleigh RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Washington, DC 20422.

Esophago-respiratory fistulas (ERF) do not close spontaneously and are uniformly 
fatal. A somatostatin analogue (octreotide acetate) was used in three consecutive
patients to promote the closure of ERF. In 2 patients with esophageal cancer,
treatment with octreotide acetate was associated with fistula closure in 30 and
46 days, respectively. In a third patient with virally-induced ERF, treatment was
associated with improvement of the inflammation of the fistula before the
patient's death from pulmonary aspiration after 40 days of treatment. These
preliminary observations suggest that octreotide acetate treatment of ERF should 
receive further investigative scrutiny.

PMID: 8074130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Proc Biol Sci. 1994 Aug 22;257(1349):179-84.

Spatial correlation of suppressive and excitatory receptive fields with direction
selectivity of complex cells in cat striate cortex.

Hammond P(1), Kim JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Communication & Neuroscience, Keele University, Staffordshire,
U.K.

The aim of the study was to account for direction selectivity of visual cortical 
neurons through systematic positional mismatch between excitatory and suppressive
influences on each neuron. Direction-selective complex neurons were therefore
recorded from striate cortex of cats lightly anaesthetized with halothane in
nitrous oxide-oxygen. All but small residual eye movements were eradicated with
intravenous gallamine triethiodide. Excitatory receptive field (ERF) dimensions
and centring were quantified with optimal sine-wave grating stimuli,
appropriately windowed to limit them to variable locations along and across the
receptive field (RF) centre. Related suppressive receptive fields (SRFS) were
similarly mapped during binocular conditioning, induced by an optimal grating
applied to the other eye and drifting continuously in each neuron's preferred
direction. Its purpose was to elevate ongoing levels of discharge to reveal often
concealed null suppression. ERF and SRF profiles were systematically offset,
especially along the line of preferred direction such that, for stimuli moving in
the non-preferred direction, the SRF lay ahead of the ERF. Derivations of ERFS
and SRFS during conditioning, within a single batch of trials, excluded eye
movements as a source of positional mismatch. It is concluded that this mismatch 
may provide the basis for direction selectivity and the emergence of null
suppression.

PMID: 7972163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Cogn Neurosci. 1994 Summer;6(3):233-55. doi: 10.1162/jocn.1994.6.3.233.

Language-Related ERPs: Scalp Distributions and Modulation by Word Type and
Semantic Priming.

Nobre AC, McCarthy G.

Abstract Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded from the scalp to
investigate the processing of word stimuli. Three tasks were used: (1) a task
comparing words that provided an anomalous or normal sentence ending, (2) a
word-list task in which different word types were examined, and (3) a word-list
task in which semantic priming was examined. ERPs were recorded from a 50-channel
montage in an attempt to dissociate overlapping ERP features by their scalp
distributions. The focus of these studies was the N400, an ERP previously
associated with language processing (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980). The temporal
interval typically associated with N400 (250-500 msec) was found to contain
overlapping ERP features. Two of these features were common to both sentence and 
word-list tasks-but one appeared different. Anomalous sentence endings and words 
with semantic content in lists both showed coincident negative left
frontotemporal and midline-anterior ERP foci, peaking at 332 msec for sentences
and 316 msec for word lists. The most negative voltage obtained in the sentence
task peaked at 386 msec and had a midline-posterior focus. A right frontotemporal
focus developed after the midline-posterior focus and outlasted its duration. The
most negative voltage for content words in lists was reached at 364 msec. The
distribution of this ERP was extensive over the midline and appeared to differ
from that observed in the sentence task. Modulation of language-related ERPs by
word type and semantic priming was investigated using the word-list tasks, which 
required category-detection responses. Two novel findings were obtained: (1) The 
ERP distributions for words serving grammatical function and content words
differed substantially in word lists. Even when devoid of any sentence context,
function words presented significantly attenuated measures of N400 compared to
content words. These findings support hypotheses that suggest a differential
processing of content and function words. (2) Semantic priming functionally
dissociated two ERP features in the 250-500 msec range. The later and most
negative midline ERP feature (peaking at 364 msec) was attenuated by semantic
priming. However, the earlier left frontotemporal feature (peaking at 316 msec)
was enhanced by semantic priming. The isolation of this novel language-related
ERF' that is sensitive to semantic manipulations has important consequences for
temporal and mechanistic aspects of theories of language processing.

PMID: 23964974  [PubMed]


141. Oncogene. 1994 Jun;9(6):1551-65.

Differential expression of ets-1 and ets-2 proto-oncogenes during murine
embryogenesis.

Maroulakou IG(1), Papas TS, Green JE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

ets-1 and ets-2 genes have previously been identified by their sequence homology 
to the v-ets oncogene of the avian erythroblastosis virus, E26. These cellular
genes have been shown to function as transcription factors important in lymphoid 
differentiation and activation and cellular proliferation. In this study, we have
broadly analysed the differential expression of ets-1 and ets-2 during murine
development using in situ hybridization. Our results indicate that these
transcription factors are expressed in multiple tissues during critical stages of
embryo formation and organogenesis, suggesting that these genes may serve
multiple functions during mouse development. The patterns of expression of both
genes are quite different as early as day 8.0 of gestation. ets-1 expression is
clearly observed during a narrow developmental stage in the developing nervous
system, including the presumptive hindbrain regions, the neural tube, as well as 
neural crest and the first and second branchial arches, ets-2 expression is
limited to the developing limb buds and distal tail. At later times, ets-1
expression is observed in developing vascular structures, including the heart,
arteries, capillaries and meninges, whereas ets-2 is highly expressed in
developing bone, tooth buds, epithelial layers of the gut, nasal sinus and
uterus, and several regions of the developing brain. Both ets-1 and ets-2 are
expressed in developing lung, gut and skin. High levels of expression in both
genes is observed in adult lymphoid tissues, but in different tissue subsets.
ets-1 is expressed in the adult lung, gut mesenchyme and bone marrow. ets-2
continues to be expressed at low levels in several adult tissues, except in the
differentiated brain, where substantial levels of expression are found in
particular regions of the mature brain. These results demonstrate that ets-1 and 
ets-2 are differentially regulated, are widely expressed in many tissues during
murine embryogenesis and may play important roles in cellular proliferation and
differentiation during mouse development.

PMID: 8183549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Curr Genet. 1994 May;25(5):385-95.

Polypeptide chain termination in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Stansfield I(1), Tuite MF.

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK.

The study of translational termination in yeast has been approached largely
through the identification of a range of mutations which either increase or
decrease the efficiency of stop-codon recognition. Subsequent cloning of the
genes encoding these factors has identified a number of proteins important for
maintaining the fidelity of termination, including at least three ribosomal
proteins (S5, S13, S28). Other non-ribosomal proteins have been identified by
mutations which produce gross termination-accuracy defects, namely the SUP35 and 
SUP45 gene products which have closely-related higher eukaryote homologues
(GST1-h and SUP45-h respectively) and which can complement the corresponding
defective yeast proteins, implying that the yeast ribosome may be a good model
for the termination apparatus existing in higher translation systems. While the
yeast mitochondrial release factor has been cloned (Pel et al. 1992), the
corresponding cytosolic RF has not yet been identified. It seems likely, however,
that the identification of the gene encoding eRF could be achieved using a
multicopy antisuppressor screen such as that employed to clone the E. coli prfA
gene (Weiss et al. 1984). Identification of the yeast eRF and an investigation of
its interaction with other components of the yeast translational machinery will
no doubt further the definition of the translational termination process. While a
large number of mutations have been isolated in which the efficiency of
termination-codon recognition is impaired, it seems probable that a proportion of
mutations within this class will comprise those where the accuracy of 'A' site
codon-anticodon interaction is compromised: such defects would also have an
effect on termination-codon suppression, allowing mis- or non-cognate tRNAs to
bind stop-codons, causing nonsense suppression. The remainder of mutations
affecting termination fidelity should represent mutations in genes coding for
components of the termination apparatus, including the eRF: these mutations
reduce the efficiency of termination, allowing nonsense suppression by
low-efficiency natural suppressor tRNAs. Elucidation of the mechanism of
termination in yeast will require discrimination between these two classes of
mutations, thus allowing definition of termination-specific gene products.

PMID: 8082183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. DNA Cell Biol. 1994 May;13(5):449-59.

Cloning and characterization of ERF-1, a human member of the Tis11 family of
early-response genes.

Bustin SA(1), Nie XF, Barnard RC, Kumar V, Pascall JC, Brown KD, Leigh IM,
Williams NS, McKay IA.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Unit, London Hospital Medical College, University of London, UK.

Members of the Tis11 family of early-response genes are characterized by a high
degree of sequence similarity around a putative zinc finger motif. They are
induced by a variety of cell agonists and polypeptide mitogens, including
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) and epidermal growth factor (EGF). We 
describe the cloning and sequencing of a human member of this gene family,
EGF-response factor 1 (ERF-1), the homolog of the mouse Tis11b/rat cMG1 genes.
The human and rodent genes are similar, with 5' UTR, coding sequence, and 3' UTR 
highly conserved. The promoter/enhancer region and intron sequences contain
multiple putative transcription factor binding motifs characteristic of
early-response genes. Amino acid sequence comparison of the seven members of the 
Tis11 family cloned so far identifies a repeated consensus motif of
(x+)YKTELC(x+)x5GxCxYGx(x+)CxFxH involving the potential zinc finger. Toward the 
carboxyterminal end is a region with a high percentage of prolines (15/73) and,
partially overlapping, a serine-rich domain (20/54). These may be important as
trans-activation and phosphorylation sites. The 3' untranslated region is
unusually long, extending over 1,860 bp. The sequence immediately downstream from
the translational stop codon has extensive secondary structure potential. The 3' 
UTR is 60% AT rich, but contains two GC rich (> 70%) regions. In addition there
are multiple reiterations of a destabilization sequence, as well as a single
UUAUUUAU motif characteristic of mRNAs specifying proteins involved in the
inflammatory response. The mRNA contains a consensus polyadenylation signal.

PMID: 8024689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Biol Rep. 1994 May;19(3):171-81.

Termination of protein synthesis.

Tuite MF(1), Stansfield I.

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK.

One of three mRNA codons--UAA, UAG and UGA--is used to signal to the elongating
ribosome that translation should be terminated at this point. Upon the arrival of
the stop codon at the ribosomal acceptor(A)-site, a protein release factor (RF)
binds to the ribosome resulting in the peptidyl transferase centre of the
ribosome switching to a hydrolytic function to remove the completed polypeptide
chain from the peptidyl-tRNA bound at the adjacent ribosomal peptidyl(P)-site. In
this review recent advances in our understanding of the mechanism of termination 
in the bacterium Escherichia coli will be summarised, paying particular attention
to the roles of 16S ribosomal RNA and the release factors RF-1, RF-2 and RF-3 in 
stop codon recognition. Our understanding of the translation termination process 
in eukaryotes is much more rudimentary with the identity of the single eukaryotic
release factor (eRF) still remaining elusive. Finally, several examples of how
the termination mechanism can be subverted either to expand the genetic code
(e.g. selenocysteine insertion at UGA codons) or to regulate the expression of
mammalian retroviral or plant viral genomes will be discussed.

PMID: 7969105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Mar 29;91(7):2777-80.

The "eRF" clone corresponds to tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase, not mammalian
release factor.

Timchenko L(1), Caskey CT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030.

To study the similarity between a putative cloned mammalian release factor (RF)
and tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (TRS), a recombinant rabbit RF fusion protein
was expressed from prokaryotic expression vectors. Purified fractions of the
fusion proteins were tested for TRS and RF activities. Addition of the fusion
protein to a TRS assay increased the binding of tryptophan to tRNA(Trp). However,
in an assay for RF activity, the addition of the fusion protein resulted in
release of only 1-3% of formylmethionine from an fMet-tRNA-AUG-ribosome
intermediate that had been provided with UAAA as message. To confirm this result,
the coding region of the putative eukaryotic RF clone "eRF" was used for in vitro
transcription and translation in a rabbit reticulocyte lysate system, resulting
in the synthesis of a single 56-kDa protein. The influence of this 56-kDa protein
on the termination of translation directed by tobacco mosaic virus was studied.
Tobacco mosaic virus RNA produced a major 126-kDa protein and a minor 184-kDa
readthrough protein in an in vitro translation system. The protein generated from
the "eRF" coding region did not inhibit biosynthesis of the 184-kDa readthrough
virus protein. Instead, it increased the yield of both viral proteins. This
increase was presumably due to its TRS activity. Chromatography of proteins
derived from human lymphoblasts separated RF from TRS activity. Thus, our results
indicate that the previously cloned "eRF" clone encodes TRS and that rabbit
reticulocyte RF activity lies in a different protein.

PMCID: PMC43453
PMID: 8146190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. EBRI Issue Brief. 1994 Apr;(148):1-93.

The changing health care delivery system. An EBRI/ERF (Employee Benefit Research 
Institute/Education and Research Fund) policy forum.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 10133372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Mar;14(3):2129-39.

Combinatorial interactions between AP-1 and ets domain proteins contribute to the
developmental regulation of the macrophage scavenger receptor gene.

Wu H(1), Moulton K, Horvai A, Parik S, Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla 92093-0656.

Macrophage development is regulated by a complex set of hormone-like molecules
and cell adhesion events that control the growth and differentiation of
progenitor cells. The macrophage scavenger receptor (SR) gene becomes markedly
upregulated during the final stages of monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation and
provides a model for the identification and characterization of transcription
factors that control this process. In this report, we have identified three
genomic regulatory elements that are required for transactivation of the SR gene 
in the THP-1 monocytic leukemia cell line following induction of macrophage
differentiation by tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate. Each of these regulatory
elements contains a near-consensus binding site for members of the AP-1 gene
family, while the two most quantitatively important elements also contain
juxtaposed binding sites for ets domain transcription factors. We demonstrate
that tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate treatment results in a marked and prolonged
increase in AP-1 binding activity on these elements, which can be accounted for
almost entirely by c-jun and junB. These proteins in turn form ternary complexes 
with additional factors that bind to the adjacent ets recognition motifs. Several
indirect lines of evidence indicate that ets2 represents a component of this
ternary complex. The combined expression of c-jun, ets2, and a constitutive form 
of ras result in synergistic increases in transcription from promoters containing
the SR regulatory elements. These observations suggest that SR gene expression is
regulated via a signal transduction pathway involving ras, AP-1, and ets domain
proteins and imply that at least some of the signalling components involved in
ras-dependent growth are also utilized to promote the expression of genes
involved in terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC358573
PMID: 8114743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Oncogene. 1994 Mar;9(3):911-21.

junB promoter regulation: Ras mediated transactivation by c-Ets-1 and c-Ets-2.

Coffer P(1), de Jonge M, Mettouchi A, Binetruy B, Ghysdael J, Kruijer W.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratorium, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The Jun gene family encode components of the AP-1 transcription factor complex
that regulate a variety of TRE-containing target promoters. Expression of family 
members is induced by a wide variety of extracellular stimuli and thought to be
important in mediating cellular proliferation and differentiation. We have
localized cis-acting DNA sequences in the murine junB promoter capable of
mediating transcriptional activation by the proto-oncogene products c-Ets-1 and
c-Ets-2. We show by promoter deletion analysis that multiple elements located
between -848 and -574, and between -196 and -91 can mediate transactivation by
ETS-family members in different cell types. In vitro DNA binding assays indicate 
that the elements identified can specifically interact with c-Ets-1 protein.
Furthermore, we show that ETS-transactivation of a variety of reporter constructs
is dramatically enhanced by introduction of oncogenic Ha-ras. The activation of
Ras by extracellular stimuli invokes a phosphorylation cascade that includes the 
downstream mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase p44ERK-1. We further show that 
addition of activated p44ERK-1 MAP kinase can also enhance ETS-transactivation of
junB promoter reporter constructs. Here we propose that ETS-family members play a
role in the activation of junB transcription by a Ras-stimulated signal
transducing pathway that includes MAP kinase(s).

PMID: 8108135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Feb 25;22(4):613-8.

One of two Ets-binding sites in the cytokeratin EndoA enhancer is essential for
enhancer activity and binds to Ets-2 related proteins.

Fujimura Y(1), Yamamoto H, Hamazato F, Nozaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Genetics, Osaka University, Japan.

Expression of the mouse cytokeratin EndoA gene is restricted in endodermal and
epithelial cells, and is regulated by an enhancer that is located 1 kilobase (kb)
3' downstream from the gene. The enhancer consists of six direct repeats, of
which each contains two predicted Ets binding sites (EBS1 and EBS2) containing
GGAA as a core. Mutation analysis showed that EBS1 is essential for the enhancer 
activity and additional effects of EBS2, suggesting that some Ets-related
proteins bind and activate the enhancer through EBS1. We also showed that Ets-2
mRNA is expressed in PYS-2 cells and that Ets-2 protein produced by E. coli
interacts with EBS1 but not with EBS2. Using co-transfection assays, we showed
that Ets-2 can trans-activate the enhancer in PYS-2 cells. Mutations that impair 
Ets-2 binding abolished the activity of the EndoA enhancer. The results obtained 
from the binding competition assay using an Ets-2 specific antibody, however,
suggest that EBS1 binds to an Ets protein which is distinct from Ets-2. These
data show that Ets-2 related protein binds and activates the EndoA enhancer in a 
sequence-specific fashion.

PMCID: PMC307851
PMID: 7510396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Oncogene. 1994 Jan;9(1):121-32.

Comparison of the expression and function of the transcription factor PU.1 (Spi-1
proto-oncogene) between murine macrophages and B lymphocytes.

Ross IL(1), Dunn TL, Yue X, Roy S, Barnett CJ, Hume DA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of Queensland,
Australia.

The expression of mRNA encoding the DNA-binding protein PU.1 (Spi-1) is
restricted to B lymphocytes and macrophages. The role of PU.1 in tissue-specific 
transcriptional regulation in the two cell types was examined by co-transfection 
of a PU.1 expression plasmid with vectors containing B cell (IgH enhancer) or
macrophage-specific (c-fms) transcription control elements. Cotransfection of the
PU.1 expression plasmid in MOPC31C B cells trans-repressed the IgH enhancer but
trans-activated the c-fms promoter. The latter was insufficient to overcome a
block to transcription elongation that determines macrophage-specific c-fms gene 
expression. In the macrophage line RAW264, PU.1 had no effect on the c-fms
promoter, but trans-repressed the activity of a c-fms reporter plasmid containing
the transcription attenuator. The effects of PU.1 in both cell types were
distinct from those of c-ets-2, a related factor, which trans-activated the c-fms
promoter in both B cells and macrophages but also repressed the IgH enhancer.
PU.1 was shown to be one of several nuclear proteins that bound a critical
cis-acting element of the IgH enhancer, microB, but analysis of nuclear extracts 
of a wide range of B cell and macrophage lines demonstrated a strong correlation 
between macrophage phenotype and nuclear PU.1 expression. The data suggest that
differences in nuclear PU.1 expression and function between macrophages and B
cells may play a role in lineage divergence.

PMID: 8302571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Biol Cybern. 1994;70(3):219-25.

Rectification of correlation by a sigmoid nonlinearity.

Bedenbaugh P(1), Gerstein GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania, School of Medicine,
Philadelphia 19104-6085.

We investigated the normalized autocovariance (correlation coefficient) function 
of the output of an erf() function nonlinearity subject to non-zero mean Gaussian
noise input. When the sigmoid is wide compared to the input, or the input mean is
close to the midpoint of the sigmoid, the output correlation coefficient function
is very close to the input correlation coefficient function. When the noise mean 
and variance are such that there is a significant probability of operating in the
saturation region and the sigmoid is not too flat, the correlation coefficient of
the output function is less than that of the input. This difference is much
greater when the correlation coefficient is negative than when it is positive.
The sigmoid partially rectifies the correlation coefficient function. The
analysis does not depend on the spectral properties of the input noise. All that 
is required is that the input at times t and (t + tau) be jointly gaussian with
the same mean and autocovariance. The analysis therefore applies equally well to 
the case of two identical sigmoids with jointly gaussian inputs. This
correlational rectification could help explain the parameter sensitivity of
"neural network" models. If biological neurons share this property it could
explain why few negative correlations between spike trains have been observed.

PMID: 8136405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Exp Brain Res. 1994;99(1):170-4.

Quantification of excitatory receptive fields of complex neurones in cat striate 
cortex.

Hammond P(1), Fothergill LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Communication and Neuroscience, Keele University, Staffordshire,
England, UK.

Excitatory receptive field (ERF) response profiles and length summation functions
were derived from complex neurones in cat striate cortex. Measured length
summation was compared with summation predicted from integration over ERF
profiles. In a minority of neurones, measured and predicted summation were well
matched. In the majority, whether end-stopped or not, responsiveness in length
summation tests was appreciably greater than predicted for short stimuli,
compared with ERF profiles. The mismatch was least in standard and greatest in
special complex neurones; in the latter group, response levels to long stimuli
fell well below predicted levels. In end-stopped neurones the decremental portion
of length summation functions was not predicted by ERF profiles. These results
implicate the involvement of non-linear mechanisms, whereby concomitant
stimulation of central regions of the receptive field (RF) potentiate the
efficacy of loci towards either end of the RF.

PMID: 7925792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1993 Dec 23;1155(3):346-56.

Gene regulation by Ets proteins.

Janknecht R(1), Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.

PMID: 8268191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. EMBO J. 1993 Oct;12(10):4013-9.

Mammalian polypeptide chain release factor and tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase are
distinct proteins.

Frolova LYu(1), Dalphin ME, Justesen J, Powell RJ, Drugeon G, McCaughan KK,
Kisselev LL, Tate WP, Haenni AL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.

A very high (approximately 90%) structural similarity exists between the bovine, 
human and murine tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetases (WRS), and quite unexpectedly the 
rabbit polypeptide chain release factor (eRF). This similarity may point to a
very close resemblance or identity between these proteins involved in distinct
steps of protein synthesis, or inadvertently to an incorrect assignment of the
clone reported to encode eRF, since the structure of clones encoding WRS were
confirmed by peptide sequencing. Using high resolution column chromatography and 
sucrose gradient centrifugation combined with assays for WRS and eRF activities, 
we show that functionally distinct WRS and eRF proteins can be completely
separated from each other. Moreover, a putative anti-eRF monoclonal antibody
appears incapable of immunoprecipitating the eRF activity or binding to
protein(s) possessing eRF activity. This antibody binds to protein fractions
which coincide in various separation procedures with rabbit WRS activity, and to 
pure bovine WRS. The protein expressed in Escherichia coli from the original cDNA
clone initially reported to encode eRF, has WRS activity but not eRF activity.
Resequencing of the fragment of the original rabbit cDNA demonstrates the
presence of the previously overlooked HXGH motif typical of class I
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Consequently, mammalian WRS and eRF are different
proteins, and the cDNA clone formerly assigned as encoding eRF encodes rabbit
WRS.

PMCID: PMC413685
PMID: 8404867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1993 Oct;204(1):40-8.

Immune development in young-adult C.RF-hyt mice is affected by congenital and
maternal hypothyroidism.

Erf GF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts
01063.

C.RF-hyt mice carry a mutation (hyt) that results in the phenotypic expression of
congenital hypothyroidism in hyt/hyt mice due to a nonresponsiveness of the
thyroid gland to thyroid-stimulating hormone. Heterozygotes of this strain are
euthyroid. To further define thyroid-immune interactions, the effect of
congenital hypothyroidism and maternal hypothyroidism on immune development were 
examined in 3- to 4-month-old hyt/+ and hyt/hyt progeny from hyt/+ and hyt/hyt
dams. The state of immune development in these mice was compared on the basis of 
immune organ weights and the proliferation response of splenocytes stimulated
with the T cell mitogens concanavalin A (Con A) and phytohemagglutinin and the B 
cell mitogen lipopolysaccharide. In addition, analysis of T cell subpopulations
in thymus and spleen was conducted using direct and indirect immunofluorescence
and flow cytometry. Data analyses for the main effects of congenital
hypothyroidism on immune development revealed a significantly lower absolute
thymus weight (P < 0.001), a lower (P = 0.022) percentage of thymocytes
expressing CD8 (CD8+), a higher (P = 0.010) ratio between CD4+ and CD8+
thymocytes, a lower (P < 0.001) absolute and adjusted spleen weight, a lower (P =
0.001) Con A to phytohemagglutinin response ratio, a higher (P = 0.003)
percentage of CD4+ splenocytes, and a marginally significant (P = 0.055) increase
in the ratio between CD4+ and CD8+ splenocytes in hypothyroid compared with
euthyroid mice. Data analyses for the main effects of maternal hypothyroidism
revealed a significantly higher absolute (P = 0.025) and adjusted (P = 0.001)
thymus weight, a higher (P = 0.006) ratio between CD4+ and CD8+ thymocytes, a
lower Con A (P = 0.018) and lipopolysaccharides (P < 0.001) response, a
marginally (P = 0.069) lower Con A to phytohemagglutinin response ratio, a lower 
(P = 0.001) percentage of CD4+ splenocytes, and a lower (P = 0.003) ratio between
CD4+ and CD8+ splenocytes in progeny of hypothyroid compared with progeny of
euthyroid mothers. These data provide further evidence for the importance of
normal thyroid function in the development, maintenance, and function of the
immune system. It was concluded that not only congenital hypothyroidism results
in altered immune development in young-adult mice, but also long-term effects on 
immune development occur in progeny of hypothyroid mothers.

PMID: 8372095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Jul 25;21(15):3580.

Coding sequence of ERF-1, the human homologue of Tis11b/cMG1, members of the
Tis11 family of early response genes.

Barnard RC(1), Pascall JC, Brown KD, McKay IA, Williams NS, Bustin SA.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Unit, London Hospital Medical College, Whitechapel, UK.

PMCID: PMC331466
PMID: 8346037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Oncogene. 1993 Jul;8(7):1783-90.

Transactivation of GATA-1 promoter with ETS1, ETS2 and ERGB/Hu-FLI-1 proteins:
stabilization of the ETS1 protein binding on GATA-1 promoter sequences by
monoclonal antibody.

Seth A(1), Robinson L, Thompson DM, Watson DK, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

Ets family proteins activate transcription via binding to the GGAA core sequence 
located in the promoter/enhancer elements of many cellular and viral genes.
GATA-1 is an erythroid-specific transcription factor. The promoter of the chicken
GATA-1 gene contains multiple ets binding sites (EBS), two of them are present in
palindromic form. The GATA-1 promoter has been shown to be activated by the E26
virus. In this study, we have analysed whether the palidromic EBS of the chicken 
GATA-1 promoter is a target for binding and activation by members of the cellular
ets gene family products. The results herein indicate that both EBS in the
palindrome are required for DNA-binding because mutations in either site reduces 
the activity by at least 95%. Moreover, DNA binding of ETS1 to the EBS palindrome
is dramatically stabilized in the presence of a specific monoclonal antibody
whose epitope maps between amino acid positions 240-260. Although each of the
single sites bind, the efficiency of binding is extremely low. Furthermore, for
efficient binding the two sites must be in an inverted configuration because of
the fact that the oligonucleotide containing the left and right EBS in the same
orientation binds 10-fold less than the oligonucleotide containing the EBS
palindrome. Additionally, we show that the transcription of a reporter gene (CAT)
either linked to the GATA-1 EBS palindrome or GATA-1 promoter can be activated by
cotransfection with ETS1, alternatively-spliced ETS1, ETS2 or ERGB/Hu-FLI-1
expression vectors.

PMID: 8510925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Minerva Med. 1993 Jun;84(6):351-4.

[Idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis: effectiveness of surgery combined with
corticosteroid therapy].

[Article in Italian]

Vincenzi V(1), Costan Biedo F, D'Andrea P, Favretti F, De Marchi G, Basevi A.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione Medicina II, Ospedale Civile di Belluno.

Idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis (ERF) is a rare disease characterized by
non-neoplastic fibroblastic and inflammatory proliferation. We describe a case of
a 58-year-old man presenting with abdominal pain, weight loss and abdominal mass 
on clinical examination. The patient was evaluated by abdominal CT scan and
magnetic resonance imaging which disclosed a periaortic soft-tissue mass with
marked longitudinal extension below renal arteries origin. The diagnosis of ERF
was histologically confirmed after surgical exploration and biopsies followed by 
extensive ablation of fibrous tissue. After 6 months of low-doses of
postoperative steroid therapy retroperitoneal fibrous tissue had almost
disappeared on CT examination.

PMID: 8336845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 1993 Apr 5;268(10):7196-204.

A polyomavirus enhancer A-binding protein-3 site and Ets-2 protein have a major
role in the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate response of the human
stromelysin gene.

Buttice G(1), Kurkinen M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, Piscataway 08854.

The expression of stromelysin, a major matrix metalloproteinase of connective
tissues, is regulated by several cytokines, growth factors, protooncogenes as
well as by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). The human stromelysin gene
promoter contains an activator protein-1 (Fos/Jun) binding site at -70, which is 
required for basal expression but is not necessary for the TPA response. In this 
study, using promoter deletion mutants in transient gene transfection
experiments, we first identify the sequence from -220 to -202 as necessary for
the TPA response of the stromelysin gene. Further, among the restriction
fragments from the 1.3-kilobase long promoter, only the proximal fragment (-274
to -101) conferred a TPA response on the heterologous thymidine kinase gene
promoter. The -220 to -202 sequence contains two copies of a motif similar to the
polyomavirus enhancer A-binding protein-3 (PEA-3) site, which binds the Ets
family of oncoproteins and transcription factors. Point mutations of either one
of the two PEA-3 sites, in the 1.3-kilobase long stromelysin promoter context,
reduced basal gene expression. However, only the mutation of the proximal, but
not the distal PEA-3 site, significantly inhibited the TPA response. In
cotransfection experiments, the Ets-2 protein transactivated the stromelysin
promoter and the promoter proximal fragment containing the PEA-3 sites but not
the promoters containing mutated PEA-3 sites. These data suggest that the PEA-3
site, but not the activator protein-1 site, and Ets-2 protein have a major role
in the TPA induction of the human stromelysin gene transcription.

PMID: 8463255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Virol. 1993 Apr;67(4):2421-5.

Localization of the c-ets-2 transactivation domain.

Chumakov AM(1), Chen DL, Chumakova EA, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of Medicine 90048-1869.

The human ets-2 proto-oncogene is one of the homologs of the v-ets gene, found in
avian acutely transforming retrovirus E26 (D. Leprince, A. Gegonne, J. Call, C.
de Taisne, A. Schneeberger, C. Lagrou, and D. Stehelin, Nature [London]
306:395-397, 1983; M. F. Nunn, P. H. Seeburg, C. Moscovici, and P. H. Duesberg,
Nature [London] 306:391-395, 1983), which causes leukemia in chickens. We used
the DNA-binding domain of yeast transcriptional activator GAL4 to locate the
transactivation region of human ets-2. The transactivation domain of ets-2 was
found in the N-terminal part of the protein, which is homologous to ets-1, and
can be disrupted by deletion of a stretch of acidic amino acid residues. A
transactivation-deficient mutant of ets-2 failed to transform Rat-1 cells and
suppressed the transforming activity of coexpressed wild-type ets-2. A mutation
in the putative DNA-binding region of ets-2 abolished transforming activity. We
show that the motif crucial for ets-2 transactivation capability is necessary for
transforming activity in Rat-1 cells. Mutant ets-2 protein that lacks the
transactivation domain has a dominant negative effect on transformation by
wild-type ets-2. We were unable to detect ets-2-dependent transcriptional
regulation of several enhancers containing ets-binding motifs.

PMCID: PMC240417
PMID: 8445738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Khirurgiia (Mosk). 1993 Apr;(4):49-52.

[External respiration in patients with craniocerebral injury].

[Article in Russian]

Vakhidov AV.

One hundred and twenty patients with a severe craniocerebral trauma were examined
to study disorders of external respiration function (ERF) in this injury. The
static and dynamic parameters of ERF were determined daily for the first week and
on the 10th, 14th, 21st, and 28th days after the trauma. It was found that the
underlying factors of ERF disorders in trauma of the brain were diminished
volumes and capacities of the lungs, impaired bronchial patency with subsequent
development of atelectasis of the lungs and the pulmonary shunt, which were
determined by the severity and level of damage of the brain structures. The
pharmacological test conducted in the posttraumatic period showed that
bronchospasm persisting for a month developed twice more frequently in patients
with a severe trauma than in those with a moderately severe injury.

PMID: 8084169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Oncogene. 1993 Mar;8(3):771-80.

c-Ets-1 protein is hyperphosphorylated during mitosis.

Fleischman LF(1), Pilaro AM, Murakami K, Kondoh A, Fisher RJ, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

The ets-1 and ets-2 proto-oncogene products can serve as transcription factors
and become phosphorylated in response to Ca(2+)-mediated signals. We have
examined expression of Ets proteins during the cell cycle in cells synchronized
by centrifugal elutriation or nocodazole-induced mitotic block. Both methods
revealed the presence of a hyperphosphorylated isoform of Ets-1 during the
mitotic phase. This isoform showed a characteristic mobility shift and was
observed during mitosis in each of four cell lines (three human T-cell lines and 
a human astrocytoma) that express ets-1. In elutriated cells, only a small
portion of the Ets-1 in cells from the G2/M fractions was hyperphosphorylated,
while in nocodazole-arrested cells more of the Ets-1 was shifted. When cells were
released from nocodazole arrest, this isoform disappeared within 1-2 h as cells
completed mitosis and entered G1. This suggests that hyperphosphorylated Ets-1 is
present transiently during early mitosis, before or around the time of the
metaphase-anaphase transition. Exposure of unsynchronized cells to okadaic acid
resulted in a dramatic hyperphosphorylation of virtually all Ets-1, suggesting
that changes in cellular phosphatase activity are important for cell cycle
regulation of Ets-1. Hyperphosphorylated Ets-1 appears to arise from multiple
phosphorylations on serine in the exon 7-encoded domain of the protein and did
not appear to alter sequence-specific DNA-binding activity. Although enhanced
phosphorylation of Ets-2 was detected in nocodazole-arrested cells, no Ets-2
hyperphosphorylation was seen.

PMID: 8437861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm. 1993 Feb;21(1):19-30.

Variability in the renal clearance of cephalexin in experimental renal failure.

Maïza A(1), Daley-Yates PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Manchester, United Kingdom.

This study forms a part of an investigation into the extent to which the type of 
renal damage influences the renal clearance of drugs. We have already
demonstrated an effect of different types of experimental renal failure (ERF) on 
the renal clearance of two cations: cimetidine, a drug that is filtered and
secreted by the nephron, and lithium, which is filtered and reabsorbed by more
than one segment of the nephron. In this report the renal clearance of cephalexin
(CLCEX) is investigated, a drug that has a different mode of renal elimination,
since it is filtered, secreted, and reabsorbed by the proximal tubules. The aim
was to extend our earlier studies to an organic anion, and to provide an
opportunity to evaluate the feasibility of using the renal clearance of
N-1-methylnicotinamide (NMN) to predict the renal clearance of anionic drugs in
renal failure. Different models of site-specific ERF have been developed in the
rat; proximal tubular necrosis (induced by cisplatin), papillary necrosis
(induced by 2-bromoethylamine), and glomerulonephritis (induced by sodium
aurothiomalate or by antiglomerular basement membrane antibodies). Glomerular
function (GFR) was assessed by the clearance of inulin (CLNULIN), and tubular
function was assessed by the clearance of endogenous NMN (CLNMN). OUr results
show that even if the models of ERF used were not absolutely site-specific,
glomerular function and tubular function did not decrease to the same extent in
the different ERF. Therefore, glomerulo-tubular imbalance existed, which is
incompatible with the "intact nephron hypothesis," i.e., the site of the damage
along the nephron and not only the degree of renal dysfunction, is a potential
source of variability in the clearance of certain drugs. The renal clearance of
cephalexin was estimated more accurately by CLNMN than GFR (r = 0.90). We
conclude that the clearance of the endogenous cation NMN can be used to predict
the renal clearance of drugs that are not only filtered by the glomeruli but also
secreted and/or reabsorbed by the proximal tubules, and in the limited examples
investigated appears to apply to both anionic and cationic compounds. In this
respect the GFR alone was not an adequate parameter for the prediction of the
renal clearance of such drugs.

PMID: 8410681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Jan 15;190(1):8-14.

Evolution of the ets gene family.

Laudet V(1), Niel C, Duterque-Coquillaud M, Leprince D, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

Over the past few years a variety of genes have been described whose protein
products share similarity with that of the c-ets-1 proto-oncogene, the cellular
counterpart of the v-ets oncogene of the avian E26 retrovirus. This so-called
"ets family" of transcription factors includes at least a dozen members present
in several organisms. We have questioned the common evolutionary origin of these 
various gene products. By constructing phylogenetical trees with different
methods, we show that the ets family is very ancient since the duplication of the
various groups of ets related proteins occurred before the Arthropods/Vertebrates
split (ca. 500 million years).

PMID: 8422262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Chem Biol Interact. 1993 Jan;86(1):51-68.

Effects of acute sodium arsenite administration on the pulmonary chemical
metabolizing enzymes, cytochrome P-450 monooxygenase, NAD(P)H:quinone acceptor
oxidoreductase and glutathione S-transferase in guinea pig: comparison with
effects in liver and kidney.

Falkner KC(1), McCallum GP, Cherian MG, Bend JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Canada.

Tissue specific changes in the cytochrome P-450 (P-450) monooxygenase system were
observed following a single subcutaneous dose of sodium arsenite (75 mumol/kg), a
known inducer of stress proteins. P-450 monooxygenase activities were assayed
with several isozyme selective substrates; 7-ethoxyresorufin, 7-pentoxyresorufin,
4-aminobiphenyl and erythromycin. Both tissue selective and isozyme selective
changes in monooxygenase activity were noted. For example, the rate of
4-aminobiphenyl N-hydroxylation (ABH) was increased by arsenite administration in
lung but not in liver. Arsenite inhibited 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation (ERF) 
in all tissues of control animals, but to a lesser extent in lung. However,
increases of ERF activity occurred after arsenite treatment in lung of
beta-naphthoflavone (beta NF)-treated guinea pigs whereas arsenite decreased ERF 
activities in the kidney and liver of these animals. These complex effects on ERF
activity may in part be modulated by induction of heme oxygenase, whose activity 
was increased 2.5-3.5-fold in these organs by arsenite. The highest heme
oxygenase activity was found in kidney with lower activities being present in
liver and lung, respectively. These data are consistent with the decreased P-450 
content observed in kidney and liver microsomes of arsenite treated guinea pigs. 
On the other hand there was either no change or a slight increase (about 2-fold) 
in the pulmonary microsomal P-450 content of these animals. A complex pattern of 
induction for the non-heme, Ah locus associated enzyme, NAD(P)H:quinone acceptor 
oxidoreductase (QOR) was also observed. With menadione as substrate arsenite
treatment increased QOR activity in all tissues studied. However, with
dichlorophenolindophenol (DCPIP) as substrate a significant arsenite effect was
observed only in the kidney. Significant differences between the QOR substrates
were also observed in beta NF-treated guinea pigs and control animals. Our
results are consistent with the presence of more than one form of QOR in the
guinea pig. Arsenite treatment also caused an increase in glutathione
S-transferase activity, with 2,4-dinitro-1-chlorobenzene (DNCB) as substrate, of 
guinea pig kidney but not liver or lung.

PMID: 8431965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jan;13(1):668-76.

GATA and Ets cis-acting sequences mediate megakaryocyte-specific expression.

Lemarchandel V(1), Ghysdael J, Mignotte V, Rahuel C, Roméo PH.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.91, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Creteil, France.

The human glycoprotein IIB (GPIIB) gene is expressed only in megakaryocytes, and 
its promoter displays cell type specificity. We show that this specificity
involved two cis-acting sequences. The first one, located at -55, contains a GATA
binding site. Point mutations that abolish protein binding on this site decrease 
the activity of the GPIIB promoter but do not affect its tissue specificity. The 
second one, located at -40, contains an Ets consensus sequence, and we show that 
Ets-1 or Ets-2 protein can interact with this -40 GPIIB sequence. Point mutations
that impair Ets binding decrease the activity of the GPIIB promoter to the same
extent as do mutations that abolish GATA binding. A GPIIB 40-bp DNA fragment
containing the GATA and Ets binding sites can confer activity to a heterologous
promoter in megakaryocytic cells. This activity is independent of the GPIIB DNA
fragment orientation, and mutations on each binding site result in decreased
activity. Using cotransfection assays, we show that c-Ets-1 and human GATA1 can
transactive the GPIIB promoter in HeLa cells and can act additively. Northern
(RNA) blot analysis indicates that the ets-1 mRNA level is increased during
megakaryocyte-induced differentiation of erythrocytic/megakaryocytic cell lines. 
Gel retardation assays show that the same GATA-Ets association is found in the
human GPIIB enhancer and the rat platelet factor 4 promoter, the other two
characterized regulatory regions of megakaryocyte-specific genes. These results
indicate that GATA and Ets cis-acting sequences are an important determinant of
megakaryocytic specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC358945
PMID: 8417360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Bacteriol. 1993 Jan;175(1):288-90.

Host RecJ is required for growth of P22 erf bacteriophage.

Mahan MJ(1), Garzón A, Casadesús J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

Growth of bacteriophage P22 erf is known to require host RecA recombination
function. We show that the RecA function is necessary but not sufficient to
restore the plaque-forming ability of phage P22 erf; such mutant phage also
requires host RecJ function. The residual efficiency of plaquing of P22 erf in a 
recJ background (0.03%) is completely abolished in recJ recB hosts (< 0.001%),
suggesting that the RecBCD nuclease can provide an alternative function allowing 
phage growth. One tentative explanation is that circularization of P22 erf DNA
mostly proceeds through the RecF pathway of recombination; however, less
efficient circularization via the RecBCD pathway may also occur. In a recJ
background, lysates obtained upon induction of an erf prophage show reduced yield
(10%), suggesting that growth of P22 erf may require host RecJ in a step(s) other
than circularization of phage DNA.

PMCID: PMC196124
PMID: 8416903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Ter Arkh. 1993;65(3):23-5.

[Diaphragmatic electrostimulation in bronchial asthma patients].

[Article in Russian]

Karashurova ES, Karashurov ES.

A study was made of the effect of transcutaneous diaphragmatic electrostimulation
(DES) on the external respiratory function (ERF) and central hemodynamics (CH) in
36 asthmatic patients. The ERF and CH were examined by microprocessor
spiroanalyzers and rheography. DES (2 mA, 0.3 ms, 20-30 v, frequency 13-17
imp/min) was performed for 7 days, 20 minutes daily. The improvement in
respiratory function parameters and a positive clinical effect were achieved in
the majority of patients, especially in asthmatic patients with respiratory
insufficiency. The parameters of CH did not noticeably changed.

PMID: 8059375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Ter Arkh. 1993;65(3):19-22.

[The late results of thrombocytapheresis in bronchial asthma patients].

[Article in Russian]

Tatarskii AR, Emirova AS, Bobkov EV, Alieva KM, Karnaushkina MA.

A long-term follow-up (within 18 months) has been conducted of bronchial asthma
(BA) patients (a total of 29 cases with atopic, aspirin and mixed BA forms)
subjected to thrombocytapheresis. The examination performed in 1-2 month
intervals included a berotec test, assessment of platelet aggregation, platelet
intracellular calcium metabolism, external respiration function (ERF). The
treatment resulted in remission of 4-18 month duration. It was characterized by
ERF normalization, high sensitivity to sympathomimetics, platelet status
improvement. The best results were achieved in the groups of atopic and aspirin
asthma patients. The findings allow recommendation of thrombocytapheresis as a
method of choice in combined therapy of BA.

PMID: 8059374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Dec;12(12):5355-62.

Mitogenic signaling by colony-stimulating factor 1 and ras is suppressed by the
ets-2 DNA-binding domain and restored by myc overexpression.

Langer SJ(1), Bortner DM, Roussel MF, Sherr CJ, Ostrowski MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710.

The activity of p21ras is required for the proliferative response to
colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1), and signals transduced by both the CSF-1
receptor (CSF-1R) and p21ras stimulate transcription from promoter elements
containing overlapping binding sites for Fos/Jun- and Ets-related proteins. A
sequence encoding the DNA-binding domain and nuclear localization signal of human
c-ets-2, which lacked portions of the c-ets-2 gene product necessary for trans
activation, was fused to the bacterial lacZ gene and expressed from an actin
promoter in NIH 3T3 cells expressing either the v-ras oncogene or human CSF-1R.
Nuclear expression of the Ets-LacZ protein, confirmed by histochemical staining
of beta-galactosidase, inhibited the activity of ras-responsive enhancer elements
and suppressed morphologic transformation by v-ras as well as CSF-1R-dependent
colony formation in semisolid medium. When CSF-1R-bearing cells expressing the
Ets-LacZ protein were stimulated by CSF-1, induction of c-ets-2, c-jun, and c-fos
ensued, but the c-myc response was impaired. Enforced expression of the c-myc
gene overrode the suppressive effect of ets-lacZ and restored the ability of
these cells to form colonies in response to CSF-1. NIH 3T3 cells engineered to
express a CSF-1R (Phe-809) mutant similarly cannot form CSF-1-dependent colonies 
in semisolid medium and exhibit an impaired c-myc response, but expression of an 
exogenous myc gene resensitizes these cells to CSF-1 [M. F. Roussel, J. L.
Cleveland, S. A. Shurtleff, and C. J. Sherr, Nature (London) 353:361-363, 1991]. 
The ability of these cells to respond to CSF-1 was also rescued by enforced
expression of an endogenous c-ets-2 gene. The ets family of transcription factors
therefore plays a central role in integrating both CSF-1R and ras-induced
mitogenic signals and in modulating the myc response to CSF-1 stimulation.

PMCID: PMC360473
PMID: 1448070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Leuk Lymphoma. 1992 Nov;8(4-5):327-36.

Megakaryocytic leukemia and platelet factor 4.

Ryo R(1), Yasunaga M, Saigo K, Yamaguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Transfusion Service, Kobe University Hospital, Japan.

The de novo megakaryocytic leukemia fulfilling the FAB criteria is still an
uncommonly recognized variant of acute leukemia. Many studies have shown that the
megakaryocytic leukemic events may occur at a pluripotent stem cell level and
clinical observations reveal that the megakaryocytic leukemias are diverse
entities. The immunophenotyping using monoclonal antibodies against platelet
specific surface antigens and the ultrastructural detection of platelet
peroxidase reaction do not provide sufficiently useful information to determine
whether a megakaryocytic leukemia is chronic, acute, therapy-responsive or
therapy-unresponsive. More sophisticated techniques are required to further
characterize megakaryocytic leukemic cells. In this review, we emphasize that
megakaryocytic leukemic cells can be categorized into two groups; one with the
PF4 mRNA, and the other without it, and that the expression of PF4 mRNA in the
blasts could be a useful marker for the identification of mature megakaryoblasts.
It seems that the patients with blasts expressing PF4 mRNA will have a longer
survival and a better response to chemotherapy than those without PF4. We further
discuss the fact that the detection of mRNAs of the IL-6 receptor, PDGF A- and
B-chains, and TGF beta 1 in megakaryocytic leukemic cells will be useful to
clarify the mechanisms involved in the proliferation of megakaryocytic leukemic
cells and fibroblasts in the bone marrow. Furthermore, we reviewed data showing
that megakaryocytic erythroid, and mast cell lineages share the nuclear
transcription factor known as GF-1 (NF-E1 or Erf-1). We suggest that
characterization of megakaryocytic leukemia should be performed using monoclonal 
antibodies against erythroid, megakaryocytic and mast cell lineages.

PMID: 1337850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Wildl Dis. 1992 Oct;28(4):669-73.

White phosphorus poisoning of waterfowl in an Alaskan salt marsh.

Racine CH(1), Walsh ME, Roebuck BD, Collins CM, Calkins D, Reitsma L, Buchli P,
Goldfarb G.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, Hanover, New
Hampshire 03755.

The cause of the yearly death of an estimated 1,000 to 2,000 migrating dabbling
ducks (Anas spp.) and 10 to 50 swans (Cygnus buccinator and C. columbianus) has
remained a mystery for the last ten years in Eagle River Flats (ERF), a 1,000 ha 
estuarine salt marsh near Anchorage, Alaska, used for artillery training by the
U.S. Army. We have gathered evidence that the cause of this mortality is the
highly toxic, incendiary munition white phosphorus (P4). The symptoms of
poisoning we observed in wild ducks included lethargy, repeated drinking, and
head shaking and rolling. Death was preceded by convulsions. Farm-reared mallards
dosed with white phosphorus showed nearly identical behavioral symptoms to those 
of wild ducks that became sick in ERF. White phosphorus does not occur in nature 
but was found in both the sediments where dabbling ducks and swans feed and in
the gizzards of all carcasses collected in ERF. We hypothesize that feeding
waterfowl are ingesting small particles of the highly toxic, incendiary munition 
P4 stored in the bottom anoxic sediments of shallow salt marsh ponds.

PMID: 1474672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Oct 1;89(19):8889-93.

An inhibitory carboxyl-terminal domain in Ets-1 and Ets-2 mediates differential
binding of ETS family factors to promoter sequences of the mb-1 gene.

Hagman J(1), Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of California, San Francisco 94143-0414.

The mb-1 gene is expressed only during the early stages of B-lymphocyte
differentiation. Here we show that the mb-1 proximal promoter region contains a
functionally important binding site for members of the ETS family of DNA-binding 
proteins. We found that both the E26 virus-encoded v-ets and the
myeloid/B-cell-specific factor PU.1 bind efficiently to this site in vitro. By
contrast, Ets-1, the lymphocyte-specific cellular homologue of v-ets, and the
related, more ubiquitously expressed Ets-2 protein interacted weakly with this
binding site. DNA binding by both Ets-1 and Ets-2, however, could be increased
20- to 50-fold by deleting as few as 16 carboxyl-terminal amino acids. The
inhibitory carboxyl-terminal amino acid sequence is highly conserved between
Ets-1 and Ets-2 but is not present in either v-ets or PU.1. Replacement of the
carboxyl-terminal amino acids of v-ets with those of Ets-1 decreased DNA binding 
by v-ets drastically. Cotranslation of Ets-1 transcripts encoding proteins of
different lengths suggested that Ets-1 binds DNA as a monomer. Therefore, the
carboxyl-terminal inhibitory domain appears to interfere directly with DNA
binding and not with homodimerization. Finally, the functional relevance of ETS
factor binding to the mb-1 promoter site was evidenced by the stimulation of
transcription through this site by a v-myb-v-ets fusion protein. Together, these 
data suggest that one or more ETS family factors are involved in the regulation
of mb-1 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC50029
PMID: 1409581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Exp Cell Res. 1992 Sep;202(1):199-202.

Ets-1 and Ets-2 protooncogene expression in theca cells of the adult mouse ovary.

Rowe A(1), Propst F.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, St. Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, United Kingdom.

We have investigated the mRNA expression of the Ets-1 and Ets-2 genes in murine
gonads and found expression in adult ovaries. In situ hybridization experiments
show that the Ets genes are predominantly expressed in theca cells and cells of
ovarian interstitium. By gel retardation experiments we detected DNA binding
proteins in ovaries that specifically bind to the ETS motif, suggesting the
expression of Ets or Ets-related proteins. Our results raise the possibility of
Ets-2 involvement in ovarian pathology seen in patients with Down's syndrome.

PMID: 1511734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Aug 1;89(15):6856-60.

pokkuri, a Drosophila gene encoding an E-26-specific (Ets) domain protein,
prevents overproduction of the R7 photoreceptor.

Tei H(1), Nihonmatsu I, Yokokura T, Ueda R, Sano Y, Okuda T, Sato K, Hirata K,
Fujita SC, Yamamoto D.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.

Studies on sevenless and bride of sevenless genes have revealed that the R8 cell 
plays a key role in the fate of the R7 photoreceptor cell, presenting on its
surface an inductive cue to which R7 responds. sev-independent induction of R7
cells has been reported in the seven-up mutation, which appears to transform R1
and R6 cells to R7 cells. We have induced recessive mutations in a gene pokkuri
(pok; pokkuri is a Japanese word that means "dropping dead") that lead to
overproduction of R7 cells with rather minor effects on outer photoreceptors and 
R8 cells. Pok protein may function as a transcription factor, as the predicted
amino acid sequence contains a region similar to the consensus established for
the E-26-specific (Ets) domain.

PMCID: PMC49603
PMID: 1495974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1992 Jul;5(1):1-13.

Expression of the ETS2 and transferrin receptor genes in Philadelphia-positive
chronic myeloid leukemia patients with a reciprocal t(3;21).

Lafage-Pochitaloff M(1), Courcoul M, Simonetti J, Sainty D, Dastugue N, Tabilio
A, Hagemeijer A, Birg F.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 119, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Marseille, France.

The translocation t(3;21)(q26;q22) is a rare recurring clonal abnormality, either
preceding or associated with blast crisis in Philadelphia chromosome-positive
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients. We previously localized the chromosomal 
breakpoints at 3q26.2 and 21q22.2, using high resolution chromosomal analysis.
Two genes of interest are localized near the breakpoints, the transferrin
receptor gene and the ETS2 proto-oncogene. Their chromosomal localizations,
determined by in situ hybridization on normal metaphase cells, were 3q29 and
21q22.3, respectively. They underwent a reciprocal translocation in patients with
t(3;21). Their structures were not altered by the translocation, and both were
expressed to varying levels in t(3;21) patients. Southern blotting investigations
showed that the structure of other single-copy genes, including FIM3, localized
near the breakpoints, were not affected by the translocation. An analysis of ETS2
expression performed on CML patients without t(3;21) showed the presence of the
transcript in 100% of the blast crises, but only in 20% of the chronic-phase
patients. Thus ETS2 expression may either be linked to or play a role in CML
progression.

PMID: 1384656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd. 1992 Jun;52(6):355-9.

[Epidermal growth factor receptor in human breast cancer: correlation with
steroid receptors, tumor stage, grading and menopausal status].

[Article in German]

Speiser P(1), Sliutz G, Zeillinger R, Czerwenka K, Jakesz R, Knogler W, Kury F,
Reiner A, Sevelda P, Schneeberger C, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Molekulare Onkologie, I. Universitäts-Frauenklinik, Wien.

In this study, correlations between the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R),
steroid receptors, and other prognostic parameters (grading, pTNM-status,
menopausal status) were analysed in 326 primary breast carcinomas. 19% of the
tumour samples were EGF-R positive, 63% were estrogen receptor (ER) and 54%
progesteron receptor (PR) positive. Both steroid receptors were positive in 46%
of all samples. We found a highly significant inverse correlation between EGF-R
and steroid receptors. 88% of the ER positive tumours were EGF-R negative (p less
than 5 x 10(-5)), 90% of the PR positive tumours were EGF-R negative (p less than
5 x 10(-5)) and 91% of the ER plus PR positive tumours were ERF-R negative (p
less than 1 x 10(-6)). Grading was available in 170 cases. Six (4%) of the
carcinomas were highly differentiated (G1), 82 (48%) were classified as G2, and
another 82 (48%) were poorly differentiated (G3). A combination of negative ER
and positive EGF-R was found more often in the population of G3 tumours. EGF-R
was also positively correlated to tumour size. With regard to receptor status, we
did not find a correlation with lymph node involvement. The ER correlated
negatively (p less than 1.3 x 10(-5) and the EGF-R positively (p less than 0.042)
with menopausal status. Thus, EGF-R overexpression seems to be a marker of
morphological and functional dedifferentiation which is associated with a loss of
steroid dependency and an increase of an autostimulatory-paracrine growth
control. These changes seem to be related to poor prognosis.

PMID: 1634099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Genes Dev. 1992 Jun;6(6):965-74.

A novel modulator domain of Ets transcription factors.

Wasylyk C(1), Kerckaert JP, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-Laboratoire de Génétique
Moléculaire des Eucaryotes/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM), Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

The ets gene family is composed of several oncogenes and codes for transcription 
factors. The Ets proteins have a similar sequence called the ets domain and bind 
to the core motif A/CGGAA. We show here that several members of the ets family
have different trans-activating properties. The ets domain of Ets-1 is required
for DNA binding. Adjacent to this domain there is a novel element that inhibits
DNA binding. It appears to alter the structure of the DNA-binding domain before
it interacts with DNA. There is a similar sequence in Ets-2 that also inhibits
DNA binding. This sequence is absent in alternative splice products of h-Ets-1.
PU1, the most distantly related member of the ets gene family, lacks this novel
element. It has a distinct DNA-binding specificity that is determined by DNA
sequences outside the core motif. These results have important implications for
both the oncogenic and normal functions of ets family members.

PMID: 1592263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 May;12(5):2213-21.

Expression of a 91-kilodalton PEA3-binding protein is down-regulated during
differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Martin ME(1), Yang XY, Folk WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia 65212.

Proteins binding to the PEA3 enhancer motif (AGGAAG) activate the polyomavirus
early promoter and help comprise the viral late mRNA initiator element (W. Yoo,
M. E. Martin, and W. R. Folk, J. Virol. 65:5391-5400, 1991). Because many
developmentally regulated cellular genes have PEA3 motifs near their promoter
sequences, and because Ets family gene products activate the PEA3 motif, we have 
studied the expression of PEA3-binding proteins and Ets-related proteins during
differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells. An approximately 91-kDa protein 
(PEA3-91) was identified in F9 cell nuclear extracts by UV cross-linking to a
radiolabeled PEA3 oligonucleotide probe, and expression of PEA3-91 was
down-regulated after differentiation of F9 cells to parietal endoderm. The
c-ets-1 gene product binds to a sequence in the murine sarcoma virus long
terminal repeat that is similar to the PEA3 motif (cGGAAG), but PEA3-91 was not
cross-linked to this Ets-1-binding motif, nor did antiserum which recognizes
murine c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 proteins have any effect on PEA3-binding activity in
mobility shift assays. Furthermore, c-ets-1 mRNA was not detected in
undifferentiated or differentiated F9 cells, and c-ets-2 mRNA levels remained
high after differentiation. Antiserum against the Drosophila Ets-related E74A
protein, however, recognized an approximately 92-kDa protein in F9 cells whose
expression during differentiation varied in a manner identical to that of
PEA3-91. These data suggest that PEA3-91 is not the product of the ets-1 or ets-2
genes but is likely to be the product of a murine homolog of the Drosophila E74
gene.

PMCID: PMC364393
PMID: 1569949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 1992 May;8(5):824-33.

"Oncogenes as probes for cellular signal processes: the family of ETS genes".

Papas TS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201.

PMID: 1515233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Clin Chem. 1992 Apr;38(4):558-62.

Method-dependent differences in apparent sodium concentrations in plasma after
exchange transfusions with citrated blood.

Schots J(1), De Raeve H, Boeyckens A, Umbrain V, Verbeek F, Gorus FK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Academisch Ziekenhuis, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Belgium.

Shortly after exchange transfusions (n = 7) with citrate-dextrose-phosphate
(CDP)-treated blood, but not after regular transfusions (n = 9), sodium
concentrations in plasma were significantly and paradoxically lower (3-10 mmol/L)
by Ektachem 700 XR determination [with use of electrolyte reference fluid (ERF)
generation 00] than by flame photometry. Similar between-method differences could
also be generated by in vitro supplementation of plasma pools with CDP solution, 
with trisodium citrate, or to a lesser extent with Na2HPO4. For four
potentiometric methods the analytical recovery of sodium added as CDP was
significantly lower than by flame photometry. Within each potentiometric method
the recovery was also less than the value for sodium added as NaCl. A significant
association of sodium ions with citrate3- ions and, to a lesser extent, HPO4(2-) 
ions could theoretically account for at least part of the observations,
conferring greater medical relevance to potentiometric measurements in this
particular clinical situation.

PMID: 1568322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Oncogene. 1992 Feb;7(2):249-56.

Two independent activation domains in c-Ets-1 and c-Ets-2 located in
non-conserved sequences of the ets gene family.

Schneikert J(1), Lutz Y, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-LGME/INSERM-U. 184, Institut de Chimie Biologique, Faculté de Médecine,
Strasbourg, France.

The c-Ets-1 oncoprotein is a transcription activator that specifically binds to
DNA. We show, using fusion proteins with heterologous DNA-binding domains, that
chicken c-Ets-1 (p68) contains two independent activation domains. The N-terminal
activation domain is absent in c-Ets-1 (p54) that is generated from an
alternatively spliced mRNA. A closely related member of the ets gene family,
c-Ets-2, also contains two separate activation domains. They lie in the regions
of the protein that are least conserved with c-Ets-1, suggesting that the
activating function will determine the different physiological roles of these two
proteins. The activation domains of c-Ets-1 (p68) and -2 are separated by a
moderately conserved region that does not activate on its own. These sequences
appear to affect stimulation by the domains, suggesting that they regulate
transcription activation. Competition experiments show that c-Ets-1 and -2
interact with a common limiting coactivator. These studies provide important
clues about the physiological roles of closely related members of the ets gene
family.

PMID: 1549346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Jan 25;20(2):371.

Characterization of the cDNA sequences of two Xenopus ets-2 proto-oncogenes.

Burdett LA(1), Qi S, Chen ZQ, Lautenberger JA, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201.

PMCID: PMC310385
PMID: 1741266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Clin Chem. 1992 Jan;38(1):114-8.

Ektachem slides for direct potentiometric determination of sodium in plasma:
effect of natremia, blood pH, and type of electrolyte reference fluid on
concordance with flame photometry and other potentiometric methods.

Boeyckens A(1), Schots J, Vandenplas H, Senesael F, Goedhuys W, Gorus FK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Akademisch Ziekenhuis, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel (AZ-VUB), Belgium.

With electrolyte reference fluid (ERF)00, results from Kodak Ektachem slides for 
the direct potentiometric assay of sodium in plasma were significantly correlated
with results from flame photometry, but also appeared to be systematically
higher, especially in hypernatremic patients. Indirect potentiometry with the
Technicon RA-1000 yielded intermediate values. In 23 hypernatremic patients with 
greater than or equal to 6 mmol/L difference in sodium between Ektachem ERF00 and
flame photometry, a clinical survey disclosed the frequent association of large
between-method differences with renal failure, diabetes mellitus, and
gastrointestinal disease. However, there was no correlation between differences
in sodium on the one hand and anion gaps or (lipo)protein concentrations on the
other, nor did in vitro addition studies implicate metabolites that often
accumulate in the above-mentioned disorders. Unlike indirect methods, sodium
measurements by direct potentiometry on Ektachem and Corning were influenced by
in vitro changes of pH between 7.0 and 7.9. However, in a group of patients that 
included many acidotic individuals, between-method differences in sodium appeared
not significantly correlated with in vivo blood pH. Use of the equitransferant
ERF04 on Ektachem strongly diminishes the systematic differences with flame
photometry, reduces the pH-dependency of the results to that of the direct
Corning method, and brings the mean analytical recovery of sodium to below 95%
(instead of 115% previously) without affecting the ability of Ektachem slides to 
avoid spuriously low results in the presence of increased (monoclonal) protein
concentrations.

PMID: 1733582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1992 Jan;58(1):71-5.

Amplification of ETS2 oncogene in acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia with
t(6;21;18).

Santoro A(1), Maggio A, Carbone P, Mirto S, Caronia F, Acuto S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Cellulare e dello Sviluppo A. Monroy, Università di
Palermo, Italy.

Cytogenetic and molecular studies in a case of acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia
(ANLL) are reported in this paper. Bone marrow blasts carried a hypodiploid
karyotype with a complex t(6;18;21)(6qter----6p21::21q22----21qter;18qter
----18p11::6p22----6pter; 21pter----21q22::6p21----6p22::18p11----18pte r) and
other numerical and structural changes. We studied the organization and the
expression of the ETS2 gene which is located on chromosome 21 in order to
investigate its possible involvement in the disease. DNA analysis showed a
20-fold amplification of ETS2 sequences; an increase of 3- to 4-fold in the mRNAs
level compared to normal was shown by Northern hybridization.

PMID: 1728954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1992;61(1):25-8.

Localization of four human chromosome 21 genes--SOD1, ETS2, IFNAR, and CBR--to
two different chromosomes in the marsupial species Macropus eugenii.

Brookes S(1), Maccarone P, de Haan JB, Tymms M, Forrest GL, Graves JA, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Birth Defects Laboratory, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

We have mapped the chromosomal location of four genes previously assigned to
human chromosome 21--Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1), the protooncogene ETS2,
the interferon alpha/beta receptor gene (IFNAR), and the carbonyl reductase gene 
(CBR)--in the tammar, Macropus eugenii. The genes are localized on two separate
autosomes: SOD1 and CBR map to chromosome 7 and ETS2 and IFNAR map to chromosome 
3 or 4. These results provide the first example of asynteny between SOD1/CBR and 
ETS2/IFNAR in a mammalian species. The results suggest that either this synteny
group has been disrupted in the marsupial lineage, or, alternatively, the genes
located on human chromosome 21 may have been joined after the marsupials diverged
from the eutherian mammals some 130-150 million years ago.

PMID: 1380419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Med Phys. 1991 Nov-Dec;18(6):1141-4.

Transfer function measurement and analysis for a magnetic resonance imager.

Mohapatra SM(1), Turley JD, Prince JR, Blechinger JC, Wilson DA.

Author information: 
(1)Magnetic Resonance Center of Oklahoma, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, Oklahoma City 73104.

Comment in
    Med Phys. 1992 Mar-Apr;19(2):511-2; discussion 513.

The transfer function characteristics of a 1.5T imager have been determined. An
edge response function (ERF) was obtained from a water/Plexiglas interface at
various pixel widths ranging from 0.312 to 1.0 mm. An SE pulse sequence was used 
with a 5-mm transaxial slice. The ERF was smoothed, differentiated, and Fourier
transformed to obtain MTF curves. The LSF was analyzed for skewness and kurtosis.
The area under the MTF amplitude curves and the equivalent bandpass were
calculated. All ERFs, LSFs, and MTFs were well behaved. The resulting LSF was
Gaussian. All calculated MTFs had cutoff frequencies slightly less than the
theoretical Nyquist limit. The MTF calculated from the theoretical Gaussian LSF
is slightly superior to that calculated from experimental data and provides an
upper limit to the MTF. Spatial resolution in our MR imager is dominated by the
pixel size via the Nyquist sampling theorem. System performance is slightly less 
than theoretically predicted, possibly due to image processing algorithms during 
the reconstruction process.

PMID: 1753895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Biochemistry. 1991 Aug 6;30(31):7809-17.

A mammalian tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase shows little homology to prokaryotic
synthetases but near identity with mammalian peptide chain release factor.

Garret M(1), Pajot B, Trézéguet V, Labouesse J, Merle M, Gandar JC, Benedetto JP,
Sallafranque ML, Alterio J, Gueguen M, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biochimie Cellulaire et Neurochimie du CNRS, Université de
Bordeaux II, France.

Determination of the amino acid sequence of beef pancreas tryptophanyl-tRNA
synthetase was undertaken through both cDNA and direct peptide sequencing. A
full-length cDNA clone containing a 475 amino acid open reading frame was
obtained. The molecular mass of the corresponding peptide chain, 53,728 Da, was
in agreement with that of beef tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase, as determined by
physicochemical methods (54 kDa). Expression of this clone in Escherichia coli
led to tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase activity in cell extracts. The open reading
frame included two sequences analogous to the consensus sequences, HIGH and
KMSKS, found in class I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. The homology with prokaryotic
and yeast mitochondrial tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetases was low and was limited to 
the regions of the consensus sequences. However, a 90% homology was observed with
the recently described rabbit peptide chain release factor (eRF) [Lee et al.
(1990) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 87, 3508-3512]. Such a strong homology may reveal a
new group of genes deriving from a common ancestor, the products of which could
be involved in tRNA aminoacylation (tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase) or translation 
termination (eRF).

PMID: 1907847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. EMBO J. 1991 May;10(5):1127-34.

The c-Ets oncoprotein activates the stromelysin promoter through the same
elements as several non-nuclear oncoproteins.

Wasylyk C(1), Gutman A, Nicholson R, Wasylyk B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-LGME/INSERM U184, Institut de Chimie Biologique, Faculté de Médecine,
Strasbourg, France.

The c-ets protooncogenes have recently been shown to code for transcription
factors that activate the oncogene responsive unit of the polyoma virus enhancer.
We show that transcription of the stromelysin gene, which is highly expressed in 
transformed cells and tumours, is efficiently activated by c-Ets-1 and -2 through
two DNA elements. The distal element is a highly conserved palindrome composed of
two strong binding sites for c-Ets-1. The proximal element does not bind c-Ets-1,
but may be activated indirectly by increased synthesis of c-Jun and c-Fos. Both
ets responsive elements mediate activation by the oncoproteins Ha-Ras, v-Src and 
v-Mos. These results suggest that c-Ets participates in the mechanisms by which
stromelysin gene expression is deregulated in transformed cells and tumours.

PMCID: PMC452766
PMID: 1850695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Virology. 1991 May;182(1):316-23.

Bacteriophage P22 accessory recombination function.

Poteete AR(1), Fenton AC, Semerjian AV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of
Massachusetts, Worcester 01655.

The accessory recombination function (arf) gene of bacteriophage P22 is located
immediately upstream of the essential recombination function (erf) gene. Three
mutant alleles of arf were constructed and installed in P22 in place of the
wild-type allele: an out-of-frame internal deletion, an in-frame internal
deletion, and an amber mutation. The deletion mutant phages are partially
defective in homologous recombination and plaque formation in wild-type and recA 
hosts; their defects are more severe in recB and recA recB hosts. The amber
mutant phage exhibits the same growth phenotypes in nonsuppressing hosts, but not
in an amber-suppressor host. Plasmids that express arf complement the growth
defect of arf- phages. These plasmids stimulate erf-mediated recombination; they 
were also found to cause a small stimulation of recA-recBCD-mediated homologous
recombination of phage lambda.

PMID: 1827223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm. 1991 Apr;19(2):175-88.

Prediction of the renal clearance of cimetidine using endogenous
N-1-methylnicotinamide.

Maiza A(1), Daley-Yates PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of Manchester, United Kingdom.

We investigated the influence of the type rather than the degree of renal
insufficiency on the renal clearance of drugs. Different models of site specific 
experimental renal failure (ERF) have been developed in the rat; proximal tubular
necrosis, induced by cisplatin; papillary necrosis, induced by 2-bromoethylamine,
and glomerulonephritis, induced by sodium aurothiomalate or by antiglomerular
basement membrane antibody. Several parameters of kidney function were assessed: 
the clearance of inulin, PAH, and endogenous N-1-methylnicotinamide (NMN). Plasma
BUN and creatinine concentrations, and the presence of proteinuria and glucosuria
were also measured. Our results showed a nonparallel decrease in glomerular
filtration rate (GFR) and tubular secretion as measured by the secretory
clearance of endogenous NMN or by the secretory clearance of p-aminohippuric acid
(PAH), that is incompatible with the "intact nephron hypothesis." As a result,
the renal clearance of cimetidine, a drug eliminated mainly by renal secretion,
correlated better with the renal clearance of endogenous NMN than with the GFR.
We conclude that (i) our models of ERF demonstrated the existence of
glomerulo-tubular imbalance that is contrary to expectations based on the intact 
nephron hypothesis; (ii) the type of the renal disease has a direct influence on 
the renal clearance of cimetidine; (iii) the clearance of endogenous NMN may be a
valuable noninvasive test for assessing renal tubular secretion which could be
useful in predicting the clearance of drugs eliminated predominantly by tubular
secretion.

PMID: 1826532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Ter Arkh. 1991;63(3):33-7.

[Interrelationship between lipoxygenase metabolites of arachidonic acid and
pulmonary blood flow and ventilation in acute pneumonia].

[Article in Russian]

Gel'tser BI.

High-pressure liquid chromatography was used to measure the blood content of
lipoxygenase metabolites (LM) of arachidonic acid: leukotriene B4 (LTB4) and
hydroxyeicosatetraene acids (5 HETE, 12 HETE, 15 HETE) in 65 patients with acute 
pneumonia (AP) of mild gravity (group 1) and of medium gravity (group 2), in 23
patients with acute bronchitis (AB), and in 15 normal male persons aged 18 to 20 
years. In all the examined, the zonal pulmonary blood flow was measured by
regional rheopulmonography. External respiratory function (ERF) was also
determined together with the recording of the flow-volume loop. At the height of 
AP and AB, all the patients demonstrated an increase of LM in the blood, with the
maximum LM content being recorded in group 2. During convalescence, AB and AP
patients of group 1 manifested normalization of the majority of the parameters.
In group 2, they significantly exceeded the control level. 5 and 15 HETE had the 
closest correlations with the blood flow parameters, whereas LTB4 and 12 HETE had
less intensive correlations. The influences of LM such as 5 and 15 HETE on the
pulmonary blood flow were associated with deterioration of the blood content of
the lungs and venous return, the action of LTB4 was coupled with venous
congestion formation, that of 12 HETE with the rise of vascular resistance. Close
negative correlations of LTB4 and 5 HETE with the majority of ERF parameters
indicate that they are important factors in the pathogenesis of restrictive and
obstructive ventilatory disorders.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1648273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Science. 1990 Dec 7;250(4986):1416-8.

Requirement of ets-2 expression for Xenopus oocyte maturation.

Chen ZQ(1), Burdett LA, Seth AK, Lautenberger JA, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702.

A molecular clone of the Xenopus laevis ets-2 gene was isolated from an oocyte
complementary DNA library. The amount of messenger RNA (mRNA) in each oocyte or
embryo was almost constant during oogenesis and was maintained until the blastula
stage of embryonic development, indicating that the observed 3.2-kilobase
transcript is a maternal message. The only normal adult tissue in which ets-2
mRNA was detected was the ovary. Injection of antisense oligonucleotides
homologous to the ets-2 sequence into oocytes led to degradation of the mRNA and 
blocked hormone-induced germinal vesicle breakdown. The ets-2 product is thus
required for the meiotic maturation of Xenopus oocytes.

PMID: 2255913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Aug 11;18(15):4603-4.

Isolation of two different c-ets-2 proto-oncogenes in Xenopus laevis.

Wolff CM(1), Stiegler P, Baltzinger M, Meyer D, Ghysdael J, Stéhelin D, Befort N,
Remy P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du CNRS, Strasbourg, France.

PMCID: PMC331296
PMID: 2201951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Hospitals. 1990 Jul 5;64(13):FB58, FB60.

New statutes may increase workforce concerns.

Erf S.

It looks like the 1990s will be difficult years for employers. Hospitals,
especially, face a double whammy: a shrinking supply of workers and increased
regulation of dealings with employees. What can hospitals do to ease the burden? 
Review employment and benefits policies before it's too late.

PMID: 2141824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mil Med. 1990 Jul;155(7):324-6.

Management of unresectable malignant esophageal obstruction.

Wetstein L(1), Brenner A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Medical College of Virginia, Richmond.

Malignant esophageal obstruction (MEO), especially with esophago-respiratory
fistula (ERF), requires efforts to achieve a meaningful degree of palliation.
Laser vaporization (LV) of the esophageal tumor and placement of an
endoesophageal prosthesis (EEP) represents a new combination for palliation of
MEO. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the
neodymium-yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:Yag) laser in reopening the esophageal
channel to permit both swallowing and insertion of an EEP. Twenty-three
consecutive patients with MEO were evaluated, and ERF was documented by
preoperative contrast study in eight patients. All 23 patients underwent laser
vaporization, dilation, and surgical placement of EEP. Adequate swallowing was
attained in 21 patients; one patient with an ERF experienced recurrent aspiration
from failure of the EEP to occlude the fistulous tract. Operative morbidity was
17% (4/23), which included: wound infection, 2; persistence of ERF, 1; esophageal
perforation, 1; and food impaction, 1. Thirty-day operative mortality was 9%
(2/23). Palliation was excellent in 87% (20/23), with discharge from the hospital
by the seventh postoperative day. Mean survival was 3.3 months. We conclude that 
laser vaporization followed by placement of an EEP represents a major advance in 
the palliation of MEO.

PMID: 1703646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 May;87(10):3723-7.

Reciprocal expression of human ETS1 and ETS2 genes during T-cell activation:
regulatory role for the protooncogene ETS1.

Bhat NK(1), Thompson CB, Lindsten T, June CH, Fujiwara S, Koizumi S, Fisher RJ,
Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21701-1013.

The expression of the protooncogenes ETS1 and ETS2 has been studied in purified
human T cells activated either by cross-linking of the T-cell receptor-CD3
complex on their cell surface or by direct stimulation with phorbol esters and
ionomycin. Our results show that resting T cells express high levels of ETS1 mRNA
and protein, while expression of ETS2 is undetectable. Upon T-cell activation,
ETS2 mRNA and proteins are induced, while ETS1 gene expression decreases to very 
low levels. Late after stimulation, ETS1 mRNA is reinduced and maintained at a
high level, while ETS2 gene expression decreases to undetectable levels.
Therefore, it appears that in human T cells, ETS2 gene products are associated
with cellular activation and proliferation, while ETS1 gene products are
preferentially expressed in a quiescent state.

PMCID: PMC53975
PMID: 2187191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Dairy Sci. 1990 Apr;73(4):1130-4.

Inheritance of calf mortality for Brown Swiss cattle.

Erf DF(1), Hansen LB, Neitzel RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Minnesota, St. Paul 55108.

Worksheets with reports of calf mortality were voluntarily submitted by dairy
producers to the Brown Swiss Cattle Breeders Association. Objective was to assess
genetic and nongenetic factors influencing calf mortality of Brown Swiss.
Multiple births were removed prior to analysis. Three traits recorded and
analyzed were dead at birth, death through 2nd d after birth including dead at
birth, and death from 1st to 7th d of life. Male calves were more likely to be
dead at birth, to die through 2nd d, and to die from 1st to 7th d of life than
female calves. Dead birth was greater for calves from primiparous than
multiparous dams; however, death from 1st to 7th d did not differ by parity
status of dam. Death from 1st to 7th d was greater from December to May than from
June to November. Heritabilities for Brown Swiss were .05, .07, and .04 for dead 
at birth, dead through 2nd d, and death from 1st to 7th d, respectively.
Mortality rates and heritabilities were similar to estimates for Holsteins from
the literature. Rank correlations of sires for transmitting abilities of calf
mortality and production were near zero.

PMID: 2345201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Med Assoc Ga. 1990 Apr;79(4):227-8.

AMA-ERF--ensuring quality medical education.

Domescik J.

PMID: 2332712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Mar;10(3):1249-53.

Phosphorylation of the ETS-2 protein: regulation by the T-cell antigen
receptor-CD3 complex.

Fujiwara S(1), Koizumi S, Fisher RJ, Bhat NK, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21701-1013.

Phosphorylation of the human ets-2 protein in response to mitogenic signals to T 
lymphocytes was investigated in Jurkat cells. Activation of the cells by
antibodies against the T-cell antigen receptor-CD3 complex or by concanavalin A
was followed within 5 min by increased phosphorylation of the protein, as shown
by a mobility shift of the protein from 54 to 56 kilodaltons in sodium dodecyl
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and increased incorporation of 32P.
The Ca2+ ionophores A23187 and ionomycin were able to mimic this effect,
suggesting that this phosphorylation is mediated by Ca2+.

PMCID: PMC361013
PMID: 2137553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Probl Tuberk. 1990;(4):23-6.

[Pathophysiological classification of external respiratory failure].

[Article in Russian]

Bodrova TN, Tetenev FF.

On the basis of literature analysis and clinical experience, a classification of 
external respiratory failure (ERF) is suggested. The types of ERF can be as
follows: 1) pulmonary ventilation failure; 2) gas diffusion failure; 3) pulmonary
blood flow failure; 4) respiration control failure; and 5) ambient air gas
composition change. The forms of ERI can be classified as acute, subacute and
chronic. The stages of ERF include the following: I (compensatory) with pulmonary
ventilation function drop of degree I-III (of an obstructive, restrictive and
mixed type) and without hypoxemia, normo- or hypocapnia; II (subcompensatory)
with the same pulmonary ventilation failures, moderate or serious hypoxemia,
normo- or hypocapnia; III (decompensatory) with hypoxemia and hypercapnia or
extremely severe hypoxemia in combination with normo- or hypocapnia.

PMID: 2395845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Vestn Dermatol Venerol. 1990;(9):9-11.

[An in-vitro system study of the immunomodulating activity of taktivin in atopic 
dermatitis].

[Article in Russian]

Matushevskaia EV, Skriabina EG, Kubanova AA, Balo-Banga M.

In vitro effect of tactivin on E-rosette forming capacity of peripheral blood T
lymphocytes of atopic dermatitis patients permits more accurate diagnosis of
immunodeficiency degree, evaluation of the relations between T-cell immunity
affection and immunomodulation results. Individual sensitivity of ERF cells to
tactivin in vitro may be utilized for selection of patients in need for
immunocorrection and the latter substantiation.

PMID: 2284871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Ter Arkh. 1990;62(11):63-6.

[The complex assessment of disordered bronchial patency in chronic obstructive
lung diseases].

[Article in Russian]

Ovcharenko SI, Filippov VV.

There were 63 patients with infectious-allergic bronchial asthma and 13 patients 
with chronic obstructive bronchitis. The clinical and bronchoscopic
manifestations of the broncho-obstructive syndrome were compared to external
respiratory function (ERF) reflecting the status of bronchial patency at
different levels of the bronchial tree and the measurement data on the
rheological properties of bronchial secretion. A reverse interrelationship was
discovered between the intensity of asphyxia attacks and patency of the distal
bronchial according to the ERF estimates. A correlation was noted between the
magnitude of bronchial secretion viscosity and some characteristics: intensity of
asphyxia attacks, dyspnea, number of dry rales; bronchial patency according to
the ERF estimates. The values of secretion viscosity turned out to be most
closely interrelated with the patency of small bronchi. A correlation was
discovered between the bronchoscopic findings and bronchial patency of the
proximal bronchi (ERF estimates). It is believed that bronchoscopic examination
plays an important part in the diagnosis of obstruction of the bronchi accessible
to inspection and has a high information content. Hyperdiscrinism intensity
determines in many respects the clinical manifestations of the
broncho-obstructive syndrome, measurement data on viscosity and adhesion of
bronchial secretion can be used for assessing the efficacy of the action on
bronchial obstruction at the level of small bronchi.

PMID: 2094994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Crit Rev Oncog. 1990;1(4):409-36.

Molecular analysis of the ets genes and their products.

Watson DK(1), Ascione R, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland.

Organisms from human to Drosophila have been found to contain cellular sequences 
and transcripts that are homologous to the ets region of the avian retrovirus,
E26. Ets-related sequences are present on at least two distinct functional loci
in chickens and mammals, and have been designated ets-1 and ets-2. The E26 virus 
transduced sequences from the chicken ets-1 locus, which encompasses over 60 kb
of DNA. The ets genes characterized so far from sea urchin and Drosophila are
most closely related to the 3' end of the known ets genes. The predicted viral
and avian ets proteins are very similar, except at the termini. The similarity
between the predicted ets proteins so far described is discussed. The ets
proteins have been identified and localized by immunoprecipitation and
immunofluorescence. While the ets-1 proteins are found in the nuclear and
cytoplasmic fractions, the viral gag-myb-ets protein (p135) and the ets-2
proteins are nuclear. The ets-1 and ets-2 genes are differentially regulated in
different cell types, probably reflecting unique controlling elements. Because
chromosomal translocations have been associated with different human leukemias,
studies addressing the possible association with the ETS1 (11q23) or ETS2
(21q22.3) loci are reviewed.

PMID: 1964597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Mol Biol. 1989 May 5;207(1):1-13.

Genetic structure of the bacteriophage P22 PL operon.

Semerjian AV(1), Malloy DC, Poteete AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of
Massachusetts, Worcester 01655.

The sequence of 1416 base-pairs of the P22 PL operon was determined, linking a
continuous sequence from PL through abc2. P22 mutants bearing deletions in the
sequenced region were constructed and tested for their phenotypes. Plasmids were 
constructed to express PL operon genes singly and in combination from Plac UV5.
Two previously known genes, 17 and c3, are located within this sequence. In
addition, three new genes have been identified: ral, kil and arf. Genes ral and
c3 are homologous, as well as functionally analogous, to lambda ral and cIII,
respectively. P22 kil, like lambda kil, kills the host cell when it is expressed.
The two kil genes, although analogous in cell killing and map location, have no
apparent sequence homology. The functions of the P22 and lambda kil genes are
unknown; however, P22 kil is essential for lytic growth in the absence of abc.
Gene arf (accessory recombination function) is located just upstream from erf; it
is essential for P22 growth in the absence of kil or other genes upstream in PL. 
The growth defect of P22 bearing a deletion that removes arf is complemented by
expression of either arf or the lambda red genes from plasmids. Sequences that
include the stop codon for gene 17 may form a small stem-loop structure and are
nearly identical to lambda sequences that contain the stop codon for ssb, which
is near lambda tL 2b. Plasmids that include the P22 structure negatively regulate
kil gene expression in cis.

PMID: 2738922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Nouv Rev Fr Hematol. 1989;31(3):217-21.

ets-1 and ets-2 proto-oncogene expression in human leukemia cells and cell lines.

Dreyfus F(1), Picard F, Gisselbrecht S, Varet B, Tambourin PE, Fichelson S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie et Virologie des Tumeurs, INSERM U152, Hôpital
Cochin, Paris, France.

c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 are 2 proto-oncogenes known to be possibly involved in some
human myelomonocytic leukemias. However, very few studies concern c-ets-1 and
c-ets-2 RNA expression in human hematologic malignancies. We have studied 18
leukemic patients, and 10 cell lines for their ets RNA contents. c-ets-1 was
strongly expressed in 5 and c-ets-2 in 8 of the 18 patients. All the cell lines
expressed both c-ets-1 and c-ets-2 RNAs. This expression was highly variable from
one patient to another, and from one cell line to another, regardless of the
cellular leukemia subtype. The variability of this expression in patients may
reflect differences in the proliferative potential of leukemic cells.

PMID: 2694094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1989;37(5):493-500.

Haemodynamics as a determinant of the pharmacokinetics of and the plasma
catecholamine responses to isoprenaline.

Ludwig J(1), Halbrügge T, Vey G, Walter J, Graefe KH.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Poliklinik, Universität Würzburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

The total body clearance and fractional extraction of isoprenaline (ISO) have
been determined, and the relation between these parameters and cardiac output
established. Whether desipramine, an inhibitor of neuronal uptake, altered the
plasma catecholamine response to ISO was also investigated. Seven healthy
subjects were given i.v., infusions of ISO in two, consecutive 25-min periods, at
constant dose rates of 31-43 and 80-124 pmol.kg-1.min-1, respectively. The
total-body (ER), pulmonary (ERp) and forearm (ERf) fractional extractions and the
total body clearance (CL) of ISO were obtained from measurements of cardiac
output and the steady-state ISO concentration in mixed central venous, arterial
and forearm venous plasma. ISO-induced increases in cardiac output resulted in
increases in CL, decreases in ER and no consistent change in ERf. ERp did not
differ from zero. ISO also produced a dose-dependent increase in the mixed venous
plasma concentrations of noradrenaline and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycol (DOPEG), and
a decrease in that of adrenaline. Pretreatment with desipramine did not alter any
of the pharmacokinetic parameters of ISO. Desipramine, however, reduced the mixed
venous baseline plasma levels of noradrenaline (47%) and DOPEG (40%), and tended 
to reduce that of adrenaline (34%). It enhanced the plasma noradrenaline response
2.4-fold, abolished the plasma DOPEG response and did not alter the plasma
adrenaline response to ISO. Hence, owing to its haemodynamic effects, ISO
modifies its own pharmacokinetics which involve non-neuronal removal processes
only. The increased DOPEG in plasma resulting from the ISO-induced increase in
noradrenaline release was presynaptic in origin. Desipramine appears to reduce
sympathetic activity.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2598988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Ter Arkh. 1989;61(7):108-12.

[Treatment procedures in the vasoconstrictive form of hypertension using calcium 
antagonists in relation to their effect on kidney function].

[Article in Russian]

Tikhonov VP, Zenchenko DI.

Single sublingual administration of nifedipine at a dose of 20 mg to patients
with essential hypertension (EH) with subsequent hemodynamic observation every
hour for 4 h resulted in the reduction of systolic and diastolic arterial
pressure (AP) by 10-15%, arteriolar tone (AT) by 30-40%. Renal metabolism was
assessed by the presence of slow isoenzymes of carbonic esterases in urine. They 
were absent in healthy persons; before nifedipine administration they were
detected in 62% of cases, after it--in 22%. Regular administration of nifedipine 
(30-60 mg/day) and verapamil (160-240 mg/day) in a less severe course of EH (AT
less than 4500 conv. units) improved the renal blood flow decreasing AT and AP.
Severe EH (AT greater than 4500 conv. units) was characterized by cases of
inadequate action of the drugs: dramatic reduction of ERF was followed by a rise 
of AT and AP which could be accounted for by excessive vasodilation at the 1st
stage with further development of the renal steal syndrome and a rise of AP and
AT. In such cases lower doses of nifedipine, the combination of verapamil with
hydrochlorthiazide and verapamil with prazosin hydrochloride were more effective;
the combination of nifedipine with propranolol did not prevent a negative effect 
on the kidneys and was ineffective in high AT.

PMID: 2588128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Dev Comp Immunol. 1989 Spring;13(2):177-86.

Effect of dietary triiodothyronine on mixed-lymphocyte responsiveness in young
male chickens.

Erf GF(1), Marsh JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry and Avian Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
4853-5601.

The effect of dietary triiodothyronine (T3) supplementation (0, 0.1, 0.1, and 1.0
ppm of T3) on the mixed lymphocyte response (MLR) was examined in MHC-matched
young Cornell K and sex-linked dwarf (SLD) strain cockerels at ages 6, 9, and 12 
weeks. At all ages, MLR in SLD strain cockerels was significantly lower than in
the K strain. Supplementation of 6-week-old cockerels with 0.01 and 0.1 ppm of T3
tended to decrease MLR in both strains, whereas the highest dose of T3 had the
opposite effect in the K strain and no effect in the SLD strain compared to the
control. No significant effects of T3 on MLR were observed in 9-week-old
cockerels. A significant main treatment effect of T3 on MLR was observed in
12-week-old cockerels. At this age dietary T3 decreased MLR in both strains.
These results show that allo-aggression, a functional parameter of cell-mediated 
immunity, can be affected by non-MHC controlled strain differences and by the
iodothyronine state of these strains.

PMID: 2528485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1988 Oct;189(1):5-12.

Triiodothyronine affects the phytohemagglutinin to concanavalin A proliferative
response ratio in sex-linked dwarf chickens.

Erf GF(1), Marsh JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry and Avian Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York
14853.

Euthyroid Cornell K strain and sex-linked dwarf (SLD) strain cockerels (which
have abnormally low serum triiodothyronine concentrations) were supplemented with
either 0, 0.01, 0.1, or 1.0 ppm of triiodothyronine (T3) in the diet. Peripheral 
blood lymphocytes (PBL) from these cockerels were obtained by slow-speed
centrifugation (slow-spin-prepared PBL). The proliferative response of these PBL 
to phytohemagglutinin (PHA) and concanavalin A (Con A) was determined when the
chicks were 6, 9, and 12 weeks of age. Con A responsiveness was also determined
in 12-week-old cockerels using PBL which were separated on Ficoll
(Ficoll-prepared PBL). Using slow-spin-prepared PBL, PHA, and Con A
responsiveness increased in both strains with increasing levels of T3
supplementation. This enhancing effect of T3 was particularly evident in older
cockerels. In 6- and 12-week-old SLD strain cockerels, the PHA:Con A response
ratio was significantly (P less than 0.05) lower than in K strain cockerels. At
12 weeks of age the PHA:Con A response ratio of the SLD strain was elevated to K 
strain control levels by T3 supplementation. Therefore, the lower PHA:Con A
response ratio in the SLD strain appears to be partially due to the existing
peripheral hypothyroidism in this strain. Using Ficoll-prepared PBL, the effects 
of T3 on Con A responsiveness differed from those observed when
slow-spin-prepared PBL were used. From this study we conclude that T3
supplementation affects mitogen responsiveness and the PHA:Con A response ratio. 
However, the effects of T3 on mitogen responsiveness depend on the age of the
chicken, the level of T3 supplemented, the T cell population stimulated, and the 
method of lymphocyte enrichment.

PMID: 3263655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Klin Wochenschr. 1988 Sep 1;66(17):773-8.

Left ventricular relaxation and filling pattern in diabetic heart muscle disease:
an echocardiographic study.

Park JW(1), Ziegler AG, Janka HU, Doering W, Mehnert H.

Author information: 
(1)Städtisches Krankenhaus und Diabetes-Forschungsinstitut München-Schwabing.

In order to study left ventricular function digitized M-mode-echocardiograms were
analyzed. 34 patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (mean age 37.8
years, mean diabetes history 21.5 years) were compared with 35 healthy
individuals (mean age 40.9 years). Only patients with negative exercise-ECG,
normal 2-D-echocardiogram and normal systemic arterial blood pressure were
enclosed. In diabetics the time-constant Te of free wall endocardial retraction
was significantly prolonged (76.8 +/- 21.2 ms versus 64.0 +/- 7.9 ms in normals, 
p less than 0.005), the dimension change during early diastole (dD DS-ERF) was
significantly reduced (54.5 +/- 13.1% versus 69.8 +/- 9% in normals, p less than 
0.001) and the dimension change during atrial contraction phase (dD ACP) was
significantly enlarged (23.4 +/- 14.4% versus 14.3 +/- 6.4% in normals, p less
than 0.001). These data suggest that impaired left ventricular diastolic function
can be found in patients with long standing insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 3184761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Bacteriol. 1988 May;170(5):2012-21.

Modulation of Escherichia coli RecBCD activity by the bacteriophage lambda Gam
and P22 Abc functions.

Poteete AR(1), Fenton AC, Murphy KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of
Massachusetts, Worcester 01605.

Plasmids that express the bacteriophage lambda gam gene or the P22 abc2 gene
(with and without abc1) at controllable levels were placed in Escherichia coli
and tested for effects on the activity of RecBCD. Like Gam, Abc2 inhibited the
ATP-dependent exonuclease activity of RecBCD, apparently not by binding to DNA.
However, Abc2-mediated inhibition was partial, while Gam-mediated inhibition was 
complete. Both Abc2 and Gam inhibited host system-mediated homologous
recombination in a Chi-containing interval in the chromosome of a hybrid lambda
phage; Abc2 inhibited it more strongly than Gam. Gam but not Abc2 spared a phage 
T4 gene 2 mutant from restriction by RecBCD; Abc2 exhibited weak sparing activity
in combination with Abc1 and substantial activity in combination with both Abc1
and P22 homologous recombination function Erf. Either Gam or the combination of
the lambda recombination functions Exo and Bet was sufficient to induce a mode of
plasmid replication that produced linear multimers. The combination of Abc2,
Abc1, and Erf also exhibited this activity. However, Erf was inactive, both by
itself and in combination with Abc1; Abc2 had weak activity. These results
indicate that Gam and Abc2 modulate the activity of RecBCD in significantly
different ways. In comparison with lambda Gam, P22 Abc2 has a weak effect on
RecBCD nuclease activity but a strong effect on its recombination-promoting
activity.

PMCID: PMC211079
PMID: 2966143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Neirofiziologiia. 1988;20(6):776-85.

[Properties of the response of frog motoneurons to glutamate application].

[Article in Russian]

Kalinina NI, Kurchavyi GG.

The reversal potential (E) of the glutamate response produced by
iontophoretically applied glutamate and that of the EPSP's recorded from three
synaptic inputs produced by reticular formation (RF), dorsal roots (DS), and
microstimulation of presynaptic terminals (PT) at the point of glutamate
application were compared at the same motoneuron of the isolated frog spinal cord
using current-chop technique. Following Cs injection the glutamate response and
EPSP's were reversed. Different points of glutamate application were tested. Mean
values of E were: Eglu = -16.9 +/- 1.7 mV (n = 13), EPT = -15.1 +/- 1.4 mV (n =
13), ERF = -6.8 +/- 1.7 mV (n = 13), EOR = -9.8 +/- 1.8 mV (n = 6). The summation
of the glutamate responses and EPSP was close to linear. Increase of the input
conductance did not exceed 10%. The results obtained suggest that glutamate
induces depolarization via the receptors of the postsynaptic membrane and may
serve as a neurotransmitter in all of the studied inputs.

PMID: 3249604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Brain Behav Evol. 1988;32(1):27-38.

Influence of stationary and moving textured backgrounds on the response of visual
neurons in toads (Bufo bufo L.).

Tsai HJ(1), Ewert JP.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroethology Department, University of Kassel, FRG.

Previous studies have shown that configurational prey recognition in common toads
is performed by feature-analyzing functional units consisting of assemblies of
connected neurons such as retinal (classes R2, R3), tectal [classes T5(1), T5(2),
T5(3)], and pretectal (class TH3) cells. In the present paper, effects of
textured backgrounds on the response of these neurons to a configurational moving
stimulus have been tested quantitatively. (1) In all investigated neurons,
neither the overall activation nor the respective stimulus-response relationships
were significantly influenced by a stationary black/white-textured background as 
far as black stimulus objects are concerned. (2) The neuronal activity in
response to a moving object (signal) could be inhibited (masked) if a
black/white-textured background (noise) was moving simultaneously at the same
speed. The strength (I) of this 'surround inhibition' (signal masking by the
background) was different in the various classes of neurons, i.e. strongest for
T5(2) and weakest for R3: IT5(2) greater than IT5(1) greater than IT5(3) greater 
than IR2 greater than ITH3 greater than IR3. These inhibitory effects were not
correlated with the size of the neuronal excitatory receptive field (ERF), since 
T4 neurons (ERF = 180 degrees) in this context displayed response properties
similar to T5(2) neurons (ERF less than 30 degrees). (3) It is suggested that the
signal (prey)-masking effect of a moving textured background is brought about by 
pretecto (TH3)-tectal [T5(1), T5(2)] inhibitory connectivity which allows toads: 
(a) to select prey from nonprey; (b) to discriminate between prey and a textured 
background, and (c) to determine the origin of moving retinal images caused
either by object movement or by self-induced motion.

PMID: 3142636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Colo Med. 1987 Dec 1;84(19):441-3.

CMS/ERF reaches around the world.

IntVeld JK.

PMID: 3690981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Virology. 1987 Oct;160(2):456-64.

Sequence of the bacteriophage P22 anti-recBCD (abc) genes and properties of P22
abc region deletion mutants.

Murphy KC(1), Fenton AC, Poteete AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester 01605.

The nucleotide sequence of a segment of the bacteriophage P22 chromosome to the
left (downstream in the PL operon) of the erf gene was determined. Previous
studies (A. C. Fenton and A. R. Poteete, 1984, Virology 134, 148-160) have shown 
that this region encodes a function that is required for efficient growth of P22 
in wild-type, but not in recB- Salmonella. The gene or genes encoding this
function were designated abc (anti-recBCD). The DNA sequence reveals three open
reading frames that potentially encode polypeptides with molecular weights of
10,900, 11,600, and 6600 (in order of transcription). P22 deletion mutants
lacking each of the open reading frames were constructed. In addition, plasmids
were constructed placing each of the open reading frames under control of the lac
UV5 promoter. The phenotypes of the deletion mutants, and the results of
plasmid-phage complementation tests, indicate that Abc activity depends primarily
on sequences that encode the 11.6-kDa polypeptide; the 10.9-kDa
polypeptide-encoding sequence makes a minor contribution to Abc activity as well.
These sequences have been designated abc2 and abc1, respectively. The 6.6-kDa
polypeptide is apparently uninvolved.

PMID: 3660589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Comp Physiol A. 1987 Aug;161(2):295-304.

Edge preference of retinal and tectal neurons in common toads (Bufo bufo) in
response to worm-like moving stripes: the question of behaviorally relevant
'position indicators'.

Tsai HJ, Ewert JP.

Previous experiments have shown that during prey-catching behavior (orienting,
snapping) in response to a worm-like moving stripe common toads, Bufo bufo (L.)
exhibit a contrast- and direction-dependent edge preference. To a black (b)
stripe moving against a white (w) background (b/w), they respond (R*) preferably 
toward the leading (l) rather the trailing (t) edge (Rl* greater than Rt*), thus 
displaying 'head preference'. If the contrast-direction is reversed (w/b), the
stripe's trailing edge is preferred (Rl* less than Rt*), hence showing 'tail
preference'. In the present study, neuronal activities of retinal classes R2 and 
R3 and tectal classes T5(2) and T7 have been extracellularly recorded in response
to leading and trailing edges of a 3 degrees X 30 degrees stripe simulating a
worm and traversing the centers of their excitatory receptive fields (ERF)
horizontally at a constant angular velocity in variable movement direction
(temporo-nasal or naso-temporal). The behavioral contrast-direction dependent
edge preferences are best resembled by the responses (R) of prey-selective class 
T5(2) neurons (Rl:Rt = 10:1 for b/w, 0.3:1 for w/b) and T7 neurons (Rl:Rt = 6:1
for b/w, 0.4:1 for w/b); the T7 responses may be dendritic spikes. This property 
can be traced back to off-responses dominated retinal class R3 neurons (Rl:Rt =
6:1 for b/w, 0.5:1 for w/b), but not to class R2 (Rl:Rt = 1.2:1 for b/w and 0.9:1
for w/b). The respective edge preference phenomena are independent of the
direction of movement. When stimuli were moved against a stationary black-white
structured background, the 'head preference' to the black stripe and the 'tail
preference' to the white stripe were maintained in class R3, T5(2), and T7
neurons. If the stripe traversed the ERF together with the structured background 
in the same direction at the same velocity, the responses of tectal class T5(2)
and T7 neurons were strongly inhibited, particularly in the former. Responses of 
retinal R2 neurons in comparable situations could be reduced by about 50%, while 
class R3 neurons responded to both the stimulus and the moving background
structure. The results support the concept that the prey feature analyzing system
in toads applies principles of (i) 'parallel' and (ii) 'hierarchial' information 
processing. These are (i) divergence of retinal R3 neuronal output contributes to
stimulus edge positioning and (in combination with R2 output) area evaluation in 
tectal neurons and to stimulus area evaluation and (in combination with R4
output) sensitivity for moving background structures in pretectal
neurons.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 3114477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Eur J Surg Oncol. 1987 Jun;13(3):219-23.

Breast reconstruction without implant: experience of 52 cases.

Petit JY, Rigaut L, Gareer W, Michel G, Lehmann A.

Reconstruction of the breast (BR) after mastectomy without using a prosthetic
implant has always presented a challenge for plastic surgeons, allowing them to
avoid complications due to foreign body and to provide a more natural
reconstructed breast. Out of 66 women who underwent BR using the rectus abdominis
musculocutaneous flap, 52 received no implant. Ten upper rectus (ERF) and 42
lower rectus (TRAM) were the two procedures applied. The ERF has been abandoned
due to the 9% rate of complete necrosis encountered among the total series of
rectus flap regardless of the implant inclusion. Partial necrosis was also the
most frequent complication of the TRAM (28% among those not having received an
implant), but the reconstruction was nevertheless possible in all the cases. The 
TRAM technique produced abdominal sequelae in 45% of the no-implant cases, though
it also improved the cosmetic aspect of the abdomen in an equal number of cases, 
particularly in obese women. Overall cosmetic results were also better for the
TRAM without implant than for the ERF (72% good vs. 51%). Moreover the BR without
implant could be performed in only 48% of the total ERF, as compared to 93% of
the total TRAM. The major advantage of such BR without implant is that it
provides a reconstructed breast which appears more symmetrical to the
contralateral breast and which remains even after several years of follow-up.

PMID: 3595885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biochem J. 1987 Apr 15;243(2):399-404.

The use of gel chromatography for the determination of sizes and relative
molecular masses of proteins. Interpretation of calibration curves in terms of
gel-pore-size distribution.

le Maire M, Ghazi A, Møller JV, Aggerbeck LP.

Erratum in
    Biochem J 1987 Aug 1;245(3):following 934.

The separation of proteins by gel-exclusion chromatography has been explained in 
terms of partitioning of the macromolecules within the gel by a distribution of
pores of various radii. The assumption that the distribution of pore sizes is
Gaussian has led to the prediction of a linear relationship between the molecular
Stokes radius (RS) of the protein and the function erf-1 (1-KD), where KD is the 
partition coefficient [Ackers (1967) J. Biol. Chem. 242, 3237-3238]. Since
careful calibrations of classical (agarose and dextran) gels and h.p.l.c. gels
have shown that such a linear relationship is not verified experimentally over a 
wide range of native protein sizes, we have reinvestigated the model of Ackers
(above reference). We show that Ackers' (above reference) derivation is not valid
except for a particular Gaussian distribution of pore sizes centred at the
origin. Relaxation of this restriction to allow for other types of Gaussian
distributions cannot account for the non-linear calibration curves that we have
obtained. Instead we show that the pore-size distribution can be calculated from 
the experimentally determined function KD = f(RS) and that this distribution is
bimodal (non-Gaussian). One distribution is centred below 2 nm, whereas the mean 
value of the second one is around 6-8 nm. The minimum in this bimodal
distribution corresponds, for some gels, to a region of poor resolution, which
needs to be appreciated for the proper use of gel chromatography in the
determination of molecular size.

PMCID: PMC1147868
PMID: 3632628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Mol Biol. 1987 Mar 5;194(1):105-17.

Localization of a DNA-binding determinant in the bacteriophage P22 Erf protein.

Murphy KC, Casey L, Yannoutsos N, Poteete AR, Hendrix RW.

Four amber fragments of the recombination-promoting P22 Erf protein were
characterized. The intact Erf monomer contains 204 amino acids. The amber
mutations produce fragments of 190, 149, 130 and 95 amino acid residues, all of
which are inactive in vivo. The 190 residue fragment is more susceptible to
proteolysis in cell extracts than is intact Erf. It breaks down to a stable
remnant that is slightly larger than the 149 residue fragment. The 149 and 130
residue fragments are stable; electron microscopy of the purified fragments
reveals that they have similar morphologies, retaining the ring-like oligomeric
structure, but lacking the tooth-like protruding portions of intact Erf. Intact
Erf and the 149 residue fragment have similar affinities for single-stranded DNA;
the affinity of the 130 residue fragment is 40-fold lower in low salt at pH 6.0. 
The 95 residue fragment is unstable in vivo. These observations, combined with
previous observations, are interpreted as suggesting that the boundary of the
amino-terminal domain of the protein lies between residues 96 and 130, that
certain residues between 131 and 149 form part of an interdomain DNA-binding
segment of the protein, that the boundary of the carboxy-terminal domain lies to 
the C-terminal side of residue 149, and that the carboxy-terminal domain is not
necessary for assembly of the ring oligomer, although it is essential for Erf
activity in vivo.

PMID: 3612797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Dev Comp Immunol. 1987 Spring;11(2):395-406.

Triiodothyronine affects mitogen responsiveness in sex-linked dwarf and Cornell K
strain chickens.

Erf GF, Marsh JA.

The response of lymphocytes to concanavalin A (Con A) was examined in the
functionally hypothyroid SLD strain and the normal K strain chickens which were
fed diets with or without T3 supplementation (0.1, 0.5 and 1.0 ppm) since the
time of hatch. Peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) from 3 and 12 week old male and
female chickens were incubated with Con A for 60 h. Mitogenic responsiveness was 
assessed by measuring the uptake of 3H-thymidine during the last 24 h of
incubation. There was no difference in the mitogen response between male and
female chickens. The mitogen responsiveness of PBL from the K strain tended to be
greater than that from the SLD strain at both ages. The lowest dose of T3 (0.1
ppm) had no effect on the mitogen response of 3-week-old K strain chicks but
caused an increase in mitogen response in 3-week-old SLD and in 12-week-old birds
of both strains. Supplementation with 0.5 and 1.0 ppm T3 tended to decrease
mitogen responsiveness in the K and SLD strain at both ages. The effect of
treatment on thymus weights, bursa weights, and lymphocyte concentrations of the 
blood was also assessed.

PMID: 3497829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Dev Comp Immunol. 1987 Fall;11(4):769-79.

Graft-versus-host response in sex-linked dwarf, autosomal dwarf and control K
strain chickens.

Erf GF(1), Briles WE, Marsh JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry and Avian Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853.

Two independent experiments were conducted to examine the ability of 1) the
autosomal-dwarf (ADW) strain and 2) the sex-linked (SLD) strain chicken to make a
Graft-versus-Host (GvH) response. In each experiment the GvH response of the
dwarf strain was compared to the GvH response of a normal growing control strain,
the Cornell K strain chicken. All 3 strains were homozygous B15/B15 at the major 
histocompatibility complex. GvH responsiveness of peripheral blood lymphocytes
(PBL) from females of each strain was assessed at various intervals from 1.5 to
20 months of age using the chorio-allantoic membrane (CAM) assay. The GvH
response in female chickens from the ADW strain was significantly higher than in 
K strain females after the birds had reached sexual maturity (after 5.5 months). 
The GvH response in females from the SLD strain was, however, significantly lower
than in the K strain females throughout the experiment. All strains tended to
have a biphasic GvH response. There was a significant increase in GvH
responsiveness from 1.5 to 5.5 months of age in chicks from all strains. In the
SLD and K strain chickens, this was followed by a drop in the GvH response until 
8.5 months of age. In 16- to 20-month-old SLD and K strain hens, the ability to
mount a GvH response returned to levels observed in younger (5.5 months) pullets.
The GvH responsiveness of the ADW strain remained at a constant level from 5.5 to
12 months of age. However, a second peak in GvH responsiveness was observed in
16-month-old ADW strain hens. Strain differences in GvH responsiveness may be due
to the known hormonal abnormalities in the dwarf strains. The suitability of
these dwarf strains for the study of endocrine-immune interrelationships is
discussed.

PMID: 3440502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Anal Biochem. 1986 May 1;154(2):525-35.

The use of high-performance liquid chromatography for the determination of size
and molecular weight of proteins: a caution and a list of membrane proteins
suitable as standards.

Le Maire M, Aggerbeck LP, Monteilhet C, Andersen JP, Møller JV.

We propose a list of 15 water-soluble globular proteins and 13 forms of
detergent-soluble membrane proteins of known Stokes radii for the calibration of 
high-performance liquid chromatography columns. It is shown that it is advisable 
to use different sets of standards for these two types of proteins as the
detergent-solubilized membrane proteins may behave differently, being excluded or
retarded, depending upon the gel support. A smooth, although nonlinear,
relationship between Stokes radii and erf-1(1--KD) is observed while a large
scatter of points exists if the calibration is expressed as the molecular weight 
as a function of KD.

PMID: 3728966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1985 Oct;235(1):186-90.

Inactivation of rabbit pulmonary cytochrome P-450 in microsomes and isolated
perfused lungs by the suicide substrate 1-aminobenzotriazole.

Mathews JM, Dostal LA, Bend JR.

Erratum in
    J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1986 Jan;236(1):300.

The autocatalytic destruction of pulmonary cytochrome P-450 (P-450) by
1-aminobenzotriazole (ABT) was investigated in microsomes and in isolated
perfused lungs from untreated and beta-naphthoflavone-induced rabbits. Microsomal
benzphetamine N-demethylase (BND) and 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylation (ERF)
activities, catalyzed by P-450 isozymes 2 and 6, respectively, and specific P-450
content were determined after incubation with ABT. In vitro destruction of P-450 
was dependent on ABT concentration and required NADPH. Significant losses of BND 
and ERF activities were observed only at ABT concentrations above 10 microM.
Percent losses of BND and ERF activities equaled those of total P-450 at 1 mM and
surpassed them at 10 mM. The time and concentration dependence of the destruction
of P-450 by ABT was investigated in isolated perfused rabbit lungs. The percent
loss of total P-450 increased with increasing ABT concentration (18 +/- 8% loss
at 1 microM to 85 +/- 4% at 10 mM). Although extensive losses of P-450 occurred
after perfusion with 10 mM ABT for 60 min, no ABT-dependent losses of
flavin-containing monooxygenase activity were observed under these conditions.
Percent losses of BND activity in these experiments were similar to those of
total P-450 at 1 and 10 mM ABT but were less than P-450 losses at 0.01 and 0.1 mM
ABT. Losses of ERF activity in lungs from beta-naphthoflavone-pretreated animals 
were also substantial and dependent upon perfusion time. Perfusion with 1 mM ABT 
for 2 to 60 min resulted in time-dependent losses of P-450 (42.8 +/- 7.2% at 2
min to 70.5 +/- 2.5% at 60 min) with equal or somewhat lesser diminishment of BND
and ERF activities.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 4045721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1985 Aug 21;825(4):384-92.

Regulation of protein synthesis in eukaryotes. Eukaryotic initiation factor eIF-2
and eukaryotic recycling factor eRF from neuroblastoma cells.

Salimans M, Posno M, Benne R, Voorma HO.

eIF-2 purified from neuroblastoma cells consists of three subunits, which appear 
to be of molecular weight identical to those of the subunits of rabbit
reticulocyte eIF-2. A protein fraction has been isolated from neuroblastoma cells
with characteristics similar to eRF from reticulocytes: stimulation of amino acid
incorporation in a hemin-deprived reticulocyte lysate, the removal of GDP from
eIF-2-GDP complexes, a 4-5-fold stimulatory effect in a two-step reaction
measuring 40 S preinitiation complex formation and a 3-3.5-fold stimulation in
the methionyl-puromycin synthesis. In the methionyl-puromycin-synthesizing system
phosphorylated eIF-2 is not responsive to the addition of this fraction from
neuroblastoma cells. The protein fraction contains eRF which seems to be similar 
to the eRF isolated from Ehrlich ascites tumor cells and somewhat distinct from
the reticulocyte factor. Incubation of neuroblastoma cell lysate in the presence 
of [gamma-32P]ATP results in the phosphorylation of a protein of Mr 36 000,
migrating on SDS-polyacrylamide gels to the position of eIF-2 alpha. This protein
is also phosphorylated in vitro by HRI from reticulocytes. These results may
reflect a common underlying principle for the quantitative regulation of protein 
synthesis in eukaryotic cells.

PMID: 4016122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Kidney Int. 1985 Mar;27(3):565-73.

Altered divalent ion metabolism in early renal failure: role of 1,25(OH)2D.

Wilson L, Felsenfeld A, Drezner MK, Llach F.

The present study evaluates the role of 1,25(OH)2D in the pathogenesis of
abnormal mineral metabolism in patients with early renal failure (ERF). This was 
accomplished by examining the calcemic response to PTH and the handling of an
oral phosphate load both before and after 6 weeks of therapy with 1,25(OH)2D.
Twelve patients with ERF and six normal volunteers were studied. Patients with
ERF as compared with normal subjects have low serum phosphate, low urinary
calcium, low serum 1,25(OH)2D, and high plasma PTH and urinary cyclic AMP (cAMP).
With EDTA infusion, an impaired calcemic response to PTH is observed in patients 
with ERF. The phosphate load test shows that these patients have an increased
ability to excrete phosphate. After 1,25(OH)2D therapy a significant increase in 
serum phosphate, urinary calcium, and a decrease in urinary cAMP is observed only
in ERF patients. In addition, the impaired calcemic response to PTH improves
significantly, the renal handling of phosphate becomes normal, and the low
baseline level of 1,25(OH)2D increases to normal. A significant correlation
between levels of 1,25(OH)2D and creatinine clearance is observed in both
patients and normals. In summary, the present data suggest that a mild deficiency
of 1,25(OH)2D is present in ERF patients. The pathophysiological consequence of
such a deficiency in patients with ERF may be important.

PMID: 3839029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Ter Arkh. 1985;57(3):88-91.

[Reproducibility of the flow-volume indices of healthy persons and patients with 
lung diseases].

[Article in Russian]

Logunov OV, Korytnikov KI.

Reproducibility of the flow-volume indicators at forced expiration and
inspiration was calculated during examination of 210 healthy subjects and 420
patients with different pulmonary diseases. Reproducibility of the flow-volume
indicators of the median and end part of the forced expiration which reflect
largely the function proper of the patency of the distal parts of the bronchial
tree was essentially higher in patients and tended toward increase with a rise in
the degree of ventilation abnormalities. Reproducibility of the conventional
spirographic parameters in healthy subjects and patients with ERF abnormalities
did not differ whatever their character and degree.

PMID: 4002169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Ter Arkh. 1985;57(3):42-8.

[Circadian organization of the indices of external respiration in bronchial
asthma patients].

[Article in Russian]

Fedoseev GB, Degtiareva ZIa, Savich AA, Alekseev MIu, Bolodon SA.

Circadian rhythms of external respiration function (ERF) and body function (BF)
were studied in 20 patients with mild bronchial asthma, 20 patients with
bronchial asthma of medium gravity and in 14 healthy subjects. Circadian rhythms 
of the medium-group parameters of ERF were shown to be statistically
insignificant, whereas individual circadian chronograms demonstrated circadian
rhythms for all the patients with BA and healthy subjects. Essential differences 
were found in the organization of the temporary structure of circadian rhythms of
ERF in BA patients and healthy subjects. It was discovered that in BA patients,
the maximal pathological alterations develop within the period from the midnight 
to 8 a. m., whereas the minimal disorders of ERF are recorded within the period
from the noon to 8 p. m. It is suggested that deterioration of bronchial patency 
which brings about the development of obstruction in BA patients is the result of
hypersynchronization and increased amplitude of the circadian rhythms of those
parameters of ERF which determine the bronchial patency.

PMID: 4002163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Uremia Invest. 1985-1986;9(2):159-63.

Glomerular filtration rate variations in patients with solitary kidneys after a
protein load.

Rugiu C, Oldrizzi L, Gammaro L, Tonon M, Maschio G.

The effects of an oral protein load, consisting of 1.5 g/kg body weight as cooked
red meat, on: serum creatinine (SCr); glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
([125I]iothalamate clearance); and "renal functional reserve" (test-baseline GFR)
(RFR) were evaluated in two groups of patients with solitary kidneys (SK). Group 
1 had 7 patients with SCr of 1.00 to 1.40 mg/dl. Group 2 had 7 patients with SCr 
of 1.40 to 3.00 mg/dl. SCr and GFR were recorded during the 4 hours preceding and
the 4 hours following the protein load. SCr rose significantly in both groups
after protein load (from 1.16 to 1.19 mg/dl in Group 1, from 1.65 to 1.80 mg/dl
in Group 2). GFR changes were: from 114.8 to 195.5 ml/min, from 59.0 to 107.7
ml/min, respectively in the two groups. The RFR was smaller in SK patients with
early renal failure (ERF) (Group 2), 48.70 ml/min, than in those with normal
renal function (Group 1), 80.77 ml/min. However, despite the smallest RFR, SK
patients with ERF had the highest percentage increase in their GFR. In
conclusion, in SK patients a hemodynamic adaptation to protein intake is present 
at different levels of renal function, and further studies are necessary to
establish whether protein intake should be monitored in these patients.

PMID: 3842028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Pharmacobiodyn. 1985 Jan;8(1):20-4.

Estimation of renal blood flow by use of endogenous N1-methylnicotinamide in
rats.

Shim CK, Sawada Y, Iga T, Hanano M.

The usefulness of the renal clearance of endogenous N1-methylnicotinamide (NMN)
as a probe for estimating the renal blood flow (RBF) was examined in rats. And
the effect of experimental acute renal failure (ERF) on RBF was also examined in 
rats treated with glycerol, folate, salicylate, uranium and gentamicin by using
this method. No significant difference was shown between the values of RBF
determined by the NMN method and conventional p-aminohippurate (PAH) method in
both the intact (control) and glycerol-ERF rats, suggesting the usefulness of the
NMN method in determining RBF. No significant difference was also shown in RBF
between the control and all ERF-rats studied, through significant decreases in
the renal clearance of NMN and renal extraction ratio (ER) were observed in the
ERF-rats except the gentamicin-treated rats. It was suggested that the endogenous
NMN would be a useful probe to estimate RBF without constant infusion of
exogenous substances.

PMID: 3159881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Eur J Biochem. 1984 Nov 15;145(1):91-8.

Regulation of protein synthesis in eukaryotes. Mode of action of eRF, an
eIF-2-recycling factor from rabbit reticulocytes involved in GDP/GTP exchange.

Salimans M, Goumans H, Amesz H, Benne R, Voorma HO.

The rate of initiation of protein synthesis appears to be controlled at the level
of recycling of eIF-2. In this process a new factor, designated eRF, plays an
important role. The factor has been purified from the post-ribosomal supernatant 
and has been called formerly anti-HRI and anti-inhibitor [Amesz, H., Goumans, H.,
Haubrich-Morree, Th., Voorma, H.O., and Benne, R. (1979) Eur. J. Biochem. 98,
513-520]. Its effect on the initiation of protein synthesis has been studied in
several assays: a small but distinct effect is found in the assay for the
formation of a ternary complex between eIF-2, GTP and Met-tRNA; a 4-5-fold
stimulation is obtained in assays for 40S preinitiation complex formation and in 
the methionyl-puromycin reaction. In the latter assay a catalytic use of eIF-2
occurs provided that eRF is present. eRF forms a complex with eIF-2 which results
in a decrease of the affinity of eIF-2 for GDP, giving it the properties of a
GDP/GTP exchange factor. The model stresses the catalytic use of eIF-2 in
initiation provided that conditions are met for GDP/GTP exchange by a transient
complex formation between eIF-2 and eRF. On the other hand, it is shown that
phosphorylation of eIF-2 by the hemin-regulated inhibitor (HRI) abolishes the
recycling of eIF-2, by the formation of another stable complex comprising eIF-2
alpha P, GDP and eRF.

PMID: 6101245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Virology. 1984 Apr 15;134(1):148-60.

Genetic analysis of the erf region of the bacteriophage P22 chromosome.

Fenton AC, Poteete AR.

Derivatives of P22 with deletions of DNA sequences around and including the erf
gene were obtained by crossing phages with plasmids containing fragments of the
P22 chromosome. In some cases, the parent phages carried a large insertion in
sequences not borne by the plasmids. In these cases, deletion of DNA from the
phage chromosome to restore terminal repetition (a selectable trait) could be
accomplished by recombination between phage and plasmid DNA in chosen sequences
flanking the insertion on both sides and borne by the plasmid. In other cases,
the parent phages had deletions of a selectable gene, which could be acquired
from the plasmid parents only by acquisition of an overlapping deletion.
Deletion-bearing P22 strains were tested for growth and homologous genetic
recombination in wild-type, recA-, and rec(B or C)- hosts. This analysis
indicated the existence of a gene, mapping to the left of erf, that is helpful
(but not completely essential) for growth of P22 in a wild-type host. Because P22
lacking this gene grows as well as wild-type P22 on a recBC- host, it has been
designated abc (anti-recBC). The abc gene does not appear to be essential for
homologous genetic recombination in any host. A plasmid bearing a 1900 base pair 
fragment of P22 DNA, that expresses erf and abc under the control of the E. coli 
lac promoter, was constructed. It supports growth and recombination in a recA-
host by a phage that lacks all of the genes known to lie between 24 and 9.

PMID: 6369766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Prostaglandins. 1984 Feb;27(2):181-93.

C-6-sulfidopeptide leukotrienes are unlikely to be involved in the endothelium
dependent relaxation of rabbit aorta by acetylcholine.

Förstermann U, Neufang B.

Acetylcholine (ACh) induced dilation of precontracted strips of rabbit aorta by a
mechanism dependent on an intact endothelium, probably by releasing an unknown
endothelial relaxing factor (ERF). The relaxation was completely inhibited by the
lipoxygenase inhibitor nordihydroguaiaretic acid (10(-5) M) but not by the
cyclooxygenase inhibitor indomethacin (10(-5) M). The aortic strips were found to
release small amounts of a material with a leukotriene-like activity. Its action 
on the guinea pig ileum was antagonized by FPL 55712 (10(-6) M). However, FPL
55712 (10(-6) - 10(-4) M) did not alter the response of rabbit aortic strips to
ACh. Also when decreasing intracellular concentrations of glutathion (GSH) by
incubating the strips with diethylmaleat or 2-cyclohexen-1-one (both 10(-3) M)
the vasodilator response could still be elicited. Leukotriene (LT) C4 and LTD4
(10(-9) - 10(-6) M) were found to be ineffective on aortic strips under basal or 
induced tension. The same held true for LTE4 (10(-9) - 10(-7) M). At 10(-6) M,
however, LTE4 induced slight relaxations of the vascular tissues. For reasons
discussed this is likely to be a pharmacological action independent of the
effects of endogenous ERF (e.g. inhibition of the formation of the LTE4 precursor
LTD4 by high extracellular GSH concentrations did not reverse the ACh-induced
vasodilation). It is concluded from these data, that C-6-sulfidopeptide
leukotrienes, although probably produced by vascular tissue, are unlikely to be
involved in the ACh-induced relaxation of rabbit aorta.

PMID: 6718751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Pharmacokinet Biopharm. 1984 Feb;12(1):23-42.

Estimation of renal secretory function for organic cations by endogenous
N1-methylnicotinamide in rats with experimental renal failure.

Shim CK, Sawada Y, Iga T, Hanano M.

To assess whether the secretory clearance of N1-methylnicotinamide (NMN), an
endogenous organic cation, represents renal tubular secretion of the organic
cation, the relationship between the secretory clearance of NMN, CLscn(NMN), and 
that of tetraethylammonium bromide (TEA), CLscn(TEA), was examined in normal and 
experimental renal failure (ERF) rats. TEA was selected as a representative
organic cation secreted by the kidney. ERF was induced by glycerol, folate,
salicylate, uranium, and gentamicin, substances which have been demonstrated to
produce specific damage to the kidney by pathophysiological studies. Glomerular
filtration rate (GFR), CLscn(NMN), and CLscn(TEA) decreased significantly in most
of ERF rats, while blood urea nitrogen (BUN) increased significantly in all ERF
rats. There was a statistically significant correlation (r = 0.952, p less than
0.001) between the endogenous CLscn(NMN) and CLscn(TEA) in both the normal and
ERF rats. Correlation analysis revealed that CLscn(NMN) was superior to GFR in
the degree of relationship to CLscn(TEA), but BUN could not be used as an index
for the secretion of NMN or TEA. Although the plasma concentration of NMN in most
of the ERF rats was much higher than that in the normal rats, it affected neither
the urinary clearance of NMN itself nor the excretion of TEA. From these
findings, we propose that CLscn(NMN) can be used as an index to assess renal
tubular function for the secretion of organic cations that are excreted by both
filtration and secretion without reabsorption.

PMID: 6235362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mol Gen Genet. 1984;196(1):123-8.

Selective transduction of recombinant plasmids with cloned pac sites by
Salmonella phage P22.

Schmidt C, Schmieger H.

Recombinant plasmids having PstI fragments of P22 DNA inserted in the vector
pBR322 can be transduced efficiently by Salmonella phage P22, irrespective of the
cloned phage sequences. When the rec function of the donor cells and the
corresponding recombination system erf of the infecting phage are simultaneously 
inactivated, only plasmids containing the P22 pac site can be transduced. By this
selective, generalized transduction an EcoRV DNA fragment of the P22 related
phage L has been identified that carries a base sequence recognized by phage P22 
as a packaging signal. Experiments in which only one of the two recombination
systems was inactivated, showed that the bacterial rec system obviously promotes 
cointegrate formation between plasmid and phage DNA much more efficiently than
the phage-coded erf system, allowing the specialized plasmid transduction
observed by Orbach and Jackson (1982).

PMID: 6592417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Vutr Boles. 1984;23(6):29-37.

[Clinical, immunological and therapeutic research in mesangial immunoglobulin-A
glomerulonephritis].

[Article in Bulgarian]

Belovezhdov N, Robeva R.

Forty seven patients with IgA glomerulonephritis (GN) were studied. The males
predominated among them--the ratio males-female--2,9:1. The first clinical
manifestations were macroscopic hematuria (in 2/3 of the cases) or only urine
changes--low-degree proteinuria and microscopic erythrocyturia. As early as the
establishment--38,2 per cent of the patients had elevated arterial pressure, and 
it reached, 59,5 per cent during the follow-up period. Anemia was rare.
Manifestations of nephrotic syndrome were absent. ESR was normal in 1/3 of the
employees or slightly accelerated. Chronic renal insufficiency developed 6,31 per
cent of the patient all of them males. Terminal renal insufficiency developed 8
patients. The elevated arterial pressure, proteinuria over 2g/24 h, accelerated
ESR, high serum levels of IgA, the longer duration of the disease and higher age 
of the patients to a certain extent--were unfavourable prognostic criteria. The
basic immune deviations of IgA GN are the high serum levels of IgA (in 53,1% of
the patients) and to a lower extent of IgG (in 17% of the patients) as well as
the reduced serum levels of C3 (in 31,9% of the patients). CIC are not a frequent
finding. The percentage of ERF is lower than in the healthy subjects. The
treatment with a combination of azathioprine (acenocoumarol, indomethacin or
levamisole) has no effect on the clinical manifestations and evolution.

PMID: 6531870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Mol Biol. 1983 Dec 25;171(4):401-18.

Domain structure and quaternary organization of the bacteriophage P22 Erf
protein.

Poteete AR, Sauer RT, Hendrix RW.

The structure and activities of the recombination-promoting P22 Erf protein were 
examined in vitro. Treatment of the protein with elastase produces a stable
amino-terminal fragment, consisting of amino acid residues 1 to (approximately)
136. We have purified this fragment, designated fragment B, to apparent
homogeneity by gel filtration chromatography. Fragment B retains the oligomeric
structure and single-stranded DNA binding specificity of intact Erf. It differs, 
however, in lacking the ability of intact Erf to bind single-stranded DNA into
large aggregates following mild heat treatment of the protein. In addition, its
binding to DNA may be weaker than that of intact Erf. Intact Erf sediments
through a sucrose gradient as a discrete species with an apparent S20,w of
approximately 11 X 7 S. Its sedimentation behavior is affected little, if at all,
by concentration. Fragment B also sediments as a discrete species at
approximately 10 X 4 S. In the electron microscope, intact Erf appears as rings, 
with 10 to 14 small projecting structures resembling the teeth of a gear.
Fragment B is similar, except that it appears to lack the peripheral structures. 
From these observations, we conclude that Erf consists of at least two
structurally and functionally distinct domains, and that it has a discrete
ring-like oligomeric structure.

PMID: 6607360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Handchir Mikrochir Plast Chir. 1983 Dec;15(4):257-60.

Experience with 33 epigastric rectus flaps in breast reconstruction.

Lejour M, De Mey A.

The contralateral epigastric rectus flap (ERF) is a myocutaneous island flap,
including epigastric skin, and the upper part of the rectus abdominis muscle with
the superior epigastric artery. It measures at least 20 X 8 cm. In breast
reconstruction, the ERF is transferred from the normal side to the mastectomized 
side on its vascular pedicle. The donor site is hidden in the submammary fold.
The ERF has many advantages over the latissimus flap (larger amount of skin, skin
comparable to breast skin, that can be taken without position change during
surgery, no muscle dysfunction, no donor site in the back, upper abdominal lift
with major addition of homolateral epigastric skin to the reconstruction), but is
not so suitable in patients with thin or irradiated skin. Compared to the lower
rectus flap, it is a less extensive procedure with no abdominal scar, but it
brings less adipose tissue to the reconstructed breast.

PMID: 6228502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Virology. 1983 Jun;127(2):309-19.

Isolation of a unique retrovirus, MNV-1, from Macaca nemestrina.

Hefti E, Ip J, Giddens WE Jr, Panem S.

Cell cultures established from the spleen of a Macaca nemestrina with enzootic
retroperitoneal fibromatosis (ERF) spontaneously released a unique retrovirus.
Throughout 14 serial passages, the spleen cell cultures remained fibroblastic and
no cytopathic effect was evident. The virus incorporates [3H]uridine, contains an
RNA-dependent DNA polymerase (RDDP), has a buoyant density of 1.15 g/cm3 in
sucrose, and was designated MNV-1. Virion-associated reverse transcriptase showed
no preference for either Mg2+ or Mn2+ in standard RDDP assays. Complementary DNA 
(cDNA) transcribed from polyadenylated MNV-1 RNA hybridized to genomic DNA and
RNA extracted from diseased tissues but not to nucleic acids from normal tissues 
of a healthy Macaca nemestrina or a Macaca mulatta. MNV-1 is therefore exogenous 
to these species. MNV-1 had no detectable homology to the endogenous macaque
virus isolates MAC-1 and MMC-1. Liquid hybridization of MNV-1 cDNA to viral RNA
derived from exogenous and endogenous subhuman primate retroviruses (SiSV(SSAV), 
GALV-SF, BaEV-M7, and BILN) did not reveal any significant sequence homologies.
In addition, MNV-1 does not share homology with bovine leukemia virus or
Mason-Pfizer monkey virus as determined by Southern blot hybridization. We
conclude that MNV-1 is a unique retrovirus which has not previously been
described. As the ultrastructure of virions in in vitro cell cultures, as well as
disease involved tissue, show some particles with type C morphology and others
with type D morphology, MNV-1 may be comprised of more than one component.

PMID: 6868369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Med Phys. 1983 May-Jun;10(3):361-4.

Gamma camera MTFs from edge response function measurements.

Logan KW, Hickey KA, Bull SR.

An experimental procedure using edge response functions (ERF) has been devised to
rapidly provide modulation transfer function (MTF) values for gamma camera
imaging. Both camera intrinsic and system MTFs are generated. This procedure uses
a simple test tool to generate the ERF which is then processed by a computer
program using a cubic splines differentiation technique and a discrete Fourier
transform algorithm to produce the MTF values. An analytic test of the computer
algorithms as well as an experimental test using collimator data from the Bureau 
of Radiological Health is presented to confirm the accuracy of the procedure.

PMID: 6877184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Mol Biol. 1983 Jan 15;163(2):257-75.

DNA-binding properties of the Erf protein of bacteriophage P22.

Poteete AR, Fenton AC.

The phage P22 erf (essential recombination function) gene was placed in a small
plasmid under the control of a strong, inducible promoter by manipulations in
vitro. Erf protein was purified from induced cells, and characterized. Erf
protein (monomer molecular weight 23,000) forms oligomers in solution. The
carboxyl terminus is protease-sensitive: its removal generates a discrete
amino-terminal fragment (molecular weight approximately 18,000) that also
oligomerizes. At temperatures below 45 degrees C, Erf forms stable, discrete
complexes with single-stranded DNA and supercoiled DNA, but not with relaxed
double-stranded DNA. Binding to single-stranded DNA is stoichiometric; one Erf
monomer binds approximately 15 bases of DNA, over the range of protein
concentrations tested (2 to 100 micrograms/ml). At high temperatures (50 to 60
degrees C). Erf binds single- and double-stranded DNA, forming aggregates instead
of discrete complexes. Heating and cooling in the absence of DNA produces a form 
of Erf that has single-stranded binding specificity, but forms aggregates on
binding.

PMID: 6302269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Exp Brain Res. 1983;49(1):84-92.

Double-opponent-process mechanism underlying RF-structure of directionally
specific cells of cat lateral suprasylvian visual area.

von Grünau M, Frost BJ.

For the experiments reported in this study, recordings were obtained from 246
single units in the middle lateral suprasylvian visual area (LS) of 13 cats. 49
of these cells were subjected to detailed quantitative analysis. The receptive
field (RF) organization was examined for directionally specific cells by
presenting moving single spots on large moving random dot backgrounds. A cell's
response to an optimal spot (in terms of size, direction, velocity) moving on a
stationary background inside the excitatory RF (ERF) was compared to in-phase
(same direction, same velocity) and anti-phase (opposite direction, same
velocity) movement of spot and background. In-phase movement resulted in
inhibition of the cell's response (3-100%) in 94% of the cells, while anti-phase 
movement led to reduced inhibition in 52% of the cells or to facilitation
(0.5-327%) in 39% of the cells. By changing the direction of background motion
with respect to that of the spot, the directional tuning of the in-phase
inhibition and anti-phase facilitation effects was determined. We were able to
manipulate the size of the background effects by masking out the background for
various proportions of the ERF, and maximizing them by restricting background
stimulation to the large inhibitory RF (IRF) surrounding the ERF. These results
could be best accounted for by a double-opponent-process mechanism with both RF
center and RF surround being directionally selective, but with opposite polarity.
It is suggested that this type of mechanism could be involved in the processing
of object motion.

PMID: 6305699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Med Assoc State Ala. 1982 Nov;52(5):51-2.

AMA-ERF: the tangible difference.

Estock P.

PMID: 7175396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Virology. 1982 Jun;119(2):422-9.

Location and sequence of the erf gene of phage P22.

Poteete AR.

PMID: 6210989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Nephron. 1982;31(2):116-22.

Immunoreactive parathyroid hormone in early and advanced renal failure.

von Lilienfeld-Toal H, Gerlach I, Klehr HU, Issa S, Keck E.

Immunoreactive parathyroid hormone (iPTH) was measured in the serum of 20
patients with early renal failure (ERF) using three assays with different
specificity. Half of these patients had elevated iPTH in one or more assays, up
to twice the upper limit of normal. In contrast, 36 patients with a creatinine
clearance below less than 20 ml/min had an 80% elevated iPTH, up to 5 times the
upper limit of normal. The patients with ERF and elevated iPTH had a lower serum 
calcium but no higher serum phosphate than those with normal iPTH. The
differences in iPTH in early and end-stage renal failure can be explained by
known differences in metabolism of different PTH forms in uremia.

PMID: 7121653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Am J Reprod Immunol. 1981 Aug;1(4):193-8.

Immunosuppression in the mouse by porcine uterine secretory protein.

Allen RL, Murray FA, Wietsma HT.

Experiments were performed to determine whether uterine secretory proteins (PAP) 
of the pig affect T cell or B cell functions in vivo. T cell functions examined
were E-rosette formation (ERF) and cutaneous reactivity (to phytohemagglutinin)
in mature BALB/c females. Two ERF experiments of identical design were performed 
using five groups of ten mice each. Each mouse was presensitized with sheep
erythrocytes (SRBC) designated as day 0; and the various groups were treated with
saline, pig serum (PS), or PAP at different times. For cutaneous reactivity, the 
area of erythema at the sensitization site (pinna of ear) was measured, and three
groups of 11 mice were used. These groups also received either PS or PAP. B cell 
function was examined by measurements of hemagglutination titers to SRBC
sensitization in BALB/c females treated in two experiments similar to the ERF. T 
cell functions examined were highly suppressed (p less than 0.01) by PAP given
hours, not days, prior to the measurement. The B cell function examined was not
affected by PAP.

PMID: 7337155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Acta Ophthalmol (Copenh). 1981 Aug;59(4):603-8.

The C-wave of the rabbit electroretinogram during dark-adaptation and the
steady-state.

Wu L, Lurie M, Marmor MF.

C-waves of the rabbit ERF under urethane anesthesia were elicited by a Grass
photostimulator during dark adaptation and under steady-state conditions. After
strong pre-adaptation with light, the amplitude and time-to-peak of the c-wave
increased in parallel with the a- and b-waves, reaching a maximum of 90-130 min. 
In the dark-adapted steady-state, repetitive stimuli at intervals ranging from 15
sec to 5 min elicited a stable c-wave response except for a small dip in
amplitude that occurred 2-6 min after initiating the shortest interval (15 sec)
flashes. Although the changes in light and dark used in these experiments should 
have elicited shifts in the standing potential, no fluctuations of the c-wave
amplitude were evident with a time course corresponding to a light response of
the standing potential.

PMID: 7315216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Chem Biol Interact. 1981 Aug;36(2):229-48.

Polyhalogenated biphenyls and phenobarbital: evaluation as inducers of drug
metabolizing enzymes in the sheepshead, Archosargus probatocephalus.

James MO, Little PJ.

Several doses of Aroclor 1254 (polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) mixture),
Firemaster FF1 (polybrominated biphenyl (PBB) mixture),
2,2',4,4',5,5'-hexabromobiphenyl (HBB), 3,3',4,4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl (HCB)
and phenobarbital (PB) were administered to the marine fish sheepshead
(Archosargus probatocephalus). The PCB and PBB mixtures caused induction of
hepatic microsomal benzo[a]pyrene hydroxylase (AHH), 7-ethoxycoumarin
O-deethylase (7-EC) and 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase (ERF) activities, but not 
benzphetamine N-demethylase (BND), epoxide hydrolase (EH) or glutathione
S-transferase (GSH-T) activities. This induction pattern is typical of that
caused by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) in fish and mammals or by
tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in mammals. The extent of induction of
AHH-activity and cytochrome P-450 content was higher when experiments were
carried out in summer (water temperature 25 +/- 4 degrees C) than in winter
(water temperature 11 +/- 3 degrees C). Firemaster FF1 (15 mg/kg) induced fish
for at least 56 days in both summer and winter at which time the liver
concentrations of PBB were in the ppm range. PCB concentrations in the ppm range 
have been found in fish from polluted lakes and seas, thus we may expect that
environmental exposure to PCB is sufficient to induce hepatic mixed function
oxidase (MFO) activities. The PCB isomer 3,3'4,4'5,5'-HCB, which induces the same
spectrum of hepatic drug-metabolizing activities as TCDD and PAH in rats, had a
broadly similar effect in the sheepshead. Another purified isomer,
2,2',4,4',5,5'-HBB, which induces the same enzymes as PB in rats, had no effect
on drug-metabolizing activities in sheepshead. PB was also without effect on
sheepshead hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes, although a typical narcotic effect 
was produced in PB-treated sheepshead. Our studies provide further evidence that 
drug-metabolizing activities in fish liver are readily induced by chemicals like 
TCDD or PAH, but we fail to demonstrate induction after treatment of sheepshead
with inducers of the PB type.

PMID: 6268313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1981 Jan;78(1):544-8.

Thymus-dependent membrane antigens in man: inhibition of cell-mediated
lympholysis by monoclonal antibodies to TH2 antigen.

Evans RL, Wall DW, Platsoucas CD, Siegal FP, Fikrig SM, Testa CM, Good RA.

In prior studies a heteroantiserum to a surface membrane component termed T(H2)
was used to define two subsets of human T cells (T(H2) (+) and T(H2) (-)), which 
were found to express distinct sets of activities in vitro. In the present
studies we prepared monoclonal antibodies to surface determinants that are
restricted to T cells belonging to each of these two subsets. Two antibodies,
termed alphaLeu-2a and alphaLeu-2b, which seem to define the same surface antigen
identified by the original T(H2) antiserum, reacted with 57-84% of thymocytes and
22-46% of the erythrocyte-rosette-forming cells (ERF-C) in peripheral blood. Two 
other monoclonal antibodies, termed alphaLeu-3a and alphaLeu-3b, reacted with the
same subpopulation of thymocytes (78-89%) and peripheral blood ERF-C (47-78%)
but, unlike alphaLeu-2a and alphaLeu-2b, did not exhibit cross-blocking; i.e.,
labeling cells with alphaLeu-3a did not inhibit the subsequent binding of
alphaLeu-3b. T cells reactive with alphaLeu-2a were shown to be unreactive with
alphaLeu-3a, indicating that two separate subpopulations of T cells, Leu-2
(formerly T(H2) (+)) and Leu-3 (T(H2) (-)) T cells, were thereby defined. These
two T cell subsets make up the subpopulation of ERF-C (80-95%) previously defined
by a monoclonal antibody to a T cell membrane antigen (Leu-1) that has a
thymus-dependent distribution on normal lymphocytes but is expressed by some
surface-immunoglobulin-positive (sIg(+)) leukemic lymphocytes. None of the Leu
antibodies reported here reacted with sIg(+), Leu-1(+) leukemic cells, nor did
they react with normal hematopoietic cells or lymphoid cells that had surface
markers characteristic of B cells. Studies of the blocking effects of Leu
antibodies on killing in cell-mediated lympholysis by effector T cells were
carried out in the absence of complement. These experiments established the
following points: (i) alphaLeu-2a abolished the killing by cytotoxic T cells of
allogeneic phytohemagglutinin-stimulated blasts, (ii) inhibition of killing by
alphaLeu-2b was markedly less than inhibition by alphaLeu-2a, and (iii) other
antibodies, including alphaLeu-1, alphaLeu-3a, and alphaLeu-3b, had little or no 
effect on killing in cell-mediated lympholysis. The relevance of these findings
to prior studies done in the mouse and in man are discussed.

PMCID: PMC319090
PMID: 6787593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Virology. 1980 Nov;107(1):270-82.

Bacteriophage P22 proteins specified by the region between genes 9 and erf.

Youderian P, Susskind MM.

PMID: 6255679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Exp Hematol. 1979 Nov;7(10):519-23.

Evidence that the fetal mouse liver cell assay detects erythroid regulatory
factors (ERF) not measured with a standard in vivo assay.

Dunn CD, Lange RD, Jones JB.

A simplified modification of the fetal mouse liver cell (FMLC) assay has been
used to investigate the relationship between in vivo and in vitro detectable
Erythroid Regulatory Factors (ERF) in the serum of dogs exposed to hypoxia. The
results suggest that the FMLC assay is a useful technique for following changes
in serum ERF. However, the data obtained cannot be directly equated with the in
vivo erythrocythemic mouse assay unless a correction factor is applied. This is
necessary because the in vitro assay, in general, detects 50% more ERF than does 
the standard mouse assay.

PMID: 548284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Immunol. 1979 Jun;122(6):2478-83.

Induction of autoreactive cells by the preculture of human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells with the autologous fresh plasma.

Tomonari K, Aizawa M.

An AMLR in which precultured cells proliferated in response to fresh non-T cells 
is described. In our system, the responder is human peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells precultured in the autologous fresh plasma for up to 16 days, and the
stimulator is fresh autologous non-T cells. Results suggested that there were two
subpopulations of autoreactive cells obtained from the preculture; the high and
low density small lymphocytes, both having ERF activity. The autoreactivity of
low density cells was augmented when either macrophages or N-ERF-cells were
depleted from PBM and thereafter precultures wre performed. A survey of the
functional characteristics of the responding cells showed that the responding
cells had NK activity against Molt-4 cells but had no significant ADCC activity
against target CRBC. Mechanisms for the induction of autoreactive cells by the
preculture in the presence of autologous fresh plasma are discussed.

PMID: 156227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Med Phys. 1979 Jan-Feb;6(1):72-3.

Calculation of the MTF from the ERF.

Israel JW, Schneiders NJ.

PMID: 440240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Blood. 1978 Dec;52(6):1238-42.

Erythroid regulatory factors: correlation of detectable titers in vivo and in
vitro.

Dunn CD, Lange RD.

Titers of erythroid regulatory factors (ERF), as measured in vivo with a standard
erythrocythemic mouse technique, showed a highly significant correlation with
those obtained in vitro with a fetal mouse liver cell (FMLC) assay. The results
from the assay in vitro were somewhat higher than would be predicted from the
assay in vivo. Nevertheless, the FMLC technique has been found to be a valid and 
useful technique particularly in the study of serum ERF titers.

PMID: 719176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Med Phys. 1978 Jan-Feb;5(1):31-3.

Single-step calculation of the MTF from the ERF.

Schneiders NJ, Bushong SC.

A method is presented whereby the modulation transfer function can be calculated 
directly from the edge response function without having to find the line spread
function as an intermediate step.

PMID: 634231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Folia Microbiol (Praha). 1978;23(1):45-54.

Antimutagenic effects of caffeine during nitrosoguanidine-induced mutagenesis of 
Salmonella typhimurium cells and phages.

Háva P, Hejlová A, Sosková L.

The effect of caffeine on nitrosoguanidine-induced mutagenesis of Salmonella
typhimurium and its P22 and L phages was studied. The detected mutations included
phage "clear" mutations, reversions of phage "amber" mutation, and prototrophic
reversions of the his- auxotroph of Salmonella typhimurium. Neither the recA
mutation of the host nor the erf mutation of the phage genome were found to
affect the nitrosoguanidine-induced mutagenesis of the phage during vegetative
growth. Beginning with a concentration of 0.2 mg/ml, caffeine decreased the
frequency of mutants by 30--60%, attaining a maximum effect at 1.5 mg/ml and
retaining this effect even at higher concentrations. A similar antimutagenic
effect was observed with the mutagenesis of the host cells. The
nitrosoguanidine-induced mutagenesis does not seem to be related to the function 
of the recA cell gene or the erf phage gene. The mechanism of mutagenesis by
nitrosoguanidine probably has two components, one of them caffeine sensitive, the
other caffeine-resistant.

PMID: 342372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Virology. 1977 Jan;76(1):19-28.

The timing of erf-mediated recombination in replication, lysogenization, and the 
formation of recombinant progeny by Salmonella phage P22.

Weaver S, Levine M.

PMID: 319593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Recent Adv Stud Cardiac Struct Metab. 1976 May 26-29;12:19-28.

The pathways of protein synthesis and degradation in normal heart and during
development and regression of cardiac hypertrophy.

Sims JM, Patzer B, Kumudavalli-Reddy M, Martin AF, Rabinowitz M, Zak R.

The half-life of cardiac myosin heavy chains (HC) was determined, with
leucyl-tRNA as precursor, to be 5.4 days. Myosin HC are labeled more rapidly than
actin; myosin light chains (LC1 and LC2) are labeled more slowly than HC. The
observed differences are attributable to heterogeneity in the half-lives, e.g.,
actin, and to the effect of dilution by the existing macromolecular precursor
pool (LC1 and LC2). Cardiac and skeletal muscle contain a population of filaments
that can be released from myofibrils by ATP-relaxing solution. The easily
released filaments (ERF) are devoid of alpha-actinin and M-protein. Labeling of
ERF is more rapid than that of residual myofibrils. Cardiac and skeletal muscle
contains calcium-activated neutral protease, which selectively removes
alpha-actinin when incubated with isolated myofibrils. During development of
pressure-induced cardiac hypertrophy, the labeling of LC2 is increased. In
regressing cardiac hypertrophy the activities of free and total cathepsin D and
of acidic RNase are unaltered.

PMID: 145638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Physiol. 1975 Mar;246(1):79-107.

Receptive field organization of ganglion cells in the frog retina: contributions 
from cones, green rods and red rods.

Bäckström AC, Reuter T.

1. The impulse discharge of ganglion cells was recorded with extracellular
micro-electrodes in the excised and opened eye of the common frog, Rana
temporaria. 2. When a single unit was isolated, the cell type was first
determined according to the Maturana, Lettvin, McCulloch & Pitts (1960)
classification with the aid of varying moving and stationary stimuli. 3. Class 4 
cells respond only to a decrease of light when cones are stimulated but respond
to an increase of light when green rods are stimulated. A distinct class of
deviating class 4 cells was found that give a brief high frequency burst at 'off'
from their small excitatory receptive fields (ERF); unlike typical class 4 cells 
they possess a purely inhibitory surrounding field (IRF).4. The contributions
from the cones and the green and red rods were isolated by measuring the
thresholds of the discharges with on-off stimuli of varying wave-lengths against 
strong yellow backgrounds, or against a very weak background or no background at 
all. The spatial distribution of the contributions to the ERF was determined by
mapping threshold profiles, and additional information about ERF and IRF was
obtained from area-threshold curves. 5. The cone-mediated ERFs were found to be
0-06-0-50 mm wide (1-5-12 degrees of visual field), which agrees well with the
sizes of the dendritic trees of the ganglion cells. The green rod-mediated ERFs
can be 0-5-1-5 mm wide and have less distinct boundaries than the cone-mediated. 
The green rod-mediated ERF of an individual ganglion cell is always larger than
the cone-mediated ERF of the same cell. The red rod-mediated ERFs seem to be
somewhat larger than the cone-mediated but smaller than the green rod-mediated.
6. The green rods contribute only to the on thresholds of class 1, 2 and 4 cells,
but both to on and off in typical class 3 cells, while the cones contribute to on
and off in classes 1-3 and only to off in class 4.7. When the red rods begin to
contribute during dark adaptation they seem to enter the cone but not the green
rod channels. 8. All three receptor types contribute to the IRF surrounding the
ERF of classes 1, 2, 3 and deviating class 4 cells. Normal class 4 cells have no 
IRF. 9. The organization of the receptive fields is discussed in relation to the 
anatomy and electrophysiology of the cell types transmitting the signals from the
receptors to the ganglion cells.

PMCID: PMC1309405
PMID: 1079535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Biochem Med. 1974 Aug;10(4):374-86.

Some solubility studies of erythropoiesis regulatory factors (ERF)s.

Lewis JP, Welch ET, Neal WA, DuBose CM Jr, Lewis WG 3rd, Wright CS, Smith LL.

PMID: 4854342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. JAMA. 1974 Jan 7;227(1):73.

Editorial: AMA-ERF loan program.

Hussey HH.

PMID: 4859631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Calif Med. 1969 Feb;110(2):186.

Woman's Auxiliary: Ama-Erf.

Hart WL.

PMCID: PMC1503276
PMID: 18730192  [PubMed]


263. Calif Med. 1968 Mar;108(3):240.

Woman's Auxiliary: Ama-Erf.

Hart WL.

PMCID: PMC1503050
PMID: 18730113  [PubMed]


264. Mich Med. 1967 Nov;66(21):1458.

Optimism expressed as AMA-ERF researchers look at smoking-health.

Brahce C.

PMID: 6062516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Calif Med. 1966 Jan;104(1):71-2.

Woman's Auxiliary: Ama-Erf.

Crawley VS.

PMCID: PMC1516199
PMID: 18729990  [PubMed]


266. J Am Med Assoc. 1958 Jul 26;167(13):1612-5.

Uncoated buffered ferrous sulfate; absorption in man of radioactive iron (Fe 59) 
as ferrous sulfate measured electronically.

PRICE AH, ERF L, BIERLY J.

PMID: 13563151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Semin Int. 1958;7(2):6-10.

Iron-storage disease.

ERF LA, STASNEY J.

PMID: 13556066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. GP. 1957 Apr;15(4):75-9.

[Is cancer a deficiency disease?].

[Article in Undetermined Language]

ERF LA, MILLER BJ.

PMID: 13457350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Semin Int. 1957;6(2):19 passim.

Human blood fractions.

ERF LA.

PMID: 13467402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Semin Int. 1957;6(1):8-10; passim.

The Rh factor.

ERF LA.

PMID: 13432926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1956 Apr;102(4):487-91.

The serum proteins and lipoproteins in patients with carcinoma and in subjects
free of recurrence.

MILLER BJ, ERF L.

PMID: 13311731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Semin Int. 1956;5(2):21-4.

Leukaemia, theory and therapy.

ERF LA.

PMID: 13401280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Prog Hematol. 1956;1:153-65.

Radioactive phosphorus in the treatment of primary polycythemia (vera).

ERF LA.

PMID: 13359507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Seminar. 1956;18(1):8-12; passim.

Iron-storage disease.

ERF LA, STASNEY J.

PMID: 13324330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Del Med J. 1955 Mar;27(3):47-50.

Drug treatment of hypertension.

ERF LA.

PMID: 14352654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Seminar. 1955;17(2):8-10; passim.

Human blood fractions.

ERF LA.

PMID: 13246731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Seminar. 1954;16(4):8-10; passim.

The Rh factor.

ERF LA.

PMID: 13216293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Seminar. 1954;104:2-6.

Leukemia; theory and therapy.

ERF LA.

PMID: 13156680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Rev Gastroenterol. 1953 May;20(5):314-20.

Present status of radioisotopes in gastroenterology.

ERF LA.

PMID: 13056216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Med Womans J. 1951 Sep-Oct;58(5):19-23.

Clinical experiences and opinions in the field of hematology.

ERF LA.

PMID: 14910003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Int Rec Med Gen Pract Clin. 1951 Sep;164(9):482-7.

Clinical experiences and opinions in the field of hematology.

ERF LA.

PMID: 14888341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Pa Med J. 1950 Nov;53(11):1172-81.

Human leukemia, with emphasis upon recent therapeutic experiences.

ERF LA.

PMID: 14786026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Med Soc N J. 1950 Oct;47(10):479-80.

Hematology: its past and future.

ERF LA.

PMID: 14774667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. GP. 1950 Apr;1(1):59-66.

Pernicious anemia discussion of treatment with special reference to vitamin B12.

ERF LA, WIMER BM.

PMID: 15427747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Am J Med Sci. 1950 Jan;219(1):16-26.

The clinical effect of nitrogen mustard on neoplastic diseases.

BAUER RD, ERF LA.

PMID: 15402299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Am Heart J. 1949 Nov;38(5):766-74, illust.

Pulmonary hemangioma with pulmonary artery-aortic septal defect; attempted
roentgen visualization by catheterization of brachial artery and basilic veins.

ERF LA, FOLDES J, et al.

PMID: 15393757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Blood. 1949 Jul;4(7):845-62.

Comparison of vitamin B12 from liver and from Streptomyces griseus in the
treatment of pernicious anemia.

ERF LA, WIMER B.

PMID: 18145033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1949 Jun;79(4):461-5.

A toxicologic study of sodium malonate.

GRUBER CM Jr, DE BERARDINIS C, ERF LA.

PMID: 18152910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Am J Clin Pathol. 1949 Apr;19(4):372-80.

The clinical effect of nitrogen mustard on Hodgkin's disease.

ERF LA, BAUER RD.

PMID: 18117537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Am J Clin Pathol. 1949 Jan;19(1):48-50.

Primary splenic neutropenia; a case report.

ERF LA, FRY KE.

PMID: 18110096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Phila Med. 1948 May 8;43(39):1413.

Present status of radioactive substances and nitrogen mustard in diseases of the 
blood and lymph tissues.

ERF LA.

PMID: 18868379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Urol. 1947 Oct;58(4):272-6.

Subacute monocytic leukemia presenting symptoms of prostatism; a case report.

LUBIN EN, FETTER TR, ERF LA.

PMID: 20266242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Am J Clin Pathol. 1947 Apr;17(4):268-80.

Leukemia (summary of 100 cases) and lymphosarcoma complicated by pregnancy;
cellular changes produced in guinea pigs by extracts of leukemic placenta.

ERF LA.

PMID: 20295391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Am J Med. 1946 Oct;1:362-6.

Radiophosphorus as the treatment of choice in primary polycythemia.

ERF LA.

PMID: 20998219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Blood. 1946 Sep;1:379-86.

Cellular changes produced by extracts of human organs.

ERF LA, TURNER DL, MILLER FR.

PMID: 21000257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Radiology. 1946 Sep;47:223-33.

The bone changes of leukemia in children.

KALAYJIAN BS, HERBUT PA, ERF LA.

PMID: 20997771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Blood. 1946 May;1:202-8.

Primary polyoythemia; remissions induced by therapy with radiophosphorus.

ERF LA.

PMID: 21026401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Am J Clin Pathol. 1946 Jan;16:13-21.

Lipoblastic and megakaryocytoid multiple myeloma.

HERBUT PA, ERF LA.

PMID: 21019963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Am J Clin Pathol. 1946 Jan;16:1-12.

Comparative cytology of Wright's stained smears and histologic sections in
multiple myeloma.

ERF LA, HERBUT PA.

PMID: 21019962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Parenter Ther. 1946;2(2):10.

The community blood bank; problems and opportunities.

ERF L.

PMID: 20992261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Am J Pathol. 1945 Mar;21(2):233-53.

The Relation of Hodgkin's Disease, Lymphosarcoma and Reticulum Cell Sarcoma.

Herbut PA, Miller FR, Erf LA.

PMCID: PMC1934097
PMID: 19970810  [PubMed]


302. J Clin Invest. 1941 Sep;20(5):577-81.

STUDIES ON NEOPLASMS WITH THE AID OF RADIOACTIVE PHOSPHORUS. III. THE PHOSPHORUS 
METABOLISM OF THE PHOSPHOLIPID, ACID SOLUBLE AND NUCLEOPROTEIN FRACTIONS OF
VARIOUS TISSUES OF NORMAL AND LEUKEMIC MICE FOLLOWING THE ADMINISTRATION OF
"TRACER" AND "THERAPEUTIC" DOSES OF RADIO-PHOSPHORUS.

Tuttle LW(1), Erf LA, Lawrence JH.

Author information: 
(1)Crocker Radiation Laboratory and Department of Medicine, University of
California.

PMCID: PMC435087
PMID: 16694862  [PubMed]


303. J Clin Invest. 1941 Sep;20(5):567-75.

CLINICAL STUDIES WITH THE AID OF RADIOACTIVE PHOSPHORUS. I. THE ABSORPTION AND
DISTRIBUTION OF RADIO-PHOSPHORUS IN THE BLOOD AND ITS EXCRETION BY NORMAL
INDIVIDUALS AND PATIENTS WITH LEUKEMIA.

Erf LA(1), Lawrence JH.

Author information: 
(1)Crocker Radiation Laboratory and the Department of Medicine, University of
California.

PMCID: PMC435086
PMID: 16694861  [PubMed]


304. J Clin Invest. 1941 Jan;20(1):57-61.

STUDIES ON NEOPLASMS WITH THE AID OF RADIOACTIVE PHOSPHORUS. II. THE PHOSPHORUS
METABOLISM OF THE NUCLEOPROTEIN, PHOSPHOLIPID AND ACID SOLUBLE FRACTIONS OF
NORMAL AND LEUKEMIC MICE.

Tuttle LW(1), Erf LA, Lawrence JH.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley.

PMCID: PMC435032
PMID: 16694808  [PubMed]


305. J Clin Invest. 1940 May;19(3):451-8.

INCREASED UROBILINOGEN EXCRETION AND ACUTE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA IN PATIENTS TREATED
WITH SULFAPYRIDINE.

Erf LA(1), Mac Leod CM.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital of The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, New York City.

PMCID: PMC434978
PMID: 16694760  [PubMed]


306. J Clin Invest. 1940 Mar;19(2):409-21.

THE GLYCINE TOLERANCE TEST IN SPRUE AND PERNICIOUS ANEMIA.

Erf LA(1), Rhoads CP.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital of The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, New York City.

PMCID: PMC434975
PMID: 16694757  [PubMed]


