
1. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Mar 18. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4999. [Epub ahead of print]

PageRank analysis reveals topologically expressed genes correspond to psoriasis
and their functions are associated with apoptosis resistance.

Zeng X(1), Zhao J(2), Wu X(1), Shi H(2), Liu W(1), Cui B(1), Yang L(3), Ding
X(1), Song P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences, Beijing 201203, P.R. China. (2)Key Laboratory of Advanced
Control and Optimization for Chemical Processes of the Ministry of Education,
East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of
Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 201203, P.R. China.

Psoriasis is an inflammatory skin disease. Deceleration in keratinocyte apoptosis
is the most significant pathological change observed in psoriasis. To detect a
meaningful correlation between the genes and gene functions associated with the
mechanism underlying psoriasis, 927 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
identified using the Gene Expression Omnibus database, GSE13355 [false discovery 
rate (FDR) <0.01; |log fold change >1] with the package in R langue. The selected
DEGs were further constructed using the search tool for the retrieval of
interacting genes, in order to analyze the interaction network between the DEGs. 
Subsequent to PageRank analysis, 14 topological hub genes were identified, and
the functions and pathways in the hub genes network were analyzed. The top-ranked
hub gene, estrogen receptor-1 (ESR1) is downregulated in psoriasis, exhibited
binding sites enriched with genes possessing anti-apoptotic functions. The ESR1
gene encodes estrogen receptor a (ERa); a reduced level of ERa expression
provides a crucial foundation in response to the anti-apoptotic activity of
psoriatic keratinocytes by activating the expression of anti-apoptotic genes.
Furthermore, it was detected that the pathway that is associated most
significantly with psoriasis is the pathways in cancer. Pathways in cancer may
protect psoriatic cells from apoptosis by inhibition of ESR1 expression. The
present study provides support towards the investigation of ESR1 gene function
and elucidates that the interaction with anti-apoptotic genes is involved in the 
underlying biological mechanisms of resistance to apoptosis in psoriasis.
However, further investigation is required to confirm the present results.

PMID: 27035208  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Mar 31. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.5078. [Epub ahead of print]

Tumor-promoting function of single nucleotide polymorphism rs1836724 (C3388T)
alters multiple potential legitimate microRNA binding sites at the
3'-untranslated region of ErbB4 in breast cancer.

Bagheri F(1), Mesrian Tanha H(2), Mojtabavi Naeini M(3), Ghaedi K(2), Azadeh
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Division, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Payame Noor 
University of Taft, Yazd 47416-95447, Iran. (2)Cellular and Molecular Biology
Division, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Isfahan,
Isfahan 81746-73441, Iran. (3)Genetics Division, Department of Biology, Faculty
of Science, University of Isfahan, Isfahan 81746-7344, Iran. (4)Zist Fanavary
Novin Institute, Isfahan 14115-111, Iran.

ErbB4 can act as either a tumor-suppressor gene or an oncogene in breast cancer. 
Multiple genetic factors including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) affect 
gene expression patterns. Multiple 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) SNPs reside
within the target binding site of microRNAs, which can strengthen or weaken
binding to target genes. The present study aimed to predict potential 3'-UTR
variants of ErbB4 that alter the target binding site of microRNAs (miRNAs) and to
clarify the association of the potential variant with the risk of developing
breast cancer. In silico prediction was performed to identify potential
functional SNPs within miRNA target binding sites in the 3'-UTR of ErbB4. Thus,
146 patients and controls were genotyped using restriction fragment length
polymorphism-polymerase chain reaction. In addition to the Cochran-Armitage test 
for trend, allele and genotype frequency differences were determined to
investigate the association between rs1836724 and the susceptibility to breast
cancer. Bioinformatics analysis identified rs1836724 to be a polymorphism in the 
seed region of four miRNA binding sites (hsa-miR335-5p, hsa-miR-28-5p,
has-miR-708-5p and has-miR-665), which may participate in the development of
breast cancer. Logistic regression data indicated that the T allele of the
polymorphism [OR (95% CI)=1.72 (1.056-2.808), P=0.029] is associated with the
risk of breast cancer. Using bioinformatics tools, a correlation was indicated
between the presence of the T allele and a reduction in ErbB4 RNA silencing based
on miRNA interaction. Furthermore, case subgroup data analysis revealed an
association between the C/T genotype and an ER positive phenotype [OR (95%
CI)=6.00 (1.082-33.274), P=0.028] compared with the T/T genotype. ErbB4 and
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) are regulated by identical miRNAs thus there may be a 
competition for binding sites. Due to this pattern, if the interaction between
miRNAs with one gene is reduced, it may be consistent with the increase in
interaction with another one. Therefore, more interaction with rs1836724
C variant within ErbB4 may be associated with higher expression of ESR1
(ER-positive phenotype). miRNAs interact with ErbB4 mRNA more frequently when it 
carries C allele at the rs1836724 position compared with the T carriers.
Therefore, the identical miRNA interacts with ESR1 less frequently when ErbB4
mRNA has a C allele. Therefore, ESR1 expression may be higher when ErbB4 mRNA has
a C allele.

PMID: 27035115  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Toxicol Sci. 2016 Mar 29. pii: kfw057. [Epub ahead of print]

THE G Protein-Coupled Estrogen Receptor Agonist G-1 Inhibits Nuclear Estrogen
Receptor Activity and Stimulates Novel Phosphoproteomic Signatures.

Smith LC(1), Ralston-Hooper KJ(2), Ferguson PL(2), Sabo-Attwood T(3).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Physiological Sciences, Center for Environmental and Human
Toxicology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611 Department of
Environmental and Global Health, Center for Environmental and Human Toxicology,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611. (2)Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Nicholas School of the Environment, Duke University,
Durham, NC 27708. (3)Department of Environmental and Global Health, Center for
Environmental and Human Toxicology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611 
sabo@phhp.ufl.edu.

Estrogen exerts cellular effects through both nuclear (ESR1 and ESR2) and
membrane-bound estrogen receptors (G-protein coupled estrogen receptor, GPER),
however it is unclear if they act independently or engage in crosstalk to
influence hormonal responses. To investigate each receptor's role in
proliferation, transcriptional activation, and protein phosphorylation in breast 
cancer cells (MCF-7), we employed selective agonists for ESR1 (PPT), ESR2 (DPN)
and GPER (G-1) and also determined the impact of xenoestrogens bisphenol-A (BPA) 
and genistein on these effects. As anticipated, 17ß-estradiol (E2), PPT, DPN,
BPA, and genistein each enhanced proliferation and activation of an ERE-driven
reporter gene whereas G-1 had no significant impact. However, G-1 significantly
reduced E2-, PPT-, DPN-, BPA, and genistein-induced proliferation and ERE
activation at doses greater than 500 nM indicating that G-1 mediated inhibition
is not ESR isotype specific. As membrane receptors initiate cascades of
phosphorylation events, we performed a global phosphoproteomic analysis on cells 
exposed to E2 or G-1 to identify potential targets of receptor crosstalk via
downstream protein phosphorylation targets. Of the 211 phosphorylated proteins
identified, 40 and 13 phosphoproteins were specifically modified by E2 and G-1,
respectively. Subnetwork enrichment analysis revealed several processes related
to cell cycle were specifically enriched by G-1 compared to E2. Further there
existed a number of newly identified proteins that were specifically
phosphorylated by G-1. These phosphorylation networks highlight specific proteins
that may modulate the inhibitory effects of G-1 and suggest a novel role for
interference with nuclear receptor activity driven by E2 and xenoestrogens.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 27026707  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Breast Cancer (Dove Med Press). 2016 Mar 8;8:29-37. doi: 10.2147/BCTT.S88434.
eCollection 2016.

Identification and prioritization of candidate genes for symptom variability in
breast cancer survivors based on disease characteristics at the cellular level.

Koleck TA(1), Conley YP(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, School of Nursing and Graduate School of Public 
Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Research is beginning to suggest that the presence and/or severity of symptoms
reported by breast cancer survivors may be associated with disease-related
factors of cancer. In this article, we present a novel approach to the
identification and prioritization of biologically plausible candidate genes to
investigate relationships between genomic variation and symptom variability in
breast cancer survivors. Cognitive dysfunction is utilized as a representative
breast cancer survivor symptom to elucidate the conceptualization of and
justification for our cellular, disease-based approach to address symptom
variability in cancer survivors. Initial candidate gene identification was based 
on genes evaluated as part of multigene expression profiles for breast cancer,
which are commonly used in the clinical setting to characterize the biology of
cancer cells for the purpose of describing overall tumor aggressiveness,
prognostication, and individualization of therapy. A list of genes evaluated
within five multigene expression profiles for breast cancer was compiled. In
order to prioritize candidate genes for investigation, genes used in each profile
were compared for duplication. Twenty-one genes (BAG1, BCL2, BIRC5, CCNB1, CENPA,
CMC2, DIAPH3, ERBB2, ESR1, GRB7, MELK, MKI67, MMP11, MYBL2, NDC80, ORC6, PGR,
RACGAP1, RFC4, RRM2, and SCUBE2) are utilized in two or more profiles, including 
five genes (CCNB1, CENPA, MELK, MYBL2, and ORC6) used in three profiles. To
ensure that the parsimonious 21 gene set is representative of the more global
biological hallmarks of cancer, an Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was conducted.
Evaluation of genes known to impact pathways involved with cancer development and
progression provide a means to evaluate the overlap between the biological
underpinnings of cancer and symptom development within the context of cancer.

PMCID: PMC4790538
PMID: 27022301  [PubMed]


5. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 28. pii: canres.2357.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

AZD9496: An oral estrogen receptor inhibitor that blocks the growth of
ER-positive and ESR1 mutant breast tumours in preclinical models.

Weir HM(1), Bradbury RH(2), Lawson M(2), Rabow AA(3), Buttar D(2), Callis RJ(4), 
Curwen JO(2), de Almeida C(2), Ballard P(2), Hulse M(2), Donald CS(2), Feron
LJ(2), Karoutchi G(2), MacFaul P(2), Moss T(2), Norman RA(5), Pearson SE(2),
Tonge M(5), Davies G(2), Walker GE(5), Wilson Z(2), Rowlinson R(2), Powell S(2), 
Sadler C(2), Richmond G(2), Ladd B(6), Pazolli E(7), Mazzola AM(6), D'Cruz CM(6),
De Savi C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology, AstraZeneca Hazel.Weir@astrazeneca.com. (2)Oncology, AstraZeneca.
(3)Oncology Innovative Medicines, AstraZeneca. (4)Cancer Research and Infection
Research Area, Discovery, AstraZeneca. (5)Department of Discovery Sciences,
AstraZeneca. (6)Oncology iMed, AstraZeneca R&D. (7)Oncology, H3 Biomedicine.

Fulvestrant is an estrogen receptor (ER) antagonist administered to breast cancer
patients by monthly intramuscular injection. Given its present limitations of
dosing and route of administration, a more flexible orally available compound has
been sought to pursue the potential benefits of this drug in patients with
advanced metastatic disease. Here we report the identification and
characterization of AZD9496, a non-steroidal small molecule inhibitor of ERa
which is a potent and selective antagonist and down-regulator of ERa in vitro and
in vivo in ER-positive models of breast cancer. Significant tumour growth
inhibition was observed as low as 0.5 mg/kg dose in the estrogen-dependent MCF-7 
xenograft model, where this effect was accompanied by a dose-dependent decrease
in PR protein levels demonstrating potent antagonist activity. Combining AZD9496 
with PI3K pathway and CDK4/6 inhibitors led to further growth inhibitory effects 
compared to monotherapy alone. Tumour regressions were also seen in a long-term
estrogen-deprived breast model, where significant down-regulation of ERa protein 
was observed. AZD9496 bound and down-regulated clinically relevant ESR1 mutants
in vitro and inhibited tumour growth in an ESR1-mutant patient-derived xenograft 
model that included a D538G mutation. Collectively, the pharmacological evidence 
showed that AZD9496 is an oral, non-steroidal, selective estrogen receptor
antagonist and down-regulator in ER-positive breast cells that could provide
meaningful benefit to ER-positive breast cancer patients. AZD9496 is currently
being evaluated in a Phase 1 clinical trial.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 27020862  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. J Genet. 2016 Mar;95(1):131-40.

Contribution of polymorphisms in ESR1, ESR2, FSHR, CYP19A1, SHBG, and NRIP1 genes
to migraine susceptibility in Turkish population.

CoSkun S(1), Yucel Y, Çim A, Cengiz B, Oztuzcu S, Varol S, Özdemir HH, Uzar E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics Diyarbakir 21280, Turkey.

Migraine, a highly prevalent headache disorder, is regarded as a polygenic
multifactorial disease. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes that 
involved in sex hormone metabolism may comprise risk for migraine, but the
results of previous genetic association studies are conflicting. The aim of this 
study was to evaluate genetic variants in genes involved in oestrogen receptor
and oestrogen hormone metabolism in a Turkish population. A total of 12 SNPs in
the ESR1, ESR2, FSHR, CYP19A1, SHBG and NRIP1 genes were genotyped in 142
migraine cases and 141 nonmigraine controls, using a BioMark 96.96 dynamic array 
system. In addition, gene-gene interactions were analysed using generalized
multifactor dimensionality reduction (GMDR) methods. According to GMDR analysis, 
our results indicated that there was a significant association between migraine
and gene-gene interaction among the CYP19A1, FSHR, ESR1 and NRIP1. Single-gene
variant analysis showed that a significant association was observed between the
TT genotype of rs10046 and migraine susceptibility.When the analysis was
performed only in women, the GG genotype of rs2229741 was different between
migraineurs and controls.When the female migraine patients were divided into two 
groups, migraine related to menstruation (MRM) or migraine not related to
menstruation (MNRM), GG genotype of rs726281 was significantly associated with
MRM. These results suggested that rs10046 could play a potential role in migraine
susceptibility in Turkish population. Also, the rare GG genotype of rs726281
appears to influence migraine susceptibility in a recessive manner in MRM
subgroup of female patients. In addition, variant GG genotype of rs2229741 may
reduce the risk of migraine in Turkish women.

PMID: 27019440  [PubMed - in process]


7. Anim Sci J. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.1111/asj.12553. [Epub ahead of print]

Expression of estrogen receptor 1 and progesterone receptor in primary goat
mammary epithelial cells.

Ogorevc J(1), Dovc P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Ljubljana, Biotechnical Faculty,
Domzale, Slovenia.

The exact role and sensitivity of cells to estrogen and progesterone mediated
through the steroid receptors during lactation is not known. Expression of
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and progesterone receptor (PGR) was quantified in
mammary tissue-derived primary goat mammary epithelial cells (pgMECs) to
determine the influence of donor tissue physiology (lactating and juvenile) and
cell culture growth conditions (basal and lactogenic) on ESR1 and PGR expression 
in the derived cells. Relative messenger RNA (mRNA) levels for both receptors
were the highest in cell lines derived from mammary tissue of juvenile goats.
Maintaining pgMECs in lactogenic conditions resulted in up-regulation of ESR1
(1.36- to 12.35-fold) and in down-regulation of PGR (-2.53- to -3.62-fold),
compared to basal conditions. Based on Western blotting analysis we suggest that 
the differences in mRNA expression are translated to the protein level. We
suggest that differential expression in lactating conditions is correlated with
terminal differentiation of the pgMECs. Double immunostainings showed that
estrogen receptor alpha (ER-a) positive cells do not exclusively belong to the
luminal lineage and that ER-a and PGR can be expressed individually or
co-expressed in the pgMECs. The derived primary cultures/lines in early passages 
are hormone-responsive and represent a useful surrogate for mammary tissue in
research experiments.

© 2016 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

PMID: 27018494  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Cancer Lett. 2016 Mar 24. pii: S0304-3835(16)30196-3. doi:
10.1016/j.canlet.2016.03.036. [Epub ahead of print]

Tumor-associated macrophage-derived CXCL8 could induce ERa suppression via HOXB13
in endometrial cancer.

Tong H(1), Ke JQ(1), Jiang FZ(1), Wang XJ(1), Wang FY(1), Li YR(1), Lu W(2), Wan 
XP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai First Maternity and Infant Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai
First Maternity and Infant Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. Electronic address: wanxiaoping@tongji.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: To elucidate the role of tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) in the loss
of ERa in endometrial cancer (EC) and the underlying mechanism.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tissue microarrays and immunohistochemistry assays were
performed using endometrial cancer tissue along with coculture,
immunofluorescence, invasion assays and ChIP-qPCR using a human endometrial
cancer cell line.
RESULTS: Compared with normal tissue, an increased number of TAM was found in EC 
tissue (34.0<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.6 vs. 8.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.1, respectively; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), which may
downregulate ERa (27.4%, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 for HEC-1A and 16.9%, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 for Ishikawa)
and promote EC cell invasion (1.8-fold, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 for HEC-1A and 2.0-fold,
p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 for Ishikawa). Furthermore, we found that TAM-derived CXCL8 mediated
the loss of ERa and cancer invasion via HOXB13. HOXB13 was highly expressed in
the ERa-negative subtype (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.204, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002) and low expression of ESR1 was
associated with a poor prognosis for EC patients (log-rank p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSION: TAM-secreted CXCL8 downregulated the ERa expression of EC cells via
HOXB13, which may be associated with cancer invasion, metastasis and poor
prognosis.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 27018308  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Mar 24. pii: S0006-291X(16)30421-1. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.03.108. [Epub ahead of print]

Functional interaction between nonreceptor tyrosine kinase c-Abl and SR-Rich
protein RBM39.

Mai S(1), Qu X(2), Li P(1), Ma Q(1), Liu X(3), Cao C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, 27 Taiping Rd, Haidian District, Beijing
100850, China. (2)General Navy Hospital of PLA, 6 Fucheng Rd, Haidian District,
Beijing 100037, China. (3)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, 27 Taiping Rd,
Haidian District, Beijing 100850, China. Electronic address: liux931932@163.com. 
(4)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, 27 Taiping Rd, Haidian District, Beijing
100850, China. Electronic address: cao_c@sohu.com.

RBM39, also known as splicing factor HCC1.4, acts as a transcriptional
coactivator for the steroid nuclear receptors JUN/AP-1, ESR1/ER-a and ESR2/ER-ß. 
RBM39 is involved in the regulation of the transcriptional responses of these
steroid nuclear receptors and promotes transcriptional initiation. In this paper,
we report that RBM39 interacts with the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase c-Abl. Both
the Src homology (SH) 2 and SH3 domains of c-Abl interact with RBM39. The major
tyrosine phosphorylation sites on RBM39 that are phosphorylated by c-Abl are Y95 
and Y99, as demonstrated by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass
spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) and mutational analysis. c-Abl was shown boost the
transcriptional coactivation activity of RBM39 for ERa and PRß in a tyrosine
kinase-dependent manner. The results suggest that mammalian c-Abl plays an
important role in steroid hormone receptor-mediated transcription by regulating
RBM39.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 27018250  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Front Behav Neurosci. 2016 Mar 16;10:41. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2016.00041.
eCollection 2016.

Neural Androgen Receptors Modulate Gene Expression and Social Recognition But Not
Social Investigation.

Karlsson SA(1), Studer E(1), Kettunen P(2), Westberg L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)Department
of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg Gothenburg, Sweden.

The role of sex and androgen receptors (ARs) for social preference and social
memory is rather unknown. In this study of mice we compared males, females and
males lacking ARs specifically in the nervous system, AR(NesDel), with respect to
social preference, assessed with the three-chambered apparatus test, and social
recognition, assessed with the social discrimination procedure. In the social
discrimination test we also evaluated the tentative importance of the sex of the 
stimulus animal. Novel object recognition and olfaction were investigated to
complement the results from the social tests. Gene expression analysis was
performed to reveal molecules involved in the effects of sex and androgens on
social behaviors. All three test groups showed social preference in the
three-chambered apparatus test. In both social tests an AR-independent sexual
dimorphism was seen in the persistence of social investigation of female
conspecifics, whereas the social interest toward male stimuli mice was similar in
all groups. Male and female controls recognized conspecifics independent of their
sex, whereas AR(NesDel) males recognized female but not male stimuli mice.
Moreover, the non-social behaviors were not affected by AR deficiency. The gene
expression analyses of hypothalamus and amygdala indicated that Oxtr, Cd38, Esr1,
Cyp19a1, Ucn3, Crh, and Gtf2i were differentially expressed between the three
groups. In conclusion, our results suggest that ARs are required for recognition 
of male but not female conspecifics, while being dispensable for social
investigation toward both sexes. In addition, the AR seems to regulate genes
related to oxytocin, estrogen and William's syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4792870
PMID: 27014003  [PubMed]


11. BMC Bioinformatics. 2016 Mar 24;17(1):144. doi: 10.1186/s12859-016-0991-z.

Detecting broad domains and narrow peaks in ChIP-seq data with hiddenDomains.

Starmer J(1,)(2), Magnuson T(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. starmer@unc.edu. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, 
USA. starmer@unc.edu. (3)Department of Genetics, The University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. (4)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Correctly identifying genomic regions enriched with histone
modifications and transcription factors is key to understanding their regulatory 
and developmental roles. Conceptually, these regions are divided into two
categories, narrow peaks and broad domains, and different algorithms are used to 
identify each one. Datasets that span these two categories are often analyzed
with a single program for peak calling combined with an ad hoc method for
domains.
RESULTS: We developed hiddenDomains, which identifies both peaks and domains, and
compare it to the leading algorithms using H3K27me3, H3K36me3, GABP, ESR1 and
FOXA ChIP-seq datasets. The output from the programs was compared to
qPCR-validated enriched and depleted sites, predicted transcription factor
binding sites, and highly-transcribed gene bodies. With every method,
hiddenDomains, performed as well as, if not better than algorithms dedicated to a
specific type of analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: hiddenDomains performs as well as the best domain and peak calling
algorithms, making it ideal for analyzing ChIP-seq datasets, especially those
that contain a mixture of peaks and domains.

PMCID: PMC4806451
PMID: 27009150  [PubMed - in process]


12. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 22;14(1):11. doi: 10.1186/s12958-016-0148-y.

Relaxin deficiency results in increased expression of angiogenesis- and
remodelling-related genes in the uterus of early pregnant mice but does not
affect endometrial angiogenesis prior to implantation.

Marshall SA(1), Ng L(1), Unemori EN(2), Girling JE(3), Parry LJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Royal Parade, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia. (2)Corthera Inc., San Mateo, California, USA. (3)Gynaecology
Research Centre, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The University of
Melbourne and Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (4)School
of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia. ljparry@unimelb.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Extensive uterine adaptations, including angiogenesis, occur prior to
implantation in early pregnancy and are potentially regulated by the peptide
hormone relaxin. This was investigated in two studies. First, we took a
microarray approach using human endometrial stromal (HES) cells treated with
relaxin in vitro to screen for target genes. Then we aimed to investigate whether
or not relaxin deficiency in mice affected uterine expression of representative
genes associated with angiogenesis and uterine remodeling, and also blood vessel 
proliferation in the pre-implantation mouse endometrium.
METHODS: Normal HES cells were isolated and treated with recombinant human
relaxin (10 ng/ml) for 24 h before microarray analysis. Reverse transcriptase PCR
was used to analyze gene expression of relaxin and its receptor (Rxfp1) in
ovaries and uteri; quantitative PCR was used to analyze steroid receptor,
angiogenesis and extracellular matrix remodeling genes in the uteri of wild type 
(Rln+/+) and Rln-/- mice on days 1-4 of pregnancy. Immunohistochemistry localized
endometrial endothelial cell proliferation and mass spectrometry measured steroid
hormones in the plasma.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis identified 63 well-characterized genes that were
differentially regulated in HES cells after relaxin treatment. Expression of some
of these genes was increased in the uterus of Rln+/+ mice by day 4 of pregnancy. 
There was significantly higher vascular endothelial growth factor A (VegfA),
estrogen receptor 1 (Esr1), progesterone receptor (Pgr), Rxfp1, egl-9 family
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (Egln1), hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (Hif1a),
matrix metalloproteinase 14 (Mmp14) and ankryn repeat domain 37 (Ankrd37) in
Rln-/- compared to Rln+/+ mice on day 1. Progesterone receptor expression and
plasma progesterone levels were higher in Rln-/- mice compared to Rln+/+ mice.
However, endometrial angiogenesis was not advanced as pre-implantation
endothelial cell proliferation did not differ between genotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: Relaxin treatment modulates expression of a variety of
angiogenesis-related genes in HES cells. However, despite accelerated uterine
gene expression of steroid receptor, progesterone and angiogenesis and
extracellular matrix remodeling genes in Rln-/- mice, there was no impact on
angiogenesis. We conclude that although relaxin deficiency results in phenotypic 
changes in the pre-implantation uterus, endogenous relaxin does not play a major 
role in pre-implantation angiogenesis in the mouse uterus.

PMCID: PMC4802869
PMID: 27005936  [PubMed - in process]


13. Mol Oncol. 2016 Feb 27. pii: S1574-7891(16)00035-1. doi:
10.1016/j.molonc.2016.02.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Amplification of WHSC1L1 regulates expression and estrogen-independent activation
of ERa in SUM-44 breast cancer cells and is associated with ERa over-expression
in breast cancer.

Irish JC(1), Mills JN(2), Turner-Ivey B(3), Wilson RC(4), Guest ST(5), Rutkovsky 
A(6), Dombkowski A(7), Kappler CS(8), Hardiman G(9), Ethier SP(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86
Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC 29425, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, Wayne
State University School of Medicine, 540 E Canfield St, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
Electronic address: jirish9@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC 29425,
USA. Electronic address: millsjn@musc.edu. (3)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC
29425, USA. Electronic address: turnerbp@musc.edu. (4)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC
29425, USA. Electronic address: wilsorc@musc.edu. (5)Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC
29425, USA. Electronic address: guests@musc.edu. (6)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC
29425, USA. Electronic address: rutkovsk@musc.edu. (7)Department of Cancer
Biology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 540 E Canfield St, Detroit,
MI 48201, USA. Electronic address: domski@wayne.edu. (8)Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA. Electronic address: kapplerc@musc.edu. (9)Department
of Medicine and Public Health, Medical University of South Carolina, 171 Ashley
Ave, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. Electronic address: hardiman@musc.edu.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86
Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. Electronic address:
ethier@musc.edu.

The 8p11-p12 amplicon occurs in approximately 15% of breast cancers in aggressive
luminal B-type tumors. Previously, we identified WHSC1L1 as a driving oncogene
from this region. Here, we demonstrate that over-expression of WHSC1L1 is linked 
to over-expression of ERa in SUM-44 breast cancer cells and in primary human
breast cancers. Knock-down of WHSC1L1, particularly WHSC1L1-short, had a dramatic
effect on ESR1 mRNA and ERa protein levels. SUM-44 cells do not require exogenous
estrogen for growth in vitro; however, they are dependent on ERa expression, as
ESR1 knock-down or exposure to the selective estrogen receptor degrader
fulvestrant resulted in growth inhibition. ChIP-Seq experiments utilizing ERa
antibodies demonstrated extensive ERa binding to chromatin in SUM-44 cells under 
estrogen-free conditions. ERa bound to ERE and FOXA1 motifs under estrogen-free
conditions and regulated expression of estrogen-responsive genes. Short-term
treatment with estradiol enhanced binding of ERa to chromatin and influenced
expression of many of the same genes to which ERa was bound under estrogen-free
conditions. Finally, knock-down of WHSC1L1 in SUM-44 cells resulted in loss of
ERa binding to chromatin under estrogen-free conditions, which was restored upon 
exposure to estradiol. These results indicate the SUM-44 cells are a good model
of a subset of luminal B breast cancers that have the 8p11-p12 amplicon,
over-express WHSC1L1, and over-express ERa, but are independent of estrogen for
binding to chromatin and regulation of gene expression. Breast cancers such as
these, that are dependent on ERa activity but independent of estradiol, are a
major cause of breast cancer mortality.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27005559  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 19. pii: S0303-7207(16)30072-7. doi:
10.1016/j.mce.2016.03.024. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential roles of estrogen receptors, ESR1 and ESR2, in adult rat
spermatogenesis.

Dumasia K(1), Kumar A(1), Deshpande S(1), Sonawane S(2), Balasinor NH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroendocrinology, National Institute for Research in
Reproductive Health (Indian Council of Medical Research), Parel, Mumbai 400 012, 
India. (2)Confocal Facility, National Institute for Research in Reproductive
Health (Indian Council of Medical Research), Parel, Mumbai 400 012, India.
(3)Department of Neuroendocrinology, National Institute for Research in
Reproductive Health (Indian Council of Medical Research), Parel, Mumbai 400 012, 
India. Electronic address: balasinorn@nirrh.res.in.

Estrogens, through their receptors, play an important role in regulation of
spermatogenesis. However, the precise role of the estrogen receptors (ESR1 and
ESR2) has been difficult to determine as in vivo estradiol treatment would signal
through both the ESRs. Hence we had developed in vivo selective ESR agonist
administration models in adult male rats to decipher the individual roles of the 
ESRs. Treatment with both ESR1 and ESR2 agonists decreased sperm counts after 60 
days of treatment. The present study aimed to delineate the precise causes of
decreased sperm counts following treatment with the two ESR agonists. Treatment
with ESR1 agonist causes an arrest in differentiation of round spermatids into
elongated spermatids, mainly due to down-regulation of genes involved in
spermiogenesis. ESR2 agonist administration reduces sperm counts due to
spermiation failure and spermatocyte apoptosis. Spermiation failure observed is
due to defects in tubulobulbar complex formation because of decrease in
expression of genes involved in actin remodelling. The increase in spermatocyte
apoptosis could be due to increase in oxidative stress and decrease in
transcripts of anti-apoptotic genes. Our results suggest that the two ESRs
regulate distinct aspects of spermatogenesis. ESR1 is mainly involved with
regulation of spermiogenesis, while ESR2 regulates spermatocyte apoptosis and
spermiation. Activation of estrogen signaling through either of the receptors can
affect their respective processes during spermatogenesis and lead to low sperm
output. Since many environmental estrogens can bind to the two ESRs with
different affinities, these observations can be useful in understanding their
potential effects on spermatogenesis.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 27004961  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Oncol Lett. 2016 Mar;11(3):1936-1942. Epub 2016 Jan 20.

S100A8/A9 is associated with estrogen receptor loss in breast cancer.

Bao YI(1), Wang A(1), Mo J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Basic and Translational Cancer Research Laboratory, The Second Hospital of
Jiaxing, Jiaxing, Zhejiang 314000, P.R. China.

S100A8 and S100A9 are calcium-binding proteins that are secreted primarily by
granulocytes and monocytes, and are upregulated during the inflammatory response.
S100A8 and S100A9 have been identified to be expressed by epithelial cells
involved in malignancy. In the present study, the transcriptional levels of
S100A8 and S100A9 were investigated in various subtypes of breast cancer (BC),
and the correlation with estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and GATA binding protein 3
(GATA3) gene expression was evaluated using microarray datasets. The expression
of S100A8 and S100A9 in BC cells was assessed by reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). The regulation of ESR1 and GATA3 by administration of
recombinant S100A8/A9 was examined in the BC MCF-7 cell line using quantitative
(q)PCR. The association between S100A8 and S100A9 and overall survival (OS) was
investigated in GeneChip® data of BC. The expression levels of S100A8 and S100A9 
were higher in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her2)-amplified and
basal-like BC. The messenger (m)RNA levels of S100A8 and S100A9 were inversely
correlated with ESR1 and GATA3 expression. S100A8/A9 induced a 10-fold decrease
in the mRNA levels of ESR1 in MCF-7 cells. Poor OS was associated with high
expression levels of S100A9, but not with high expression levels of S100A8 in BC.
In conclusion, strong expression and secretion of S100A8/A9 may be associated
with the loss of estrogen receptor in BC, and may be involved in the poor
prognosis of Her2+/basal-like subtypes of BC.

PMCID: PMC4774479
PMID: 26998104  [PubMed]


16. Mediators Inflamm. 2016;2016:4867368. doi: 10.1155/2016/4867368. Epub 2016 Feb
15.

Altered Autophagy-Associated Genes Expression in T Cells of Oral Lichen Planus
Correlated with Clinical Features.

Tan YQ(1), Zhang J(2), Du GF(2), Lu R(2), Chen GY(1), Zhou G(2).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology
(Hubei-MOST) and Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, School
and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Luoyu Road 237, Wuhan 430079,
China. (2)The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology 
(Hubei-MOST) and Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, School
and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Luoyu Road 237, Wuhan 430079,
China; Department of Oral Medicine, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan
University, Luoyu Road 237, Wuhan 430079, China.

Oral lichen planus (OLP) is a T cell-mediated inflammatory autoimmune disease.
Autophagy has emerged as a fundamental trafficking event in mediating T cell
response, which plays crucial roles in innate and adaptive immunity. The present 
study mainly investigated the mRNA expression of autophagy-associated genes in
peripheral blood T cells of OLP patients and evaluated correlations between their
expression and the clinical features of OLP. Five differentially expressed
autophagy-associated genes were identified by autophagy array. Quantitative
real-time RT-PCR results confirmed that IGF1 expression in the peripheral blood T
cells of OLP patients was significantly higher than that in controls, especially 
in female and middle-aged (30-50 years old) OLP patients. In addition, ATG9B mRNA
levels were significantly lower in nonerosive OLP patients. However, no
significant differences were found in the expression of HGS, ESR1, and SNCA
between OLP patients and controls. Taken together, dysregulation of T cell
autophagy may be involved in immune response of OLP and may be correlated with
clinical patterns.

PMCID: PMC4770128
PMID: 26980945  [PubMed - in process]


17. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2016 Mar 14. pii: cebp.1039.2015. [Epub ahead
of print]

Assessment of multifactor gene-environment interactions and ovarian cancer risk: 
candidate genes, obesity, and hormone-related risk factors.

Usset JL(1), Raghavan R(1), Tyrer JP(2), McGuire V(3), Sieh W(3), Webb P(4),
Chang-Claude J(5), Rudolph A(6), Anton-Culver H(7), Berchuck A(8), Brinton LA(9),
Cunningham JM(10), deFazio A(11), Doherty JA(12), Edwards RP(13), Gayther SA(14),
Gentry-Maharaj A(15), Goodman MT(16), Hogdall E(17), Jensen A(18), Johnatty
SE(19), Kiemeney LA(20), Kjaer SK(21), Larson MC(22), Lurie G(23), Massuger
L(24), Menon U(15), Modugno F(13), Moysich KB(25), Ness RB(26), Pike MC(27),
Ramus SJ(28), Rossing MA(29), Rothstein J(3), Song H(30), Thompson PJ(16), Van
Den Berg DJ(28), Vierkant RA(31), Wang-Gohrke S(32), Wentzensen N(9), Whittemore 
AS(3), Wilkens LR(33), Wu AH(28), Yang H(9), Pearce CL(34), Schildkraut JM(35),
Pharaoh P(36), Goode EL(22), Fridley BL(37).

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics, University of Kansas Medical Center. (2)Centre for Cancer
Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge.
(3)Department of Health Research and Policy - Epidemiology, Stanford University
School of Medicine. (4)Population Health Department, QIMR Berghofer Medical
Research Institute. (5)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, National Center for Tumor
Diseases and German Cancer Research Center. (6)Division of Cancer Epidemiology,
German Cancer Research Center. (7)Department of Epidemiology, University of
California Irvine. (8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Duke University
Medical Center. (9)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer 
Institute. (10)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic.
(11)Westmead Institute for Cancer Research, University of Sydney at Westmead
Millennium Institute. (12)Department of Epidemiology, Geisel School of Medicine
at Dartmouth. (13)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. (14)Department of Preventive
Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. (15)Department of Women's Cancer,
Institute for Women's Health, University College London. (16)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. (17)Department of Virus,
Lifestyle and Genes,, Danish Cancer Society Research Center. (18)Department of
Virus, Lifestyle and Genes, Danish Cancer Society Research Center. (19)Division
of Genetics and Public Health, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute.
(20)Department for Health Evidence, Radboud University Medical Center.
(21)Department of Gynecology, University of Copenhagen. (22)Department of Health 
Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic. (23)Cancer Epidemiology Program, University of
Hawaii Cancer Center. (24)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Radboud
University Medical Center. (25)Department of Cancer Prevention and Control,
Roswell Park Cancer Institute. (26)School of Public Health, The University of
Texas. (27)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center. (28)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern
California. (29)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center. (30)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge.
(31)Department of Health Science Research, Mayo Clinic. (32)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Ulm. (33)Cancer Epidemology Program,
University of Hawaii Cancer Center. (34)Department of Epidemiology, University of
Michigan. (35)Department of Public Health Sciences,, University of Virginia.
(36)Department of Oncology, Strangeways Research laboratory, University of
Cambridge. (37)Kansas IDeA Network of Biomedical Research Excellence
Bioinformatics Core, University of Kansas Cancer Center bfridley@kumc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Many epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk factors relate to hormone
exposure, and elevated estrogen levels are associated with obesity in
post-menopausal women. Therefore, we hypothesized that gene-environment
interactions related to hormone-related risk factors could differ between obese
and non-obese women.
METHODS: We considered interactions between 11,441 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) within 80 candidate genes related to hormone biosynthesis & 
metabolism and insulin-like growth factors with six hormone-related factors: oral
contraceptive use; parity; endometriosis; tubal ligation; hormone replacement
therapy; and estrogen use; and assessed whether these interactions differed
between obese and non-obese women. Interactions were assessed using logistic
regression models and data from 14 case-control studies (6,247 cases; 10,379
controls). Histotype specific analyses were also completed.
RESULTS: SNPs in the following candidate genes showed notable interaction: IGF1R 
(rs41497346, estrogen plus progesterone hormone therapy, histology = all, p =
4.9x10-6) and ESR1 (rs12661437, endometriosis, histology = all, p = 1.5x10-5).
The most notable obesity - gene - hormone risk factor interaction was within INSR
(rs113759408, parity, histology = endometrioid, p = 8.8x10-6).
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated the feasibility of assessing multi-factor
interactions in large genetic epidemiology studies. Follow-up studies are
necessary to assess the robustness of our findings for ESR1, CYP11A1, IGF1R,
CYP11B1, INSR, and IGFBP2. Future work is needed to develop powerful statistical 
methods able to detect these complex interactions.
IMPACT: Assessment of multifactor interaction is feasible, and, here, suggest
that the relationship between genetic variants within candidate genes and
hormone-related risk factors may vary EOC susceptibility.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26976855  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Microsc Res Tech. 2016 Mar 12. doi: 10.1002/jemt.22649. [Epub ahead of print]

Postnatal development of Mongolian gerbil female prostate: An immunohistochemical
and 3D modeling study.

Sanches BD(1), Zani BC(2), Maldarine JS(2), Biancardi MF(3), Santos FC(3), Góes
RM(2), Vilamaior PS(2), Taboga SR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, State University of Campinas,
Av. Bertrand Russel s/n, Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Department of Biology,
Laboratory of Microscopy and Microanalysis, University of Estadual Paulista -
UNESP, Rua Cristovão Colombo, São Jose do Rio Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Morphology, Federal University of Goias, Samambaia II, Goiania, 
Goias, Brazil.

The development of the prostate in male rodents, which involves complex
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions between the urogenital sinus epithelium (UGE)
and the urogenital sinus mesenchyme (UGM), has been deeply studied. In females,
however, this process is not very clear. In this study, the postnatal development
of the prostate in female Mongolian gerbils employing three-dimensional (3D)
reconstructions, histochemical, and immunohistochemical techniques was
characterized. It was observed that prostatic branching and differentiation in
females was induced by a single mesenchyme localized at a ventrolateral position,
which was named as ventrolateral mesenchyme (VLM); furthermore, the canalization 
of solid buds began on the third postnatal day (P3) and the branching
morphogenesis on P5. We observed secretions in the acini at the end of the first 
month, and, on P45, the acini were completely differentiated. The strong cell
proliferation phase in the first week coincided with the mesenchymal expression
of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1). The expression of androgen receptor (AR)
paralleled cell differentiation, and, on P30, immunolabelling with p63 was
restricted to basal cells. This study serves as a baseline parameter for future
research on disruptions that could affect the development of the female prostate.
Microsc. Res. Tech., 2016. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26971884  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 14;6:23027. doi: 10.1038/srep23027.

Discovery of a Novel Seminal Fluid Microbiome and Influence of Estrogen Receptor 
Alpha Genetic Status.

Javurek AB(1,)(2), Spollen WG(1,)(3), Ali AM(4,)(5), Johnson SA(1,)(2,)(6),
Lubahn DB(4,)(5,)(6,)(7,)(8), Bivens NJ(9), Bromert KH(9), Ellersieck MR(10),
Givan SA(1,)(3,)(11), Rosenfeld CS(1,)(2,)(8,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Bond Life Sciences Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA.
(2)Biomedical Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA.
(3)Informatics Research Core Facility, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211
USA. (4)Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA. (5)MU
Center for Botanical Interaction Studies, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO
65211 USA. (6)Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA.
(7)Child Health, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA. (8)Genetics Area
Program, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA. (9)DNA Core Facility,
University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA. (10)Agriculture Experimental
Station-Statistics, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA. (11)Molecular
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA.
(12)Thompson Center for Autism and Neurobehavioral Disorders, University of
Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211 USA.

Bacteria harbored in the male reproductive system may influence reproductive
function and health of the male and result in developmental origins of adult
health and disease (DOHaD) effects in his offspring. Such effects could be due to
the seminal fluid, which is slightly basic and enriched with carbohydrates;
thereby, creating an ideal habitat for microbes or a potential seminal fluid
microbiome (SFM). Using wild-type (WT) and estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1)
knockout (KO) male mice, we describe a unique SFM whose inhabitants differ from
gut microbes. The bacterial composition of the SFM is influenced according to
whether mice have functional Esr1 genes. Propionibacterium acnes, causative agent
of chronic prostatitis possibly culminating in prostate cancer, is reduced in SFM
of ESR1 KO compared to WT mice (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0007). In certain genetic backgrounds, WT
mice show a greater incidence of prostate cancer than ESR1 KO, which may be due
to increased abundance of P. acnes. Additionally, select gut microbiome residents
in ESR1 KO males, such as Lachnospiraceae and Christensenellaceae, might
contribute to previously identified phenotypes, especially obesity, in these
mutant mice. Understanding how genetics and environmental factors influence the
SFM may provide the next frontier in male reproductive disorders and possibly
paternal-based DOHaD diseases.

PMCID: PMC4789797
PMID: 26971397  [PubMed - in process]


20. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 5. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7926. [Epub ahead of print]

Systematic meta-analyses of gene-specific genetic association studies in prostate
cancer.

Hao Q(1,)(2,)(3), Wei D(2), Zhang Y(2), Chen X(2), Yang F(3), Yang Z(3), Zhu
X(3), Wang J(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Beijing Hospital, Beijing, 100730, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Geriatrics, Beijing Hospital and Beijing Institute of Geriatrics,
Ministry of Health, Beijing, 100730, China.

In the past twenty-five years, over 700 case-control association studies on the
risk of prostate cancer have been published worldwide, but their results were
largely inconsistent. To facilitate following and explaining these findings, we
performed a systematic meta-analysis using allelic contrasts for gene-specific
SNVs from at least three independent population-based case-control studies, which
were published in the field of prostate cancer between August 1, 1990 and August 
1, 2015. Across 66 meta-analyses, a total of 20 genetic variants involving
584,100 subjects in 19 different genes (KLK3, IGFBP3, ESR1, SOD2, CAT, CYP1B1,
VDR, RFX6, HNF1B, SRD5A2, FGFR4, LEP, HOXB13, FAS, FOXP4, SLC22A3, LMTK2, EHBP1
and MSMB) exhibited significant association with prostate cancer. The average
summary OR was 1.33 (ranging from: 1.016-3.788) for risk alleles and 0.838
(ranging from: 0.757-0.896) for protective alleles. Of these positive variants,
FOXP4 rs1983891, LMTK2 rs6465657 and RFX6 rs339331 had not been previously
meta-analyzed. Further analyses with sufficient power design and investigations
of the potential biological roles of these genetic variants in prostate cancer
should be conducted.

PMID: 26967244  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. BMC Cancer. 2016 Mar 10;16(1):205. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2212-6.

Dynamic modulation of phosphoprotein expression in ovarian cancer xenograft
models.

Koussounadis A(1), Langdon SP(2), Um I(2,)(3), Kay C(2), Francis KE(2), Harrison 
DJ(3), Smith VA(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, Sir Harold Mitchell Building, University of St Andrews, St 
Andrews, Fife, KY16 9TH, UK. (2)Division of Pathology, Institute of Genetics and 
Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. (3)School of
Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK. (4)School of Biology, Sir
Harold Mitchell Building, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9TH,
UK. anne.smith@st-andrews.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The dynamic changes that occur in protein expression after treatment 
of a cancer in vivo are poorly described. In this study we measure the effect of 
chemotherapy over time on the expression of a panel of proteins in ovarian cancer
xenograft models. The objective was to identify phosphoprotein and other protein 
changes indicative of pathway activation that might link with drug response.
METHODS: Two xenograft models, platinum-responsive OV1002 and
platinum-unresponsive HOX424, were used. Treatments were carboplatin and
carboplatin-paclitaxel. Expression of 49 proteins over 14 days post treatment was
measured by quantitative immunofluorescence and analysed by AQUA.
RESULTS: Carboplatin treatment in the platinum-sensitive OV1002 model triggered
up-regulation of cell cycle, mTOR and DDR pathways, while at late time points
WNT, invasion, EMT and MAPK pathways were modulated. Estrogen receptor-alpha
(ESR1) and ERBB pathways were down-regulated early, within 24 h from treatment
administration. Combined carboplatin-paclitaxel treatment triggered a more
extensive response in the OV1002 model modulating expression of 23 of 49
proteins. Therefore the cell cycle and DDR pathways showed similar or more
pronounced changes than with carboplatin alone. In addition to expression of pS6 
and pERK increasing, components of the AKT pathway were modulated with pAKT
increasing while its regulator PTEN was down-regulated early. WNT signaling, EMT 
and invasion markers were modulated at later time points. Additional pathways
were also observed with the NF<U+03BA>B and JAK/STAT pathways being up-regulated. ESR1
was down-regulated as was HER4, while further protein members of the ERBB pathway
were upregulated late. By contrast, in the carboplatin-unresponsive HOX 424
xenograft, carboplatin only modulated expression of MLH1 while
carboplatin-paclitaxel treatment modulated ESR1 and pMET.
CONCLUSIONS: Thirteen proteins were modulated by carboplatin and a more robust
set of changes by carboplatin-paclitaxel. Early changes included DDR and cell
cycle regulatory proteins associating with tumor volume changes, as expected.
Changes in ESR1 and ERBB signaling were also observed. Late changes included
components of MAPK signaling, EMT and invasion markers and coincided in time with
reversal in tumor volume reduction. These results suggest potential therapeutic
roles for inhibitors of such pathways that may prolong chemotherapeutic effects.

PMCID: PMC4787009
PMID: 26964739  [PubMed - in process]


22. Gynecol Oncol. 2016 Mar 10. pii: S0090-8258(16)30062-2. doi:
10.1016/j.ygyno.2016.03.006. [Epub ahead of print]

Estrogen receptor-alpha as a predictive biomarker in endometrioid endometrial
cancer.

Backes FJ(1), Walker CJ(2), Goodfellow PJ(2), Hade EM(3), Agarwal G(2), Mutch
D(4), Cohn DE(2), Suarez AA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecology Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The 
Ohio State University College of Medicine, The James Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbus, OH, United States. Electronic address: Floor.Backes@osumc.edu.
(2)Division of Gynecology Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The 
Ohio State University College of Medicine, The James Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbus, OH, United States. (3)Center for Biostatistics, Department of
Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, 
OH, United States. (4)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Washington University School of Medicine, Siteman Cancer Center, 
St Louis, MO, United States. (5)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State
University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, United States.

BACKGROUND: We sought to validate the prognostic significance of estrogen
receptor alpha (ERa) expression and to investigate the relationship between ESR1 
mutation status and outcomes in a large cohort of patients with endometrial
cancer. We also investigated the predictive value of ERa for lymph node
involvement in a large surgically staged cohort.
METHODS: A tumor microarray (TMA) was constructed including only pure
endometrioid adenocarcinomas, stained with ER50 monoclonal antibody, and assessed
using digital image analysis. For mutation analysis, somatic DNA was extracted
and sequenced for ESR1 gene hotspot regions. Differences in patient and tumor
characteristics, recurrence and survival between ERa positive and negative,
mutated and wild-type tumors were evaluated.
RESULTS: Sixty (18.6%) tumors were negative for ERa. Absence of ERa was
significantly associated with stage and grade, but not with disease-free or
overall survival. ERa was a strong predictor of lymph node involvement (RR: 2.37,
95% CI: 1.12-5.02). Nineteen of 1034 tumors (1.8%) had an ESR1 hotspot mutation; 
twelve in hotspot 537Y, four in 538D and three in 536L. Patients with an ESR1
mutation had a significantly lower BMI, but were comparable in age, stage and
grade, and progression-free survival.
CONCLUSION: Patients with ERa negative endometrioid endometrial cancer are more
often diagnosed with higher grade and advanced stage disease. Lymph node
involvement is more common with lack of ERa expression, and may be able to help
triage which patients should undergo lymphadenectomy. Mutations in ESR1 might
explain why some low risk women with low BMI develop endometrial cancer.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26957478  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2016 Mar 8. pii: nsw010. [Epub ahead of print]

Social memory associated with estrogen receptor polymorphisms in women.

Karlsson S(1), Henningsson S(1), Hovey D(1), Zettergren A(2), Jonsson L(1),
Cortes DS(3), Melke J(1), Laukka P(3), Fischer H(3), Westberg L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology at the
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)Department 
of Pharmacology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology at the Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, Department of Psychiatry
and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology at the Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, and. (3)Department of
Psychology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Department of
Pharmacology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology at the Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, lars.westberg@pharm.gu.se.

The ability to recognize the identity of faces and voices is essential for social
relationships. Although the heritability of social memory is high, knowledge
about the contributing genes is sparse. Since sex differences and rodent studies 
support an influence of estrogens and androgens on social memory, polymorphisms
in the estrogen and androgen receptor genes (ESR1, ESR2, AR) are candidates for
this trait. Recognition of faces and vocal sounds, separately and combined, was
investigated in 490 subjects, genotyped for 10 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in ESR1, four in ESR2 and one in the AR. Four of the associations survived
correction for multiple testing: women carrying rare alleles of the three ESR2
SNPs, rs928554, rs1271572 and rs1256030, in linkage disequilibrium with each
other, displayed superior face recognition compared with non-carriers.
Furthermore, the uncommon genotype of the ESR1 SNP rs2504063 was associated with 
better recognition of identity through vocal sounds, also specifically in women. 
This study demonstrates evidence for associations in women between face
recognition and variation in ESR2, and recognition of identity through vocal
sounds and variation in ESR1. These results suggest that estrogen receptors may
regulate social memory function in humans, in line with what has previously been 
established in mice.

© The Author (2016). Published by Oxford University Press. For Permissions,
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26955855  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Reproduction. 2016 Mar 7. pii: REP-15-0583. [Epub ahead of print]

BVDV alters uterine prostaglandin production during pregnancy recognition in
cows.

Cheng Z(1), Abudureyimu A(2), Oguejiofor CF(3), Ellis R(4), Barry AT(5), Chen
X(6), Anstaett DO(7), Brownlie J(8), Wathes DC(9).

Author information: 
(1)Z Cheng, Production and Population Health, Royal Veterinary College, Hatfield,
AL9 7TA, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland zcheng@rvc.ac.uk.
(2)A Abudureyimu, Life Science and Engineering College, Northwest University for 
Nationalities, Lanzhou, China. (3)C Oguejiofor, Production and Population Health,
Royal Veterinary College, Hatfield, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland. (4)R Ellis, Production and Population Health, Royal Veterinary College, 
Hatfield, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. (5)A Barry,
Production and Population Health, Royal Veterinary College, Hatfield, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. (6)X Chen, Animal Science and
Technology, Huazhong Agriculture University, Wuhan, China. (7)D Anstaett,
Department of Pathology and Pathogen Biology, Royal Veterinary College Department
of Pathology and Pathogen Biology, Hatfield, United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland. (8)J Brownlie, Department of Pathology and Pathogen Biology,
Royal Veterinary College Department of Pathology and Pathogen Biology, Hatfield, 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. (9)D Wathes, Veterinary
Basic Sciences,, Royal Veterinary College, Hatfield, AL9 7TA, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

Embryonic mortality in cows is at least in part caused by failed pregnancy
recognition (PR). Evidence has shown that bovine viral diarrhoea virus (BVDV)
infection can disrupt pregnancy. Prostaglandins (PG) play important roles in many
reproductive processes, including implantation. The aims of the present study
were to investigate the effect of BVDV infection on uterine PG production and PR 
using an in vitro PR model. Bovine uterine endometrial cells isolated from 10
BVDV free cows were cultured and treated with 0 or 100 ng/ml interferon-tau
(IFNT) in the absence or presence of non-cytopathic BVDV (ncpBVDV). PGF2a and
PGE2 concentrations in the spent medium were measured using radioimmunoassays and
in the treated cells expression of the genes associated with PG production and
signalling was quantified using qPCR. The results showed that IFNT challenge
significantly stimulated PTGS1 and PTGER3 mRNA expression and PGE2 production,
but these stimulatory effects were neutralised in the presence of ncpBVDV
infection. ncpBVDV infection significantly increased PTGS1 and mPGES1 mRNA
expression and decreased AKR1B1 expression, leading to increased PGE2 and
decreased PGF2a concentrations and an increased PGE2:PGF2a ratio. The other
tested genes, including PGR, ESR1, OXTR, PTGS2, PTGER2 and PTGFR, were not
significantly altered by IFNT, ncpBVDV or their combination. Our study suggests
that BVDV infection may impair PR by 1) inhibiting the effect of IFNT on uterine 
PG production and 2) inducing an endocrine switch of PG production from PGF2a to 
PGE2 to decrease uterine immunity, so predisposing the animals to uterine
disease.

PMID: 26952097  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Transcr Open Access. 2015 Dec;3(2). pii: 124. Epub 2015 Dec 28.

Microglial P2 Purinergic Receptor and Immunomodulatory Gene Transcripts Vary By
Region, Sex, and Age in the Healthy Mouse CNS.

Crain JM(1), Watters JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI 53706; Center for Women's Health Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
WI 53706. (2)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, WI 53706; Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706; Center for Women's Health Research, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706.

Inflammatory damage in many neurodegenerative diseases is restricted to certain
regions of the CNS, and while microglia have long been implicated in the
pathology of many of these disorders, information comparing their gene expression
in different CNS regions is lacking. Here we tested the hypothesis that the
expression of purinergic receptors, estrogen receptors and other neuroprotective 
and pro-inflammatory genes differed among CNS regions in healthy mice. Because
neurodegenerative diseases vary in incidence by sex and age, we also examined the
regional distribution of these genes in male and female mice of four different
ages between 21 days and 12 months. We postulated that pro-inflammatory gene
expression would be higher in older animals, and lower in young adult females. We
found that microglial gene expression differed across the CNS. Estrogen receptor 
alpha (Esr1) mRNA levels were often lower in microglia from the brainstem/spinal 
cord than from the cortex, whereas tumor necrosis factor alpha (Tnfa) expression 
was several times higher. In addition, the regional pattern of gene expression
often changed with animal age; for example, no regional differences in P2X7 mRNA 
levels were detected in 21 day-old animals, but at 7 weeks and older, expression 
was highest in cerebellar microglia. Lastly, the expression of some genes was
sexually dimorphic. In microglia from 12 month-old animals, mRNA levels of
inducible nitric oxide synthase, but not Tnfa, were higher in females than males.
These data suggest that microglial gene expression is not uniformly more
pro-inflammatory in males or older animals. Moreover, microglia from CNS regions 
in which neuronal damage predominates in neurodegenerative disease do not
generally express more pro-inflammatory genes than microglia from regions less
frequently affected. This study provides an in-depth assessment of regional-,
sex- and age-dependent differences in key microglial transcripts from the healthy
mouse CNS.

PMCID: PMC4777314
PMID: 26949719  [PubMed]


26. Genet Epigenet. 2016 Feb 24;8:1-6. doi: 10.4137/GEG.S31264. eCollection 2016.

Estrogen Receptor Alpha (ESR1) Single-Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) Affect
Malignant Melanoma Susceptibility and Disease Course.

Glatthaar H(1), Katto J(2), Vogt T(3), Mahlknecht U(4).

Author information: 
(1)Trauma and Hand Surgery, St. Vincentius Hospital Karlsruhe, Germany.
(2)Biologist, José Carreras Center for Immuno and Gene Therapy, University of
Saarland, Homburg/Saar, Germany. (3)Clinical Director of Dermatology, University 
Hospital of Homburg/Saar, Germany. (4)Chief Physician Medicine/Oncology, St.
Lukas Hospital Solingen, Germany.

The incidence of malignant melanoma in the developed world is continuously
increasing. We conducted a case-control study in order to evaluate the
association between each of the four estrogen receptor alpha polymorphisms (ESR1 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms [SNPs] +2464C/T, -4576A/C, +1619A/G, and
+6362C/T) and malignant melanoma susceptibility and disease course. The study
population consisted of 205 Caucasian patients who were diagnosed as having
malignant melanoma and 208 healthy Caucasian controls. Through DNA genotyping, we
identified a SNP-dependent malignant melanoma susceptibility as well as a
SNP-dependent effect on the course of disease and response to therapy.

PMCID: PMC4767130
PMID: 26949342  [PubMed]


27. BMB Rep. 2016 Mar 7. pii: 3506. [Epub ahead of print]

Gene Repressive Mechanisms in the Mouse Brain Involved in Memory Formation.

Yu NK, Kaang BK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-747, Korea.

Gene regulation in the brain is essential for long-term plasticity and memory
formation. Despite this established notion, the quantitative translational map in
the brain during memory formation has not been reported. Therefore, our recent
study exploited ribosome profiling using the mouse hippocampal tissues at
multiple time points after a learning event. Analysis of the resulting database
found novel types of gene regulation after learning. First, the translation of a 
group of genes was rapidly suppressed without any change in mRNA levels. At later
time points, expression of another group of genes was downregulated through
reduction in mRNA levels. This reduction was predicted to be downstream of
inhibition of ESR1 (Estrogen Receptor 1) signaling. Overexpressing Nrsn1, one of 
the genes whose translation was suppressed, or activating ESR1 by injecting an
agonist interfered with memory formation, suggesting the functional importance of
these findings. Moreover, the translation of genes encoding the translational
machineries was found to be suppressed, among other genes in the mouse
hippocampus. Together, this unbiased approach has revealed previously
unidentified characteristics of gene regulation in the brain and highlighted the 
importance of repressive controls.

PMID: 26949020  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 4. pii: canres.1758.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Synergistic activation of ERa by estrogen and prolactin in breast cancer cells
requires tyrosyl phosphorylation of PAK1.

Oladimeji P(1), Skerl R(1), Rusch C(1), Diakonova M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toledo. (2)Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Toledo mdiakon@utnet.utoledo.edu.

Serine/threonine kinase PAK1 is activated by estrogen and plays an important role
in breast cancer. However, the integration of PAK1 into the estrogen response is 
not fully understood. In this study, we investigated the mechanisms underlying
hormone-induced activation of estrogen receptor (ERa, ESR1). We show that
estrogen activated PAK1 through both the ERa and GPER1 membrane receptors.
Estrogen-dependent activation of PAK1 required the phosphorylation of tyrosine
residues by Etk/Bmx and protein kinase A (PKA) within an assembled signaling
complex comprising pTyr-PAK1, Etk/Bmx, the heterotrimer G-protein subunits Gß1,
G<U+03B3>2 and/or G<U+03B3>5, PAK-associated guanine nucleotide exchange factor (ßPIX,
ARHGEF7), and PKA. Moreover, the PKA RIIß subunit is a direct target of PAK1, and
thus in response to estrogen, the activated pTyr-PAK1 complex reciprocally
potentiated PKA activity, suggesting a positive feedback mechanism. We also
demonstrate that PKA phosphorylated Ser305-ERa in response to estrogen, but
pTyr-PAK1 phosphorylated Ser305-ERa in response to prolactin (PRL), implying that
maximal ERa phosphorylation is achieved when cells are exposed to both PRL and
estrogen. Furthermore, S305-ERa activation led to enhanced phosphorylation of
Ser118-ERa and promoted cell proliferation and tumor growth. Together, these data
strongly support a critical interplay between PRL and estrogen via PAK1, and
suggest that ligand-independent activation of ERa through PRL/PAK1 may impart
resistance to anti-estrogen therapies.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26944939  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Reproduction. 2016 Mar 3. pii: REP-15-0254. [Epub ahead of print]

Regulation of bovine oviductal NO synthesis by follicular steroids and
prostaglandins.

Kobayashi Y(1), Yamamoto Y(2), Kageyama S(3), Hirayama H(4), Kimura K(5), Okuda
K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Y Kobayashi, Graduate school of Environmental and Life Science, Okayama
University, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan. (2)Y Yamamoto, Graduate School of
Environmental and Life Science, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan. (3)S
Kageyama, Animal Research Center, Hokkaido Research Organization, Shintoku,
Japan. (4)H Hirayama, Animal Research Center, Hokkaido Research Organization,
Shintoku, Japan. (5)K Kimura, Graduate School of Environmental and Life Science, 
Okayama University, Okayama, Japan. (6)K Okuda, Graduate School of Environmental 
and Life Science, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan kokuda@okayama-u.ac.jp.

Nitric oxide (NO) is a regulator of sperm motility, oocyte/embryo survival and
waves of contraction/relaxation in mammalian oviducts. Since follicles control
oviductal functions by two routes at least, 1) a systemic way via blood vessels
before ovulation, 2) a direct way by entering of follicular fluid through fimbria
at ovulation, we hypothesized that NO synthesis in the bovine oviduct is
regulated by follicular steroids and prostaglandins (PGs). Quantification of mRNA
expressions in the ampullary tissues showed that inducible NO synthase (iNOS)
mRNA expression was highest at the day of ovulation (Day 0). In contrast, iNOS
mRNA expression in the isthmus was highest at Days 5-6 and lowest at Days 19-21. 
Endothelial NOS (eNOS) mRNA expressions in either the ampulla or the isthmus did 
not change during the estrous cycle. PGE2 and PGF2a increased iNOS mRNA
expressions in cultured ampullary oviductal epithelial cells after 1 h
incubation. These increases were suppressed by an antagonist of E-prostanoid
receptor type 2, one of the PGE2 receptor. Estradiol-17ß decreased the expression
of iNOS mRNA expression in cultured isthmic epithelial cells 24 h after
treatment. This effect was suppressed by an antagonist of estrogen receptor a
(ESR1). Expression of ESR1 was highest at Days 19-21 in the isthmic tissues. The 
overall findings indicate region-specific difference of NO synthesis in the
oviduct. PGs flowed from ruptured follicle may up-regulate NO synthesis in the
oviductal epithelium, while circulating E2 seems to inhibit NO synthesis via ESR1
in the isthmus at the follicular stage.

PMID: 26940101  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


30. Klin Khir. 2015 Nov;(11):24-7.

[HORMONAL-GENETIC SCREENING IN PATIENTS, SUFFERING GASTRODUODENAL ULCER
HEMORRHAGE].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Duzhiy ID, Romanyuk AM, Lyndin MC, Bratushka VV, Dubnytskiy VY, Shevchenko YY,
Kharchenko SV.

Genetic-hormonal regulation plays a key pathophysiologic role in a blood loss on 
background of complicated gastroduodenal ulcer disease, but a clinical
significance of some genes of compensatory steroidogenesis remains unrevealed.
Examination of 63 patients, using a chain reaction with polymerase (CRP);
analysis of length of restriction fragments (CRP-RFLP) and immunohistochemical
investigation of gastroduodenal mucosa were performed on the base of a Sumsky
Rural Clinical Hospital. Trustworthy difference of distribution of polymorphic
genes ESR1 and VKORC1 in patients of both gender in presence of the ulcer
hemorrhage was not revealed, excluding genotype A/A VKORC1, what trustworthy more
frequently was revealed in women (p < 0.05). There was established, that intact
zone of gastric fundus owes immunoreactivity towards alpha-receptors of estrogen 
in nuclei of epitheliocytes and stromocytes. Diagnosis of polymorphic gene VKORC1
and expression of the estrogen receptors may serve the base for pathogenetic
therapy in patients with hemorrhage occurrence.

PMID: 26939421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS Genet. 2016 Mar 3;12(3):e1005898. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005898.
eCollection 2016.

Role of the BAHD1 Chromatin-Repressive Complex in Placental Development and
Regulation of Steroid Metabolism.

Lakisic G(1), Lebreton A(2,)(3,)(4), Pourpre R(1), Wendling O(5), Libertini E(6),
Radford EJ(7,)(8), Le Guillou M(9), Champy MF(5), Wattenhofer-Donzé M(5),
Soubigou G(6), Ait-Si-Ali S(10), Feunteun J(9), Sorg T(5), Coppée JY(6),
Ferguson-Smith AC(7), Cossart P(2,)(3,)(4), Bierne H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Micalis Institute, INRA, AgroParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, Équipe
Microbiologie Cellulaire et Epigénétique, Jouy-en-Josas, France. (2)Unité des
Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. (3)INSERM U604,
Paris, France. (4)INRA USC2020, Paris, France. (5)Institut Clinique de la
Souris-ICS-MCI, PHENOMIN, CNRS UMR7104, INSERM U964, Université de Strasbourg,
Illkirch, France. (6)Plateforme Transcriptome et Epigénome, Département Génomes
et Génétique, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. (7)Department of Genetics,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (8)Cambridge University
Hospitals, NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (9)CNRS UMR8200
Stabilité génétique et oncogenèse, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(10)CNRS UMR7216, Université Paris Diderot-Paris 7, Paris, France.

BAHD1 is a vertebrate protein that promotes heterochromatin formation and gene
repression in association with several epigenetic regulators. However, its
physiological roles remain unknown. Here, we demonstrate that ablation of the
Bahd1 gene results in hypocholesterolemia, hypoglycemia and decreased body fat in
mice. It also causes placental growth restriction with a drop of trophoblast
glycogen cells, a reduction of fetal weight and a high neonatal mortality rate.
By intersecting transcriptome data from murine Bahd1 knockout (KO) placentas at
stages E16.5 and E18.5 of gestation, Bahd1-KO embryonic fibroblasts, and human
cells stably expressing BAHD1, we also show that changes in BAHD1 levels alter
expression of steroid/lipid metabolism genes. Biochemical analysis of the
BAHD1-associated multiprotein complex identifies MIER proteins as novel partners 
of BAHD1 and suggests that BAHD1-MIER interaction forms a hub for histone
deacetylases and methyltransferases, chromatin readers and transcription factors.
We further show that overexpression of BAHD1 leads to an increase of MIER1
enrichment on the inactive X chromosome (Xi). In addition, BAHD1 and MIER1/3
repress expression of the steroid hormone receptor genes ESR1 and PGR, both
playing important roles in placental development and energy metabolism. Moreover,
modulation of BAHD1 expression in HEK293 cells triggers epigenetic changes at the
ESR1 locus. Together, these results identify BAHD1 as a core component of a
chromatin-repressive complex regulating placental morphogenesis and body fat
storage and suggest that its dysfunction may contribute to several human
diseases.

PMCID: PMC4777444
PMID: 26938916  [PubMed - in process]


32. Mol Neurodegener. 2016 Mar 1;11(1):22. doi: 10.1186/s13024-016-0087-2.

Vitamin D interacts with Esr1 and Igf1 to regulate molecular pathways relevant to
Alzheimer's disease.

Landel V(1), Millet P(2,)(3), Baranger K(4), Loriod B(5), Féron F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, NICN UMR 7259, Marseille, 13916, France.
verena.landel@univ-amu.fr. (2)Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, NICN UMR 7259,
Marseille, 13916, France. pascal.millet@inserm.fr. (3)APHP, Groupe hospitalier
universitaire Saint Louis-Lariboisière-Fernand Widal, Centre Mémoire de
Ressources et de Recherche, Hôpital Fernand Widal, Paris, France.
pascal.millet@inserm.fr. (4)Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, NICN UMR 7259,
Marseille, 13916, France. kevin.baranger@univ-amu.fr. (5)Aix Marseille
Université, INSERM UMR 1090, TAGC, Marseille, France, Marseille, 13288, France.
beatrice.loriod@inserm.fr. (6)Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, NICN UMR 7259,
Marseille, 13916, France. francois.feron@univ-amu.fr.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence suggests a potential therapeutic benefit of
vitamin D supplementation against Alzheimer's disease (AD). Although studies have
shown improvements in cognitive performance and decreases in markers of the
pathology after chronic treatment, the mechanisms by which vitamin D acts on
brain cells are multiple and remain to be thoroughly studied. We analyzed the
molecular changes observed after 5 months of vitamin D3 supplementation in the
brains of transgenic 5xFAD (Tg) mice, a recognized mouse model of AD, and their
wild type (Wt) littermates. We first performed a kinematic behavioural
examination at 4, 6 and 8 months of age (M4, M6 and M8) followed by a histologic 
assessment of AD markers. We then performed a comparative transcriptomic analysis
of mRNA regulation in the neocortex and hippocampus of 9 months old (M9) female
mice.
RESULTS: Transcriptomic analysis of the hippocampus and neocortex of both Wt and 
Tg mice at M9, following 5 months of vitamin D3 treatment, reveals a large panel 
of dysregulated pathways related to i) immune and inflammatory response, ii)
neurotransmitter activity, iii) endothelial and vascular processes and iv)
hormonal alterations. The differentially expressed genes are not all direct
targets of the vitamin D-VDR pathway and it appears that vitamin D action engages
in the crosstalk with estrogen and insulin signaling. The misexpression of the
large number of genes observed in this study translates into improved learning
and memory performance and a decrease in amyloid plaques and astrogliosis in Tg
animals.
CONCLUSIONS: This study underlies the multiplicity of action of this potent
neurosteroid in an aging and AD-like brain. The classical and non-classical
actions of vitamin D3 can act in an additive and possibly synergistic manner to
induce neuroprotective activities in a context-specific way.

PMCID: PMC4774101
PMID: 26932723  [PubMed - in process]


33. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 1;11(3):e0150070. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150070.
eCollection 2016.

Computational Characterization of Osteoporosis Associated SNPs and Genes
Identified by Genome-Wide Association Studies.

Qin L(1), Liu Y(1), Wang Y(1), Wu G(1), Chen J(1), Ye W(1), Yang J(2), Huang
Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, 430079,
China. (2)College of Computer Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan,
430079, China.

OBJECTIVES: Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have revealed many SNPs and
genes associated with osteoporosis. However, influence of these SNPs and genes on
the predisposition to osteoporosis is not fully understood. We aimed to identify 
osteoporosis GWASs-associated SNPs potentially influencing the binding affinity
of transcription factors and miRNAs, and reveal enrichment signaling pathway and 
"hub" genes of osteoporosis GWAS-associated genes.
METHODS: We conducted multiple computational analyses to explore function and
mechanisms of osteoporosis GWAS-associated SNPs and genes, including SNP
conservation analysis and functional annotation (influence of SNPs on
transcription factors and miRNA binding), gene ontology analysis, pathway
analysis and protein-protein interaction analysis.
RESULTS: Our results suggested that a number of SNPs potentially influence the
binding affinity of transcription factors (NFATC2, MEF2C, SOX9, RUNX2, ESR2,
FOXA1 and STAT3) and miRNAs. Osteoporosis GWASs-associated genes showed
enrichment of Wnt signaling pathway, basal cell carcinoma and Hedgehog signaling 
pathway. Highly interconnected "hub" genes revealed by interaction network
analysis are RUNX2, SP7, TNFRSF11B, LRP5, DKK1, ESR1 and SOST.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provided the targets for further experimental assessment
and further insight on osteoporosis pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC4773152
PMID: 26930606  [PubMed - in process]


34. Aquat Toxicol. 2016 May;174:109-22. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2016.02.005. Epub 2016
Feb 22.

Activity of binary mixtures of drospirenone with progesterone and
17a-ethinylestradiol in vitro and in vivo.

Rossier NM(1), Chew G(2), Zhang K(2), Riva F(3), Fent K(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland, School of
Life Sciences, Gründenstrasse 40, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland; University of
Basel, Division of Molecular and Systems Toxicology, Department of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Klingelbergstrasse 50, 4056 Basel, Switzerland. (2)University of
Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland, School of Life Sciences,
Gründenstrasse 40, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland. (3)IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche
Farmacologiche "Mario Negri", Environmental Biomarkers Unit, Department of
Environmental Health Sciences, Via La Masa 19, I-20156 Milan, Italy.
(4)University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland, School of
Life Sciences, Gründenstrasse 40, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland; Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology (ETH Zürich), Institute of Biogeochemistry and Pollution 
Dynamics, Department of Environmental System Sciences, CH-8092 Zürich,
Switzerland. Electronic address: karl.fent@fhnw.ch.

Despite potential exposure of aquatic organisms to mixtures of steroid hormones, 
very little is known on their joint activity in fish. Drospirenone (DRS) is a new
synthetic progestin used in contraceptive pills in combination with
17a-ethinylestradiol (EE2). Here we systematically analyzed effects of DRS in
binary mixtures with progesterone (P4) and EE2. First, we determined the in vitro
activity of single compounds in recombinant yeast assays that express the human
progesterone, androgen, or estrogen receptor, followed by determination of
mixture activities of DRS and P4, DRS and EE2, as well as medroxyprogesterone
acetate (MPA) and dydrogesterone (DDG). Mixtures of DRS and P4, as well as of DRS
and EE2 showed additive progestogenic and androgenic activities. However, DDG and
MPA showed non-additive progestogenic and androgenic activities. We then analyzed
the in vivo activity of single compounds and mixtures of DRS and P4, as well as
DRS and EE2, by assessing transcriptional changes of up to 14 selected target
genes in zebrafish embryos at 48h post fertilization (hpf), and in
eleuthero-embryos at 96hpf and 144hpf. DRS, P4, and EE2 led to significant
transcriptional alteration of genes, including those encoding hormone receptors
(pgr, esr1), a steroidogenic enzyme (hsd17b3), and estrogenic markers (vtg1,
cyp19b), in particular at 144 hpf. In general, DRS showed stronger
transcriptional changes than P4. In mixtures of DRS and P4, they were mainly
non-additive (antagonistic interaction). In mixtures of DRS and EE2,
transcriptional responses of esr1, vtg1 and cyp19b were dominated by EE2,
suggesting an antagonistic interaction or independent action. Equi-effective
mixtures of DRS and EE2, based on progesterone receptor transcripts, showed
antagonistic interactions. Our data suggest that interactions in mixtures
assessed in vitro in recombinant yeast cannot be translated to the in vivo
situation. The receptor-based responses did not correspond well to the
transcriptional responses in embryos which are much more complex due to the
interplay between hormonal pathways, receptor crosstalk, and hormonal feedback
loops.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26930480  [PubMed - in process]


35. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2016 Feb 23;68:1-5. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2016.02.020. [Epub ahead of print]

Further investigations of the relation between polymorphisms in sex steroid
related genes and autistic-like traits.

Zettergren A(1), Karlsson S(2), Hovey D(2), Jonsson L(2), Melke J(2), Anckarsäter
H(3), Lichtenstein P(4), Lundström S(5), Westberg L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Pharmacology,
University of Gothenburg, Sweden; Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, University of Gothenburg, Sweden.
Electronic address: anna.zettergren@neuro.gu.se. (2)Institute of Neuroscience and
Physiology, Department of Pharmacology, University of Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Centre of Ethics, Law and Mental
Health (CELAM), University of Gothenburg, Sweden. (4)Karolinska Institutet,
Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Centre of Ethics, Law and Mental
Health (CELAM), University of Gothenburg, Sweden; Institute of Neuroscience and
Physiology, Gillberg Neuropsychiatry Centre, University of Gothenburg, Sweden.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are more prevalent in boys than in girls,
indicating that high levels of testosterone during early development may be a
risk factor. Evidence for this hypothesis comes from studies showing associations
between fetal testosterone levels, as well as indirect measures of prenatal
androgenization, and ASDs and autistic-like traits (ALTs). In a recent study we
reported associations between ALTs and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
the genes encoding estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), steroid-5-alpha-reductase, type 2 
(SRD5A2) and sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) in a subset (n=1771) from the
Child and Adolescent Twin Study in Sweden (CATSS). The aim of the present study
was to try to replicate these findings in an additional, larger, sample of
individuals from the CATSS (n=10,654), as well as to analyze additional SNPs of
functional importance in SHBG and SRD5A2. No associations between the previously 
associated SNPs in the genes ESR1 and SRD5A2 and ALTs could be seen in the large 
replication sample. Still, our results show that two non-linked SNPs (rs6259 and 
rs9901675) at the SHBG gene locus might be of importance for language impairment 
problems in boys. The results of the present study do not point toward a major
role for the investigated SNPs in the genes ESR1 and SRD5A2 in ALTs, but a
possible influence of genetic variation in SHBG, especially for language
impairment problems in boys, cannot be ruled out.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26930261  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. Hypertension. 2016 Feb 29. pii: HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.07082. [Epub ahead of print]

Estrogen Receptor a Is Required for Maintaining Baseline Renin Expression.

Lu KT(1), Keen HL(1), Weatherford ET(1), Sequeira-Lopez ML(1), Gomez RA(1),
Sigmund CD(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology (K.-T.L., H.L.K., E.T.W., C.D.S.) and
Center for Hypertension Research (C.D.S.), Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College
of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City; and Department of Pediatrics,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville (M.L.S.S.-L., R.A.G.). (2)From the
Department of Pharmacology (K.-T.L., H.L.K., E.T.W., C.D.S.) and Center for
Hypertension Research (C.D.S.), Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa, Iowa City; and Department of Pediatrics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville (M.L.S.S.-L., R.A.G.). curt-sigmund@uiowa.edu.

Enzymatic cleavage of angiotensinogen by renin represents the critical
rate-limiting step in the production of angiotensin II, but the mechanisms
regulating the initial expression of the renin gene remain incomplete. The
purpose of this study is to unravel the molecular mechanism controlling renin
expression. We identified a subset of nuclear receptors that exhibited an
expression pattern similar to renin by reanalyzing a publicly available
microarray data set. Expression of some of these nuclear receptors was similarly 
regulated as renin in response to physiological cues, which are known to regulate
renin. Among these, only estrogen receptor a (ERa) and hepatic nuclear factor a
have no known function in regulating renin expression. We determined that ERa is 
essential for the maintenance of renin expression by transfection of small
interfering RNAs targeting Esr1, the gene encoding ERa, in renin-expressing As4.1
cells. We also observed that previously characterized negative regulators of
renin expression, Nr2f2 and vitamin D receptor, exhibited elevated expression in 
response to ERa inhibition. Therefore, we tested whether ERa regulates renin
expression through an interaction with Nr2f2 and vitamin D receptor. Renin
expression did not return to baseline when we concurrently suppressed both Esr1
and Nr2f2 or Esr1 and vitamin D receptor mRNAs, strongly suggesting that Esr1
regulates renin expression independent of Nr2f2 and vitamin D receptor. ERa
directly binds to the hormone response element within the renin enhancer region. 
We conclude that ERa is a previously unknown regulator of renin that directly
binds to the renin enhancer hormone response element sequence and is critical in 
maintaining renin expression in renin-expressing As4.1 cells.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26928806  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


37. Nat Genet. 2016 Apr;48(4):374-86. doi: 10.1038/ng.3521. Epub 2016 Feb 29.

Breast cancer risk variants at 6q25 display different phenotype associations and 
regulate ESR1, RMND1 and CCDC170.

Dunning AM, Michailidou K, Kuchenbaecker KB, Thompson D, French JD, Beesley J,
Healey CS, Kar S, Pooley KA, Lopez-Knowles E, Dicks E, Barrowdale D,
Sinnott-Armstrong NA, Sallari RC, Hillman KM, Kaufmann S, Sivakumaran H, Moradi
Marjaneh M, Lee JS, Hills M, Jarosz M, Drury S, Canisius S, Bolla MK, Dennis J,
Wang Q, Hopper JL, Southey MC, Broeks A, Schmidt MK, Lophatananon A, Muir K,
Beckmann MW, Fasching PA, Dos-Santos-Silva I, Peto J, Sawyer EJ, Tomlinson I,
Burwinkel B, Marme F, Guénel P, Truong T, Bojesen SE, Flyger H, González-Neira A,
Perez JI, Anton-Culver H, Eunjung L, Arndt V, Brenner H, Meindl A, Schmutzler RK,
Brauch H, Hamann U, Aittomäki K, Blomqvist C, Ito H, Matsuo K, Bogdanova N, Dörk 
T, Lindblom A, Margolin S, Kosma VM, Mannermaa A, Tseng CC, Wu AH, Lambrechts D, 
Wildiers H, Chang-Claude J, Rudolph A, Peterlongo P, Radice P, Olson JE, Giles
GG, Milne RL, Haiman CA, Henderson BE, Goldberg MS, Teo SH, Yip CH, Nord S,
Borresen-Dale AL, Kristensen V, Long J, Zheng W, Pylkäs K, Winqvist R, Andrulis
IL, Knight JA, Devilee P, Seynaeve C, Figueroa J, Sherman ME, Czene K, Darabi H, 
Hollestelle A, van den Ouweland AM, Humphreys K, Gao YT, Shu XO, Cox A, Cross SS,
Blot W, Cai Q, Ghoussaini M, Perkins BJ, Shah M, Choi JY, Kang D, Lee SC, Hartman
M, Kabisch M, Torres D, Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Brennan P, Sangrajrang S,
Ambrosone CB, Toland AE, Shen CY, Wu PE, Orr N, Swerdlow A, McGuffog L, Healey S,
Lee A, Kapuscinski M, John EM, Terry MB, Daly MB, Goldgar DE, Buys SS, Janavicius
R, Tihomirova L, Tung N, Dorfling CM, van Rensburg EJ, Neuhausen SL, Ejlertsen B,
Hansen TV, Osorio A, Benitez J, Rando R, Weitzel JN, Bonanni B, Peissel B,
Manoukian S, Papi L, Ottini L, Konstantopoulou I, Apostolou P, Garber J, Rashid
MU, Frost D; EMBRACE, Izatt L, Ellis S, Godwin AK, Arnold N, Niederacher D, Rhiem
K, Bogdanova-Markov N, Sagne C, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Damiola F; GEMO Study
Collaborators, Sinilnikova OM, Mazoyer S, Isaacs C, Claes KB, De Leeneer K, de la
Hoya M, Caldes T, Nevanlinna H, Khan S, Mensenkamp AR; HEBON, Hooning MJ, Rookus 
MA, Kwong A, Olah E, Diez O, Brunet J, Pujana MA, Gronwald J, Huzarski T,
Barkardottir RB, Laframboise R, Soucy P, Montagna M, Agata S, Teixeira MR;
kConFab Investigators, Park SK, Lindor N, Couch FJ, Tischkowitz M, Foretova L,
Vijai J, Offit K, Singer CF, Rappaport C, Phelan CM, Greene MH, Mai PL, Rennert
G, Imyanitov EN, Hulick PJ, Phillips KA, Piedmonte M, Mulligan AM, Glendon G,
Bojesen A, Thomassen M, Caligo MA, Yoon SY, Friedman E, Laitman Y, Borg A, von
Wachenfeldt A, Ehrencrona H, Rantala J, Olopade OI, Ganz PA, Nussbaum RL, Gayther
SA, Nathanson KL, Domchek SM, Arun BK, Mitchell G, Karlan BY, Lester J,
Maskarinec G, Woolcott C, Scott C, Stone J, Apicella C, Tamimi R, Luben R, Khaw
KT, Helland Å, Haakensen V, Dowsett M, Pharoah PD, Simard J, Hall P,
García-Closas M, Vachon C, Chenevix-Trench G, Antoniou AC, Easton DF, Edwards SL.

We analyzed 3,872 common genetic variants across the ESR1 locus (encoding
estrogen receptor a) in 118,816 subjects from three international consortia. We
found evidence for at least five independent causal variants, each associated
with different phenotype sets, including estrogen receptor (ER(+) or ER(-)) and
human ERBB2 (HER2(+) or HER2(-)) tumor subtypes, mammographic density and tumor
grade. The best candidate causal variants for ER(-) tumors lie in four separate
enhancer elements, and their risk alleles reduce expression of ESR1, RMND1 and
CCDC170, whereas the risk alleles of the strongest candidates for the remaining
independent causal variant disrupt a silencer element and putatively increase
ESR1 and RMND1 expression.

PMID: 26928228  [PubMed - in process]


38. J Clin Oncol. 2016 Feb 29. pii: JCO640334. [Epub ahead of print]

Genomic Characterization of Primary Invasive Lobular Breast Cancer.

Desmedt C(1), Zoppoli G(2), Gundem G(2), Pruneri G(2), Larsimont D(2), Fornili
M(2), Fumagalli D(2), Brown D(2), Rothé F(2), Vincent D(2), Kheddoumi N(2), Rouas
G(2), Majjaj S(2), Brohée S(2), Van Loo P(2), Maisonneuve P(2), Salgado R(2), Van
Brussel T(2), Lambrechts D(2), Bose R(2), Metzger O(2), Galant C(2), Bertucci
F(2), Piccart-Gebhart M(2), Viale G(2), Biganzoli E(2), Campbell PJ(2), Sotiriou 
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Christine Desmedt, Gabriele Zoppoli, Denis Larsimont, Debora Fumagalli, David 
Brown, Françoise Rothé, Delphine Vincent, Naima Kheddoumi, Ghizlane Rouas, Samira
Majjaj, Sylvain Brohée, Roberto Salgado, Martine Piccart-Gebhart, and Christos
Sotiriou, Institut Jules Bordet; Christine Galant, Cliniques Universitaires Saint
Luc, Brussels; Peter Van Loo, University of Leuven; Thomas Van Brussel and
Diether Lambrechts, VIB Vesalius Research Center, Leuven, Belgium; Gabriele
Zoppoli, University of Genoa and Istituto di Ricerca a Carattere
Clinico-Scientifico San Martino-National Cancer Institute, Genoa; Giancarlo
Pruneri, Patrick Maisonneuve, and Giuseppe Viale, European Institute of Oncology;
Marco Fornili and Elia Biganzoli, University of Milan, Fondazione Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy; 
Gunes Gundem and Peter J. Campbell, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Cambridgeshire; Peter Van Loo, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom; Ron Bose, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO; Otto
Metzger, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; and François Bertucci,
Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France. christine.desmedt@bordet.be.
(2)Christine Desmedt, Gabriele Zoppoli, Denis Larsimont, Debora Fumagalli, David 
Brown, Françoise Rothé, Delphine Vincent, Naima Kheddoumi, Ghizlane Rouas, Samira
Majjaj, Sylvain Brohée, Roberto Salgado, Martine Piccart-Gebhart, and Christos
Sotiriou, Institut Jules Bordet; Christine Galant, Cliniques Universitaires Saint
Luc, Brussels; Peter Van Loo, University of Leuven; Thomas Van Brussel and
Diether Lambrechts, VIB Vesalius Research Center, Leuven, Belgium; Gabriele
Zoppoli, University of Genoa and Istituto di Ricerca a Carattere
Clinico-Scientifico San Martino-National Cancer Institute, Genoa; Giancarlo
Pruneri, Patrick Maisonneuve, and Giuseppe Viale, European Institute of Oncology;
Marco Fornili and Elia Biganzoli, University of Milan, Fondazione Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy; 
Gunes Gundem and Peter J. Campbell, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Cambridgeshire; Peter Van Loo, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom; Ron Bose, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO; Otto
Metzger, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; and François Bertucci,
Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

PURPOSE: Invasive lobular breast cancer (ILBC) is the second most common
histologic subtype after invasive ductal breast cancer (IDBC). Despite clinical
and pathologic differences, ILBC is still treated as IDBC. We aimed to identify
genomic alterations in ILBC with potential clinical implications.
METHODS: From an initial 630 ILBC primary tumors, we interrogated oncogenic
substitutions and insertions and deletions of 360 cancer genes and genome-wide
copy number aberrations in 413 and 170 ILBC samples, respectively, and correlated
those findings with clinicopathologic and outcome features.
RESULTS: Besides the high mutation frequency of CDH1 in 65% of tumors,
alterations in one of the three key genes of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
pathway, PIK3CA, PTEN, and AKT1, were present in more than one-half of the cases.
HER2 and HER3 were mutated in 5.1% and 3.6% of the tumors, with most of these
mutations having a proven role in activating the human epidermal growth factor
receptor/ERBB pathway. Mutations in FOXA1 and ESR1 copy number gains were
detected in 9% and 25% of the samples. All these alterations were more frequent
in ILBC than in IDBC. The histologic diversity of ILBC was associated with
specific alterations, such as enrichment for HER2 mutations in the mixed,
nonclassic, and ESR1 gains in the solid subtype. Survival analyses revealed that 
chromosome 1q and 11p gains showed independent prognostic value in ILBC and that 
HER2 and AKT1 mutations were associated with increased risk of early relapse.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that we can now begin to individualize the
treatment of ILBC, with HER2, HER3, and AKT1 mutations representing
high-prevalence therapeutic targets and FOXA1 mutations and ESR1 gains deserving 
urgent dedicated clinical investigation, especially in the context of endocrine
treatment.

© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

PMID: 26926684  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


39. Horm Cancer. 2016 Feb 24. [Epub ahead of print]

Bisphenol A (BPA) Exposure In Utero Leads to Immunoregulatory Cytokine
Dysregulation in the Mouse Mammary Gland: A Potential Mechanism Programming
Breast Cancer Risk.

Fischer C(1), Mamillapalli R(2), Goetz LG(1), Jorgenson E(1), Ilagan Y(1), Taylor
HS(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School
of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, P.O. Box 208063, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School
of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, P.O. Box 208063, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA.
ramana.mamillapalli@yale.edu. (3)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and
Developmental Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 06520, USA.

Bisphenol-A (BPA) is a ubiquitous estrogen-like endocrine disrupting compound
(EDC). BPA exposure in utero has been linked to breast cancer and abnormal
mammary gland development in mice. The recent rise in incidence of human breast
cancer and decreased age of first detection suggests a possible environmental
etiology. We hypothesized that developmental programming of carcinogenesis may
involve an aberrant immune response. Both innate and adaptive immunity play a
role in tumor suppression through cytolytic CD8, NK, and Th1 T-cells. We
hypothesized that BPA exposure in utero would lead to dysregulation of both
innate and adaptive immunity in the mammary gland. CD1 mice were exposed to BPA
in utero during gestation (days 9-21) via osmotic minipump. At 6 weeks, the
female offspring were ovariectomized and estradiol was given at 8 weeks. RNA and 
protein were extracted from the posterior mammary glands, and the mRNA and
protein levels were measured by PCR array, qRT-PCR, and western blot. In mouse
mammary tissue, BPA exposure in utero significantly decreased the expression of
members of the chemokine CXC family (Cxcl2, Cxcl4, Cxcl14, and Ccl20),
interleukin 1 (Il1) gene family (Il1ß and Il1rn), interleukin 2 gene family (Il7 
receptor), and interferon gene family (interferon regulatory factor 9 (Irf9), as 
well as immune response gene 1 (Irg1). Additionally, BPA exposure in utero
decreased Esr1 receptor gene expression and increased Esr2 receptor gene
expression. In utero exposure of BPA resulted in significant changes to
inflammatory modulators within mammary tissue. We suggest that dysregulation of
inflammatory cytokines, both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory, leads to a
microenvironment that may promote disordered cell growth through inhibition of
the immune response that targets cancer cells.

PMID: 26911702  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


40. BMC Genomics. 2016 Feb 25;17(1):136. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2481-0.

Genome-wide association study using family-based cohorts identifies the WLS and
CCDC170/ESR1 loci as associated with bone mineral density.

Mullin BH(1,)(2), Walsh JP(3,)(4), Zheng HF(5), Brown SJ(6), Surdulescu GL(7),
Curtis C(8,)(9), Breen G(10,)(11), Dudbridge F(12), Richards JB(13,)(14), Spector
TD(15), Wilson SG(16,)(17,)(18).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology & Diabetes, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital,
Nedlands, Western Australia. Benjamin.Mullin@uwa.edu.au. (2)School of Medicine
and Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia.
Benjamin.Mullin@uwa.edu.au. (3)Department of Endocrinology & Diabetes, Sir
Charles Gairdner Hospital, Nedlands, Western Australia.
John.Walsh@health.wa.gov.au. (4)School of Medicine and Pharmacology, University
of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia. John.Walsh@health.wa.gov.au.
(5)Institute of Aging Research, School of Medicine, Hangzhou Normal University,
and the Affiliated Hospital of Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
China. hfzheng@hznu.edu.cn. (6)Department of Endocrinology & Diabetes, Sir
Charles Gairdner Hospital, Nedlands, Western Australia.
Suzanne.Brown@health.wa.gov.au. (7)Department of Twin Research & Genetic
Epidemiology, King's College London, London, UK. Gabriela.L.Surdulescu@kcl.ac.uk.
(8)MRC Social, Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
Charles.Curtis@kcl.ac.uk. (9)NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health,
Maudsley Hospital and Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's 
College London, London, UK. Charles.Curtis@kcl.ac.uk. (10)MRC Social, Genetic &
Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology &
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK. Gerome.Breen@kcl.ac.uk. (11)NIHR
Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health, Maudsley Hospital and Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
Gerome.Breen@kcl.ac.uk. (12)Department of Non-communicable Disease Epidemiology, 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
Frank.Dudbridge@lshtm.ac.uk. (13)Department of Twin Research & Genetic
Epidemiology, King's College London, London, UK. Brent.Richards@mcgill.ca.
(14)Departments of Medicine, Human Genetics, Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Jewish General Hospital, Lady Davis Institute, McGill University, Montreal,
Canada. Brent.Richards@mcgill.ca. (15)Department of Twin Research & Genetic
Epidemiology, King's College London, London, UK. Tim.Spector@kcl.ac.uk.
(16)Department of Endocrinology & Diabetes, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital,
Nedlands, Western Australia. Scott.Wilson@uwa.edu.au. (17)School of Medicine and 
Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia.
Scott.Wilson@uwa.edu.au. (18)Department of Twin Research & Genetic Epidemiology, 
King's College London, London, UK. Scott.Wilson@uwa.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Osteoporosis is a common and debilitating bone disease that is
characterised by a low bone mineral density (BMD), a highly heritable trait.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have proven to be very successful in
identifying common genetic variants associated with BMD adjusted for age, gender 
and weight, however a large portion of the genetic variance for this trait
remains unexplained. There is evidence to suggest significant genetic correlation
between body size traits and BMD. It has also recently been suggested that
unintended bias can be introduced as a result of adjusting a phenotype for a
correlated trait. We performed a GWAS meta-analysis in two populations (total
n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6,696) using BMD data adjusted for only age and gender, in an attempt to
identify genetic variants associated with BMD including those that may have
potential pleiotropic effects on BMD and body size traits.
RESULTS: We observed a single variant, rs2566752, associated with spine BMD at
the genome-wide significance level in the meta-analysis (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.36<U+2009>×<U+2009>10 (-09) ).
Logistic regression analysis also revealed an association between rs2566752 and
fracture rate in one of our study cohorts (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.017, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5,654). This is an
intronic variant located in the wntless Wnt ligand secretion mediator (WLS) gene 
(1p31.3), a known BMD locus which encodes an integral component of the Wnt ligand
secretion pathway. Bioinformatics analyses of variants in moderate LD with
rs2566752 produced strong evidence for a regulatory role for the variants
rs72670452, rs17130567 and rs1430738. Expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) 
analysis suggested that the variants rs12568456 and rs17130567 are associated
with expression of the WLS gene in whole blood, cerebellum and temporal cortex
brain tissue (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.034-1.19<U+2009>×<U+2009>10 (-23) ). Gene-wide association testing using
the VErsatile Gene-based Association Study 2 (VEGAS2) software revealed
associations between the coiled-coil domain containing 170 (CCDC170) gene,
located adjacent to the oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene, and BMD at the spine,
femoral neck and total hip sites (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.0<U+2009>×<U+2009>10 (-06) , 2.0<U+2009>×<U+2009>10 (-06) and
2.0<U+2009>×<U+2009>10 (-06) respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variation at the WLS and CCDC170/ESR1 loci were found to be 
significantly associated with BMD adjusted for only age and gender at the
genome-wide level in this meta-analysis.

PMCID: PMC4766752
PMID: 26911590  [PubMed - in process]


41. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 20. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7533. [Epub ahead of print]

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERa/ESR1) mediates the p53-independent overexpression of
MDM4/MDMX and MDM2 in human breast cancer.

Swetzig WM(1,)(2), Wang J(3), Das GM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Cancer
Therapeutics, The University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo,
NY, USA. (3)Department of Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, Roswell Park Cancer
Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA.

MDM2 and MDM4 are heterodimeric, non-redundant oncoproteins that potently inhibit
the p53 tumor suppressor protein. MDM2 and MDM4 also enhance the tumorigenicity
of breast cancer cells in in vitro and in vivo models and are overexpressed in
primary human breast cancers. Prior studies have characterized Estrogen Receptor 
Alpha (ERa/ESR1) as a regulator of MDM2 expression and an MDM2- and
p53-interacting protein. However, similar crosstalk between ERa and MDM4 has not 
been investigated. Moreover, signaling pathways that mediate the overexpression
of MDM4 in human breast cancer remain to be elucidated. Using the Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) breast invasive carcinoma patient cohort, we have analyzed
correlations between ERa status and MDM4 and MDM2 expression in primary,
treatment-naïve, invasive breast carcinoma samples. We report that the expression
of MDM4 and MDM2 is elevated in primary human breast cancers of luminal A/B
subtypes and associates with ERa-positive disease, independently of p53 mutation 
status. Furthermore, in cell culture models, ERa positively regulates MDM4 and
MDM2 expression via p53-independent mechanisms, and these effects can be blocked 
by the clinically-relevant endocrine therapies fulvestrant and tamoxifen.
Additionally, ERa also positively regulates p53 expression. Lastly, we report
that endogenous MDM4 negatively regulates ERa expression and forms a protein
complex with ERa in breast cancer cell lines and primary human breast tumor
tissue. This suggests direct signaling crosstalk and negative feedback loops
between ERa and MDM4 expression in breast cancer cells. Collectively, these novel
findings implicate ERa as a central component of the p53-MDM2-MDM4 signaling axis
in human breast cancer.

PMID: 26909605  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


42. BMC Cancer. 2016 Feb 22;16(1):138. doi: 10.1186/s12885-016-2195-3.

Prognostic value of ERBB4 expression in patients with triple negative breast
cancer.

Kim JY(1), Jung HH(2), Do IG(3), Bae S(4), Lee SK(5), Kim SW(6), Lee JE(7), Nam
SJ(8), Ahn JS(9), Park YH(10,)(11), Im YH(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu,
Seoul, 135-710, Korea. jyeon25.kim@samsung.com. (2)Biomedical Research Institute,
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, 
Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 135-710, Korea. haehyun.jung@sbri.co.kr. (3)Cancer of
Companion Diagnostics, Innovative Cancer Medicine Institute, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu,
Seoul, 135-710, Korea. ingu.do@samsung.com. (4)Department of Surgery, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro,
Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 135-710, Korea. sooyoun.bae@samsung.com. (5)Department of
Surgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81
Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 135-710, Korea. sekyung.lee@samsung.com.
(6)Department of Surgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School 
of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 135-710, Korea.
seokwon1.kim@samsung.com. (7)Department of Surgery, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul,
135-710, Korea. jeongeon.lee@samsung.com. (8)Department of Surgery, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro,
Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 135-710, Korea. seokjin.nam@samsung.com. (9)Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 135-710, Korea.
jinseok.ahn@samsung.com. (10)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of
Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 
Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 135-710, Korea. yhparkhmo@skku.edu. (11)Biomedical
Research Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 135-710, Korea. yhparkhmo@skku.edu.
(12)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu,
Seoul, 135-710, Korea. imyh00@skku.edu. (13)Biomedical Research Institute,
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-ro, 
Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 135-710, Korea. imyh00@skku.edu.

BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is known for aggressive biologic
features and poor prognosis. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
overexpression in TNBC indicates poor prognosis. However, there is no previous
study of the relationship between expression of the entire human epidermal growth
factor receptor (HER) family genes and patient prognosis in TNBC. Accordingly, we
investigated the expression profiles of HER family genes in patients with TNBC to
determine the prognostic value and clinical implications of HER family
expression.
METHODS: We used the nCounter expression assay (NanoString®) to measure the
expression of EGFR, erb-B2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (ERBB2), ERBB3, ERBB4, and 
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) genes using mRNA extracted from paraffin-embedded
tumor tissues from 203 patients diagnosed with TNBC. Our data were validated
using a separate cohort of 84 TNBC patients.
RESULTS: A total of 203 TNBC patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy after
curative surgery from 2000 to 2004 formed the training set. The 84 TNBC patients 
in the validation consort were selected from breast cancer patients who received 
curative surgery since 2005 to 2010. Analysis of the expression profiles of the
HER family genes in TNBC tissue specimens revealed that increased expression of
ERBB4 was associated with poor prognosis according to survival analysis (5-year
distant relapse free survival [5Y DRFS], low vs. high expression [cut-off:
median]: 90.1 % vs. 80.2 %; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.022). This trend was also observed in the
validation set of TNBC patients (5Y DRFS, low vs. high: 69.4 % vs. 44.7 %;
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.053). In a multivariate Cox regression model, ERBB4 expression was
identified as a indicator of long-term prognosis in patients with TNBC.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression profile of ERBB4, a member of the HER family, might
serve as a prognostic marker in patients with TNBC.

PMCID: PMC4763414
PMID: 26907936  [PubMed - in process]


43. J Pain. 2016 Feb 19. pii: S1526-5900(16)00519-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jpain.2016.02.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Human Genetic Variability Contributes to Post-operative Morphine Consumption.

De Gregori M(1), Diatchenko L(2), Ingelmo PM(3), Napolioni V(4), Klepstad P(5),
Belfer I(6), Molinaro V(7), Garbin G(7), Ranzani GN(7), Alberio G(8), Normanno
M(8), Lovisari F(8), Somaini M(8), Govoni S(9), Mura E(10), Bugada D(11), Niebel 
T(11), Zorzetto M(12), De Gregori S(13), Molinaro M(13), Fanelli G(14), Allegri
M(15).

Author information: 
(1)Pain Therapy Service, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy;
SIMPAR (Study In Multidisciplinary Pain Research) Group; YAP (Young Against Pain)
Group. (2)SIMPAR (Study In Multidisciplinary Pain Research) Group; Alan Edwards
Pain Centre For Research on Pain, McGill University, Montrèal, Canada. (3)SIMPAR 
(Study In Multidisciplinary Pain Research) Group; Department of Anesthesia,
Montreal Children's Hospital, Canada. (4)SIMPAR (Study In Multidisciplinary Pain 
Research) Group; Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, USA. (5)SIMPAR (Study In
Multidisciplinary Pain Research) Group; Department of Circulation and Medical
Imaging, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim,
Norway; Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, St. Olav's
University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway, Norway. (6)SIMPAR (Study In
Multidisciplinary Pain Research) Group; Department of Anesthesiology, University 
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA. (7)Department of Biology and Biotechnology,
University of Pavia, Italy. (8)First Service of Anesthesia, Azienda Ospedaliera
San Gerardo, Monza, Italy. (9)SIMPAR (Study In Multidisciplinary Pain Research)
Group; Department of Experimental and Applied Pharmacology, University of Pavia, 
Italy. (10)Department of Experimental and Applied Pharmacology, University of
Pavia, Italy. (11)SIMPAR (Study In Multidisciplinary Pain Research) Group;
Department of Clinical, Surgical, Pediatric and Diagnostic Science, University of
Pavia, Italy. (12)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Genetics, Division of
Pneumology, Department of Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San
Matteo, Pavia, Italy. (13)Clinical and Experimental Pharmacokinetics Unit,
Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. (14)SIMPAR (Study In
Multidisciplinary Pain Research) Group; Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain
Medicine, Dept. of Surgical Sciences, University of Parma, Italy; UO 2ª
Anestesia, Rianimazione e Terapia Antalgica, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di
Parma, Italy. (15)SIMPAR (Study In Multidisciplinary Pain Research) Group;
Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Dept. of Surgical Sciences,
University of Parma, Italy; UO 2ª Anestesia, Rianimazione e Terapia Antalgica,
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Parma, Italy. Electronic address:
massimo.allegri@unipr.it.

High inter-individual variability in postoperative opioid consumption is related 
to genetic and environmental factors. We tested the association between morphine 
consumption, postoperative pain and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within
OPRM1, COMT, UGT2B7, and ESR1 gene loci to elucidate genetic prediction of opioid
consumption. We analyzed 20 SNPs in 201 unrelated Caucasian patients undergone
abdominal surgery receiving postoperative patient-controlled
analgesia-administered morphine. Morphine consumption and pain intensity were
dependent variables; age and sex covariates. A haplotype of seven SNPs in OPRM1
showed significant additive effect on opioid consumption (P=0.007); a linear
regression model including age and nine SNPs in ESR1, OPRM1 and COMT explained
the highest proportion of variance of morphine consumption (10.7%) (P=0.001). The
minimal model including three SNPs in ESR1, OPRM1, and COMT explained 5% of
variance (P=0.007). We found a significant interaction between rs4680 in COMT and
rs4986936 in ESR1 (P=0.007) on opioid consumption. SNPs rs677830 and rs540825 of 
OPRM1 and rs9340799 of ESR1 were nominally associated with pain Numeric Rating
Scale scores. Combinations of genetic variants within OPRM1, COMT, and ESR1
better explain variability in morphine consumption than single genetic variant.
Our results contribute to develop genetic markers and statistical models for
future diagnostic tools for opioid consumption/efficacy. Number of registration
on ClinicalTrial.gov: NCT01233752 PERSPECTIVE: This article presents the efforts 
dedicated to detect correlations between the genetic polymorphisms and the
clinical morphine effect self-administrated by patients by a PCA pump, after
major surgery. The clinical effect is expressed in terms of both morphine
consumption and pain scores.

Copyright © 2016 American Pain Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 26902643  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 May 5;426:33-42. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2016.02.010. Epub
2016 Feb 16.

A deregulated expression of estrogen-target genes is associated with an altered
response to estradiol in aged rats perinatally exposed to bisphenol A.

Vigezzi L(1), Ramos JG(2), Kass L(3), Tschopp MV(4), Muñoz-de-Toro M(3), Luque
EH(1), Bosquiazzo VL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Salud y Ambiente del Litoral (ISAL UNL-CONICET), Facultad de
Bioquímica y Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe,
Argentina; Cátedra de Fisiología Humana, Facultad de Bioquímica y Ciencias
Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe, Argentina. (2)Instituto
de Salud y Ambiente del Litoral (ISAL UNL-CONICET), Facultad de Bioquímica y
Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe, Argentina;
Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica y Cuantitativa, Facultad de Bioquímica y
Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe, Argentina.
(3)Instituto de Salud y Ambiente del Litoral (ISAL UNL-CONICET), Facultad de
Bioquímica y Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe,
Argentina; Cátedra de Patología Humana, Facultad de Bioquímica y Ciencias
Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe, Argentina. (4)Instituto
de Salud y Ambiente del Litoral (ISAL UNL-CONICET), Facultad de Bioquímica y
Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe, Argentina.
(5)Instituto de Salud y Ambiente del Litoral (ISAL UNL-CONICET), Facultad de
Bioquímica y Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe,
Argentina; Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica y Cuantitativa, Facultad de
Bioquímica y Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe,
Argentina. Electronic address: vlbosqui@fbcb.unl.edu.ar.

Here we assessed the effects of perinatal exposure to bisphenol A (BPA) on the
uterine response to 17ß-estradiol (E2) in aged rats. Pregnant rats were orally
exposed to 0.5 or 50 µg BPA/kg/day from gestational day 9 until weaning. On
postnatal day (PND) 360, the rats were ovariectomized and treated with E2 for
three months. The uterine tissue of BPA50 and BPA0.5 rats showed increased
density of glands with squamous metaplasia (GSM) and glands with daughter glands 
respectively. Wnt7a expression was lower in GSM of BPA50 rats than in controls.
The expression of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and its 5'- untranslated exons
ESR1-O and ESR1-OT was lower in BPA50 rats. Both doses of BPA modified the
expression of coactivator proteins and epigenetic regulatory enzymes. Thus,
perinatal BPA-exposed rats showed different glandular abnormalities associated
with deregulated expression of E2-target genes. Different mechanisms would be
involved depending on the BPA dose administered.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26898831  [PubMed - in process]


45. Cancer Cell Int. 2016 Feb 16;16:8. doi: 10.1186/s12935-016-0282-9. eCollection
2016.

ELF5 and DOK7 regulation in anti-estrogen treated cells and tumors.

Fitzgerald LM(1), Browne EP(2), Christie KD(3), Punska EC(2), Simmons LO(3),
Williams KE(4), Pentecost BT(5), M Jawale R(6), Otis CN(6), Arcaro KF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science, University of Massachusetts Amherst,
Amherst, MA USA. (2)Department of Veterinary and Animal Science, University of
Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, Amherst, MA USA. (5)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health, Albany, NY USA. (6)Pathology Department, Baystate Medical Center,
Springfield, MA USA.

BACKGROUND: Most women with primary breast cancers that express estrogen receptor
alpha (ER or ESR1) are treated with endocrine therapies including the
anti-estrogen tamoxifen, but resistance to these anti-endocrine therapies often
develops. This study characterizes the expression of hormone receptors, and the
mRNA and DNA methylation levels of docking protein 7 (DOK7), and E74-like factor 
5 (ELF5), in 21 novel tamoxifen-resistant cell lines and extends the findings to 
primary and recurrent human breast tumors.
METHODS: Twenty-one tamoxifen-selected cell lines were developed through cloning 
by limiting dilution of an MCF-7 cell culture treated with 1 µM tamoxifen for
6 months. The parent (MCF-7) and tamoxifen-selected cell lines were characterized
for protein expression of ER, progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) using immunohistochemistry (IHC). The mRNA levels
of ER, DOK7, and ELF5 were assessed using quantitative RT-PCR. Promoter
methylation levels of DOK7 and ELF5 were determined by pyrosequencing of
bisulfite-modified DNA. The relationship between hormone receptor status and
promoter methylation of DOK7 and ELF5 was further examined using available
methylation array data (Illumina HM450) from a set of paired primary and second
breast tumors from 24 women.
RESULTS: All 21 of the novel tamoxifen-selected cell lines are ER-positive, and
HER2-negative, and 18 of the cell lines are PR-negative while the MCF-7 cells
were scored as ER-positive, modestly PR-positive and HER2 negative. Expression of
DOK7 and ELF5 is significantly up-regulated in half of the tamoxifen-selected
cell lines as compared to the parental MCF-7. In contrast, the previously
established ER-negative TMX2-28 cell line has decreased expression of both DOK7
and ELF5 and increased DNA methylation in the transcriptional start site region
of these genes. ELF5 methylation was lower in second versus primary tumors in
women who received anti-estrogen treatment, in PR-negative versus PR-positive
tumors, and in the subset of PR-positive first tumors from the group of women who
had second PR-negative tumors as compared to those who had second PR-positive
tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: The distinct ELF5 methylation of PR-positive primary tumors from
women who had a PR-negative recurrence indicates the possibility of
stratification of women for tailored treatment in the early stages of disease.

PMCID: PMC4754800
PMID: 26884724  [PubMed]


46. EMBO Mol Med. 2016 Feb 8;8(3):191-207. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201505523.

Wbp2 is required for normal glutamatergic synapses in the cochlea and is crucial 
for hearing.

Buniello A(1), Ingham NJ(2), Lewis MA(2), Huma AC(3), Martinez-Vega R(4),
Varela-Nieto I(5), Vizcay-Barrena G(6), Fleck RA(6), Houston O(7), Bardhan T(7), 
Johnson SL(7), White JK(3), Yuan H(8), Marcotti W(7), Steel KP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Centre For Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, London, UK
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK
annalisa.buniello@kcl.ac.uk karen.steel@kcl.ac.uk. (2)Wolfson Centre For
Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, London, UK Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK. (3)Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK. (4)Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, UK Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas Alberto Sols, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain Centre for Biomedical Network
Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Unit 761, Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Madrid, Spain. (5)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, CSIC-UAM,
Madrid, Spain Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), 
Unit 761, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. (6)Centre for
Ultrastructural Imaging, King's College London, London, UK. (7)Department of
Biomedical Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. (8)Medical Genetics
Center, Southwest Hospital Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China.

WBP2 encodes the WW domain-binding protein 2 that acts as a transcriptional
coactivator for estrogen receptor a (ESR1) and progesterone receptor (PGR). We
reported that the loss of Wbp2 expression leads to progressive high-frequency
hearing loss in mouse, as well as in two deaf children, each carrying two
different variants in the WBP2 gene. The earliest abnormality we detect in
Wbp2-deficient mice is a primary defect at inner hair cell afferent synapses.
This study defines a new gene involved in the molecular pathway linking hearing
impairment to hormonal signalling and provides new therapeutic targets.

© 2016 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMID: 26881968  [PubMed - in process]


47. Toxicol Sci. 2016 Feb 10. pii: kfw026. [Epub ahead of print]

Moving Toward Integrating Gene Expression Profiling into High-throughput Testing:
A Gene Expression Biomarker Accurately Predicts Estrogen Receptor a Modulation in
a Microarray Compendium.

Ryan N(1), Chorley B(2), Tice RR(3), Judson R(4), Corton JC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE), Research Triangle Park,
NC 27711 Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, US-EPA, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27711. (2)Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, US-EPA, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27711. (3)Division of the National Toxicology Program, National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, 27711.
(4)National Center for Computational Toxicology, US-EPA, Research Triangle Park, 
NC 27711. (5)Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, US-EPA, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27711 corton.chris@epa.gov.

Microarray profiling of chemical-induced effects is being increasingly used in
medium- and high-throughput formats. Computational methods are described here to 
identify molecular targets from whole-genome microarray data using as an example 
the estrogen receptor a (ERa), often modulated by potential endocrine disrupting 
chemicals. ERa biomarker genes were identified by their consistent expression
after exposure to 7 structurally-diverse ERa agonists and 3 ERa antagonists in
ERa-positive MCF-7 cells. Most of the biomarker genes were shown to be directly
regulated by ERa as determined by ESR1 gene knockdown using siRNA as well as
through ChIP-Seq analysis of ERa-DNA interactions. The biomarker was evaluated as
a predictive tool using the fold-change rank-based Running Fisher algorithm by
comparison to annotated gene expression data sets from experiments using MCF-7
cells, including those evaluating the transcriptional effects of hormones and
chemicals. Using 141 comparisons from chemical- and hormone-treated cells, the
biomarker gave a balanced accuracy for prediction of ERa activation or
suppression of 94% and 93%, respectively. The biomarker was able to correctly
classify 18 out of 21 (86%) ER reference chemicals including "very weak"
agonists. Importantly, the biomarker predictions accurately replicated
predictions based on 18 in vitro high-throughput screening assays that queried
different steps in ERa signaling. For 114 chemicals, the balanced accuracies were
95% and 98% for activation or suppression, respectively. These results
demonstrate that the ERa gene expression biomarker can accurately identify ERa
modulators in large collections of microarray data derived from MCF-7 cells.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society of Toxicology 2016.
This work is written by US Government employees and is in the public domain in
the US.

PMID: 26865669  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. Endocrinology. 2016 Apr;157(4):1555-65. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1928. Epub 2016 Feb 
10.

ERa in Tac2 Neurons Regulates Puberty Onset in Female Mice.

Greenwald-Yarnell ML(1), Marsh C(1), Allison MB(1), Patterson CM(1), Kasper C(1),
MacKenzie A(1), Cravo R(1), Elias CF(1), Moenter SM(1), Myers MG Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program (M.L.G.-Y., S.M.M., M.G.M.); Division of
Metabolism, Endocrinology and Diabetes (M.L.G.-Y., M.B.A., C.M.P., C.K., A.M.,
S.M.M., M.G.M.), Department of Internal Medicine; and Departments of Obstetrics
and Gynecology (C.M., C.F.E., S.M.M.) and Molecular and Integrative Physiology
(M.B.A., R.C., C.F.E., S.M.M., M.G.M.), University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109.

A variety of data suggest that estrogen action on kisspeptin (Kiss1)-containing
arcuate nucleus neurons (which coexpress Kiss1, neurokinin B (the product of
Tac2) and dynorphin (KNDy) neurons restrains reproductive onset and function, but
roles for estrogen action in these Kiss1 neurons relative to a distinct
population of rostral hypothalamic Kiss1 neurons (which does not express Tac2 or 
dynorphin) have not been directly tested. To test the role for estrogen receptor 
(ER)a in KNDy cells, we thus generated Tac2(Cre) and Kiss1(Cre) knock-in mice and
bred them onto the Esr1(flox) background to ablate ERa specifically in
Tac2-expressing cells (ERa(Tac2)KO mice) or all Kiss1 cells (ERa(Kiss1)KO mice), 
respectively. Most ERa-expressing Tac2 neurons represent KNDy cells. Arcuate
nucleus Kiss1 expression was elevated in ERa(Tac2)KO and ERa(Kiss1)KO females
independent of gonadal hormones, whereas rostral hypothalamic Kiss1 expression
was normal in ERa(Tac2)KO but decreased in ERa(Kiss1)KO females; this suggests
that ERa in rostral Kiss1 cells is crucial for control of Kiss1 expression in
these cells. Both ERa(Kiss1)KO and ERa(Tac2)KO females displayed early vaginal
opening, early and persistent vaginal cornification, increased gonadotropins,
uterine hypertrophy, and other evidence of estrogen excess. Thus, deletion of ERa
in Tac2 neurons suffices to drive precocious gonadal hyperstimulation,
demonstrating that ERa in Tac2 neurons typically restrains pubertal onset and
hypothalamic reproductive drive.

PMID: 26862996  [PubMed - in process]


49. J Appl Toxicol. 2016 Feb 9. doi: 10.1002/jat.3285. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibitory effect of cadmium on estrogen signaling in zebrafish brain and
protection by zinc.

Chouchene L(1), Pellegrini E(2), Gueguen MM(2), Hinfray N(3), Brion F(3), Piccini
B(3), Kah O(2), Saïd K(1), Messaoudi I(1), Pakdel F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Génétique, Biodiversité et Valorisation des Bioressources, Université de
Monastir, Institut Supérieur de Biotechnologie de Monastir, Tunisia.
(2)Neuroendocrine Effects of Endocrine Disruptors, University of Rennes 1, Campus
de Beaulieu, France. (3)Unité d'Ecotoxicologie in vitro et in vivo, Direction des
Risques Chroniques, Institut National de l'Environnement Industriel et des
Risques (INERIS), Verneuil-en-Halatte, France. (4)Transcription, Environnement et
Cancer, Institut de Recherche en Santé-Environnement-Travail (Irset), Inserm UMR 
1085, Université de Rennes 1, France.

The present study was conducted to assess the effects of Cd exposure on estrogen 
signaling in the zebrafish brain, as well as the potential protective role of Zn 
against Cd-induced toxicity. For this purpose, the effects on transcriptional
activation of the estrogen receptors (ERs), aromatase B (Aro-B) protein
expression and molecular expression of related genes were examined in vivo using 
wild-type and transgenic zebrafish embryos. For in vitro studies, an ER-negative 
glial cell line (U251MG) transfected with different zebrafish ER subtypes (ERa,
ERß1 and ERß2) was also used. Embryos were exposed either to estradiol (E2 ), Cd,
E2 +Cd or E2 +Cd+Zn for 72 h and cells were exposed to the same treatments for 30
h. Our results show that E2 treatment promoted the transcriptional activation of 
ERs and increased Aro-B expression, at both the protein and mRNA levels. Although
exposure to Cd, does not affect the studied parameters when administered alone,
it significantly abolished the E2 -stimulated transcriptional response of the
reporter gene for the three ER subtypes in U251-MG cells, and clearly inhibited
the E2 induction of Aro-B in radial glial cells of zebrafish embryos. These
inhibitory effects were accompanied by a significant downregulation of the
expression of esr1, esr2a, esr2b and cyp19a1b genes compared to the E2 -treated
group used as a positive control. Zn administration during simultaneous exposure 
to E2 and Cd strongly stimulated zebrafish ERs transactivation and increased
Aro-B protein expression, whereas mRNA levels of the three ERs as well as the
cyp19a1b remained unchanged in comparison with Cd-treated embryos. In conclusion,
our results clearly demonstrate that Cd acts as a potent anti-estrogen in vivo
and in vitro, and that Cd-induced E2 antagonism can be reversed, at the protein
level, by Zn supplement. Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26857037  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


50. Adv Gerontol. 2015;28(2):228-47.

GENETICS OF HUMAN AGE RELATED DISORDERS.

Srivastava I, Thukral N, Hasija Y.

Aging is an inevitable biological phenomenon. The incidence of age related
disorders (ARDs) such as cardiovascular diseases, cancer, arthritis, dementia,
osteoporosis, diabetes, neurodegenerative diseases increase rapidly with aging.
ARDs are becoming a key social and economic trouble for the world's elderly
population (above 60 years), which is expected to reach 2 billion by 2050.
Advancement in understanding of genetic associations, particularly through genome
wide association studies (GWAS), has revealed a substantial contribution of genes
to human aging and ARDs. In this review, we have focused on the recent
understanding of the extent to which genetic predisposition may influence the
aging process. Further analysis of the genetic association studies through
pathway analysis several genes associated with multiple ARDs have been
highlighted such as apolipoprotein E (APOE), brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF), cadherin 13 (CDH13), CDK5 regulatory subunit associated protein 1
(CDKAL-1), methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), disrupted in
schizophrenia 1 (DISC1), nitric oxide synthase 3 (NOS3), paraoxonase 1 (PON1),
indicating that these genes could play a pivotal role in ARD causation. These
genes were found to be significantly enriched in Jak-STAT signalling pathway,
asthma and allograft rejection. Further, interleukin-6 (IL-6), insulin (INS),
vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), estrogen receptor1 (ESR1),
transforming growth factor, beta 1(TGFB1) and calmodulin 1 (CALM1) were found to 
be highly interconnected in network analysis. We believe that extensive research 
on the presence of common genetic variants among various ARDs may facilitate
scientists to understand the biology behind ARDs causation.

PMID: 26856084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2016 Feb 5:1-4. [Epub ahead of print]

The association between a novel polymorphism (rs1062577) in ESR1 and breast
cancer susceptibility in the Han Chinese women.

Chen L(1), Kang H(1), Jin GJ(1), Chen X(1), Zhang QY(1), Lao WT(1), Li R(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Laboratory Medicine , The First Affiliated Hospital of China
Medical University , Shenyang , Liaoning Province , China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to analyze the genetic association
between the three estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs; rs1062577, rs2881766, and rs9479118) and breast cancer risk in Han Chinese
women.
METHODS/MATERIALS: To investigate the possible association of genetic
polymorphisms of any of the three ESR1 SNPs in breast cancer patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>198)
and healthy controls (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>218) collected from the college hospital, peripheral
blood mononuclear cells samples were analyzed by high-resolution melt-polymerase 
chain reaction. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were used to evaluate
the association between the ESR1 SNPs and breast cancer.
RESULTS: Patients genotyped AA for ESR1 rs1062577 showed increased breast cancer 
risk (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005). In the menarche at<U+2009>=<U+2009>13-year-old group, there were significant 
differences in alleles A versus T at rs1062577 and alleles G versus T at
rs2881766 between the breast cancer group and the control group. In
the<U+2009>><U+2009>13-year-old group, the AA genotype at rs1062577, the GG genotype at
rs2881766, and the CC genotype at rs9479118 increased breast cancer
susceptibility.
CONCLUSIONS: These results showed that the ESR1 rs1062577 polymorphism increased 
breast cancer risk in Han Chinese women, which might be used as a new SNP marker.

PMID: 26850117  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


52. Mol Endocrinol. 2016 Mar;30(3):302-13. doi: 10.1210/me.2015-1274. Epub 2016 Feb
5.

Roles of Estrogen Receptor-a and the Coactivator MED1 During Human Endometrial
Decidualization.

Kaya Okur HS(1), Das A(1), Taylor RN(1), Bagchi IC(1), Bagchi MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular and Integrative Physiology (H.S.K.O., M.K.B.) and
Comparative Biosciences (A.D., I.C.B.), University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801; and Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology (R.N.T.), Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North
Carolina 27157.

The steroid hormones 17ß-estradiol and progesterone are critical regulators of
endometrial stromal cell differentiation, known as decidualization, which is a
prerequisite for successful establishment of pregnancy. The present study using
primary human endometrial stromal cells (HESCs) addressed the role of estrogen
receptor-a (ESR1) in decidualization. Knockdown of ESR1 transcripts by RNA
interference led to a marked reduction in decidualization of HESCs. Gene
expression profiling at an early stage of decidualization indicated that ESR1
negatively regulates several cell cycle regulatory factors, thereby suppressing
the proliferation of HESCs as these cells enter the differentiation program. ESR1
also controls the expression of WNT4, FOXO1, and progesterone receptor (PGR),
well-known mediators of decidualization. Whereas ESR1 knockdown strongly
inhibited the expression of FOXO1 and WNT4 transcripts within 24 hours of the
initiation of decidualization, PGR expression remained unaffected at this early
time point. Our study also revealed a major role of cAMP signaling in influencing
the function of ESR1 during decidualization. Using a proteomic approach, we
discovered that the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylates Mediator
1 (MED1), a subunit of the mediator coactivator complex, during HESC
differentiation. Using immunoprecipitation, we demonstrated that
PKA-phosphorylated MED1 interacts with ESR1. The PKA-dependent phosphorylation of
MED1 was also correlated with its enhanced recruitment to estrogen-responsive
elements in the WNT4 gene. Knockdown of MED1 transcripts impaired the expression 
of ESR1-induced WNT4 and FOXO1 transcripts and blocked decidualization. Based on 
these findings, we conclude that modulation of ESR1-MED1 interactions by cAMP
signaling plays a critical role in human decidualization.

PMCID: PMC4771698 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26849466  [PubMed - in process]


53. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Feb 1;17(2). pii: E191. doi: 10.3390/ijms17020191.

Prioritization of Susceptibility Genes for Ectopic Pregnancy by Gene Network
Analysis.

Liu JL(1), Zhao M(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou
510642, China. jilongliu@scau.edu.cn. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, South
China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China. zm1586186423@126.com.

Ectopic pregnancy is a very dangerous complication of pregnancy, affecting 1%-2% 
of all reported pregnancies. Due to ethical constraints on human biopsies and the
lack of suitable animal models, there has been little success in identifying
functionally important genes in the pathogenesis of ectopic pregnancy. In the
present study, we developed a random walk-based computational method named
TM-rank to prioritize ectopic pregnancy-related genes based on text mining data
and gene network information. Using a defined threshold value, we identified five
top-ranked genes: VEGFA (vascular endothelial growth factor A), IL8 (interleukin 
8), IL6 (interleukin 6), ESR1 (estrogen receptor 1) and EGFR (epidermal growth
factor receptor). These genes are promising candidate genes that can serve as
useful diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets. Our approach represents a
novel strategy for prioritizing disease susceptibility genes.

PMCID: PMC4783925
PMID: 26840308  [PubMed - in process]


54. Elife. 2016 Feb 2;5. pii: e12792. doi: 10.7554/eLife.12792.

Estrogen receptor alpha somatic mutations Y537S and D538G confer breast cancer
endocrine resistance by stabilizing the activating function-2 binding
conformation.

Fanning SW(1), Mayne CG(2,)(3,)(4), Dharmarajan V(5), Carlson KE(3), Martin
TA(3), Novick SJ(5), Toy W(6), Green B(1), Panchamukhi S(1), Katzenellenbogen
BS(7), Tajkhorshid E(2,)(4), Griffin PR(5), Shen Y(8), Chandarlapaty S(6),
Katzenellenbogen JA(3), Greene GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, United
States. (2)Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, United States. (3)Department of Chemistry, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, United States. (4)Department 
of Biochemistry, Center for Biophysics and Computational Biology, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, United States. (5)Department of Molecular
Therapeutics, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, United States. (6)Human
Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, United States. (7)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology,
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, United States. (8)Department of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering, TEES-AgriLife Center for Bioinformatics and 
Genomic Systems Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, United
States.

Somatic mutations in the estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) gene (ESR1), especially
Y537S and D538G, have been linked to acquired resistance to endocrine therapies. 
Cell-based studies demonstrated that these mutants confer ERa constitutive
activity and antiestrogen resistance and suggest that ligand-binding domain
dysfunction leads to endocrine therapy resistance. Here, we integrate biophysical
and structural biology data to reveal how these mutations lead to a
constitutively active and antiestrogen-resistant ERa. We show that these mutant
ERs recruit coactivator in the absence of hormone while their affinities for
estrogen agonist (estradiol) and antagonist (4-hydroxytamoxifen) are reduced.
Further, they confer antiestrogen resistance by altering the conformational
dynamics of the loop connecting Helix 11 and Helix 12 in the ligand-binding
domain of ERa, which leads to a stabilized agonist state and an altered
antagonist state that resists inhibition.

PMID: 26836308  [PubMed - in process]


55. Drug Resist Updat. 2016 Jan;24:13-22. doi: 10.1016/j.drup.2015.11.001. Epub 2015 
Nov 10.

Treatment strategies for advanced hormone receptor-positive and human epidermal
growth factor 2-negative breast cancer: the role of treatment order.

Perez EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.
Electronic address: perez.edith@mayo.edu.

Although survival rates among patients with breast cancer have improved in recent
years, those diagnosed with advanced disease with distant metastasis face a
5-year survival rate of less than 25%, making the management of these patients an
area still in significant need of continued research. Selecting the optimal
treatment order from among the variety of currently available therapy options
presents a relevant challenge for medical oncologists. With the understanding
that the majority of patients with breast cancer and those who succumb to this
disease have HR-positive disease, this review will focus on treatment options and
treatment order in patients with HR-positive advanced breast cancer. While
endocrine therapy is considered the preferred treatment for first-line therapy in
HR-positive/HER2-negative breast cancer, selection of the specific agent depends 
on the menopausal status of the patient. Palbociclib, a cyclin-dependent kinase
(CDK) 4/6 inhibitor, is also recommended as first-line treatment in patients with
ER-positive/HER2-negative disease. In patients with endocrine therapy-resistant
disease, specific strategies include sequencing of other antiestrogen receptor
agents, or agents that target other molecular pathways. Future treatment
strategies for patients with primary or secondary resistance to endocrine therapy
for advanced disease are discussed. These strategies include first-line therapy
with high-dose fulvestrant or everolimus (in combination with exemestane or
letrozole or with other endocrine therapies), use of the PI3K inhibitors (e.g.,
buparlisib, alpelisib, pictilisib, taselisib), entinostat, CDK 4/6 inhibitors
(e.g., palbociclib, ribociclib, abemaciclib), and novel selective estrogen
receptor degradation agents that may enhance the targeting of acquired mutations 
in the ESR1 gene.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26830312  [PubMed - in process]


56. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Mar 8;113(10):2738-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1520376113. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

Genome-wide coexpression of steroid receptors in the mouse brain: Identifying
signaling pathways and functionally coordinated regions.

Mahfouz A(1), Lelieveldt BP(2), Grefhorst A(3), van Weert LT(4), Mol IM(4), Sips 
HC(4), van den Heuvel JK(4), Datson NA(5), Visser JA(3), Reinders MJ(6), Meijer
OC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The
Netherlands; Delft Bioinformatics Laboratory, Delft University of Technology,
2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands; a.mahfouz@lumc.nl. (2)Department of Radiology,
Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands; Delft
Bioinformatics Laboratory, Delft University of Technology, 2628 CD Delft, The
Netherlands; (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical
Center, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands; (4)Division of Endocrinology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC
Leiden, The Netherlands; (5)Division of Medical Pharmacology, Leiden Academic
Centre for Drug Research/Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden 2333 CC, The
Netherlands; Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden 2300 RC, The Netherlands. (6)Delft Bioinformatics Laboratory, Delft
University of Technology, 2628 CD Delft, The Netherlands;

Steroid receptors are pleiotropic transcription factors that coordinate
adaptation to different physiological states. An important target organ is the
brain, but even though their effects are well studied in specific regions,
brain-wide steroid receptor targets and mediators remain largely unknown due to
the complexity of the brain. Here, we tested the idea that novel aspects of
steroid action can be identified through spatial correlation of steroid receptors
with genome-wide mRNA expression across different regions in the mouse brain.
First, we observed significant coexpression of six nuclear receptors (NRs)
[androgen receptor (Ar), estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1), estrogen receptor beta
(Esr2), glucocorticoid receptor (Gr), mineralocorticoid receptor (Mr), and
progesterone receptor (Pgr)] with sets of steroid target genes that were
identified in single brain regions. These coexpression relationships were also
present in distinct other brain regions, suggestive of as yet unidentified
coordinate regulation of brain regions by, for example, glucocorticoids and
estrogens. Second, coexpression of a set of 62 known NR coregulators and the six 
steroid receptors in 12 nonoverlapping mouse brain regions revealed selective
downstream pathways, such as Pak6 as a mediator for the effects of Ar and Gr on
dopaminergic transmission. Third, Magel2 and Irs4 were identified and validated
as strongly responsive targets to the estrogen diethylstilbestrol in the mouse
hypothalamus. The brain- and genome-wide correlations of mRNA expression levels
of six steroid receptors that we provide constitute a rich resource for further
predictions and understanding of brain modulation by steroid hormones.

PMCID: PMC4791033
PMID: 26811448  [PubMed - in process]


57. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 25;11(1):e0147685. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147685.
eCollection 2016.

Estrogen Receptor Alpha (ESR1)-Dependent Regulation of the Mouse Oviductal
Transcriptome.

Cerny KL(1), Ribeiro RA(1), Jeoung M(2), Ko C(3), Bridges PJ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Food Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 
40546, United States of America. (2)Department of Clinical Sciences, University
of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, United States of America. (3)Department of
Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL
61802, United States of America.

Estrogen receptor-a (ESR1) is an important transcriptional regulator in the
mammalian oviduct, however ESR1-dependent regulation of the transcriptome of this
organ is not well defined, especially at the genomic level. The objective of this
study was therefore to investigate estradiol- and ESR1-dependent regulation of
the transcriptome of the oviduct using transgenic mice, both with (ESR1KO) and
without (wild-type, WT) a global deletion of ESR1. Oviducts were collected from
ESR1KO and WT littermates at 23 days of age, or ESR1KO and WT mice were treated
with 5 IU PMSG to stimulate follicular development and the production of ovarian 
estradiol, and the oviducts collected 48 h later. RNA extracted from whole
oviducts was hybridized to Affymetrix Genechip Mouse Genome 430-2.0 arrays (n = 3
arrays per genotype and treatment) or reverse transcribed to cDNA for analysis of
the expression of selected mRNAs by real-time PCR. Following microarray analysis,
a statistical two-way ANOVA and pairwise comparison (LSD test) revealed 2428
differentially expressed transcripts (DEG's, P < 0.01). Genotype affected the
expression of 2215 genes, treatment (PMSG) affected the expression of 465 genes, 
and genotype x treatment affected the expression of 438 genes. With the goal of
determining estradiol/ESR1-regulated function, gene ontology (GO) and
bioinformatic pathway analyses were performed on DEG's in the oviducts of
PMSG-treated ESR1KO versus PMSG-treated WT mice. Significantly enriched GO
molecular function categories included binding and catalytic activity.
Significantly enriched GO cellular component categories indicated the
extracellular region. Significantly enriched GO biological process categories
involved a single organism, modulation of a measurable attribute and
developmental processes. Bioinformatic analysis revealed ESR1-regulation of the
immune response within the oviduct as the primary canonical pathway. In summary, 
a transcriptomal profile of estradiol- and ESR1-regulated gene expression and
related bioinformatic analysis is presented to increase our understanding of how 
estradiol/ESR1 affects function of the oviduct, and to identify genes that may be
proven as important regulators of fertility in the future.

PMCID: PMC4725743
PMID: 26808832  [PubMed - in process]


58. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 25;11(1):e0147705. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147705.
eCollection 2016.

Evaluation of Suitable Internal Control Genes for RT-qPCR in Yak Mammary Tissue
during the Lactation Cycle.

Jiang M(1), Lee JN(1,)(2), Bionaz M(3), Deng XY(1), Wang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science and Technology, Southwest University for
Nationalities, Chengdu, China. (2)National Research Foundation of Korea, Seoul,
Korea. (3)College of Agricultural Sciences, Oregon State University, Oregon,
United States of America. (4)Sichuan Key Laboratory of Conservation and
Utilization of Animal Genetic Resources in Tibetan Plateau, Southwest University 
for Nationalities, Chengdu, China.

The yak is primarily found throughout the Tibetan high plateau and the
surrounding mountainous area of south central Asia; among its others attributes, 
its milk is very important for the local population. A key concern in the field
of yak research is the better understanding of which genes control the production
and composition of milk. The most accurate and sensitive method for gene
expression analysis is quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-qPCR). It is essential for reliable RT-qPCR to be able to the
normalize the data using internal control genes (ICGs). However, it is critical
to assess the reliability of the normalization by testing multiple ICGs. Our
objective was to uncover a reliable normalization for RT-qPCR data obtained from 
yak mammary tissue during the lactation cycle. We assessed the reliability of 10 
ICGs (ACTB, EIF6, GAPDH, LRP10, MRPL39, MRPS15, MTG1, RPS8, RPS23, and UXT) using
geNorm. The analysis revealed that all of the tested ICGs can be considered to be
reliable, but the use of the 6 most stable ICGs should be applied to yield a
reliable normalization factor (NF). We compared the results of 3 target genes
(CSN1S1, ESR1, and MYC) normalized using 6, 3, or 1 of the best ICGs. We did not 
observe overall differences between the 3 normalization strategies with the
exception of 1 time point in MYC. The use of only a single ICG is not
recommended; thus, we concluded that the calculation of the NF using the 3 best
ICGs, MRPS15, RPS23, and UXT, is a reliable normalization strategy for RT-qPCR
data obtained from yak mammary tissue during pregnancy and lactation. A dilution 
effect of the ICGs due to a large increase in the mRNA of abundantly expressed
genes in bovine and porcine mammary tissue during the lactation cycle was
previously observed. To test for the presence of a dilution effect in our study, 
we evaluated the pattern of non-normalized RT-qPCR data of ICGs from pregnancy to
lactation and compared them with the total RNA concentration, milk yield, and
non-normalized RT-qPCR data of 3 target genes. With a few exceptions, the non-
normalized RT-qPCR data for the tested ICGs was significantly increased by
lactation and had a positive correlation with total RNA and the non-normalized
RT-qPCR data of CSN1S1. These data clearly indicated the presence of a
"concentration effect" of single mRNA that remains unexplained but needs to be
accounted for during the normalization of RT-qPCR data. Based on our findings, we
recommend that the NF of the MRPS15, RPS23, and UXT genes should be used in the
normalization of RT-qPCR data obtained from mammary tissue of lactating yaks
during pregnancy and lactation.

PMCID: PMC4726593
PMID: 26808329  [PubMed - in process]


59. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 25;11(1):e0147475. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0147475.
eCollection 2016.

Network-Based Meta-Analyses of Associations of Multiple Gene Expression Profiles 
with Bone Mineral Density Variations in Women.

He H(1), Cao S(2), Niu T(1), Zhou Y(1), Zhang L(1), Zeng Y(1), Zhu W(1), Wang
YP(1,)(2), Deng HW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Bioinformatics and Genomics, Department of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics, Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, 
New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America. (2)Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Existing microarray studies of bone mineral density (BMD) have been
critical for understanding the pathophysiology of osteoporosis, and have
identified a number of candidate genes. However, these studies were limited by
their relatively small sample sizes and were usually analyzed individually. Here,
we propose a novel network-based meta-analysis approach that combines data across
six microarray studies to identify functional modules from human protein-protein 
interaction (PPI) data, and highlight several differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) and a functional module that may play an important role in BMD regulation 
in women.
METHODS: Expression profiling studies were identified by searching PubMed, Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) and ArrayExpress. Two meta-analysis methods were applied
across different gene expression profiling studies. The first, a nonparametric
Fisher's method, combined p-values from individual experiments to identify genes 
with large effect sizes. The second method combined effect sizes from individual 
datasets into a meta-effect size to gain a higher precision of effect size
estimation across all datasets. Genes with Q test's p-values < 0.05 or I2 values 
> 50% were assessed by a random effects model and the remainder by a fixed
effects model. Using Fisher's combined p-values, functional modules were
identified through an integrated analysis of microarray data in the context of
large protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks. Two previously published
meta-analysis studies of genome-wide association (GWA) datasets were used to
determine whether these module genes were genetically associated with BMD.
Pathway enrichment analysis was performed with a hypergeometric test.
RESULTS: Six gene expression datasets were identified, which included a total of 
249 (129 high BMD and 120 low BMD) female subjects. Using a network-based
meta-analysis, a consensus module containing 58 genes (nodes) and 83 edges was
detected. Pathway enrichment analysis of the 58 module genes revealed that these 
genes were enriched in several important KEGG pathways including Osteoclast
differentiation, B cell receptor signaling pathway, MAPK signaling pathway,
Chemokine signaling pathway and Insulin signaling pathway. The importance of
module genes was replicated by demonstrating that most module genes were
genetically associated with BMD in the GWAS data sets. Meta-analyses were
performed at the individual gene level by combining p-values and effect sizes.
Five candidate genes (ESR1, MAP3K3, PYGM, RAC1 and SYK) were identified based on 
gene expression meta-analysis, and their associations with BMD were also
replicated by two BMD meta-analysis studies.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our network-based meta-analysis not only identified
important differentially expressed genes but also discovered biologically
meaningful functional modules for BMD determination. Our study may provide novel 
therapeutic targets for osteoporosis in women.

PMCID: PMC4726665
PMID: 26808152  [PubMed - in process]


60. Med Hypotheses. 2016 Jan;86:67-70. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2015.11.030. Epub 2015 Dec
11.

Hepatocellular carcinoma and estrogen receptors: Polymorphisms and isoforms
relations and implications.

Baldissera VD(1), Alves AF(1), Almeida S(1), Porawski M(2), Giovenardi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre (UFCSPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil. (2)Programa de 
Pós-Graduação em Medicina: Hepatologia, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde
de Porto Alegre (UFCSPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil. (3)Programa de Pós-Graduação em
Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre
(UFCSPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil. Electronic address: giovenardi.marcia@gmail.com.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary tumor of liver and its 
incidence continues to increase worldwide. HCC is a disease with multifactorial
causes and genetic variability has been discussed as a risk factor for its
development. Liver is a hormone-sensitive organ and therefore is influenced by
gonadal hormones, such as estrogen. Estrogen is known to participate in various
biological functions, but its role in development of HCC, on the other hand, is
controversial and presents evidence suggesting a role as both a carcinogen and
protective effect in liver. Estrogen way of action is mediated by estrogen
receptor alpha (ERa) and estrogen receptor beta (ERß), that belong to a family of
nuclear receptors that may regulate the expression of many genes. The ER subtypes
exert a variety of roles in many stages of liver disease and may play a part in
the process of signal transduction, according to some studies. However, the many 
functions of ER subtypes in hepatic diseases, in special of the ERß, are yet to
be clarified. The genetic modifications related to HCC are not yet fully
clarified and accumulation of multiple genetic alterations appears to have an
important role in carcinogenesis of HCC. The presence of some certain single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) may have a functional repercussion related to final
product of a gene, which can be measured and may participate in some alterations 
related to a pathological condition. Our hypothesis is based on the fact that
liver tissue express ER and its different variants exert multiple functions in
various stages of liver disease and participate in an extremely complicated
signal transduction process, therefore we believe that the presence of one or
more SNPs of ESR1 and ESR2 genes may be related with the increase of risk in
developing and the severity of HCC, as well as in the response to different
treatments. The confirmation of our hypothesis by scientific studies may provide 
knowledge of markers that act as prognostic factors of this disease, as well as
enabling alternatives to development of anti tumoral therapies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26804600  [PubMed - in process]


61. Front Neurosci. 2016 Jan 12;9:504. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00504. eCollection
2015.

Direct Regulation of Aromatase B Expression by 17ß-Estradiol and Dopamine D1
Receptor Agonist in Adult Radial Glial Cells.

Xing L(1), Esau C(1), Trudeau VL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Centre for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics,
University of Ottawa Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Aromatase cytochrome P450arom (cyp19) is the only enzyme that has the ability to 
convert androgens into estrogens. Estrogens, which are produced locally in the
vertebrate brain play many fundamental roles in neuroendocrine functions,
reproductive functions, socio-sexual behaviors, and neurogenesis. Radial glial
cells (RGCs) are neuronal progenitor cells that are abundant in fish brains and
are the exclusive site of aromatase B expression and neuroestrogen synthesis.
Using a novel in vitro RGC culture preparation we studied the regulation of
aromatase B by 17ß-estradiol (E2) and dopamine (DA). We have established that
activation of the dopamine D1 receptor (D1R) by SKF 38393 up-regulates aromatase 
B gene expression most likely through the phosphorylation of cyclic AMP response 
element binding protein (CREB). This up-regulation can be enhanced by low
concentration of E2 (100 nM) through increasing the expression of D1R and the
level of p-CREB protein. However, a high concentration of E2 (1 µM) and D1R
agonist together failed to up-regulate aromatase B, potentially due to
attenuation of esr2b expression and p-CREB levels. Furthermore, we found the
up-regulation of aromatase B by E2 and DA both requires the involvement of esr1
and esr2a. The combined effect of E2 and DA agonist indicates that aromatase B in
the adult teleost brain is under tight control by both steroids and
neurotransmitters to precisely regulate neuroestrogen levels.

PMCID: PMC4709857
PMID: 26793050  [PubMed]


62. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 22;14(4):17788-98. doi: 10.4238/2015.December.22.3.

Role of heme oxygenase-1 in demethylating effects on SKM-1 cells induced by
decitabine.

Gao R(1,)(2,)(3), Ma D(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Wang P(1,)(2,)(3), Sun J(5), Wang
JS(1,)(2,)(3), Fang Q(4,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of Guiyang Medical University,
Guiyang, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Hematological Disease Diagnostic & Treat
Centre of Guizhou Province, Guiyang, China. (3)Guizhou Province Hematopoietic
Stem Cell Transplantation Center, Affiliated Hospital of Guiyang Medical
University, Guiyang, China. (4)Department of Pharmacy, Affiliated Baiyun Hospital
of Guiyang Medical University, Guiyang, China. (5)School of Pharmacy, Guiyang
Medical University, Guiyang, China. (6)Department of Pharmacy, Affiliated
Hospital of Guiyang Medical University, Guiyang, China.

We evaluated the influence of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) gene inhibition in
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) cell line SKM-1 on enhancement of the
demethylating effects of decitabine on p15, and explored the possible mechanism. 
DNMT1 gene expression in SKM-1 cells was silenced by being transfected by a
constructed siRNA with liposomes. The proliferation inhibition rates after drug
treatment were detected by cell counting kit-8 assay. The apoptotic rates were
detected by Annexin V/PI assay with flow cytometry. The expressions of p16, p15, 
TP73, CDH1, ESR1, and PDLIM4 mRNAs were detected by real-time PCR, and those of
HO-1, DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B, HDAC, and p15 proteins were measured by western
blot. The degree of methylation of the p15 gene was analyzed by using
methylation-specific PCR (MSP). CCK-8 assay showed that after HO-1 gene
expression was inhibited; the proliferation rate of SKM-1 cells treated by
decitabine (70.91 ± 0.05%) was significantly higher than that of the control
group (53.67 ± 0.05%). Flow cytometry showed that the apoptotic rate of SKM- 1
cells treated by decitabine in combination with HO-1 expression inhibition (44.25
± 0.05%) exceeded that of the cells treated by this drug alone (37.70 ± 0.05%).
MSP showed that inhibiting HO-1 expression significantly increased the degree of 
methylation of the p15 gene. As suggested by western blot, the degree of
methylation of the p15 protein was changed after decitabine treatment when the
expression of the HO-1 protein was changed, being associated with the affected
DNMT1 expression. Inhibited HO-1 expression attenuated the hypermethylation of
CDKN2B by suppressing DNMT1, which was conducive to treatment by cooperating with
decitabine. In conclusion, the findings of this study provide valuable
experimental evidence for targeted MDS therapy, and a theoretical basis for
further studies.

PMID: 26782424  [PubMed - in process]


63. Anim Reprod Sci. 2016 Mar;166:28-35. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2016.01.001. Epub
2016 Jan 6.

Luteal P4 synthesis in early pregnant gilts after induction of estrus with
PMSG/hCG.

Blitek A(1), Szymanska M(2), Pieczywek M(2), Morawska-Pucinska E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of the Polish Academy of
Sciences, Tuwima 10, 10-748 Olsztyn, Poland. Electronic address:
a.blitek@pan.olsztyn.pl. (2)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of
the Polish Academy of Sciences, Tuwima 10, 10-748 Olsztyn, Poland.

The present study was designed to examine whether an estrus induction with
gonadotropins could affect luteal P4 synthesis in early pregnant gilts. Sixteen
prepubertal gilts received 750IU of PMSG and 500IU of hCG 72h later. Prepubertal 
gilts in the control group (n=17) were observed daily for estrus behavior. All
gilts were inseminated in their first estrus. Corpora lutea (CLs) were collected 
on days 10, 12 and 15 of pregnancy and analyzed for (1) the mRNA and protein
expression of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), cytochrome P450
family 11 subfamily A polypeptide 1 (CYP11A1), and 3ß-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase (3ßHSD); (2) the tissue concentration of P4; and (3) the mRNA
expression of luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR) and estrogen receptors (ESR1 and
ESR2). Additionally, P4 concentration was analyzed in blood serum of all animals.
PMSG/hCG injections to induce estrus decreased mRNA expression of StAR, CYP11A1
and 3ßHSD on day 10 and CYP11A1 on day 12 of pregnancy compared with the control 
group, while CYP11A1 and 3ßHSD proteins were down-regulated on day 10 in the
hormonally-treated gilts. Concentrations of P4 in luteal tissue and blood serum
were also lower in animals after gonadotropin-induced estrus. In contrast, LHR
and ESR1 mRNA expression was greater in PMSG/hCG-treated than control gilts on
day 15 of gestation. In conclusion, induction of estrus with a PMSG/hCG protocol 
in prepubertal gilts impaired expression of the luteal P4 synthesis system. Low
P4 content may, in turn, induce local mechanisms involving LHR and ESR1
expression to support CL function.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26781360  [PubMed - in process]


64. Front Genet. 2015 Dec 23;6:341. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2015.00341. eCollection 2015.

A Network-Based Model of Oncogenic Collaboration for Prediction of Drug
Sensitivity.

Laderas TG(1), Heiser LM(2), Sönmez K(2).

Author information: 
(1)OHSU Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, PortlandOR, 
USA; Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology, Oregon Health &
Science University, PortlandOR, USA. (2)Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland OR, USA.

Tumorigenesis is a multi-step process, involving the acquisition of multiple
oncogenic mutations that transform cells, resulting in systemic dysregulation
that enables proliferation, invasion, and other cancer hallmarks. The goal of
precision medicine is to identify therapeutically-actionable mutations from
large-scale omic datasets. However, the multiplicity of oncogenes required for
transformation, known as oncogenic collaboration, makes assigning effective
treatments difficult. Motivated by this observation, we propose a new type of
oncogenic collaboration where mutations in genes that interact with an oncogene
may contribute to the oncogene's deleterious potential, a new genomic feature
that we term "surrogate oncogenes." Surrogate oncogenes are representatives of
these mutated subnetworks that interact with oncogenes. By mapping mutations to a
protein-protein interaction network, we determine the significance of the
observed distribution using permutation-based methods. For a panel of 38 breast
cancer cell lines, we identified a significant number of surrogate oncogenes in
known oncogenes such as BRCA1 and ESR1, lending credence to this approach. In
addition, using Random Forest Classifiers, we show that these significant
surrogate oncogenes predict drug sensitivity for 74 drugs in the breast cancer
cell lines with a mean error rate of 30.9%. Additionally, we show that surrogate 
oncogenes are predictive of survival in patients. The surrogate oncogene
framework incorporates unique or rare mutations from a single sample, and
therefore has the potential to integrate patient-unique mutations into drug
sensitivity predictions, suggesting a new direction in precision medicine and
drug development. Additionally, we show the prevalence of significant surrogate
oncogenes in multiple cancers from The Cancer Genome Atlas, suggesting that
surrogate oncogenes may be a useful genomic feature for guiding pancancer
analyses and assigning therapies across many tissue types.

PMCID: PMC4688377
PMID: 26779250  [PubMed]


65. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Feb 12;470(3):748-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.022. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Trichostatin A enhances estrogen receptor-alpha repression in MCF-7 breast cancer
cells under hypoxia.

Noh H(1), Park J(1), Shim M(1), Lee Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Bioscience and Biotechnology, College of Life
Science, Sejong University, Kwangjingu, Kunjadong, Seoul 143-747, Republic of
Korea. (2)Department of Integrated Bioscience and Biotechnology, College of Life 
Science, Sejong University, Kwangjingu, Kunjadong, Seoul 143-747, Republic of
Korea. Electronic address: yjlee@sejong.ac.kr.

Estrogen receptor (ER) is a crucial determinant of resistance to endocrine
therapy, which may change during the progression of breast cancer. We previously 
showed that hypoxia induces ESR1 gene repression and ERa protein degradation via 
proteasome-mediated pathway in breast cancer cells. HDAC plays important roles in
the regulation of histone and non-histone protein post-translational
modification. HDAC inhibitors can induce epigenetic changes and have therapeutic 
potential for targeting various cancers. Trichostatin A exerts potent antitumor
activities against breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. In this report, we
show that TSA augments ESR1 gene repression at the transcriptional level and
downregulates ERa protein expression under hypoxic conditions through a
proteasome-mediated pathway. TSA-induced estrogen response element-driven
reporter activity in the absence of estrogen was synergistically enhanced under
hypoxia; however, TSA inhibited cell proliferation under both normoxia and
hypoxia. Our data show that the hypoxia-induced repression of ESR1 and
degradation of ERa are enhanced by concomitant treatment with TSA. These findings
expand our understanding of hormone responsiveness in the tumor microenvironment;
however, additional in-depth studies are required to elucidate the detailed
mechanisms of TSA-induced ERa regulation under hypoxia.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26768368  [PubMed - in process]


66. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2016 Jan;155(2):405-13. doi: 10.1007/s10549-016-3682-6. 
Epub 2016 Jan 13.

Clinically advanced and metastatic pure mucinous carcinoma of the breast: a
comprehensive genomic profiling study.

Ross JS(1,)(2), Gay LM(3), Nozad S(4), Wang K(3), Ali SM(3), Boguniewicz A(4),
Khaira D(3), Johnson A(3), Elvin JA(3), Vergilio JA(3), Suh J(3), Miller VA(3),
Stephens PJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Mail Code 81, Albany Medical College, 47 New Scotland
Avenue, Albany, NY, 12208, USA. rossj@mail.amc.edu. (2)Foundation Medicine, Inc.,
Cambridge, MA, USA. rossj@mail.amc.edu. (3)Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, 
MA, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, Mail Code 81, Albany Medical College, 47 New
Scotland Avenue, Albany, NY, 12208, USA.

PURPOSE: Pure mucinous breast carcinoma (pmucBC) is a distinctive variant of
breast cancer (BC) featuring an excellent overall prognosis. However, on rare
occasions, pmucBC pursues an aggressive clinical course. We queried whether
comprehensive genomic profiling (CGP) would uncover clinically relevant genomic
alterations (CRGA) that could lead to targeted therapy treatment for patients
with an advanced and metastatic form of pmucBC.
METHODS: From a series of 51,238 total cancer samples, which included 5605 cases 
of clinically advanced BC and 22 cases of stage IV pmucBC, DNA was extracted from
40 microns of FFPE sections. Comprehensive genomic profiling was performed using 
a hybrid-capture, adaptor ligation-based next generation sequencing assay to a
mean coverage depth of 564X. The results were analyzed for all classes of genomic
alterations (GA) including base substitutions, insertions and deletions, select
rearrangements, and copy number changes. Clinically relevant genomic alterations 
were defined as those indicating possible treatment with anti-cancer drugs on the
market or in registered clinical trials.
RESULTS: Samples were obtained from breast (11), lymph nodes (3), chest wall (2),
liver (2), soft tissue (2), bone (1), and pleura (1). The median age of the 22
pmucBC patients was 57 years (range 32-79 years). Three pmucBCs were grade 1, 17 
were grade 2, and 2 were grade 3. Twenty-one (95 %) pmucBC were ER+, 18 (82 %)
were PR+, and 3 (14 %) were HER2+ by IHC and/or FISH. A total of 132 GA were
identified (6.0 GA per tumor), including 53 CRGA, for a mean of 2.4 GA per tumor.
Amplification of FGFR1 or ZNF703, located within the same amplicon, was found in 
8 of 22 cases (36 %). This enrichment of FGFR1 amplification in 36 % of pmucBC
versus 11 % of non-mucinous ER+ BC (601 cases) was significant (p < 0.005). Other
frequently altered genes of interest in pmucBC were CCND1 and the FGF3/FGF4/FGF19
amplicon (27 %), often co-amplified together. ERBB2/HER2 alterations were
identified in 5 pmucBC (23 %): ERBB2 amplification was found in 3 of 3 cases
(100 %) that were HER2+ by IHC and/or FISH; 1 pmucBC was negative for HER2
overexpression by IHC, but positive for amplification by CGP; and 2 pmucBC
harbored the ERBB2 substitutions D769Y and V777L (one sample also featured ERBB2 
amplification). The enrichment of ERBB2 GA in metastatic pmucBC versus
non-metastatic primary pmucBC was significant (p = 0.03). CRGA were also found in
20 additional genes including PIK3CA (5), BRCA1 (1), TSC2 (1), STK11 (1), AKT3
(1), and ESR1 (1).
CONCLUSIONS: Metastatic pmucBC is a distinct form of breast cancer that features 
a relatively high frequency of CRGA, including a significant enrichment of FGFR1 
alterations and a high frequency of ERBB2 alterations when compared with
non-metastatic pmucBC. These findings suggest that CGP can identify a variety of 
known and emerging therapy targets that have the potential to improve outcomes
for patients with clinically advanced and metastatic forms of this disease.

PMID: 26762307  [PubMed - in process]


67. Nat Biotechnol. 2016 Feb;34(2):192-8. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3450. Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Functional genetic screens for enhancer elements in the human genome using
CRISPR-Cas9.

Korkmaz G(1), Lopes R(1), Ugalde AP(1), Nevedomskaya E(2), Han R(1), Myacheva
K(1), Zwart W(2), Elkon R(1), Agami R(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Stress Response, the Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Division of Molecular Pathology, the Netherlands
Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Erasmus MC, Rotterdam
University, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Systematic identification of noncoding regulatory elements has, to date, mainly
relied on large-scale reporter assays that do not reproduce endogenous
conditions. We present two distinct CRISPR-Cas9 genetic screens to identify and
characterize functional enhancers in their native context. Our strategy is to
target Cas9 to transcription factor binding sites in enhancer regions. We
identified several functional enhancer elements and characterized the role of two
of them in mediating p53 (TP53) and ERa (ESR1) gene regulation. Moreover, we show
that a genomic CRISPR-Cas9 tiling screen can precisely map functional domains
within enhancer elements. Our approach expands the utility of CRISPR-Cas9 to
elucidate the functions of the noncoding genome.

PMID: 26751173  [PubMed - in process]


68. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2016 Jan;29(1):36-42. doi: 10.5713/ajas.15.0476.

The Prediction of the Expected Current Selection Coefficient of Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism Associated with Holstein Milk Yield, Fat and Protein Contents.

Lee YS(1), Shin D(2), Lee W(2), Taye M(2), Cho K(3), Park KD(4), Kim H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Natural Science, Interdisciplinary Program in Bioinformatics,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-747, Korea. (2)Department of Agricultural
Biotechnology, Animal Biotechnology, and Research Institute for Agriculture and
Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-921, Korea . (3)National
Livestock Research Institute, Cheonan 330-801, Korea . (4)Genomic Informatics
Center, Hankyong National University, Anseong 456-749, Korea . (5)Department of
Natural Science, Interdisciplinary Program in Bioinformatics, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-747, Korea ; Department of Agricultural Biotechnology,
Animal Biotechnology, and Research Institute for Agriculture and Life Sciences,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-921, Korea .

Milk-related traits (milk yield, fat and protein) have been crucial to selection 
of Holstein. It is essential to find the current selection trends of Holstein.
Despite this, uncovering the current trends of selection have been ignored in
previous studies. We suggest a new formula to detect the current selection trends
based on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP). This suggestion is based on the
best linear unbiased prediction (BLUP) and the Fisher's fundamental theorem of
natural selection both of which are trait-dependent. Fisher's theorem links the
additive genetic variance to the selection coefficient. For Holstein milk
production traits, we estimated the additive genetic variance using SNP effect
from BLUP and selection coefficients based on genetic variance to search highly
selective SNPs. Through these processes, we identified significantly selective
SNPs. The number of genes containing highly selective SNPs with p-value <0.01
(nearly top 1% SNPs) in all traits and p-value <0.001 (nearly top 0.1%) in any
traits was 14. They are phosphodiesterase 4B (PDE4B), serine/threonine kinase 40 
(STK40), collagen, type XI, alpha 1 (COL11A1), ephrin-A1 (EFNA1), netrin 4
(NTN4), neuron specific gene family member 1 (NSG1), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), 
neurexin 3 (NRXN3), spectrin, beta, non-erythrocytic 1 (SPTBN1), ADP-ribosylation
factor interacting protein 1 (ARFIP1), mutL homolog 1 (MLH1), transmembrane
channel-like 7 (TMC7), carboxypeptidase X, member 2 (CPXM2) and ADAM
metallopeptidase domain 12 (ADAM12). These genes may be important for future
artificial selection trends. Also, we found that the SNP effect predicted from
BLUP was the key factor to determine the expected current selection coefficient
of SNP. Under Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium of SNP markers in current generation,
the selection coefficient is equivalent to 2*SNP effect.

PMCID: PMC4698687
PMID: 26732326  [PubMed]


69. Stem Cells Dev. 2016 Mar 1;25(5):415-26. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0267. Epub 2016
Feb 8.

miR-26b-3p Regulates Human Umbilical Cord-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cell
Proliferation by Targeting Estrogen Receptor.

Wang Q(1,)(2), Xu C(1,)(2,)(3), Zhao Y(1,)(2), Xu Z(1,)(2), Zhang Y(1,)(2), Jiang
J(1,)(2), Yan B(1,)(2), Gu D(1,)(2), Wu M(1), Wang Y(1,)(2), Liu H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Translational Medicine Center, Second Military Medical University ,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China . (2)2 Department of Histology and
Embryology, Research Center of Developmental Biology, Second Military Medical
University , Shanghai, People's Republic of China . (3)3 Department of Spinal
Surgery, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University , Shanghai,
People's Republic of China .

Human umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hUC-MSC) have been
considered as promising candidates for cell-based regeneration medicine. However,
the application was limited to its poor in vitro proliferation ability against
the huge demand of cells. MicroRNA plays important roles in the regulation of
cell proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation. The objective of this study
is to explore the roles of miRNAs in regulating the in vitro proliferation of
hUC-MSC and unveil their possible mechanism. In this study, we found that
miR-26b-3p was significantly upregulated during serial in vitro passage of
hUC-MSC and was correlated with cellular senescence and cell cycle genes. The
overexpression of miR-26b-3p greatly inhibited the proliferation of hUC-MSC in
vitro, which is indicated by 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU) incorporation assay,
cell cycle, and cell growth curve analyses. miR-26b-3p suppression partly rescued
this phenotype by maintaining its proliferation ability in vitro. For mechanism
studies, we predicted and validated that miR-26b-3p suppresses estrogen receptor 
1 (ESR1) expression by directly binding to the coding sequence (CDS) region of
its message RNA (mRNA), thus subsequently changing the expression of its
downstream effector Cyclin D1. In conclusion, we found that miR-26b-3p played an 
important role in the regulation of hUC-MSC proliferation in vitro by targeting
the ESR-CCND1 pathway.

PMID: 26723394  [PubMed - in process]


70. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Apr;158:127-37. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.12.023. Epub 2015 Dec 21.

Tissue responsiveness to estradiol and genistein in the sea bass liver and scale.

Pinto PI(1), Estêvão MD(2), Andrade A(3), Santos S(3), Power DM(3).

Author information: 
(1)CCMAR-Centro de Ciências do Mar, Universidade do Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, 
8005-139 Faro, Portugal. Electronic address: ppinto@ualg.pt. (2)CCMAR-Centro de
Ciências do Mar, Universidade do Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, 8005-139 Faro,
Portugal; Escola Superior de Saúde, Universidade do Algarve, Av. Dr. Adelino da
Palma Carlos, 8000-510 Faro, Portugal. (3)CCMAR-Centro de Ciências do Mar,
Universidade do Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal.

As in mammals, estrogens in fish are essential for reproduction but also
important regulators of mineral homeostasis. Fish scales are a non-conventional
target tissue responsive to estradiol and constitute a good model to study
mineralized tissues effects and mechanisms of action of estrogenic compounds,
including phytoestrogens. The responsiveness to estradiol and the phytoestrogen
genistein, was compared between the scales and the liver, a classical estrogenic 
target, in sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax). Injection with estradiol and
genistein significantly increased circulating vitellogenin (for both compounds)
and mineral levels (estradiol only) and genistein also significantly increased
scale enzymatic activities suggesting it increased mineral turnover. The
repertoire, abundance and estrogenic regulation of nuclear estrogen receptors
(ESR1, 2a and 2b) and membrane G-protein receptors (GPER and GPER-like) were
different between liver and scales, which presumably explains the tissue-specific
changes detected in estrogen-responsive gene expression. In scales changes in
gene expression mainly consisted of small rapid increases, while in liver strong,
sustained increases/decreases in gene expression occurred. Similar but not
overlapping gene expression changes were observed in response to both estradiol
and genistein. This study demonstrates for the first time the expression of
membrane estrogen receptors in scales and that estrogens and phytoestrogens, to
which fish may be exposed in the wild or in aquaculture, both affect liver and
mineralized tissues in a tissue-specific manner.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26718875  [PubMed - in process]


71. Exp Cell Res. 2016 Jan 1;340(1):125-31. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.12.013. Epub
2015 Dec 19.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1)-signaling regulates the expression of the
taxane-response biomarker PRP4K.

Lahsaee S(1), Corkery DP(2), Anthes LE(1), Holly A(1), Dellaire G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. 
(2)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada. (3)Departments of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova 
Scotia, Canada; Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. Electronic address: dellaire@dal.ca.

The pre-mRNA splicing factor 4 kinase PRP4K (PRPF4B), is an essential kinase that
is a component of the U5 snRNP and functions in spliceosome assembly. We
demonstrated that PRP4K is a novel biological marker for taxane response in
ovarian cancer patients and reduced levels of PRP4K correlate with intrinsic and 
acquired taxane resistance in both breast and ovarian cancer. Breast cancer
treatments are chosen based on hormone and growth factor receptor status, with
HER2 (ERBB2) positive breast cancer patients receiving anti-HER2 agents and
taxanes and estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) positive (ER+) breast cancer patients 
receiving anti-estrogen therapies such as tamoxifen. Here we demonstrate that
PRP4K is expressed in the normal mammary duct epithelial cells of the mouse, and 
that estrogen induces PRP4K gene and protein expression in ER+ human MCF7 breast 
cancer cells. Estrogen acts through ESR1 to regulate PRP4K expression, as
over-expression of ESR1 in the ER-negative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cell line
increased the expression of this kinase, and knock-down of ESR1 in ER+ T47D
breast cancer cells reduced PRP4K levels. Furthermore, treatment with
4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in PRP4K protein
expression in MCF7 cells. Consistent with our previous studies identifying PRP4K 
as a taxane-response biomarker, reduced PRP4K expression in 4-OHT-treated cells
correlated with reduced sensitivity to paclitaxel. Thus, PRP4K is novel estrogen 
regulated kinase, and its levels can be reduced by 4-OHT in ER+ breast cancer
cells altering their response to taxanes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26712520  [PubMed - in process]


72. Cell Rep. 2015 Dec 29;13(12):2671-8. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.001. Epub 2015
Dec 17.

Synergistic Actions of Ogg1 and Mutyh DNA Glycosylases Modulate Anxiety-like
Behavior in Mice.

Bjørge MD(1), Hildrestrand GA(1), Scheffler K(2), Suganthan R(1), Rolseth V(1),
Kusnierczyk A(3), Rowe AD(1), Vågbø CB(3), Vetlesen S(1), Eide L(4), Slupphaug
G(5), Nakabeppu Y(6), Bredy TW(7), Klungland A(1), Bjørås M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo,
0424 Oslo, Norway. (2)Department of Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital and
University of Oslo, 0424 Oslo, Norway; Department of Cancer Research and
Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7491
Trondheim, Norway. (3)Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility PROMEC, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway. (4)Department of
Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo, 0424 Oslo,
Norway. (5)Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility PROMEC, Norwegian University
of Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway; Department of Cancer Research 
and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7491
Trondheim, Norway. (6)Division of Neurofunctional Genomics, Department of
Immunobiology and Neuroscience, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, and Research 
Center for Nucleotide Pool, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(7)Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, 
Australia. (8)Department of Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital and University
of Oslo, 0424 Oslo, Norway; Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine,
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway.
Electronic address: magnar.bjoras@rr-research.no.

Ogg1 and Mutyh DNA glycosylases cooperate to prevent mutations caused by 8-oxoG, 
a major premutagenic DNA lesion associated with cognitive decline. We have
examined behavior and cognitive function in mice deficient of these glycosylases.
Ogg1(-/-)Mutyh(-/-) mice were more active and less anxious, with impaired
learning ability. In contrast, Mutyh(-/-) mice showed moderately improved memory.
We observed no apparent change in genomic 8-oxoG levels, suggesting that Ogg1 and
Mutyh play minor roles in global repair in adult brain. Notably, transcriptome
analysis of hippocampus revealed that differentially expressed genes in the
mutants belong to pathways known to be involved in anxiety and cognition. Esr1
targets were upregulated, suggesting a role of Ogg1 and Mutyh in repression of
Esr1 signaling. Thus, beyond their involvement in DNA repair, Ogg1 and Mutyh
regulate hippocampal gene expression related to cognition and behavior,
suggesting a role for the glycosylases in regulating adaptive behavior.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26711335  [PubMed - in process]


73. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Apr;158:189-97. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.12.009. Epub 2015 Dec 18.

Evolution of estrogen receptors in ray-finned fish and their comparative
responses to estrogenic substances.

Tohyama S(1), Miyagawa S(2), Lange A(3), Ogino Y(4), Mizutani T(4), Ihara M(5),
Tanaka H(5), Tatarazako N(6), Kobayashi T(7), Tyler CR(3), Iguchi T(8).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Pharmaceutical and Nutritional Sciences,
University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan; Okazaki Institute for
Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes
of Natural Sciences, SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies),
Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan. (2)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, 
National Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences,
SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies), Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787,
Japan. Electronic address: miyagawa@nibb.ac.jp. (3)University of Exeter,
Biosciences, College of Life & Environmental Sciences, Exeter EX4 4QD, United
Kingdom. (4)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for 
Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, SOKENDAI (The Graduate
University for Advanced Studies), Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan. (5)Research
Center for Environmental Quality Management, Kyoto University, Otsu, Shiga
520-0811, Japan. (6)Center for Environmental Risk Research, National Institute
for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8506, Japan. (7)Graduate School
of Integrated Pharmaceutical and Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka,
Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan. (8)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience,
National Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences,
SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies), Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787,
Japan. Electronic address: taisen@nibb.ac.jp.

In vertebrates, estrogens play fundamental roles in regulating reproductive
activities through estrogen receptors (ESRs), and disruption of estrogen
signaling is now of global concern for both wildlife and human health. To date,
ESRs of only a limited number of species have been characterized. We investigated
the functional diversity and molecular basis or ligand sensitivity of ESRs among 
ray-finned fish species (Actinopterygii), the most variable group within
vertebrates. We cloned and characterized ESRs from several key species in the
evolution of ray-finned fish including bichir (Polypteriformes, ESR1 and ESR2) at
the basal lineage of ray-finned fish, and arowana (Osteoglossiformes, ESR1 and
ESR2b) and eel (Anguilliformes, ESR1, ESR2a and ESR2b) both belonging to ancient 
early-branching lineages of teleosts, and suggest that ESR2a and ESR2b emerged
through teleost-specific whole genome duplication, but an ESR1 paralogue has been
lost in the early lineage of euteleost fish species. All cloned ESR isoforms
showed similar responses to endogenous and synthetic steroidal estrogens, but
they responded differently to non-steroidal estrogenic endocrine disrupting
chemicals (EDCs) (e.g., ESR2a exhibits a weaker reporter activity compared with
ESR2b). We show that variation in ligand sensitivity of ESRs can be attributed to
phylogeny among species of different taxonomic groups in ray-finned fish. The
molecular information provided contributes both to understanding of the
comparative role of ESRs in the reproductive biology of fish and their
comparative responses to EDCs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26707410  [PubMed - in process]


74. Genes Genomics. 2015 Dec 1;37(12):1007-1016. Epub 2015 Sep 3.

Sex difference of autosomal alleles in populations of European and African
descent.

Zuo L(1), Wang T(2), Lin X(3), Wang J(4), Tan Y(5), Wang X(6), Yu X(7), Luo X(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA ; VA Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven Campus, CT, USA. (2)Department
of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA. (3)Provincial Key Laboratory of Translational Cancer Medicine, Fujian
Provincial Cancer Hospital, Fuzhou, Fujian, China. (4)Department of EEG &
Neuroimaging, Shanghai Mental Health Center, Shanghai, China. (5)Biological
Psychiatry Research Center, Beijing Huilongguan Hospital, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, Shanghai First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao-Tong 
University, China. (7)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital,
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (8)Department of Psychiatry,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA ; VA Connecticut
Healthcare System, West Haven Campus, CT, USA ; Biological Psychiatry Research
Center, Beijing Huilongguan Hospital, Beijing, China.

In the present study, we aimed to report the individual sex-different genetic
markers across autosomes in European- and African-origin populations. A total of 
8,400 females and 8,081 males in 19 independent cohorts were genotyped across
genomes using Illumina or Affymetrix arrays. The allele frequencies were compared
between females and males in 9 non-clean cohorts (with some human disease traits)
using genome-wide logistic regression and then the nominally significant
associations were replicated across 10 clean cohorts (without disease traits).
Meta-analysis was performed to derive the combined p values across all cohorts.
We found 13 markers that were genome-wide significant (p=5×10(-8)) between
females and males in the meta-analysis of all cohorts of European descent,
including rs7740449 at SYNE1, rs7531151 at PLD5, rs697455 at PPP1R12B, rs6745746 
at LOC100128413, rs17000079 at PARM1, rs11948070 at PDE4D, rs7801825 at INSIG1,
rs9551642 at MTUS2, rs2932174 at TPTE2, rs1961597 at SALL3, rs4117529 at METTL4, 
rs6021473 at SALL4 and rs6092466 at RAE1, and one marker, i.e., rs10145208 at
PCNX, that was genome-wide significant in the meta-analysis of all cohorts of
African descent. The most robust finding was rs7740449 at SYNE1, next to ESR1. We
conclude that there are many sex-different markers on autosomes. These markers
may be informative in differentiating females and males.

PMCID: PMC4684836 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26702338  [PubMed]


75. Immunol Invest. 2016 Jan;45(1):75-86. doi: 10.3109/08820139.2015.1113426. Epub
2015 Dec 23.

The Evaluation of IL6 and ESR1 Gene Polymorphisms in Primary Dysmenorrhea.

Ozsoy AZ(1), Karakus N(2), Yigit S(2), Cakmak B(1), Nacar MC(1), Yilmaz Dogru
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology , Gaziosmanpasa University, Faculty 
of Medicine , Tokat , Turkey. (2)b Department of Medical Biology , Gaziosmanpasa 
University, Faculty of Medicine , Tokat , Turkey.

Primary dysmenorrhea is the most common gynecological complaint with painful
menstrual cramps in pelvis without any pathology. It affects about half of
menstruating women, and it causes significant disruption in quality of life. We
investigated the association between IL6 gene promoter and ESR1 gene XbaI and
PvuII polymorphisms and primary dysmenorrhea. In this case-control study, 152
unrelated young women with primary dysmenorrhea and 150 unrelated healthy
age-matched controls participated. Genomic DNA was isolated and IL6 and ESR1 gene
polymorphisms were genotyped using PCR-based RFLP assay. The distribution of
genotype and allele frequencies of IL6 gene promoter and ESR1 gene XbaI
polymorphisms were not statistically different between patients and controls (p >
0.05). However, the genotype and allele frequencies of ESR1 gene PvuII
polymorphism showed statistically significant differences between primary
dysmenorrhea patients and controls (p = 0.009 and p = 0.021, respectively).
Statistically significant associations were also observed between age and married
status of primary dysmenorrhea patients and ESR1 gene PvuII polymorphism (p =
0.044 and p = 0.023, respectively). In combined genotype analyses, AG at ESR1
XbaI and TC at ESR1 PvuII loci encoded a p-value of 0.027. Thus, individuals who 
are heterozygote at both loci have a lower risk of developing primary
dysmenorrhea. Our study suggests no strong association between IL6 gene promoter 
and ESR1 gene XbaI polymorphisms and primary dysmenorrhea in Turkish women.
However, ESR1 gene PvuII polymorphism showed statistically significant
differences between primary dysmenorrhea patients and controls. The potential
association between ESR1 gene PvuII polymorphism and age and married status of
dysmenorrhea patients deserves further consideration.

PMID: 26700208  [PubMed - in process]


76. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 1;22(5):1034-6. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-2549.
Epub 2015 Dec 23.

ESR1 Mutations in Breast Cancer: Proof-of-Concept Challenges Clinical Action.

Gu G(1), Fuqua SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas. (2)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas. Dan L Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas. sfuqua@bcm.edu.

Wang and colleagues demonstrate that digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) identified ESR1 
mutations in 7% of primary breast cancers. ESR1 mutations were also readily
detected in metastatic tissues and circulating tumor DNA in the blood. These
results suggest that ddPCR may be amendable for monitoring tumor burden, and to
predict relapse. Clin Cancer Res; 22(5); 1034-6. ©2015 AACR.See related article
by Wang et al., p. 1130.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4775407 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26700205  [PubMed - in process]


77. Chem Res Toxicol. 2016 Feb 15;29(2):150-61. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemrestox.5b00342. 
Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Urban Endocrine Disruptors Targeting Breast Cancer Proteins.

Montes-Grajales D(1,)(2), Bernardes GJ(2,)(3), Olivero-Verbel J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental and Computational Chemistry Group, School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Zaragocilla Campus, University of Cartagena , Cartagena 130015,
Colombia. (2)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge , Lensfield Road,
Cambridge CB2 1EW, United Kingdom. (3)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade 
de Medicina da Universidade de Lisboa , Av. Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649-028 Lisboa,
Portugal.

Humans are exposed to a huge amount of environmental pollutants called endocrine 
disrupting chemicals (EDCs). These molecules interfere with the homeostasis of
the body, usually through mimicking natural hormones leading to activation or
blocking of their receptors. Many of these compounds have been associated with a 
broad range of diseases including the development or increased susceptibility to 
breast cancer, the most prevalent cancer in women worldwide, according to the
World Health Organization. Thus, this article presents a virtual high-throughput 
screening (vHTS) to evaluate the affinity of proteins related to breast cancer,
such as ESR1, ERBB2, PGR, BCRA1, and SHBG, among others, with EDCs from urban
sources. A blind docking strategy was employed to screen each protein-ligand pair
in triplicate in AutoDock Vina 2.0, using the computed binding affinities as
ranking criteria. The three-dimensional structures were previously obtained from 
EDCs DataBank and Protein Data Bank, prepared and optimized by SYBYL X-2.0. Some 
of the chemicals that exhibited the best affinity scores for breast cancer
proteins in each category were 1,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, bisphenol A
derivatives, perfluorooctanesulfonic acid, and benzo(a)pyrene, for catalase,
several proteins, sex hormone-binding globulin, and cytochrome P450 1A2,
respectively. An experimental validation of this approach was performed with a
complex that gave a moderate binding affinity in silico, the sex hormone binding 
globulin (SHBG), and bisphenol A (BPA) complex. The protein was obtained using
DNA recombinant technology and the physical interaction with BPA assessed through
spectroscopic techniques. BPA binds on the recombinant SHBG, and this results in 
an increase of its a helix content. In short, this work shows the potential of
several EDCs to bind breast cancer associated proteins as a tool to prioritize
compounds to perform in vitro analysis to benefit the regulation or exposure
prevention by the general population.

PMID: 26700111  [PubMed - in process]


78. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Dec 21;7:131. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0165-2. eCollection 
2015.

Aberrant DNA methylation profiles of inherited and sporadic colorectal cancer.

Sahnane N(1), Magnoli F(1), Bernasconi B(1), Tibiletti MG(2), Romualdi C(3),
Pedroni M(4), Ponz de Leon M(4), Magnani G(4), Reggiani-Bonetti L(5), Bertario
L(6), Signoroni S(6), Capella C(1), Sessa F(1), Furlan D(1); AIFEG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical and Morphological Sciences, Section of Anatomic
Pathology, University of Insubria, Via O. Rossi, 9, 21100 Varese, Italy.
(2)Department of Pathology, Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy. (3)CRIBI
Biotechnology Center, University of Padova, Padua, Italy. (4)Department of
Diagnostic Medicine, Clinical and Public Health, University of Modena and Reggio 
Emilia, Modena, Italy. (5)Department of Pathology, Policlinico di Modena, Modena,
Italy. (6)Unit of Hereditary Digestive Tract Tumours, Fondazione IRCCS-Istituto
Nazionale dei Tumori Milan, Modena, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation has been widely investigated in sporadic
colorectal carcinomas (CRCs), and extensive work has been performed to
characterize different methylation profiles of CRC. Less information is available
about the role of epigenetics in hereditary CRC and about the possible clinical
use of epigenetic biomarkers in CRC, regardless of the etiopathogenesis. Long
interspersed nucleotide element 1 (LINE-1) hypomethylation and gene-specific
hypermethylation of 38 promoters were analyzed in multicenter series of 220 CRCs 
including 71 Lynch (Lynch colorectal cancer with microsatellite instability
(LS-MSI)), 23 CRCs of patients under 40 years in which the main inherited CRC
syndromes had been excluded (early-onset colorectal cancer with microsatellite
stability (EO-MSS)), and 126 sporadic CRCs, comprising 28 cases with
microsatellite instability (S-MSI) and 98 that were microsatellite stable
(S-MSS). All tumor methylation patterns were integrated with clinico-pathological
and genetic characteristics, namely chromosomal instability (CIN), TP53 loss,
BRAF, and KRAS mutations.
RESULTS: LS-MSI mainly showed absence of extensive DNA hypo- and
hypermethylation. LINE-1 hypomethylation was observed in a subset of LS-MSI that 
were associated with the worse prognosis. Genetically, they commonly displayed
G:A transition in the KRAS gene and absence of a CIN phenotype and of TP53 loss. 
S-MSI exhibited a specific epigenetic profile showing low rates of LINE-1
hypomethylation and extensive gene hypermethylation. S-MSI were mainly
characterized by MLH1 methylation, BRAF mutation, and absence of a CIN phenotype 
and of TP53 loss. By contrast, S-MSS showed a high frequency of LINE-1
hypomethylation and of CIN, and they were associated with a worse prognosis.
EO-MSS were a genetically and epigenetically heterogeneous group of CRCs. Like
LS-MSI, some EO-MSS displayed low rates of DNA hypo- or hypermethylation and
frequent G:A transitions in the KRAS gene, suggesting that a genetic syndrome
might still be unrevealed in these patients. By contrast, some EO-MSS showed
similar features to those observed in S-MSS, such as LINE-1 hypomethylation, CIN,
and TP53 deletion. In all four classes, hypermethylation of ESR1, GATA5, and WT1 
was very common.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant DNA methylation analysis allows the identification of
different subsets of CRCs. This study confirms the potential utility of
methylation tests for early detection of CRC and suggests that LINE-1
hypomethylation may be a useful prognostic marker in both sporadic and inherited 
CRCs.

PMCID: PMC4687378
PMID: 26697123  [PubMed]


79. Biomed Environ Sci. 2015 Nov;28(11):820-2. doi: 10.3967/bes2015.113.

The Expression of Estrogen Receptor Subtypes in Prolactinomas and Their
Relationship to Tumor Biological Behavior.

Li CZ(1), Gui SB(2), Zong XY(2), Zhang YZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, Beijing 100050, China; Neurosurgical
Department of Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Beijing 100050, China; Beijing Institute 
for Brain Disorders Brain Tumor Center, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Neurosurgical
Department of Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Beijing 100050, China. (3)Beijing
Neurosurgical Institute, Beijing 100050, China; Beijing Institute for Brain
Disorders Brain Tumor Center, Beijing 100050, China; Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100050, China.

Dopamine agonists (DA) are a first-line therapy for prolactinomas (PA). However, 
nearly 10% of prolactinomas do not respond to DA therapy. A considerable number
of studies have shown that estrogen plays an important role in the development of
prolactinomas. However, the expression of estrogen receptors (ER) in
prolactinomas has not been fully explored. Accordingly, we examined the levels of
ESR1 and its subtypes <U+0394>5-Del-ESR1 and ESR2 mRNA in prolactinomas. In the present 
study, we found that ESR1 mRNA levels were significantly lower in women of
childbearing age group compared to men (P<0.01) and post-menopausal women
(P<0.05). In addition, ESR1 mRNA levels showed a significant positive correlation
with the levels of prolactin (PRL). Moreover, ESR1 mRNA levels were significantly
lower in noninvasive prolactinomas compared to invasive prolactinomas.

Copyright © 2015 The Editorial Board of Biomedical and Environmental Sciences.
Published by China CDC. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26695360  [PubMed - in process]


80. Biol Sex Differ. 2015 Dec 10;6:31. doi: 10.1186/s13293-015-0050-x. eCollection
2015.

Removal of reproductive suppression reveals latent sex differences in brain
steroid hormone receptors in naked mole-rats, Heterocephalus glaber.

Swift-Gallant A(1), Mo K(1), Peragine DE(1), Monks DA(2), Holmes MM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto Mississauga, 3359 Mississauga 
Road, Mississauga, ON L5L 1C6 Canada. (2)Department of Psychology, University of 
Toronto Mississauga, 3359 Mississauga Road, Mississauga, ON L5L 1C6 Canada ;
Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, 100 St. George
Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3G3 Canada. (3)Department of Psychology, University of
Toronto Mississauga, 3359 Mississauga Road, Mississauga, ON L5L 1C6 Canada ;
Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, 100 St. George
Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3G3 Canada ; Department of Ecology and Evolutionary
Biology, University of Toronto, 25 Willcocks Street, Toronto, ON M5S 3B2 Canada.

BACKGROUND: Naked mole-rats are eusocial mammals, living in large colonies with a
single breeding female and 1-3 breeding males. Breeders are socially dominant,
and only the breeders exhibit traditional sex differences in circulating gonadal 
steroid hormones and reproductive behaviors. Non-reproductive subordinates also
fail to show sex differences in overall body size, external genital morphology,
and non-reproductive behaviors. However, subordinates can transition to breeding 
status if removed from their colony and housed with an opposite-sex conspecific, 
suggesting the presence of latent sex differences. Here, we assessed the
expression of steroid hormone receptor and aromatase messenger RNA (mRNA) in the 
brains of males and females as they transitioned in social and reproductive
status.
METHODS: We compared in-colony subordinates to opposite-sex subordinate pairs
that were removed from their colony for either 1 day, 1 week, 1 month, or until
they became breeders (i.e., produced a litter). Diencephalic tissue was collected
and mRNA of androgen receptor (Ar), estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1), progesterone 
receptor (Pgr), and aromatase (Cyp19a1) was measured using qPCR. Testosterone,
17ß-estradiol, and progesterone from serum were also measured.
RESULTS: As early as 1 week post-removal, males exhibited increased diencephalic 
Ar mRNA and circulating testosterone, whereas females had increased Cyp19a1 mRNA 
in the diencephalon. At 1 month post-removal, females exhibited increased
17ß-estradiol and progesterone. The largest changes in steroid hormone receptors 
were observed in breeders. Breeding females had a threefold increase in Cyp19a1
and fivefold increases in Esr1 and Pgr, whereas breeding males had reduced Pgr
and increased Ar.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that sex differences in circulating gonadal
steroids and hypothalamic gene expression emerge weeks to months after
subordinate animals are removed from reproductive suppression in their home
colony.

PMCID: PMC4676092
PMID: 26693002  [PubMed]


81. Mol Diagn Ther. 2016 Feb;20(1):83-95. doi: 10.1007/s40291-015-0181-0.

Application of Various Statistical Models to Explore Gene-Gene Interactions in
Folate, Xenobiotic, Toll-Like Receptor and STAT4 Pathways that Modulate
Susceptibility to Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.

Rupasree Y(1), Naushad SM(2), Varshaa R(2), Mahalakshmi GS(2), Kumaraswami K(3), 
Rajasekhar L(3), Kutala VK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Nizam's Institute of
Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, 500082, India. (2)School of Chemical and
Biotechnology, SASTRA University, Tirumalaisamudram, Thanjavur, 613401, India.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, Panjagutta,
Hyderabad, 500082, India. (4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, 500082, India.
vijaykutala@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: In view of our previous studies showing an independent association 
of genetic polymorphisms in folate, xenobiotic, and toll-like receptor (TLR)
pathways with the risk for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), we have developed 
three statistical models to delineate complex gene-gene interactions between
folate, xenobiotic, TLR, and signal transducer and activator of transcription 4
(STAT4) signaling pathways in association with the molecular pathophysiology of
SLE.
METHODS: We developed additive, multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR), and
artificial neural network (ANN) models.
RESULTS: The additive model, although the simplest, suggested a moderate
predictability of 30 polymorphisms of these four pathways (area under the curve
[AUC] 0.66). MDR analysis revealed significant gene-gene interactions among
glutathione-S-transferase (GST)T1 and STAT4 (rs3821236 and rs7574865)
polymorphisms, which account for moderate predictability of SLE. The MDR model
for specific auto-antibodies revealed the importance of gene-gene interactions
among cytochrome P450, family1, subfamily A, polypeptide 1 (CYP1A1) m1,
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) H108L, solute carrier family 19 (folate
transporter), member 1 (SLC19A1) G80A, estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), TLR5,
5-methyltetrahydrofolate-homocysteine methyltransferase reductase (MTRR),
thymidylate synthase (TYMS). and STAT4 polymorphisms. The ANN model for disease
prediction showed reasonably good predictability of SLE risk with 30
polymorphisms (AUC 0.76). These polymorphisms contribute towards the production
of SSB and anti-dsDNA antibodies to the extent of 48 and 40 %, respectively,
while their contribution for the production of antiRNP, SSA, and anti-cardiolipin
antibodies varies between 20 and 30 %.
CONCLUSION: The current study highlighted the importance of genetic polymorphisms
in folate, xenobiotic, TLR, and STAT4 signaling pathways as moderate predictors
of SLE risk and delineates the molecular pathophysiology associated with these
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by demonstrating their association with
specific auto-antibody production.

PMID: 26689915  [PubMed - in process]


82. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2016 Mar 1;310(5):L415-25. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00398.2015. Epub 2015 Dec 18.

Estrogenic compounds reduce influenza A virus replication in primary human nasal 
epithelial cells derived from female, but not male, donors.

Peretz J(1), Pekosz A(2), Lane AP(3), Klein SL(4).

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; (2)W. Harry
Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; Department of
Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland; (3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (4)W. Harry Feinstone
Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore,
Maryland; and sklein2@jhu.edu.

Influenza causes an acute infection characterized by virus replication in
respiratory epithelial cells. The severity of influenza and other respiratory
diseases changes over the life course and during pregnancy in women, suggesting
that sex steroid hormones, such as estrogens, may be involved. Using primary,
differentiated human nasal epithelial cell (hNEC) cultures from adult male and
female donors, we exposed cultures to the endogenous 17ß-estradiol (E2) or select
estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) and then infected cultures with a seasonal
influenza A virus (IAV) to determine whether estrogenic signaling could affect
the outcome of IAV infection and whether these effects were sex dependent.
Estradiol, raloxifene, and bisphenol A decreased IAV titers in hNECs from female,
but not male, donors. The estrogenic decrease in viral titer was dependent on the
genomic estrogen receptor-2 (ESR2) as neither genomic ESR1 nor nongenomic GPR30
was expressed in hNEC cultures and addition of the genomic ER antagonist ICI
182,780 reversed the antiviral effects of E2. Treatment of hNECs with E2 had no
effect on interferon or chemokine secretion but significantly downregulated cell 
metabolic processes, including genes that encode for zinc finger proteins, many
of which contain estrogen response elements in their promoters. These data
provide novel insights into the cellular and molecular mechanisms of how natural 
and synthetic estrogens impact IAV infection in respiratory epithelial cells
derived from humans.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4773846 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26684252  [PubMed - in process]


83. Mol Endocrinol. 2016 Mar;30(3):335-47. doi: 10.1210/me.2015-1058. Epub 2015 Dec
18.

Tissue-Specific Expression of Estrogen Receptor 1 Is Regulated by DNA Methylation
in a T-DMR.

Maekawa R(1), Sato S(1), Okada M(1), Lee L(1), Tamura I(1), Jozaki K(1), Kajimura
T(1), Asada H(1), Yamagata Y(1), Tamura H(1), Yamamoto S(1), Sugino N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology (R.M., S.S., M.O., L.L., I.T., K.J., 
T.K., H.A., Y.Y., H.T., N.S.) and Digestive Surgery and Surgical Oncology (S.Y.),
Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine, Ube 755-8505, Japan.

The mechanism controlling tissue-specific expression of estrogen receptor 1
(ESR1) is unclear. In other genes, DNA methylation of a region called the
tissue-dependent and differentially methylated region (T-DMR) has been associated
with tissue-specific gene expression. This study investigated whether human ESR1 
has a T-DMR and whether DNA methylation of the T-DMR regulates its expression.
ESR1 expression was tissue-specific, being high in the endometrium and mammary
gland and low/nil in the placenta and skin. Therefore, DNA methylation profiles
of the promoter of ESR1 were analyzed in these tissues and in breast cancer
tissues. In all of the normal tissues, the proximal promoter regions were
unmethylated. On the other hand, the distal regions (T-DMR) were unmethylated in 
the endometrium and mammary gland, but were moderately methylated and
hypermethylated in the placenta and skin, respectively. T-DMR-methylated reporter
assay was performed to examine whether DNA methylation at the T-DMR suppresses
ESR1 transcription. T-DMR, but not the promoter region, had transcriptional
activities and DNA methylation of the T-DMR suppressed ESR1 transcription. Early 
growth response protein 1 was shown to be a possible transcription factor to bind
the T-DMR and up-regulate ESR1 expression. ESR1 has several upstream exons, and
each upstream exon, Exon-A/Exon-B/Exon-C, had its own T-DMR. In some breast
cancer cases and breast cancer cell lines, ESR1 expression was not regulated by
DNA methylation at T-DMR as it is in normal tissues. In conclusion, ESR1 has a
T-DMR. DNA methylation status at the T-DMR is involved in tissue-specific ESR1
expression in normal tissues but not always in breast cancer.

PMID: 26683811  [PubMed - in process]


84. Cancer Discov. 2016 Feb;6(2):114-5. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2015-175. Epub
2015 Dec 17.

ESR1 Mutations Prevalent in Some Breast Cancers.

[No authors listed]

A recent analysis of cell-free DNA from blood samples found that ESR1 mutations
are highly prevalent and associated with worse overall survival in women with
advanced estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer that progressed on aromatase
inhibitor therapy. The data also show that patients' mutation status may affect
their response to the mTOR inhibitor everolimus.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26681738  [PubMed - in process]


85. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2016 Feb;25(2):327-33. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-15-0746. Epub 2015 Dec 16.

Variants in 6q25.1 Are Associated with Mammographic Density in Malaysian Chinese 
Women.

Mariapun S(1), Ho WK(2), Kang PC(3), Li J(4), Lindström S(5), Yip CH(6), Teo
SH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Malaysia (formerly known as Cancer Research Initiatives
Foundation), Subang Jaya Medical Centre, Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia. Breast 
Cancer Research Group, University Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
(2)Department of Applied Mathematics, Faculty of Engineering, University of
Nottingham Malaysia Campus, Semenyih, Selangor, Malaysia. (3)Cancer Research
Malaysia (formerly known as Cancer Research Initiatives Foundation), Subang Jaya 
Medical Centre, Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia. (4)Department of Medical
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts. (6)Subang Jaya Medical Centre, Selangor, Malaysia. (7)Cancer
Research Malaysia (formerly known as Cancer Research Initiatives Foundation),
Subang Jaya Medical Centre, Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia. Breast Cancer
Research Group, University Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
soohwang.teo@cancerresearch.my.

BACKGROUND: Mammographic density is an established risk factor for breast cancer 
and has a strong heritable component. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for 
mammographic density conducted in women of European descent have identified
several genetic associations, but none of the studies have been tested in Asians.
We sought to investigate whether these genetic loci, and loci associated with
breast cancer risk and breast size, are associated with mammographic density in
an Asian cohort.
METHODS: We conducted genotyping by mass spectrometry in 1,189 women (865
Chinese, 187 Indian, and 137 Malay). Quantitative measurements of mammographic
density were performed using ImageJ, a fully automated thresholding technique.
The associations of SNPs to densities were analyzed using linear regression
models.
RESULTS: We successfully evaluated the associations of 36 SNPs with mammographic 
densities. After adjusting for age, body mass index, parity, and menopausal
status, we found that in our cohort of 865 Malaysian Chinese, three SNPs in the
6q25.1 region near ESR1 (rs2046210, rs12173570, and rs10484919) that were
associated with mammographic density, breast cancer risk, or breast size in
previous GWAS were significantly associated with both percentage density and
absolute dense area. We could not replicate the most significant association
found previously in European women (rs10995190, ZNF365 gene) because the minor
allele was absent for Asian women.
CONCLUSION: We found that the directions of genetic associations were similar to 
those reported in Caucasian women.
IMPACT: Our results show that even in Asian women with lower population risk to
breast cancer, there is shared heritability between mammographic density and
breast cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev; 25(2); 327-33. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26677210  [PubMed - in process]


86. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2015 Dec 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of crucial genes related to postmenopausal osteoporosis using gene
expression profiling.

Ma M(1), Chen X(2), Lu L(1), Yuan F(1), Zeng W(1), Luo S(1), Yin F(3), Cai J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School
of Medicine, 150 Jimo Rd, Shanghai, 200120, China. (2)Department of Gynecology
and Obstetrics, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, 200120, China. (3)Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai East Hospital,
Tongji University School of Medicine, 150 Jimo Rd, Shanghai, 200120, China.
jfcaicai@hotmail.com. (4)Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai East Hospital,
Tongji University School of Medicine, 150 Jimo Rd, Shanghai, 200120, China.
dr_cjf@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Postmenopausal osteoporosis is a common bone disease and
characterized by low bone mineral density.
AIM: This study aimed to reveal key genes associated with postmenopausal
osteoporosis (PMO), and provide a theoretical basis for subsequent experiments.
METHODS: The dataset GSE7429 was obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus. A total
of 20 B cell samples (ten ones, respectively from postmenopausal women with low
or high bone mineral density (BMD) were included in this dataset. Following
screening of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), coexpression analysis of all 
genes was performed, and key genes in the coexpression network were screened
using the random walk algorithm. Afterwards, functional and pathway analyses were
conducted. Additionally, protein-protein interactions (PPIs) between DEGs and key
genes were analyzed.
RESULTS: A set of 308 DEGs (170 up-regulated ones and 138 down-regulated ones)
between low BMD and high BMD samples were identified, and 101 key genes in the
coexpression network were screened out. In the coexpression network, some genes
had a higher score and degree, such as CSTA. The key genes in the coexpression
network were mainly enriched in GO terms of the defense response (e.g., SERPINA1 
and CST3), immune response (e.g., IL32 and CLEC7A); while, the DEGs were mainly
enriched in structural constituent of cytoskeleton (e.g., CYLC2 and TUBA1B) and
membrane-enclosed lumen (e.g., CCNE1 and INTS5). In the PPI network, CCNE1
interacted with REL; and TUBA1B interacted with ESR1.
CONCLUSIONS: A series of interactions, such as CSTA/TYROBP, CCNE1/REL and
TUBA1B/ESR1 might play pivotal roles in the occurrence and development of PMO.

PMID: 26676054  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


87. Environ Res. 2016 Feb;145:93-100. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2015.11.033. Epub 2015
Dec 6.

Sources of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are associated with gene-specific
promoter methylation in women with breast cancer.

White AJ(1), Chen J(2), Teitelbaum SL(3), McCullough LE(4), Xu X(5), Hee Cho
Y(6), Conway K(4), Beyea J(7), Stellman SD(8), Steck SE(9), Mordukhovich I(4),
Eng SM(8), Beth Terry M(8), Engel LS(4), Hatch M(10), Neugut AI(11), Hibshoosh
H(12), Santella RM(13), Gammon MD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
Electronic address: whitea@unc.edu. (2)Departments of Preventive Medicine, New
York, NY, USA; Departments of Oncological Science, New York, NY, USA; Departments
of Pediatrics, Ichan School of Medicine at Mt. Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Departments of Preventive Medicine, New York, NY, USA. (4)Department of
Epidemiology University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (5)Departments
of Preventive Medicine, New York, NY, USA; Departments of Biometrics, Roche
Product Development in Asia-Pacific, Shanghai, China. (6)Department of Biomedical
and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.
(7)Department of Consulting in the Public Interest (CIPI), Lambertville, NJ, USA.
(8)Departments of Epidemiology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(9)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, SC, USA. (10)Departments of Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, Radiation Epidemiology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD,
USA. (11)Departments of Epidemiology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA;
Departments of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. (12)Departments 
of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(13)Departments of Environmental Health Sciences; Columbia University, New York, 
NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Tobacco smoke, diet and indoor/outdoor air pollution, all major
sources of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), have been associated with
breast cancer. Aberrant methylation may be an early event in carcinogenesis, but 
whether PAHs influence the epigenome is unclear, particularly in breast tissue
where methylation may be most relevant. We aimed to evaluate the role of
methylation in the association between PAHs and breast cancer.
METHODS: In a population-based case-control study, we measured promoter
methylation of 13 breast cancer-related genes in breast tumor tissue (n=765-851
cases) and global methylation in peripheral blood (1055 cases/1101 controls). PAH
sources (current active smoking, residential environmental tobacco smoke (ETS),
vehicular traffic, synthetic log burning, and grilled/smoked meat intake) were
evaluated separately. Logistic regression was used to estimate adjusted odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: When comparing methylated versus unmethylated genes, synthetic log use
was associated with increased ORs for CDH1 (OR=2.26, 95%CI=1.06-4.79), HIN1
(OR=2.14, 95%CI=1.34-3.42) and RARß (OR=1.80, 95%CI=1.16-2.78) and decreased ORs 
for BRCA1 (OR=0.44, 95%CI=0.30-0.66). Residential ETS was associated with
decreased ORs for ESR1 (OR=0.74, 95%CI=0.56-0.99) and CCND2 methylation (OR=0.65,
95%CI=0.44-0.96). Current smoking and vehicular traffic were associated with
decreased ORs for DAPK (OR=0.53, 95%CI=0.28-0.99) and increased ORs for TWIST1
methylation (OR=2.79, 95%CI=1.24-6.30), respectively. In controls, synthetic log 
use was inversely associated with LINE-1 (OR=0.59, 95%CI=0.41-0.86).
DISCUSSION: PAH sources were associated with hypo- and hypermethylation at
multiple promoter regions in breast tumors and LINE-1 hypomethylation in blood of
controls. Methylation may be a potential biologic mechanism for the associations 
between PAHs and breast cancer incidence.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4706465 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26671626  [PubMed - in process]


88. Indian J Exp Biol. 2015 Nov;53(11):714-8.

Association of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) haplotypes with risk for systemic lupus
erythematosus among South Indians.

Rupasree Y, Naushad SM, Rajasekhar L, Uma A, Kutala VK.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disorder involving
genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors and has higher incidence in women. 
In this study, we explored the association of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)
rs2234693 (PvuII) and rs9340799 (XbaI) polymorphisms with susceptibility to SLE. 
PCR-RFLP and ELISA were used for genetic analysis and determination of specific
autoantibodies, respectively. The univariate analysis showed no independent
association of rs2234693 (OR: 1.14, 95% CI: 0.87 - 1.49, p = 0.36) and rs9340799 
(OR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.66-1.14, p = 0.34). The haplotype analysis using SHEsis
platform revealed strong linkage disequilibrium between these two polymorphisms
(D': 0.81, r2: 0.55). Among the four haplotype groups, the C-A haplotype
(rs2234693-rs9340799) was strongly associated with the risk for SLE (OR: 2.10,
95% CI: 1.32 - 3.34, p = 0.001). The homozygous variant genotype of rs2234693
exhibited elevated TNF-a and depleted IFN-a, while the effects of rs9340799 were 
contradictory. The wild genotype of rs2234693 exhibited lower levels of IL-12
with number of rs9340799 variant alleles pronouncing this effect. From this
study, it is concluded that the ESR1 haplotypes may influence the Th2 cytokine
profile and susceptibility to SLE among the South Indians.

PMID: 26669013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Genesis. 2016 Jan;54(1):38-52. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22911. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

Generation of an estrogen receptor beta-iCre knock-in mouse.

Cacioppo JA(1), Koo Y(1,)(2), Lin PC(1), Osmulski SA(1), Ko CD(1), Ko C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, 61802. (2)School of Biological Sciences,
Inje University, Gimhae, South Korea.

A novel knock-in mouse that expresses codon-improved Cre recombinase (iCre) under
regulation of the estrogen receptor beta (Esr2) promoter was developed for
conditional deletion of genes and for the spatial and/or temporal localization of
Esr2 expression. ESR2 is one of two classical nuclear estrogen receptors and
displays a spatiotemporal expression pattern and functions that are different
from the other estrogen receptor, ESR1. A cassette was constructed that contained
iCre, a polyadenylation sequence, and a neomycin selection marker. This construct
was used to insert iCre in front of the endogenous start codon of the Esr2 gene
of a C57BL/6J embryonic stem cell line via homologous recombination. Resulting
Esr2-iCre mice were bred with ROSA26-lacZ and Ai9-RFP reporter mice to visualize 
cells of functional iCre expression. Strong expression was observed in the ovary,
the pituitary, the interstitium of the testes, the head and tail but not body of 
the epididymis, skeletal muscle, the coagulation gland (anterior prostate), the
lung, and the preputial gland. Additional diffuse or patchy expression was
observed in the cerebrum, the hypothalamus, the heart, the adrenal gland, the
colon, the bladder, and the pads of the paws. Overall, Esr2-iCre mice will serve 
as a novel line for conditionally ablating genes in Esr2-expressing tissues,
identifying novel Esr2-expressing cells, and differentiating the functions of
ESR2 and ESR1. genesis 54:38-52, 2016. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4756916 [Available on 2017-01-08]
PMID: 26663382  [PubMed - in process]


90. Dig Dis Sci. 2016 Apr;61(4):1130-8. doi: 10.1007/s10620-015-3975-3. Epub 2015 Dec
10.

Sera DNA Methylation of CDH1, DNMT3b and ESR1 Promoters as Biomarker for the
Early Diagnosis of Hepatitis B Virus-Related Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Dou CY(1), Fan YC(1,)(2), Cao CJ(3), Yang Y(1), Wang K(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 250012,
China. (2)Institute of Hepatology, Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-san
University, Guangzhou, 510080, China. (4)Department of Hepatology, Qilu Hospital 
of Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, China. wangdoc876@126.com. (5)Institute of
Hepatology, Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, China. wangdoc876@126.com.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation mainly affects tumor suppressor genes in the
development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, sera methylation of
specific genes in hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related HCC remains unknown.
AIMS: The purpose of this study was to identify methylation frequencies of sera
E-cadherin (CDH1), DNA methyltransferase 3b (DNMT3b) and estrogen receptor 1
(ESR1) promoter in HBV-related HCC and analyze the associated clinical
significance.
METHODS: Methylation-specific PCR was used to determine the frequencies of DNA
methylation for CDH1, DNMT3b and ESR1 genes in sera from 183 patients with HCC,
47 liver cirrhosis (LC), 126 chronic hepatitis B (CHB), and 50 normal controls
(NCs).
RESULTS: Significantly higher frequencies of methylation of CDH1, DNMT3b and ESR1
were found in HBV-related HCC compared with LC, CHB and NCs. Nodule numbers,
tumor size and the presence of liver cirrhosis were significantly associated with
gene methylation status in HBV-related HCC. Moreover, HBV may have a strong and
enhanced effect on the concurrent methylation of CDH1, DNMT3b and ESR1 in
HBV-related HCC. More importantly, combined methylation as a biomarker displayed 
significantly higher diagnostic value than AFP to discriminate HCC from CHB and
LC.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant sera DNA methylation of CDH1, DNMT3b and ESR1 gene
promoters could be a biomarker in the early diagnosis of HBV-related HCC.

PMID: 26660680  [PubMed - in process]


91. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2015 Nov 30. pii: S0016-6480(15)30034-4. doi:
10.1016/j.ygcen.2015.11.021. [Epub ahead of print]

Three nuclear and two membrane estrogen receptors in basal teleosts, Anguilla
sp.: Identification, evolutionary history and differential expression regulation.

Lafont AG(1), Rousseau K(2), Tomkiewicz J(3), Dufour S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Sorbonne Universités, Research Unit
BOREA, Biology of Aquatic Organisms and Ecosystems, CNRS 7208, IRD207, UPMC, UCN,
Paris, France. Electronic address: lafont@mnhn.fr. (2)Muséum National d'Histoire 
Naturelle, Sorbonne Universités, Research Unit BOREA, Biology of Aquatic
Organisms and Ecosystems, CNRS 7208, IRD207, UPMC, UCN, Paris, France.
(3)Technical University of Denmark, National Institute of Aquatic Resources,
Charlottenlund, Denmark. (4)Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Sorbonne
Universités, Research Unit BOREA, Biology of Aquatic Organisms and Ecosystems,
CNRS 7208, IRD207, UPMC, UCN, Paris, France. Electronic address:
Sylvie.dufour@mnhn.fr.

Estrogens interact with classical intracellular nuclear receptors (ESR), and with
G-coupled membrane receptors (GPER). In the eel, we identified three nuclear
(ESR1, ESR2a, ESR2b) and two membrane (GPERa, GPERb) estrogen receptors.
Duplicated ESR2 and GPER were also retrieved in most extant teleosts. Phylogeny
and synteny analyses suggest that they result from teleost whole genome
duplication (3R). In contrast to conserved 3R-duplicated ESR2 and GPER, one of
3R-duplicated ESR1 has been lost shortly after teleost emergence. Quantitative
PCRs revealed that the five receptors are all widely expressed in the eel, but
with differential patterns of tissue expression and regulation. ESR1 only is
consistently up-regulated in vivo in female eel BPG-liver axis during induced
sexual maturation, and also up-regulated in vitro by estradiol in eel hepatocyte 
primary cultures. This first comparative study of the five teleost estradiol
receptors provides bases for future investigations on differential roles that may
have contributed to the conservation of multiple estrogen receptors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26654744  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


92. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Nov 11;8:3323-8. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S92443. eCollection
2015.

Incidence and clinical significance of ESR1 mutations in heavily pretreated
metastatic breast cancer patients.

Niu J(1), Andres G(1), Kramer K(2), Kundranda MN(3), Alvarez RH(4), Klimant E(5),
Parikh AR(5), Tan B(6), Staren ED(7), Markman M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Western Regional Medical Center at Cancer
Treatment Centers of America (CTCA), Goodyear, AZ, USA. (2)CTCA Medicine and
Science, Zion, IL, USA. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Banner MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Gilbert, AZ, USA. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Southeastern 
Regional Medical Center at CTCA, Newnan, GA, USA. (5)Department of Medical
Oncology, Eastern Regional Medical Center at CTCA, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Midwestern Regional Medical Center at CTCA, Zion, IL,
USA. (7)Advanced Individual Medicine, Phoenix, AZ, USA. (8)CTCA Medicine and
Science, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: ESR1 mutation has recently emerged as one of the important mechanisms
involved in endocrine resistance. The incidence and clinical implication of ESR1 
mutation has not been well evaluated in heavily pretreated breast cancer
patients.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective review of advanced breast cancer patients
with tumors who underwent next-generation sequencing genomic profiling using
Foundation One test at Cancer Treatment Centers of America(®) regional hospitals 
between November 2012 and November 2014.
RESULTS: We identified a total of 341 patients including 217 (59%) estrogen
receptor (ER)+, 177 (48%) progesterone receptor (PR)+, 30 (8%) hormone
receptor+/HER2 positive, and 119 (32%) triple negative patients. ESR1 mutation
was noted in 27/222 (12.1%) ER+ or PR+ breast cancer patients. All ER+ patients
received at least one line of an aromatase inhibitor. All 28 patients were found 
to harbor ESR1 mutations affecting ligand-binding domain with the most common
mutations affecting Y537 (17/28, 60.7%) and D538 (9/28, 32.1%). In this cohort,
19 (67.9%) patients carried three or more, seven (25%) patients had one or two
additional genomic alterations and one (3.6%) patient had an ESR1 mutation only. 
Of 28 patients, three patients were treated with fulvestrant immediately before
and two patients were treated after next-generation sequencing testing; only one 
patient achieved stable disease for 8 months and the other four patients had
progression of disease. In all, 3/3 (100%) patients before testing and 2/4 (50%) 
after testing treated with exemestane and everolimus achieved stable disease for 
at least 6 months.
CONCLUSION: ESR1 mutation was found in 12.1% of a large cohort of advanced breast
cancer patients. Exemestane in combination with everolimus might be a reasonable 
option. Prospective studies are warranted to validate these findings.

PMCID: PMC4648593
PMID: 26648736  [PubMed]


93. Zhongguo Gu Shang. 2015 Sep;28(9):854-60.

[Advance on genetic mechanism of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis and genetic
relationship map].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang W, Ma J, Li SY, Wu X, Hu B, Wang XF, Zhou XH.

Identification of genetic risk factors is the hotspot of adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis (AIS). Through candidate gene approach and genome-wide association
studies (GWAS), some genes were preliminary identified. To review AIS related
genes,and construct the gene network map of AIS gene. We searched on NCBI PubMed 
and Web of Science database using search terms "adolescent idiopathic scoliosis" 
and "gene", to classify induction genes. We then constructed gene diagram using
string-db. We found 35 AIS genes relating to connective tissue, nervous system
active substances, melatonin synthesis and metabolism, puberty and growth, and
genes whose function is unknown. Gene diagram shows that a network relationship
between gene and other genes,in which IL6, ESR1, ESR2, VDR, TGFB1, IGF1 gene may 
as the key gene about AIS' genetic mechanism. Two sites of 3 GWAS results outside
the network, it is suggesting new pathway that need to be explored. The study
about AIS susceptibility gene is still preliminary, requiring in-depth research
to identify the new networks.

PMID: 26647570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Carcinogenesis. 2016 Feb;37(2):163-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv170. Epub 2015 Dec
8.

Evaluation of potential regulatory function of breast cancer risk locus at
6q25.1.

Sun Y(1), Ye C(2), Guo X(2), Wen W(2), Long J(2), Gao YT(3), Shu XO(2), Zheng
W(2), Cai Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology
Center, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN, 37203, USA, Shanghai Municipal Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, Shanghai, China and. (2)Division of Epidemiology,
Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology Center, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer 
Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, 37203, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai, China.
(4)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology
Center, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN, 37203, USA, qiuyin.cai@vanderbilt.edu.

In a genome-wide association study conducted among Chinese women, we identified
the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs2046210 at 6q25.1 for breast cancer
risk. To explore a potential regulatory role for this risk locus, we measured
expression levels of nine genes at the locus in breast cancer tissue and adjacent
normal tissue samples obtained from 67 patients recruited in the Shanghai Breast 
Cancer Study. We found that rs2046210 had a statistically significant association
with the expression levels of the AKAP12 and ESR1 genes in adjacent normal breast
tissues. Women who carry the AA/AG risk genotypes had higher expressions of these
two genes compared to those who carry G/G genotypes (P = 0.02 and 0.04 for the
AKAP12 and ESR1, respectively). However, no significant differences of SNP
rs2046210 with gene expression levels were found in tumor tissues. In The Cancer 
Genome Atlas samples, the AA/AG risk genotypes of SNP rs2046210 were associated
with a significantly higher expression level of the AKAP12 gene and a lower level
of the ESR1 gene in tumor tissue. Functional analysis using ENCODE data revealed 
that SNP rs7763637, which is in strong linkage disequilibrium with SNP rs2046210,
is likely a potential functional variant, regulating the AKAP12 gene. Taken
together, these results from our study suggest that the association between the
6q25.1 locus and breast cancer risk may be mediated through SNPs that regulate
expressions of the AKAP12 gene.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26645718  [PubMed - in process]


95. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 7;10(12):e0144158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144158.
eCollection 2015.

Photoperiodic Modulation of Circadian Clock and Reproductive Axis Gene Expression
in the Pre-Pubertal European Sea Bass Brain.

Martins RS(1), Gomez A(2), Zanuy S(2), Carrillo M(2), Canário AV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Endocrinology and Integrative Biology group, Centre of Marine
Sciences (CCMAR), University of Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, Faro, Portugal.
(2)Department of Fish Physiology and Biotechnology, Instituto de Acuicultura de
Torre la Sal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Torre la
Sal, Castellón, Spain.

The acquisition of reproductive competence requires the activation of the
brain-pituitary-gonad (BPG) axis, which in most vertebrates, including fishes, is
initiated by changes in photoperiod. In the European sea bass long-term exposure 
to continuous light (LL) alters the rhythm of reproductive hormones, delays
spermatogenesis and reduces the incidence of precocious males. In contrast, an
early shift from long to short photoperiod (AP) accelerates spermatogenesis.
However, how photoperiod affects key genes in the brain to trigger the onset of
puberty is still largely unknown. Here, we investigated if the integration of the
light stimulus by clock proteins is sufficient to activate key genes that trigger
the BPG axis in the European sea bass. We found that the clock genes clock,
npas2, bmal1 and the BPG genes gnrh, kiss and kissr share conserved transcription
factor frameworks in their promoters, suggesting co-regulation. Other gene
promoters of the BGP axis were also predicted to be co-regulated by the same
frameworks. Co-regulation was confirmed through gene expression analysis of
brains from males exposed to LL or AP photoperiod compared to natural conditions:
LL fish had suppressed gnrh1, kiss2, galr1b and esr1, while AP fish had
stimulated npas2, gnrh1, gnrh2, kiss2, kiss1rb and galr1b compared to NP. It is
concluded that fish exposed to different photoperiods present significant
expression differences in some clock and reproductive axis related genes well
before the first detectable endocrine and morphological responses of the BPG
axis.

PMCID: PMC4671726
PMID: 26641263  [PubMed - in process]


96. Tsitol Genet. 2015 Sep-Oct;49(5):26-37.

[THE GENETIC DIVERSITY OF PIG BREEDS ON TEN PRODUCTION QUANTITATIVE TRAITS LOCI].

[Article in Russian]

Balatskyi VN, Saienko AM, Pena RN, Buslyk TV, Gibolenko OS.

Genetic structure of 11 pig breeds and lines of different origins and production 
specialization for 10 quantitative traits loci: RYR1, GH, IGF2, CTSL, CTSS, CTSB,
CTSK, MC4R, ESR1 & PRLR was analyzed. The results allow us to suppose that the
uniqueness of genetic structure of each breed is largely determined by features
of the allelic structure of a number of loci. Breeds of different production
specialization differ significantly for such QTL, as RYR1, MC4R, ESR1 and IGF2.
However, we have found that the loci CTSB, CTSL, CTSK, CTSS and PRLR in most of
investigated breeds showed similar distribution of alleles, significant genetic
differentiation between breeds and within breeds for these loci is missing. The
exception is the Large Black breed for the CTSB locus and Ukrainian steppe
spotted breed for the CTSL locus. Also, it can be assumed that allelic structure 
of some of investigated loci are more connected with the origins of pig breeds
than to the selection on production traits. This refers, for example, to the
growth hormone gene, the using of which in marker assisted selection could be
effective only in some populations. The genetic distance between breeds and lines
was defined and the dendrogram of the genetic relationship was built. Breeds are 
grouped in connection with the production specialization, as well as by their
origins.

PMID: 26638494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 2;14(4):15802-10. doi: 10.4238/2015.December.1.32.

Polymorphisms in CYP17, COMT, and ESR1 genes in women after menopause and
association with bone mineral density.

Gonçalves CG(1), Almeida BC(1), Camargo-Kosugi CM(2), Costa AM(1), Silva ID(1),
Haidar MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Ginecologia Molecular e Proteômica, Departamento de
Ginecologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.
(2)Laboratório de Ginecologia Molecular e Proteômica, Departamento de
Ginecologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil
cintiakosugi@gmail.com.

In this study, we evaluated genetic factors related to the mineral density during
post-menopause. We evaluated 110 women in the first 5 years post-menopause,
without previous hormone replacement therapy. Cytochrome P450 17 (CYP17)
(rs743572), catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) (rs4680), and estrogen receptor 
1 (ESR1) (rs9322331) were examined for the presence of polymorphisms. Clinical
data were collected by anamnesis; all patients had the osseous densitometry
examined using a lunar instrument to determine mineral osseous densitometry in
the lumbar column (L2-L4). CYP17, COMT, and ESR1 genotyping was carried out by
polymerase chain reaction with DNA collected from buccal swabs. The average age
was 51.96 years. The average weights of the patients in control and osteopenia
groups were 70.25 ± 12.00 and 62.45 ± 11.64, respectively (P = 0.001) and body
mass index (P = 0.006; control: 29.43 ± 5.25; osteopenia: 26.72 ± 4.57). Related 
to CYP17 polymorphisms, 28.18% of women were TT (wild-type homozygous), 60% were 
TC (heterozygous), and 11.82% were CC (mutated homozygous). Related to COMT
polymorphisms, 53.64% of women were GG (wild-type homozygous), 37.27% were GA
(heterozygous), and 9.09% were AA (mutated homozygous). Related to ESR1, 53.64%
of women were CC (wild-type homozygous), 40.91% were CT (heterozygous), and 5.45%
were TT (mutated homozygous). The ESR1 variant allele was significantly higher in
the osteopenia group when compared with women in the normal group (P = 0.02).
ESR1 may be associated with low mineral osseous densitometry, while CYP17 and
COMT gene polymorphisms were not associated with mineral osseous densitometry.

PMID: 26634548  [PubMed - in process]


98. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Dec 1;14(4):15471-81. doi: 10.4238/2015.November.30.25.

Quantitative candidate gene association studies of metabolic traits in Han
Chinese type 2 diabetes patients.

Wei FJ(1), Cai CY(1), Yu P(1), Lv J(1), Ling C(1), Shi WT(1), Jiao HX(1), Chang
BC(2), Yang FH(1), Tian Y(1), Li MS(1), Wang YH(1), Zou L(1), Shi JM(1), Chen
LM(2), Li WD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (2)Metabolic Diseases Hospital, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China. (3)Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin, China liweidong98@tmu.edu.cn.

Recent genome-wide association studies have identified many loci associated with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), hyperuricemia, and obesity in various ethnic
populations. However, quantitative traits have been less well investigated in Han
Chinese T2DM populations. We investigated the association between candidate gene 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and metabolic syndrome-related
quantitative traits in Han Chinese T2DM subjects. Unrelated Han Chinese T2DM
patients (1975) were recruited. Eighty-six SNPs were genotyped and tested for
association with quantitative traits including lipid profiles, blood pressure,
body mass index (BMI), serum uric acid (SUA), glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), plasma
glucose [fasting plasma glucose (FPG)], plasma glucose 120 min post-OGTT (P2PG;
OGTT = oral glucose tolerance test), and insulin resistance-related traits. We
found that CAMTA1, ABI2, VHL, KAT2B, PKHD1, ESR1, TOX, SLC30A8, SFI1, and MYH9
polymorphisms were associated with HbA1c, FPG, and/or P2PG; GCK, HHEX, TCF7L2,
KCNQ1, and TBX5 polymorphisms were associated with insulin resistance-related
traits; ABCG2, SLC2A9, and PKHD1 polymorphisms were associated with SUA; CAMTA1, 
VHL, KAT2B, PON1, NUB1, SLITRK5, SMAD3, FTO, FANCA, and PCSK2 polymorphisms were 
associated with blood lipid traits; CAMTA1, SPAG16, TOX, KCNQ1, ACACB, and MYH9
polymorphisms were associated with blood pressure; and UBE2E3, SPAG16, SLC2A9,
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, SMAD3, and PNPLA3 polymorphisms were associated with
BMI (all P values <0.05). Some of the candidate genes were associated with
metabolic and anthropometric traits in T2DM in Han Chinese. Although none of
these associations reached genome-wide significance (P < 5 x 10(-8)), genes and
loci identified in this study are worthy of further replication and
investigation.

PMID: 26634513  [PubMed - in process]


99. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(17):7997-8002.

Detection of Gene Amplification by Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe
Amplification in Comparison with In Situ Hybridization and Immunohistochemistry.

Tabarestani S(1), Ghaderian SM, Rezvani H.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran E-mail : sghaderian@sbmu.ac.ir.

Gene amplification is an important mechanism in the development and progression
of cancer. Currently, gene amplification status is generally determined by in
situ hybridization (ISH). Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA)
is a PCR-based method that allows copy number detection of up to 50 nucleic acid 
sequences in one reaction. The aim of the present study was to compare results
for HER2, CCND1, MYC and ESR1 gene amplification detected by MLPA with
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and chromogenic in situ hybridization
(CISH) as clinically approved methods. Tissue samples of 170 invasive breast
cancers were collected. All were ER positive. Tissue samples had previously been 
tested for HER2 using immunohistochemistry. Amplification of the selected genes
were assessed using MLPA, FISH and CISH and results were compared. HER2 MLPA and 
ISH results were also compared with HER2 immunohistochemistry (IHC) which detects
protein overexpression. Amplification of HER2, CCND1, MYC and ESR1 by MLPA were
found in 9%, 19%, 20% and 2% of samples, respectively. Amplification of HER2,
CCND1, MYC and ESR1 by FISH was noted in 7%, 16%, 16% and 1% of samples,
respectively. A high level of concordance was found between MLPA/ FISH (HER2:
88%, CCND1: 88%, MYC: 86%, ESR1: 92%) and MLPA/ CISH (HER2: 84%). Of all IHC 3+
cases, 91% were amplified by MLPA. In IHC 2+ group, 31% were MLPA amplified. In
IHC 1+ group, 2% were MLPA amplified. None of the IHC 0 cases were amplified by
MLPA. Our results indicate that there is a good correlation between MLPA, IHC and
ISH results. Therefore, MLPA can serve as an alternative to ISH for detection of 
gene amplification.

PMID: 26625832  [PubMed - in process]


100. BMC Biol. 2015 Nov 30;13:104. doi: 10.1186/s12915-015-0211-8.

Pregnancy and estrogen enhance neural progenitor-cell proliferation in the
vomeronasal sensory epithelium.

Oboti L(1,)(2), Ibarra-Soria X(3), Pérez-Gómez A(4), Schmid A(5), Pyrski M(6),
Paschek N(7), Kircher S(8), Logan DW(9,)(10), Leinders-Zufall T(11), Zufall
F(12), Chamero P(13,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, and Center for Integrative Physiology and Molecular 
Medicine, University of Saarland School of Medicine, 66421, Homburg, Germany.
livio.oboti@gmail.com. (2)Present address: Center for Neuroscience Research,
Children's National Health System, 20010, Washington, DC, USA.
livio.oboti@gmail.com. (3)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome 
Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK. xs1@sanger.ac.uk. (4)Department of
Physiology, and Center for Integrative Physiology and Molecular Medicine,
University of Saarland School of Medicine, 66421, Homburg, Germany.
anabelpgo@gmail.com. (5)Department of Physiology, and Center for Integrative
Physiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Saarland School of Medicine,
66421, Homburg, Germany. andreas.schmid@uks.eu. (6)Department of Physiology, and 
Center for Integrative Physiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Saarland 
School of Medicine, 66421, Homburg, Germany. martina.pyrski@uks.eu. (7)Department
of Physiology, and Center for Integrative Physiology and Molecular Medicine,
University of Saarland School of Medicine, 66421, Homburg, Germany.
n.paschek@gmx.de. (8)Department of Physiology, and Center for Integrative
Physiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Saarland School of Medicine,
66421, Homburg, Germany. sarah.kircher@uks.de. (9)Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK.
dl5@sanger.ac.uk. (10)Monell Chemical Senses Center, 3500 Market Street,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19104, USA. dl5@sanger.ac.uk. (11)Department of
Physiology, and Center for Integrative Physiology and Molecular Medicine,
University of Saarland School of Medicine, 66421, Homburg, Germany.
trese.leinders@uks.de. (12)Department of Physiology, and Center for Integrative
Physiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Saarland School of Medicine,
66421, Homburg, Germany. frank.zufall@uks.eu. (13)Department of Physiology, and
Center for Integrative Physiology and Molecular Medicine, University of Saarland 
School of Medicine, 66421, Homburg, Germany. pablo.chamero@uks.eu. (14)Present
address: Laboratoire de Physiologie de la Reproduction & des Comportments, UMR
7247 INRA-CNRS-Université François Rabelais, F-37380, Nouzilly, France.
pablo.chamero@uks.eu.

BACKGROUND: The hormonal state during the estrus cycle or pregnancy produces
alterations on female olfactory perception that are accompanied by specific
maternal behaviors, but it is unclear how sex hormones act on the olfactory
system to enable these sensory changes.
RESULTS: Herein, we show that the production of neuronal progenitors is
stimulated in the vomeronasal organ (VNO) epithelium of female mice during a late
phase of pregnancy. Using a wide range of molecular markers that cover the whole 
VNO cell maturation process in combination with Ca(2+) imaging in early
postmitotic neurons, we show that newly generated VNO cells adopt morphological
and functional properties of mature sensory neurons. A fraction of these newly
generated cells project their axons to the olfactory forebrain, extend dendrites 
that contact the VNO lumen, and can detect peptides and urinary proteins shown to
contain pheromone activity. High-throughput RNA-sequencing reveals concomitant
differences in gene expression in the VNO transcriptomes of pregnant females.
These include relative increases in expression of 20 vomeronasal receptors, of
which 17 belong to the V1R subfamily, and may therefore be considered as
candidate receptors for mediating maternal behaviors. We identify the expression 
of several hormone receptors in the VNO of which estrogen receptor a (Esr1) is
directly localized to neural progenitors. Administration of sustained high levels
of estrogen, but not progesterone, is sufficient to stimulate vomeronasal
progenitor cell proliferation in the VNO epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: Peripheral olfactory neurogenesis driven by estrogen may contribute 
to modulate sensory perception and adaptive VNO-dependent behaviors during
pregnancy and early motherhood.

PMCID: PMC4665882
PMID: 26621367  [PubMed - in process]


101. Maturitas. 2016 Feb;84:42-54. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2015.10.011. Epub 2015 Oct
30.

The MAOA, COMT, MTHFR and ESR1 gene polymorphisms are associated with the risk of
depression in menopausal women.

Rózycka A(1), Slopien R(2), Slopien A(3), Dorszewska J(4), Seremak-Mrozikiewicz
A(5), Lianeri M(6), Maciukiewicz M(7), Warenik-Szymankiewicz A(2), Grzelak T(8), 
Kurzawinska G(9), Drews K(9), Klejewski A(10), Jagodzinski PP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, 6 Swiecickiego St., 60-781 Poznan, Poland. Electronic address:
arozycka@ump.edu.pl. (2)Department of Gynecological Endocrinology, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, 33 Polna St., 60-535 Poznan, Poland.
(3)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, 27/33 Szpitalna St., 60-572 Poznan, Poland. (4)Laboratory of
Neurobiology, Department of Neurology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 49 
Przybyszewskiego St., 60-355 Poznan, Poland. (5)Department of Perinatology and
Women's Diseases, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 33 Polna St., 60-535
Poznan, Poland; Department of Pharmacology and Phytochemistry, Institute of
Natural Fibres and Medicinal Plants, 71b Wojska Polskiego St., 60-630 Poznan,
Poland. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, 6 Swiecickiego St., 60-781 Poznan, Poland. (7)Department of
Psychiatric Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 27/33 Szpitalna St.,
60-572 Poznan, Poland. (8)Laboratory of Biology of Civilization-Related Diseases,
Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 6 Swiecickiego St., 60-781 Poznan, Poland.
(9)Department of Perinatology and Women's Diseases, Poznan University of Medical 
Sciences, 33 Polna St., 60-535 Poznan, Poland. (10)Department of Nursing, Poznan 
University of Medical Sciences, 11 Smoluchowskiego St., 60-179 Poznan, Poland.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was assessment of a possible relationship between
the polymorphisms of the candidate genes participating in the etiology of some
neurological and psychiatric disorders and the risk of depression in
perimenopausal and postmenopausal women.
METHODS: A total of 167 (54 perimenopausal and 113 postmenopausal) Caucasian
women from western Poland, aged 42-67, were recruited as the patient group in the
study because of depressive symptoms, and another 321 healthy women (102
perimenopausal and 219 postmenopausal) served as the controls. All study
participants were evaluated for climacteric and depressive disorders according to
the Kupperman index and Hamilton rating scale for depression (HRSD),
respectively. The following candidate genes were selected for the study: 5HTR2A, 
5HTR1B, 5HTR2C, TPH1, TPH2, MAOA, COMT, NET, GABRB1, ESR1, MTHFR, MTR and MTHFD1.
In each group the frequencies of the polymorphisms were determined using PCR-RFLP
analysis.
RESULTS: After correcting for Bonferroni multiple tests, we found associations
between the MAOA c.1460C>T (SNP 1137070), COMT c.472G>A (SNP 4680), MTHFR
c.677C>T (SNP 1801133) and ESR1 454(-351) A>G (SNP 9340799) polymorphisms to mild
and moderate depressive symptoms in menopausal women. In the perimenopausal and
postmenopausal women, genotype association of the MAOA c.1460 CT and c.1460 CT+TT
(OR=1.83; pcorr=0.009 and OR=1.85; pcorr=0.003, resp.), and of the MTHFR c.677 TT
and c.677 CT+TT (OR=3.52; pcorr=0.00009 and OR=2.06; pcorr=0.0006, resp.), as
well as of the COMT c.472 GA and COMT c.472 GA+AA genotypes (OR=2.23; pcorr=0.03 
and OR=2.17; pcorr=0.027, resp.) in the postmenopausal women revealed
significantly higher frequencies of these variants in depressed female patients
than in controls, whereas the ESR1 454(-351) AG and 454(-351) AG+GG genotypes
were associated with lower risk of depression in postmenopausal women (OR=0.48;
pcorr=0.012, and OR=0.52; pcorr=0.015, resp.).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study substantiates the involvement of the MAOA and MTHFR
polymorphisms in climacteric depression and offers evidence that the COMT and
ESR1 genes may also play a role in the susceptibility to depressive mood in
postmenopausal women.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26620113  [PubMed - in process]


102. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2016 Jan;54:95-105. doi: 10.1016/j.domaniend.2015.10.002.
Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Tamoxifen impairs prepubertal mammary development and alters expression of
estrogen receptor a (ESR1) and progesterone receptors (PGR).

Tucker HL(1), Parsons CL(1), Ellis S(2), Rhoads ML(3), Akers RM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, 24061, USA.
(2)Biological Sciences Directorate, National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA
22230, USA. (3)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, 24061, USA. (4)Department of Dairy Science, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, 24061, USA. Electronic address: rma@vt.edu.

Research has shown that prepubertal heifers experience allometric mammary growth 
that is influenced by the ovaries. Our purpose was to determine the role of
estrogen in prepubertal mammary gland development. Sixteen Holstein calves were
randomly assigned to 1 of 2 treatment groups: tamoxifen-injected (TAM) or control
(CON). Calves were administered the antiestrogen tamoxifen (0.3 mg kg(1) d(1)) or
placebo from 28 to 120 d of age. At 120 d, calves were euthanized and udders
removed. Weight and DNA content of trimmed parenchymal tissue were halved (P =
0.0001) in TAM compared with CON calves. Parenchymal samples from 3 zones of the 
left rear mammary gland (lower, middle, and outer regions) were processed for
immunohistochemical staining for estrogen receptor a (ESR1) and progesterone
receptor (PGR), Ki67-positive cells, and 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine label retaining 
cells (LRCs). Overall, neither the percentage nor location within the epithelial 
tissue layer of either ESR1- or PGR-positive cells was impacted by TAM treatment.
However, image analysis indicated a 6.2-fold lower (P = 0.0001) level of ESR1
protein expression in TAM calves. Similarly, messenger RNA expression of ESR1 was
also reduced (P = 0.0001) in TAM heifers. In contrast, expression of PGR protein 
was greater by 43% (P = 0.03) in TAM calves, but messenger RNA expression did not
differ between treatments. Overall, TAM calves had a higher (P = 0.03) percentage
and density (cells per tissue area) of Ki67-positive cells. Irrespective of
treatment, there were also more Ki67-labeled cells in the outer zones of the
mammary gland (P = 0.001). We were able to effectively use multispectral imaging 
to identify positive cells and quantify the expression of ESR1 and PGR protein.
We also identified and counted the proportion of label retaining cells (LCR)
(putative epithelial stem cells). We noted an overall 2.9-fold greater number of 
LRCs in TAM heifers and more LRCs in the outer sampling zones. This suggests that
a cohort of LCR cells in TAM remained inactivated in comparison with CON heifers,
which exhibited markedly increased growth of the mammary parenchymal tissue over 
the treatment period. These results suggest that the impacts of ovariectomy are
partially explained by loss of ESR1 expression and/or estrogen receptor signaling
in the prepubertal bovine mammary gland. The significance of mammary expression
of PGR in control of prepubertal bovine mammary development remains unresolved.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26619291  [PubMed - in process]


103. Springerplus. 2015 Nov 19;4:710. doi: 10.1186/s40064-015-1512-7. eCollection
2015.

High incidence of triple negative breast cancers following pregnancy and an
associated gene expression signature.

Asztalos S(1), Pham TN(1), Gann PH(2), Hayes MK(1), Deaton R(2), Wiley EL(2),
Emmadi R(2), Kajdacsy-Balla A(2), Banerji N(3), McDonald W(3), Khan SA(4),
Tonetti DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL USA. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL USA. (3)Allina Health, Minneapolis, MN USA. (4)Department of Surgery,
Northwestern Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL USA.

Breast cancer risk increases transiently in the period following pregnancy;
pregnancy-associated breast cancers (PABC) are more aggressive than cases
diagnosed in nulliparous women. We have previously reported that in the normal
human breast pregnancy results in the upregulation of a number of inflammation
related genes, suggesting a pro-tumorigenic environment as well as downregulation
of ESR1 (ERa) and ERBB2 (HER2) and upregulation of ESR2 (ERß), suggesting a
protective effect. In this study, we aimed to investigate the possibility of
differential regulation of the same gene set modulated in the normal breast, in
human breast tumors following pregnancy. Gene expression was measured by
real-time PCR on tumor regions isolated by laser capture microdissection from
paraffin sections. Immunohistochemistry was performed on tissue microarrays (TMA)
for protein expression. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the average
linkage method to determine coordinate expression of sets of genes. We find that 
breast cancers detected within 10 years following pregnancy display a different
gene expression pattern than those detected in nulliparous breast cancer
patients. The gene expression difference is mainly attributable to a triple
negative (TNBC) subgroup found to be more frequent in PABCs up to 10 years
following a pregnancy. We also show that protein and mRNA expression levels
correlate in half of the proteins tested by TMA. Despite the fact that this is a 
small study of 53 patients, we identified a gene expression signature that is
differentially expressed in pregnancy-associated TNBC.

PMCID: PMC4653130
PMID: 26618099  [PubMed]


104. Chin Med J (Engl). 2015 Nov 20;128(22):3008-14. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.168964.

Association of Estrogen Receptor Gene Polymorphisms and Primary Biliary Cirrhosis
in a Chinese Population: A Case-Control Study.

Yang L, Zhang H, Jiang YF, Jin QL, Zhang P, Li X, Gao PJ, Niu JQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatology, First Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin
130021, China.

BACKGROUND: Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a chronic and slowly progressive
cholestatic liver disease characterized by destruction of the interlobular bile
ducts and a striking female predominance. The aim of this study was to identify
associations between estrogen receptor (ESR) gene polymorphisms with the risk of 
developing PBC and abnormal serum liver tests in a Chinese population.
METHODS: Thirty-six patients with PBC (case group) and 35 healthy individuals
(control group) from the First Hospital of Jilin University were studied. Whole
genomic DNA was extracted from all the participants. Three single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (rs2234693, rs2228480, and rs3798577) from ESR1 and two (rs1256030 
and rs1048315) from ESR2 were analyzed by a pyrosequencing method. Demographic
data and liver biochemical data were collected.
RESULTS: Subjects with the T allele at ESR2 rs1256030 had 1.5 times higher risk
of developing PBC than those with the C allele (odds ratio [OR] = 2.1277, 95%
confidence interval [CI] = 1.1872-4.5517). Haplotypes TGC of ESR1 rs2234693,
rs2228480, and rs3798577 were risk factors for having PBC. The C allele at ESR1
rs2234693 was associated with abnormal alkaline phosphatase (OR = 5.2469, 95% CI 
= 1.3704-20.0895) and gamma-glutamyl transferase (OR = 3.4286, 95% CI =
1.0083-13.6578) levels in PBC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR2 rs1256030 T allele may be a significant risk factor for the
development of PBC. Screening for patients with gene polymorphisms may help to
make early diagnoses in patients with PBC.

PMID: 26608979  [PubMed - in process]


105. Nat Prod Commun. 2015 Sep;10(9):1573-6.

The Combinatory Effects of Glabridin and Tamoxifen on Ishikawa and MCF-7 Cell
Lines.

Jen SH, Wei MP, Yin AC.

Estrogen replacement therapy is commonly used to replace the loss of estrogen in 
post-menopausal women. However, it is not suitable to be used in women taking
tamoxifen as both of the drugs increase the risk of endometrial cancer. This
project aimed to study the potential of using the natural compound glabridin in
combination with tamoxifen as a drug for estrogen replacement therapy. Ishikawa
and MCF-7 cells were used to investigate the estrogenic activities stimulated by 
the combination of tamoxifen and glabridin through ALP and MTT assays. The
expressions of the ESR1 and bcl-2 genes have also been determined using RT-PCR.
The results indicated that the combination of 1 x 10(-5)M tamoxifen and 1 x
10(-6)M glabridin exhibited estrogenic activities and suppressed cell growth in
both cell lines. The relative expressions of ESR1 and bcl-2 genes indicated that 
the estrogenicity expressed by the combinatory drug was regulated by estrogen
receptor a; however, the reduction in cell proliferation was not modulated by
bcl-2 anti-apoptotic proteins. These results suggested that the combination of
tamoxifen and glabridin has potential to be used as an estrogen replacement drug 
with a reduced risk of endometrial cancer that has arisen from the intake of
tamoxifen.

PMID: 26594762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Dec;154(3):543-55. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3634-6. 
Epub 2015 Nov 21.

ESR1 and ESR2 polymorphisms in the BIG 1-98 trial comparing adjuvant letrozole
versus tamoxifen or their sequence for early breast cancer.

Leyland-Jones B(1), Gray KP(2), Abramovitz M(3), Bouzyk M(4), Young B(5), Long
B(6), Kammler R(7), Dell'Orto P(8), Biasi MO(9), Thürlimann B(10,)(11,)(12),
Harvey V(13,)(14,)(15), Neven P(16), Arnould L(17), Maibach R(18), Price KN(19), 
Coates AS(20,)(21), Goldhirsch A(22,)(23), Gelber RD(24), Pagani O(25,)(26),
Viale G(27), Rae JM(28), Regan MM(29); BIG 1-98 Collaborative Group.

Author information: 
(1)Avera Cancer Institute, 1000 E 23rd Street, Sioux Falls, SD, 57105, USA.
bleylandj@aol.com. (2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology,
International Breast Cancer Study Group Statistical Center, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, 450 Brookline Ave, Boston,
MA, 02215, USA. pkruan@jimmy.harvard.edu. (3)VM Institute of Research, 6100 Av
Royalmount, Montréal, QC, H4P 2R2, Canada. mark.abramovitz@gmail.com.
(4)AKESOgen, Inc., 3155 Northwoods Pl NW, Norcross, GA, 30071, USA.
mbouzyk@akesogen.com. (5)Avera Cancer Institute, 1000 E 23rd Street, Sioux Falls,
SD, 57105, USA. brandon.young@avera.org. (6)Genomic and Molecular Pathology,
University of Chicago, 900 E 57th St. Room 1260D, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
bradley.long@uchospitals.edu. (7)International Breast Cancer Study Group
Coordinating Center and Central Pathology Office, Effingerstrasse 40, 3008, Bern,
Switzerland. rosita.kammler@ibcsg.org. (8)Division of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, International Breast Cancer Study Group Central Pathology Office,
European Institute of Oncology, Via Ripamonti 435, 20146, Milan, Italy.
patrizia.dellorto@ieo.it. (9)Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
European Institute of Oncology, Via Ripamonti 435, 20146, Milan, Italy.
olivia.biasi@ieo.it. (10)Breast Center, Kantonsspital St. Gallen, Rorschacher
Strasse 95, 9007, St. Gallen, Switzerland. (11)Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer
Research (SAKK), Bern, Switzerland. (12)International Breast Cancer Study Group, 
Bern, Switzerland. (13)International Breast Cancer Study Group, Bern,
Switzerland. vernonh@adhb.govt.nz. (14)Auckland City Hospital, PO Box 26498,
Epsom, Auckland, 1344, New Zealand. vernonh@adhb.govt.nz. (15)Australia and New
Zealand Breast Cancer Trials Group, Newcastle, Australia. vernonh@adhb.govt.nz.
(16)Department of Oncology, Multidisciplinary Breast Center, KULeuven (University
of Leuven), University Hospitals Leuven, Herestraat 49, 3000, Leuven, Belgium.
patrick.neven@uzleuven.be. (17)Institute Georges François Leclerc, 1 Rue
Professeur Marion, BP 77 980, 21079, Dijon Cedex, France.
larnould@dijon.fnclcc.fr. (18)International Breast Cancer Study Group
Coordinating Center, Effingerstrasse 40, 3008, Bern, Switzerland.
rudolf.maibach@ibcsg.org. (19)International Breast Cancer Study Group Statistical
Center, Frontier Science and Technology Research Foundation, 450 Brookline Ave,
Boston, MA, 02215, USA. price@jimmy.harvard.edu. (20)International Breast Cancer 
Study Group, Bern, Switzerland. alan.coates@ibcsg.org. (21)University of Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia. alan.coates@ibcsg.org. (22)International Breast Cancer Study
Group, Bern, Switzerland. aron.goldhirsch@ibcsg.org. (23)Program for Breast
Health (Senology), European Institute of Oncology, Via Ripamonti 435, 20146,
Milan, Italy. aron.goldhirsch@ibcsg.org. (24)International Breast Cancer Study
Group Statistical Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Frontier Science and Technology
Research Foundation, 450 Brookline Ave, Boston, MA, 02215, USA.
gelber@jimmy.harvard.edu. (25)International Breast Cancer Study Group, Bern,
Switzerland. olivia.pagani@ibcsg.org. (26)Institute of Oncology of Southern
Switzerland (IOSI), Ospedale Italiano, Via Capelli, 6962, Viganello, Switzerland.
olivia.pagani@ibcsg.org. (27)International Breast Cancer Study Group Central
Pathology Office, Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, European
Institute of Oncology, University of Milan, Via Ripamonti 435, 20146, Milan,
Italy. giuseppe.viale@ieo.it. (28)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of 
Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, 1500 E Medical Cntr Drive/SPC 5946, Ann
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. jimmyrae@med.umich.edu. (29)Department of Biostatistics
and Computational Biology, International Breast Cancer Study Group Statistical
Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 450 Brookline Ave, 
Boston, MA, 02215, USA. mregan@jimmy.harvard.edu.

Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and ESR2 gene polymorphisms have been associated with 
endocrine-mediated physiological mechanisms, and inconsistently with breast
cancer risk and outcomes, bone mineral density changes, and hot flushes/night
sweats. DNA was isolated and genotyped for six ESR1 and two ESR2
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from tumor specimens from 3691
postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer enrolled in the
BIG 1-98 trial to receive tamoxifen and/or letrozole for 5 years. Associations
with recurrence and adverse events (AEs) were assessed using Cox proportional
hazards models. 3401 samples were successfully genotyped for five SNPs. ESR1
rs9340799(XbaI) (T>C) variants CC or TC were associated with reduced breast
cancer risk (HR = 0.82,95% CI = 0.67-1.0), and ESR1 rs2077647 (T>C) variants CC
or TC was associated with reduced distant recurrence risk (HR = 0.69, 95% CI =
0.53-0.90), both regardless of the treatments. No differential treatment effects 
(letrozole vs. tamoxifen) were observed for the association of outcome with any
of the SNPs. Letrozole-treated patients with rs2077647 (T>C) variants CC and TC
had a reduced risk of bone AE (HR = 0.75, 95% CI = 0.58-0.98, P interaction =
0.08), whereas patients with rs4986938 (G>A) genotype variants AA and AG had an
increased risk of bone AE (HR = 1.37, 95% CI = 1.01-1.84, P interaction = 0.07). 
We observed that (1) rare ESR1 homozygous polymorphisms were associated with
lower recurrence, and (2) ESR1 and ESR2 SNPs were associated with bone AEs in
letrozole-treated patients. Genes that are involved in estrogen signaling and
synthesis have the potential to affect both breast cancer recurrence and side
effects, suggesting that individual treatment strategies can incorporate not only
oncogenic drivers but also SNPs related to estrogen activity.

PMCID: PMC4730949 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26590813  [PubMed - in process]


107. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1366:67-77. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3127-9_7.

Chromatin Immunoprecipitation with Estrogen Receptor 1 and the Promoter of Greb1 
in TM4 Sertoli Cells.

Lin J(1), Lei Z(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of OB/GYN & Women's Health, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, Louisville, KY, 40292, USA. (2)Department of OB/GYN & Women's Health,
University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, 40292, USA.
zhenmin.lei@louisville.edu. (3)Department of OB/GYN & Women's Health, University 
of Louisville Health Sciences Center, 412 A Building, 500 South Preston Street,
Louisville, KY, 40202, USA. zhenmin.lei@louisville.edu.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) is a technique to investigate the
interaction between proteins and DNA within the natural chromatin context of the 
cell. There are two previously identified two canonical estrogen response
elements (ERE1 and ERE2) present in the 5'-flanking region of the Greb1 gene
which is a known estrogen-responsive gene. ChIP results showed the physical
interaction between estrogen receptor I (ESR1) and EREs in the Greb1 promoter in 
TM4 mouse Sertoli cells. This chapter describes the protocol for chromatin
immunoprecipitation applied to the estrogen response elements in the Greb1
promoter.

PMID: 26585128  [PubMed - in process]


108. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1366:29-39. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3127-9_4.

Bioinformatics Analysis of Estrogen-Responsive Genes.

Handel AE(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QX, UK. adam.handel@gmail.com. (2)Weatherall Institute
of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Headley Way, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.
adam.handel@gmail.com.

Estrogen is a steroid hormone that plays critical roles in a myriad of
intracellular pathways. The expression of many genes is regulated through the
steroid hormone receptors ESR1 and ESR2. These bind to DNA and modulate the
expression of target genes. Identification of estrogen target genes is greatly
facilitated by the use of transcriptomic methods, such as RNA-seq and expression 
microarrays, and chromatin immunoprecipitation with massively parallel sequencing
(ChIP-seq). Combining transcriptomic and ChIP-seq data enables a distinction to
be drawn between direct and indirect estrogen target genes. This chapter
discusses some methods of identifying estrogen target genes that do not require
any expertise in programming languages or complex bioinformatics.

PMID: 26585125  [PubMed - in process]


109. J Appl Toxicol. 2015 Nov 20. doi: 10.1002/jat.3257. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptional and morphological effects of tamoxifen on the early development
of zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Xia L(1), Zheng L(1), Zhou JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Estuarine and Coastal Research, East China Normal
University, 3663 Zhongshan North Road, Shanghai, 200062, China.

Tamoxifen is a widely used anticancer drug with both an estrogen agonist and
antagonist effect. This study focused on its endocrine disrupting effect, and
overall environmental significance. Zebrafish embryos were exposed to different
concentrations (0.5, 5, 50 and 500<U+2009>µg<U+2009>l(-1) ) of tamoxifen for 96<U+2009>h. The results 
showed a complex effect of tamoxifen on zebrafish embryo development. For the
500<U+2009>µg<U+2009>l(-1) exposure group, the heart rate was decreased by 20% and mild defects
in caudal fin and skin were observed. Expressions of a series of genes related to
endocrine and morphological changes were subsequently tested through quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Bisphenol A as a known estrogen was also
tested as an endocrine-related comparison. Among the expression of
endocrine-related genes, esr1, ar, cyp19a1b, hsd3b1 and ugt1a1 were all increased
by tamoxifen exposure, similar to bisphenol A. The cyp19a1b is a key gene that
controls estrogen synthesis. Exposure to 0.5, 5, 50 and 500<U+2009>µg<U+2009>l(-1) of tamoxifen
caused upregulation of cyp19a1b expression to 152%, 568%, 953% and 2024% compared
to controls, higher than the effects from the same concentrations of bisphenol A 
treatment, yet vtg1 was suppressed by 24% from exposure to 500<U+2009>µg<U+2009>l(-1)
tamoxifen. The expression of metabolic-related genes such as cyp1a, cyp1c2,
cyp3a65, gpx1a, gstp1, gsr and genes related to observed morphological changes
such as krt17 were also found to be upregulated by high concentrations of
tamoxifen. These findings indicated the potential environmental effect of
tamoxifen on teleost early development. Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26584595  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


110. Eur Urol. 2015 Nov 10. pii: S0302-2838(15)01076-3. doi:
10.1016/j.eururo.2015.10.042. [Epub ahead of print]

The Early Effects of Rapid Androgen Deprivation on Human Prostate Cancer.

Shaw GL(1), Whitaker H(2), Corcoran M(3), Dunning MJ(4), Luxton H(2), Kay J(2),
Massie CE(4), Miller JL(4), Lamb AD(5), Ross-Adams H(4), Russell R(4), Nelson
AW(5), Eldridge MD(4), Lynch AG(4), Ramos-Montoya A(4), Mills IG(6), Taylor
AE(7), Arlt W(7), Shah N(3), Warren AY(8), Neal DE(9).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge, UK;
Department of Urology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, UK;
University College Hospitals NHS Trust, UK. Electronic address:
gregshaw@doctors.org.uk. (2)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing
Centre, Cambridge, UK; University College London, London, UK. (3)Department of
Urology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, UK. (4)Cancer
Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge, UK. (5)Cancer
Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge, UK; Department of
Urology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, UK. (6)Prostate
Cancer Research Group, Nordic EMBL Partnership, Centre for Molecular Medicine
Norway (NCMM), University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Departments of Cancer Prevention
and Urology, Institute of Cancer Research and Oslo University Hospitals, Oslo,
Norway; Prostate Cancer UK/Movember Centre of Excellence for Prostate Cancer
Research, Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast,
Belfast, UK. (7)Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, University of 
Birmingham, Egbaston, Birmingham, UK. (8)Department of Pathology, Cambridge
University Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, UK. (9)Cancer Research UK Cambridge
Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge, UK; Department of Urology, Cambridge
University Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, UK; Nuffield Department of Surgery,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, UK.

The androgen receptor (AR) is the dominant growth factor in prostate cancer
(PCa). Therefore, understanding how ARs regulate the human transcriptome is of
paramount importance. The early effects of castration on human PCa have not
previously been studied 27 patients medically castrated with degarelix 7 d before
radical prostatectomy. We used mass spectrometry, immunohistochemistry, and gene 
expression array (validated by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction)
to compare resected tumour with matched, controlled, untreated PCa tissue. All
patients had levels of serum androgen, with reduced levels of intraprostatic
androgen at prostatectomy. We observed differential expression of known
androgen-regulated genes (TMPRSS2, KLK3, CAMKK2, FKBP5). We identified 749 genes 
downregulated and 908 genes upregulated following castration. AR regulation of
a-methylacyl-CoA racemase expression and three other genes (FAM129A, RAB27A, and 
KIAA0101) was confirmed. Upregulation of oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) expression
was observed in malignant epithelia and was associated with differential
expression of ESR1-regulated genes and correlated with proliferation (Ki-67
expression).PATIENT SUMMARY: This first-in-man study defines the rapid gene
expression changes taking place in prostate cancer (PCa) following castration.
Expression levels of the genes that the androgen receptor regulates are
predictive of treatment outcome. Upregulation of oestrogen receptor 1 is a
mechanism by which PCa cells may survive despite castration.

Copyright © 2015 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 26572708  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


111. Sci Transl Med. 2015 Nov 11;7(313):313ra182. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aac7551.

Analysis of ESR1 mutation in circulating tumor DNA demonstrates evolution during 
therapy for metastatic breast cancer.

Schiavon G(1), Hrebien S(2), Garcia-Murillas I(2), Cutts RJ(2), Pearson A(2),
Tarazona N(2), Fenwick K(2), Kozarewa I(2), Lopez-Knowles E(2), Ribas R(2),
Nerurkar A(3), Osin P(3), Chandarlapaty S(4), Martin LA(2), Dowsett M(1), Smith
IE(1), Turner NC(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Breast Cancer Now Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer Research,
London SW3 6JB, UK. Breast Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, Fulham Road, London SW3 
6JJ, UK. (2)The Breast Cancer Now Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer
Research, London SW3 6JB, UK. (3)Breast Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, Fulham
Road, London SW3 6JJ, UK. (4)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (5)The Breast Cancer Now Research Centre,
The Institute of Cancer Research, London SW3 6JB, UK. Breast Unit, Royal Marsden 
Hospital, Fulham Road, London SW3 6JJ, UK. nicholas.turner@icr.ac.uk.

Acquired ESR1 mutations are a major mechanism of resistance to aromatase
inhibitors (AIs). We developed ultra high-sensitivity multiplex digital
polymerase chain reaction assays for ESR1 mutations in circulating tumor DNA
(ctDNA) and investigated the clinical relevance and origin of ESR1 mutations in
171 women with advanced breast cancer. ESR1 mutation status in ctDNA showed high 
concordance with contemporaneous tumor biopsies and was accurately assessed in
samples shipped at room temperature in preservative tubes. ESR1 mutations were
found exclusively in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer patients previously
exposed to AI. Patients with ESR1 mutations had a substantially shorter
progression-free survival on subsequent AI-based therapy [hazard ratio, 3.1; 95% 
confidence interval (CI), 1.9 to 23.1; P = 0.0041]. ESR1 mutation prevalence
differed markedly between patients who were first exposed to AI during the
adjuvant and metastatic settings [5.8% (3 of 52) versus 36.4% (16 of 44),
respectively; P = 0.0002]. In an independent cohort, ESR1 mutations were
identified in 0% (0 of 32; 95% CI, 0 to 10.9) tumor biopsies taken after
progression on adjuvant AI. In a patient with serial sampling, ESR1 mutation was 
selected during metastatic AI therapy to become the dominant clone in the cancer.
ESR1 mutations can be robustly identified with ctDNA analysis and predict for
resistance to subsequent AI therapy. ESR1 mutations are rarely acquired during
adjuvant AI but are commonly selected by therapy for metastatic disease,
providing evidence that mechanisms of resistance to targeted therapy may be
substantially different between the treatment of micrometastatic and overt
metastatic cancer.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26560360  [PubMed - in process]


112. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2015;2015:132190. doi: 10.1155/2015/132190. Epub 2015
Oct 19.

Molecular Features and Methylation Status in Early Onset (=40 Years) Colorectal
Cancer: A Population Based, Case-Control Study.

Magnani G(1), Furlan D(2), Sahnane N(2), Reggiani Bonetti L(3), Domati F(1),
Pedroni M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Diagnostica, Clinica e Sanità Pubblica, Università di
Modena e Reggio Emilia, 41124 Modena, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Chirurgia e
Scienze Morfologiche, Università dell'Insubria, 21100 Varese, Italy. (3)Divisione
di Anatomia Patologica, Policlinico di Modena, 41124 Modena, Italy.

Colorectal cancer is usually considered a disease of the elderly. However, a
small fraction of patients develops colorectal cancer earlier. The aim of our
study was to define the frequency of known hereditary colorectal syndromes and to
characterise genetic and epigenetic features of early nonhereditary tumors.
Thirty-three patients =40 years with diagnosis of colorectal cancer and 41
patients with disease at >60 years of age were investigated for MSI, Mismatch
Repair proteins expression, KRAS and BRAF mutations, hypermethylation, and LINE-1
hypomethylation. Detection of germline mutations was performed in Mismatch
Repair, APC and MUTYH genes. Early onset colorectal cancer showed a high
incidence of hereditary forms (18%). KRAS mutations were detected in 36% of early
nonhereditary tumors. Early onset colorectal cancer disclosed an average number
of methylated genes significantly lower when compared to the controls (p = 0.02).
Finally both of the two groups were highly methylated in ESR1, GATA5, and WT1
genes and were similar for LINE-1 hypomethylation. The genetic make-up of
carcinomas differs from young to elderly patients. Early onset tumors showed more
frequently a constitutional defective of Mismatch Repair System and a minor
number of methylated genes. Hypermethylation of ESR1, GATA5, and WT1 genes
suggests possible markers in the earlier diagnosis of colorectal tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4629034
PMID: 26557847  [PubMed]


113. Neuromolecular Med. 2016 Mar;18(1):37-49. doi: 10.1007/s12017-015-8376-4. Epub
2015 Nov 9.

Genetic Factors Affecting Late-Onset Alzheimer's Disease Susceptibility.

Rezazadeh M(1), Khorrami A(1), Yeghaneh T(1), Talebi M(2), Kiani SJ(3), Heshmati 
Y(4), Gharesouran J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. (2)Neuroscience Research Center, Tabriz
University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. (3)Virology Department, School of
Public Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (4)Department
of Medicine, Huddinge, H7, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. Gharesouranj@tbzmed.ac.ir.

Alzheimer's disease is considered a progressive brain disease in the older
population. Late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) as a multifactorial dementia
has a polygenic inheritance. Age, environment, and lifestyle along with a growing
number of genetic factors have been reported as risk factors for LOAD. Our aim
was to present results of LOAD association studies that have been done in
northwestern Iran, and we also explored possible interactions with apolipoprotein
E (APOE) status. We re-evaluated the association of these markers in dominant,
recessive, and additive models. In all, 160 LOAD and 163 healthy control subjects
of Azeri Turkish ethnicity were studied. The Chi-square test with Yates'
correction and Fisher's exact test were used for statistical analysis. A
Bonferroni-corrected p value, based on the number of statistical tests, was
considered significant. Our results confirmed that chemokine receptor type 2
(CCR2), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF a), APOE, bridging integrator 1 (BIN1), and
phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein (PICALM) are LOAD
susceptibility loci in Azeri Turk ancestry populations. Among them, variants of
CCR2, ESR1, TNF a, and APOE revealed associations in three different genetic
models. After adjusting for APOE, the association (both allelic and genotypic)
with CCR2, BIN1, and ESRa (PvuII) was evident only among subjects without the
APOE e4, whereas the association with CCR5, without Bonferroni correction, was
significant only among subjects carrying the APOE e4 allele. This result is an
evidence of a synergistic and antagonistic effect of APOE on variant associations
with LOAD.

PMID: 26553058  [PubMed - in process]


114. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Aug 15;8(8):13446-54. eCollection 2015.

Genetic effects of common polymorphisms in estrogen receptor alpha gene on
osteoarthritis: a meta-analysis.

Ma H(1), Wu W(1), Yang X(1), Liu J(1), Gong Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bone and Joint, The First Hospital of Jilin University Changchun
130021, Jilin, China.

OBJECTIVE: The estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene has been implicated in the
etiology of osteoarthritis (OA). However, the results are conflicting. We
assessed the association of three common ESR1 polymorphisms, rs2234693, rs9340799
and rs2228480, with OA in this meta-analysis.
METHODS: A comprehensive search was performed to identify related studies. Pooled
odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) was calculated using fixed or
random effects model.
RESULTS: 15 studies (7036 cases and 9669 controls) for rs2234693 polymorphism, 14
studies (3904 cases and 6991 controls) for rs9340799 and 3 studies (331 cases and
619 controls) for rs2228480 polymorphism were identified. The final results
indicated that the G allele in ESR1 rs9340799 was associated with decreased OA
risk (GG+GA vs. AA: OR=0.878, 95% CI=0.792-0.972, P=0.012; G vs. A: OR=0.902, 95%
CI=0.836-0.975, P=0.009). The A allele in rs2228480 might be associated with
increased OA risk. But no significant association of rs2234693 polymorphism with 
OA susceptibility was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis indicates rs9340799 and rs2228480 rather than
rs2234693 polymorphisms are associated with the incidence of OA. Some stable
associations should be further confirmed in future.

PMCID: PMC4612966
PMID: 26550281  [PubMed]


115. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Aug 15;8(8):12696-705. eCollection 2015.

Estrogen receptor a (ESR1) IVS1-397T>C polymorphism lowers risk of fracture.

Wang J(1), Feng G(1), Li H(1), Li W(1), Pan Z(1), Wang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Orthopedics, The Second Hospital Affiliated to Zhejiang
University School of Medicine Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

BACKGROUND: Genetic factors are reported to affect fracture incidence. Many
groups have explored the correlation of fracture risk with ESR1 IVS1-397T>C. The 
observed associations, however, are largely inconsistent. This meta-analysis of
data from early-released studies was performed in an effort to determine the role
of IVS1-397T>C in fracture.
METHODS: Relevant studies were searched through Pubmed, Embase, ScienceDirect,
and Wiley Online Library databases. 16 studies meeting all selection criteria
were finally identified. We calculated ORs with 95% CIs to assess risk of
fracture. Subgroup analyses were performed by subtype, ethnicity and gender.
RESULTS: Data on 2916 cases and 19170 controls were analyzed in the
meta-analysis. Overall, we found moderately decreased risk in association with
IVS1-397 CC genotype (OR = 0.82, 95% CI = 0.73-0.92; OR = 0.84, 95% CI =
0.76-0.94). The decrease persisted in both hip fracture (OR = 0.82, 95% CI =
0.71-0.94; OR = 0.83, 95% CI = 0.73-0.94) and vertebral fracture (OR = 0.67, 95% 
CI = 0.50-0.91; OR = 0.78, 95% CI = 0.64-0.97; OR = 0.82, 95% CI = 0.68-0.98)
when data were stratified by subtype. We also found a significant trend of
decreasing risk in relation to the CC genotype in Caucasian, male and female. All
fixed-effects meta-analysis results were homogeneous.
CONCLUSION: The meta-analysis demonstrates that risk of fracture seems likely to 
be decreased due to IVS1-397 CC or CT genotype.

PMCID: PMC4612868
PMID: 26550183  [PubMed]


116. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 9;5:16553. doi: 10.1038/srep16553.

A potential prognostic long non-coding RNA signature to predict metastasis-free
survival of breast cancer patients.

Sun J(1), Chen X(2), Wang Z(1), Guo M(1), Shi H(1), Wang X(1), Cheng L(1), Zhou
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University,
Harbin 150081, PR China. (2)Department of General Surgery, The Fourth Affiliated 
Hospital, Harbin medical university, Harbin 150081, China.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been implicated in a variety of biological
processes, and dysregulated lncRNAs have demonstrated potential roles as
biomarkers and therapeutic targets for cancer prognosis and treatment. In this
study, by repurposing microarray probes, we analyzed lncRNA expression profiles
of 916 breast cancer patients from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Nine
lncRNAs were identified to be significantly associated with metastasis-free
survival (MFS) in the training dataset of 254 patients using the Cox proportional
hazards regression model. These nine lncRNAs were then combined to form a single 
prognostic signature for predicting metastatic risk in breast cancer patients
that was able to classify patients in the training dataset into high- and
low-risk subgroups with significantly different MFSs (median 2.4 years versus 3.0
years, log-rank test p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). This nine-lncRNA signature was similarly
effective for prognosis in a testing dataset and two independent datasets.
Further analysis showed that the predictive ability of the signature was
independent of clinical variables, including age, ER status, ESR1 status and
ERBB2 status. Our results indicated that lncRNA signature could be a useful
prognostic marker to predict metastatic risk in breast cancer patients and may
improve upon our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying breast
cancer metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4637883
PMID: 26549855  [PubMed - in process]


117. BMC Genomics. 2015 Nov 6;16:906. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2172-2.

Expression of microRNAs and isomiRs in the porcine endometrium: implications for 
gene regulation at the maternal-conceptus interface.

Krawczynski K(1), Bauersachs S(2,)(3), Reliszko ZP(1), Graf A(2), Kaczmarek
MM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research Polish Academy of Sciences 
(IARFR PAS), Tuwima 10, 10-748, Olsztyn, Poland. (2)Laboratory for Functional
Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), LMU University of Munich, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 25,
Munich, 81377, Germany. (3)Present address: Department of Environmental Systems
Science, ETH Zurich, Animal Physiology, Institute of Agricultural Sciences,
Universitaetstrasse 2, Zurich, 8092, Switzerland. (4)Institute of Animal
Reproduction and Food Research Polish Academy of Sciences (IARFR PAS), Tuwima 10,
10-748, Olsztyn, Poland. m.kaczmarek@pan.olsztyn.pl.

BACKGROUND: Embryo implantation is a complex, synchronized process that requires 
establishment of a reciprocal dialogue between a receptive endometrium and
developing blastocysts. Recently, microRNAs (miRNAs), known to modulate gene
expression through post-transcriptional mechanisms, were implicated in regulation
of early pregnancy events including maternal recognition of pregnancy and
implantation. To characterize complex transcriptomic changes, expression of
miRNAs in pregnant and cyclic endometria collected on days 12, 16 and 20 was
analyzed using Illumina deep sequencing and analyzed with bioinformatic pipeline.
Moreover, expression profiles of ten genes related to miRNA synthesis and
transport such as DROSHA, DGCR8, XPO5, DICER, TARBP2, TNRC6A, and AGO1-4 were
determined.
RESULTS: Among genes involved in miRNA transport and synthesis DROSHA, XPO5,
DICER1, TARBP, and AGO1 expression was affected by the reproductive status.
Moreover, DICER1 and AGO2 proteins were localized in luminal and glandular
epithelium with immunofluorescence staining. Several hundred mature, canonical
and non-canonical miRNAs were found to be expressed in the endometrial samples.
Detailed analysis revealed that miRNA length variants, isomiRs, accounted for the
vast majority of defined sequences. Both miRNA and isomiR of miR-140-3p were
shown to affect expression of putative targets in endometrial stromal cells in
vitro. Computational analysis of putative target genes for miRNAs differentially 
expressed (DE) between pregnant and cyclic animals resulted in lists of
biological processes and regulatory pathways indicating their role in cellular
development, cell cycle, immunological response and organismal development. Among
predicted target genes for DE miRNAs, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), 
progesterone and estradiol receptors (PGR, ESR1) and leukemia inhibitory factor
(LIF) were found.
CONCLUSIONS: This research revealed a repertoire of pregnancy-related miRNAs in
porcine endometrium during initial stages of conceptus implantation and during
the estrous cycle, and sheds light on mechanisms regulating miRNA-mediated gene
expression at the maternal-conceptus interface.

PMCID: PMC4636777
PMID: 26546342  [PubMed - in process]


118. Epigenetics. 2015 Dec 2;10(12):1099-110. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1107694.

Stat3 is a candidate epigenetic biomarker of perinatal Bisphenol A exposure
associated with murine hepatic tumors with implications for human health.

Weinhouse C(1), Bergin IL(2), Harris C(1), Dolinoy DC(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Environmental Health Sciences ; University of Michigan ; Ann
Arbor , Michigan , USA. (2)b Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine; University of
Michigan ; Ann Arbor , Michigan , USA. (3)c Department of Nutritional Sciences ; 
University of Michigan ; Ann Arbor , Michigan , USA.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is an endocrine disrupting chemical (EDC) that has been
implicated as a potential carcinogen and epigenotoxicant. We have previously
reported dose-dependent incidence of hepatic tumors in 10-month-old isogenic mice
perinatally exposed to BPA. Here, we evaluated DNA methylation at 3 candidate
genes (Esr1, Il-6st, and Stat3) in liver tissue of BPA-exposed mice euthanized at
2 time points: post-natal day 22 (PND22; n = 147) or 10-months of age (n = 78,
including n = 18 with hepatic tumors). Additionally, DNA methylation profiles
were analyzed at human homologs of murine candidate genes in human fetal liver
samples (n = 50) with known liver tissue BPA levels. Candidate genes were chosen 
based on reported expression changes in both rodent and human hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Regions for bisulfite sequencing were chosen by mining whole
genome next generation sequencing methylation datasets of both mice and human
liver samples with known perinatal BPA exposures. One of 3 candidate genes,
Stat3, displayed dose-dependent DNA methylation changes in both 10-month mice
with liver tumors as compared to those without liver tumors and 3-week sibling
mice from the same exposure study, implicating Stat3 as a potential epigenetic
biomarker of both early life BPA exposure and adult disease in mice. DNA
methylation profiles within STAT3 varied with liver tissue BPA level in human
fetal liver samples as well, suggesting STAT3 may be a translationally relevant
candidate biomarker. These data implicate Stat3 as a potential early life
biomarker of adult murine liver tumor risk following early BPA exposure with
early evidence of relevance to human health.

PMID: 26542749  [PubMed - in process]


119. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Nov;154(2):263-73. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3608-8. 
Epub 2015 Nov 4.

Associations between genetic variants and the effect of letrozole and exemestane 
on bone mass and bone turnover.

Oesterreich S(1), Henry NL(2), Kidwell KM(3), Van Poznak CH(2), Skaar TC(4),
Dantzer J(4), Li L(4), Hangartner TN(5), Peacock M(6), Nguyen AT(4), Rae JM(2),
Desta Z(4), Philips S(4), Storniolo AM(7), Stearns V(8), Hayes DF(2), Flockhart
DA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Women's Cancer Research
Center, Magee Womens Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute (UPCI), 204 Craft Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA, 15261, USA.
oesterreichs@upmc.edu. (2)Breast Oncology Program, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI,
48109, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan School of
Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. (4)Division of Clinical Pharmacology,
Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, 
46202, USA. (5)BioMedical Imaging Laboratory, Wright State University, Dayton,
OH, 45435, USA. (6)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA. (7)Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer 
Center, Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA. (8)Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA.

Adjuvant therapy for hormone receptor (HR) positive postmenopausal breast cancer 
patients includes aromatase inhibitors (AI). While both the non-steroidal AI
letrozole and the steroidal AI exemestane decrease serum estrogen concentrations,
there is evidence that exemestane may be less detrimental to bone. We
hypothesized that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) predict effects of AIs on
bone turnover. Early stage HR-positive breast cancer patients were enrolled in a 
randomized trial of exemestane versus letrozole. Effects of AI on bone mineral
density (BMD) and bone turnover markers (BTM), and associations between SNPs in
24 candidate genes and changes in BMD or BTM were determined. Of the 503 enrolled
patients, paired BMD data were available for 123 and 101 patients treated with
letrozole and exemestane, respectively, and paired BTM data were available for
175 and 173 patients, respectively. The mean change in lumbar spine BMD was
significantly greater for letrozole-treated (-3.2 %) compared to
exemestane-treated patients (-1.0 %) (p = 0.0016). Urine N-telopeptide was
significantly increased in patients treated with exemestane (p = 0.001) but not
letrozole. Two SNPs (rs4870061 and rs9322335) in ESR1 and one SNP (rs10140457) in
ESR2 were associated with decreased BMD in letrozole-treated patients. In the
exemestane-treated patients, SNPs in ESR1 (Rs2813543) and CYP19A1 (Rs6493497)
were associated with decreased bone density. Exemestane had a less negative
impact on bone density compared to letrozole, and the effects of AI therapy on
bone may be impacted by genetic variants in the ER pathway.

PMCID: PMC4807610 [Available on 2016-11-04]
PMID: 26536870  [PubMed - in process]


120. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;37(5):1671-85. doi: 10.1159/000438533. Epub 2015 Nov
5.

A Breast Tissue Protein Expression Profile Contributing to Early Parity-Induced
Protection Against Breast Cancer.

Gutierrez CM, Lopez-Valdez R, Subramani R, Arumugam A, Nandy S, Rajamanickam V,
Ravichandran V, Lakshmanaswamy R.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Early parity reduces breast cancer risk, whereas, late parity
and nulliparity increase breast cancer risk. Despite substantial efforts to
understand the protective effects of early parity, the precise molecular
circuitry responsible for these changes is not yet fully defined.
METHODS: Here, we have conducted the first study assessing protein expression
profiles in normal breast tissue of healthy early parous, late parous, and
nulliparous women. Breast tissue biopsies were obtained from 132 healthy parous
and nulliparous volunteers. These samples were subjected to global protein
expression profiling and immunohistochemistry. GeneSpring and MetaCore
bioinformatics analysis software were used to identify protein expression
profiles associated with early parity (low risk) versus late/nulliparity (high
risk).
RESULTS: Early parity reduces expression of key proteins involved in mitogenic
signaling pathways in breast tissue through down regulation of EGFR1/3, ESR1,
AKT1, ATF, Fos, and SRC. Early parity is also characterized by greater genomic
stability and reduced tissue inflammation based on differential expression of
aurora kinases, p53, RAD52, BRCA1, MAPKAPK-2, ATF-1, ICAM1, and NF-kappaB
compared to late and nulli parity.
CONCLUSIONS: Early parity reduces basal cell proliferation in breast tissue,
which translates to enhanced genomic stability, reduced cellular
stress/inflammation, and thus reduced breast cancer risk.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26536102  [PubMed - in process]


121. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Oct 30;14(4):13932-44. doi: 10.4238/2015.October.29.14.

ESR1 gene polymorphisms PvuII (rs2234693T>C) and XbaI (rs9340799A>G) may not be
directly correlated with cardiovascular disease risk.

Jiang N(1), Yang G(1), Peng CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Third Department of Cardiovascular, The First Hospital Affiliated
Heilongjiang University of TCM, Xiangfang, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.

The aim of this meta-analysis was to evaluate the correlations between the
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene polymorphisms PvuII (rs2234693T>C) and XbaI
(rs9340799A>G) and the risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD). Case-control studies
were screened and selected from a larger group of studies that were retrieved
through a comprehensive search of scientific literature databases, which was
complemented by manual searches. Data from studies selected were analyzed using
the Comprehensive Meta-analysis 2.0 software. A total of 240 studies were
initially retrieved and 10 studies were eventually included in the meta-analysis.
These 10 case-control studies involved 7029 CVD patients (5001 myocardial
infarction patients, 1223 coronary artery disease patients, 805 acute coronary
syndromes patients) and 6901 healthy controls. We found no significant
association between the PvuII (rs2234693T>C) and XbaI (rs9340799A>G)
polymorphisms and CVD risk. We detected no significant associations under all
genetic inheritance models tested, including the allele, dominant, homozygous,
heterozygous, and recessive models, or for comparisons between the case group and
control group (all P > 0.05). Our meta-analysis results strongly suggest that the
ESR1 gene polymorphisms PvuII (rs2234693T>C) and XbaI (rs9340799A>G) are not
associated with CVD risk.

PMID: 26535709  [PubMed - in process]


122. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2016 Mar;171(2):250-6. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32399. Epub 2015 Nov 4.

Influence of family history of dementia in the development and progression of
late-onset Alzheimer's disease.

Scarabino D(1), Gambina G(2), Broggio E(2), Pelliccia F(3), Corbo RM(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)CNR Institute of Cellular Biology and Neurobiology, Monterotondo Scalo, Rome, 
Italy. (2)Department of Neuroscience, Alzheimer's Disease Center, University and 
Hospital of Verona, Verona, Italy. (3)Department of Biology and Biotechnology
"Charles Darwin," Sapienza University, Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Biology and 
Biotechnology "Charles Darwin," CNR Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology,
Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

Family history of dementia (FH) is a recognized risk factor for developing
late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). We asked whether having FH increases AD risk
and influences disease severity (age at onset and cognitive impairment) in 420 AD
patients and 109 controls with (FH+) or without (FH-). The relationships of APOE 
and other AD risk genes with FH were analyzed as well. The proportion of APOE e4 
allele carriers was higher among the FH+ than the FH- AD patients (49.6% vs.
38.9%; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04). The distribution of the risk genotypes of nine AD
susceptibility genes previously examined (CHAT, CYP17, CYP19, ESR1, FSHR, P53,
P73, P21, PPARG) did not differ between the FH+ and the FH- AD patients,
indicating that none contributed significantly to familial clustering of disease.
FH was associated with an increased AD risk (odds ratio [OR] 2.71, 95% confidence
interval [CI] 1.44-5.09; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002) independent of carrying the APOE e4 allele
(OR 2.61, 95%CI 1.53-4.44; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0004). Having a first-degree relative or a
parent with dementia was significantly associated with AD risk (OR 2.9, 95%CI
1.3-6.4; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009 and OR 2.7, 95%CI 1.1-6.2; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02) but having a sibling with
dementia was not (OR 1.7, 95%CI 0.2 to 14.7; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.6). Among the FH+ AD patients,
having one or both parents affected seemed to raise the risk of earlier onset age
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02) and greater cognitive impairment (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02) than having only an
affected sibling, whereas having two or more affected relatives did not. © 2015
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26531229  [PubMed - in process]


123. Int J Oncol. 2016 Jan;48(1):130-44. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3222. Epub 2015 Oct 30.

Transcriptome sequencing of human breast cancer reveals aberrant intronic
transcription in amplicons and dysregulation of alternative splicing with major
therapeutic implications.

Forootan SS(1), Butler JM(1), Gardener D(1), Baird AE(1), Dodson A(1), Darby
A(2), Kenny J(2), Hall N(2), Cossins AR(2), Foster CS(1), Gosden CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer
Medicine, Institute of Translational Medicine, Faculty of Health and Life
Sciences, University of Liverpool, Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool
L69 3GA, UK. (2)Center for Genomic Research, University of Liverpool, Liverpool
L69 7ZB, UK.

Advances in genomic and transcriptome sequencing are revealing the massive scale 
of previously unrecognised alterations occurring during neoplastic
transformation. Breast cancers are genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous. 
Each of the three major subtypes [ERBB2 amplified, estrogen receptor
(ESR)-positive and triple-negative] poses diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. 
Here we show, using high-resolution next-generation transcriptome sequencing,
that in all three breast cancer subtypes, but not matched controls, there was
significant overexpression of transcripts from intronic and untranslated regions 
in addition to exons from specific genes, particularly amplified oncogenes and
hormone receptors. For key genes ERBB2 and ESR1, we demonstrate that
overexpression is linked to the production of highly modified and truncated
splice variants in tumours, but not controls, correlated with tumour subtype.
Translation of these tumour-specific splice variants generates truncated proteins
with altered subcellular locations and functions, modifying the phenotype,
affecting tumour biology, and targeted antitumour therapies. In contrast, tumour 
suppressors TP53, BRCA1/2 and NF1 did not show intronic overexpression or
truncated splice variants in cancers. These findings emphasize the detection of
intronic as well as exonic changes in the transcriptional landscapes of cancers
have profound therapeutic implications.

PMID: 26530297  [PubMed - in process]


124. Prz Menopauzalny. 2015 Sep;14(3):161-7. doi: 10.5114/pm.2015.54339. Epub 2015 Sep
30.

Polymorphisms of estrogen metabolism-related genes ESR1, UGT2B17, and UGT1A1 are 
not associated with osteoporosis in surgically menopausal Japanese women.

Yokota M(1), Hirasawa A(1), Makita K(1), Akahane T(1), Sakai K(1), Makabe T(1),
Horiba Y(1), Yamagami W(1), Ogawa M(1), Iwata T(1), Yanamoto S(1), Deshimaru
R(1), Banno K(1), Susumu N(1), Aoki D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) is a risk factor for
osteoporosis. Previous studies have reported an association between genetic
polymorphisms and the risk of developing osteoporosis. However, the relationship 
between osteoporosis and genetic polymorphisms in Japanese women treated with BSO
is not well understood. To improve the quality of life for post-BSO patients, it 
is important to determine the genetic factors that influence their risk for
osteoporosis. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between
gene variations of estrogen metabolism-related genes and osteoporosis in
surgically menopausal patients, which may improve their quality of life.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This study included 203 menopausal women treated with BSO
because of gynecologic disorders. One hundred and twenty-six women with
artificial (surgical) menopause, who had undergone BSO in the premenopausal
period, were compared with 77 women with natural menopause, who had undergone BSO
in the postmenopausal period. The women were tested for bone mineral density to
diagnose osteoporosis. Polymorphisms of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and
UDP-glucuronosyl transferase (UGT) genes UGT2B17 and UGT1A1 were analyzed, and
their association with bone mass and osteoporosis was statistically evaluated.
RESULTS: No significant association was found between osteoporosis and
polymorphisms in ESR1, UGT2B17, or UGT1A1 in both groups, suggesting that BSO
might be a more significant physiological factor in influencing bone mass density
compared to genetic variations.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the ESR1, UGT2B17, and UGT1A1
polymorphisms are not genetic factors affecting osteoporosis in postmenopausal
Japanese women.

PMCID: PMC4612551
PMID: 26528103  [PubMed]


125. Eur J Cell Biol. 2015 Dec;94(12):611-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2015.10.001. Epub
2015 Oct 21.

ERa36--Another piece of the estrogen puzzle.

Soltysik K(1), Czekaj P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Students Scientific Society, School of Medicine in Katowice, Medical
University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. (2)Department of Cytophysiology, Chair
of Histology and Embryology, School of Medicine in Katowice, Medical University
of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. Electronic address: pcz@sum.edu.pl.

Although the nuclear action of estrogen receptors (ER) is a well-known fact,
evidence supporting membrane estrogen receptors is steadily accumulating. New ER 
variants of unrecognized function have been discovered. ERa is a product of the
ESR1 gene. It serves not only as a template for the full-length 66kDa protein,
but also for smaller isoforms which exist as independent receptors. The recently 
discovered ERa36 (36kDa), consisting of 310 amino acids of total 595 ERa66
protein residues, is an example of that group. The transcription initiation site 
is identified in the first intron of the ESR1 gene. C-Terminal 27 amino acids are
encoded by previously unknown exon 9. The presence of this unique C-terminal
sequence creates an opportunity for the production of selective antibodies. ERa36
has been shown to have a high affinity to the cell membrane and as much as 90% of
the protein can be bound with it. Post-translational palmitoylation is suspected 
to play a crucial role in ERa36 anchoring to the cell membrane. In silico
analysis suggests the existence of a potential transmembrane domain in ERa36.
ERa36 was found in most cells of animals at various ages, but its exact
physiological function remains to be fully elucidated. It seems that cells
traditionally considered as being deprived of ER are able to respond to hormonal 
stimulation via the ERa36 receptor. Moreover, ERa36 displays unique
pharmacological properties and its action may be behind antiestrogen resistance. 
The use of ERa36 in cancer diagnosis gives rise to great expectations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26522827  [PubMed - in process]


126. J Immunol. 2015 Dec 1;195(11):5327-36. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501684. Epub 2015
Oct 30.

Sex Differences in Plasmacytoid Dendritic Cell Levels of IRF5 Drive Higher IFN-a 
Production in Women.

Griesbeck M(1), Ziegler S(2), Laffont S(3), Smith N(4), Chauveau L(5), Tomezsko
P(6), Sharei A(7), Kourjian G(6), Porichis F(6), Hart M(6), Palmer CD(6),
Sirignano M(6), Beisel C(8), Hildebrandt H(2), Cénac C(3), Villani AC(9),
Diefenbach TJ(6), Le Gall S(6), Schwartz O(5), Herbeuval JP(4), Autran B(10),
Guéry JC(3), Chang JJ(11), Altfeld M(12).

Author information: 
(1)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; Centre
d'Immunonologie et des Maladies Infectieuses-Paris, Université Pierre et Marie
Curie/INSERM U1135, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris 75013, France; (2)Heinrich
Pette Institute-Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg 20246,
Germany; (3)INSERM U1043, Toulouse F-31300, France; CNRS, U5282, Toulouse
F-31300, France; Université de Toulouse, Université Paul Sabatier, Centre de
Physiopathologie de Toulouse Purpan, Toulouse F-31300, France; (4)Chemistry and
Biology, Nucleotides and Immunology for Therapy, CNRS UMR-8601, Université Paris 
Descartes, Paris 75270, France; (5)Institut Pasteur, Unité de recherche associée 
CNRS 3015, Unite Virus et Immunité, Paris 75015, France; (6)Ragon Institute of
MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; (7)The David H. Koch Institute for
Integrative Cancer Research, Cambridge, MA 02139; (8)Heinrich Pette
Institute-Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg 20246, Germany;
Medical Department, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg 20246,
Germany; (9)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; and.
(10)Centre d'Immunonologie et des Maladies Infectieuses-Paris, Université Pierre 
et Marie Curie/INSERM U1135, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris 75013, France;
(11)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; Department of
Infectious Diseases, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia.
(12)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; Heinrich Pette 
Institute-Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg 20246, Germany;
marcus.altfeld@hpi.uni-hamburg.de.

Increased IFN-a production contributes to the pathogenesis of infectious and
autoimmune diseases. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) from females produce
more IFN-a upon TLR7 stimulation than pDCs from males, yet the mechanisms
underlying this difference remain unclear. In this article, we show that basal
levels of IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 5 in pDCs were significantly higher in
females compared with males and positively correlated with the percentage of
IFN-a-secreting pDCs. Delivery of recombinant IRF5 protein into human primary
pDCs increased TLR7-mediated IFN-a secretion. In mice, genetic ablation of the
estrogen receptor 1 (Esr1) gene in the hematopoietic compartment or DC lineage
reduced Irf5 mRNA expression in pDCs and IFN-a production. IRF5 mRNA levels
furthermore correlated with ESR1 mRNA levels in human pDCs, consistent with IRF5 
regulation at the transcriptional level by ESR1. Taken together, these data
demonstrate a critical mechanism by which sex differences in basal pDC IRF5
expression lead to higher IFN-a production upon TLR7 stimulation in females and
provide novel targets for the modulation of immune responses and inflammation.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4654231
PMID: 26519527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Neurosci. 2015 Oct 28;35(43):14533-43. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1776-15.2015.

Expression of ESR1 in Glutamatergic and GABAergic Neurons Is Essential for Normal
Puberty Onset, Estrogen Feedback, and Fertility in Female Mice.

Cheong RY(1), Czieselsky K(1), Porteous R(1), Herbison AE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroendocrinology and Department of Physiology, School of Medical 
Sciences, University of Otago, Dunedin 9054, New Zealand. (2)Centre for
Neuroendocrinology and Department of Physiology, School of Medical Sciences,
University of Otago, Dunedin 9054, New Zealand allan.herbison@otago.ac.nz.

Circulating estradiol exerts a profound influence on the activity of the
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neuronal network controlling fertility.
Using genetic strategies enabling neuron-specific deletion of estrogen receptor a
(Esr1), we examine here whether estradiol-modulated GABA and glutamate
transmission are critical for the functioning of the GnRH neuron network in the
female mouse. Using Vgat- and Vglut2-ires-Cre knock-in mice and ESR1
immunohistochemistry, we demonstrate that subpopulations of GABA and glutamate
neurons throughout the limbic forebrain express ESR1, with ESR1-GABAergic neurons
being more widespread and numerous than ESR1-glutamatergic neurons. We crossed
Vgat- and Vglut2-ires-Cre mice with an Esr1(lox/lox) line to generate animals
with GABA-neuron-specific or glutamate-neuron-specific deletion of Esr1.
Vgat-ires-Cre;Esr1(lox/lox) mice were infertile, with abnormal estrous cycles,
and exhibited a complete failure of the estrogen positive feedback mechanism
responsible for the preovulatory GnRH surge. However, puberty onset and estrogen 
negative feedback were normal. Vglut2-ires-Cre;Esr1(lox/lox) mice were also
infertile but displayed a wider range of deficits, including advanced puberty
onset, abnormal negative feedback, and abolished positive feedback. Whereas <25% 
of preoptic kisspeptin neurons expressed Cre in Vgat- and Vglut2-ires-Cre lines, 
~70% of arcuate kisspeptin neurons were targeted in Vglut2-ires-Cre;Esr1(lox/lox)
mice, possibly contributing to their advanced puberty phenotype. These
observations show that, unexpectedly, ESR1-GABA neurons are only essential for
the positive feedback mechanism. In contrast, we reveal the key importance of
ESR1 in glutamatergic neurons for multiple estrogen feedback loops within the
GnRH neuronal network required for fertility in the female mouse.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3514533-11$15.00/0.

PMID: 26511244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Genetics. 2015 Dec;201(4):1341-8. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.180125. Epub 2015 Oct
28.

A Gene Regulatory Program in Human Breast Cancer.

Li R(1), Campos J(2), Iida J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Windber Research Institute, Windber, Pennsylvania 15963 The Jackson
Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609 renhua.li10@gmail.com. (2)Windber Research
Institute, Windber, Pennsylvania 15963.

Molecular heterogeneity in human breast cancer has challenged diagnosis,
prognosis, and clinical treatment. It is well known that molecular subtypes of
breast tumors are associated with significant differences in prognosis and
survival. Assuming that the differences are attributed to subtype-specific
pathways, we then suspect that there might be gene regulatory mechanisms that
modulate the behavior of the pathways and their interactions. In this study, we
proposed an integrated methodology, including machine learning and information
theory, to explore the mechanisms. Using existing data from three large cohorts
of human breast cancer populations, we have identified an ensemble of 16 master
regulator genes (or MR16) that can discriminate breast tumor samples into four
major subtypes. Evidence from gene expression across the three cohorts has
consistently indicated that the MR16 can be divided into two groups that
demonstrate subtype-specific gene expression patterns. For example, group 1 MRs, 
including ESR1, FOXA1, and GATA3, are overexpressed in luminal A and luminal B
subtypes, but lowly expressed in HER2-enriched and basal-like subtypes. In
contrast, group 2 MRs, including FOXM1, EZH2, MYBL2, and ZNF695, display an
opposite pattern. Furthermore, evidence from mutual information modeling has
congruently indicated that the two groups of MRs either up- or down-regulate
cancer driver-related genes in opposite directions. Furthermore, integration of
somatic mutations with pathway changes leads to identification of canonical
genomic alternations in a subtype-specific fashion. Taken together, these studies
have implicated a gene regulatory program for breast tumor progression.

Copyright © 2015 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4676531 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26510790  [PubMed - in process]


129. BMC Cancer. 2015 Oct 29;15:816. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1777-9.

Exploring DNA methylation changes in promoter, intragenic, and intergenic regions
as early and late events in breast cancer formation.

Rauscher GH(1), Kresovich JK(2), Poulin M(3), Yan L(4), Macias V(5), Mahmoud
AM(6), Al-Alem U(7), Kajdacsy-Balla A(8), Wiley EL(9), Tonetti D(10), Ehrlich
M(11).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Illinois-Chicago,
School of Public Health, M/C 923, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA. garthr@uic.edu.
(2)Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Illinois-Chicago,
School of Public Health, M/C 923, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA. jkreso2@uic.edu.
(3)EpigenDx, Inc., Hopkinton, MA, USA. mpoulin@epigendx.com. (4)EpigenDx, Inc.,
Hopkinton, MA, USA. lyan@epigendx.com. (5)Department of Pathology, University of 
Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. vmacias@uic.edu. (6)Department of Pathology, 
University of Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. amahmo4@uic.edu. (7)Division of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Illinois-Chicago, School of Public 
Health, M/C 923, Chicago, IL, 60612, USA. ualale2@uic.edu. (8)Department of
Pathology, University of Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. aballa@uic.edu.
(9)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
ewiley@uic.edu. (10)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Illinois-Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. dtonetti@uic.edu. (11)Human Genetics Program,
Tulane Cancer Center, and Center for Bioinformatics and Genomics, Tulane
University Health Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Ave., New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.
ehrlich@tulane.edu.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer formation is associated with frequent changes in DNA
methylation but the extent of very early alterations in DNA methylation and the
biological significance of cancer-associated epigenetic changes need further
elucidation.
METHODS: Pyrosequencing was done on bisulfite-treated DNA from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded sections containing invasive tumor and paired samples of
histologically normal tissue adjacent to the cancers as well as control reduction
mammoplasty samples from unaffected women. The DNA regions studied were promoters
(BRCA1, CD44, ESR1, GSTM2, GSTP1, MAGEA1, MSI1, NFE2L3, RASSF1A, RUNX3, SIX3 and 
TFF1), far-upstream regions (EN1, PAX3, PITX2, and SGK1), introns (APC, EGFR,
LHX2, RFX1 and SOX9) and the LINE-1 and satellite 2 DNA repeats. These choices
were based upon previous literature or publicly available DNA methylome profiles.
The percent methylation was averaged across neighboring CpG sites.
RESULTS: Most of the assayed gene regions displayed hypermethylation in cancer
vs. adjacent tissue but the TFF1 and MAGEA1 regions were significantly
hypomethylated (p =0.001). Importantly, six of the 16 regions examined in a large
collection of patients (105 - 129) and in 15-18 reduction mammoplasty samples
were already aberrantly methylated in adjacent, histologically normal tissue vs. 
non-cancerous mammoplasty samples (p =0.01). In addition, examination of
transcriptome and DNA methylation databases indicated that methylation at three
non-promoter regions (far-upstream EN1 and PITX2 and intronic LHX2) was
associated with higher gene expression, unlike the inverse associations between
cancer DNA hypermethylation and cancer-altered gene expression usually reported. 
These three non-promoter regions also exhibited normal tissue-specific
hypermethylation positively associated with differentiation-related gene
expression (in muscle progenitor cells vs. many other types of normal cells). The
importance of considering the exact DNA region analyzed and the gene structure
was further illustrated by bioinformatic analysis of an alternative
promoter/intron gene region for APC.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed the frequent DNA methylation changes in invasive breast
cancer at a variety of genome locations and found evidence for an extensive field
effect in breast cancer. In addition, we illustrate the power of combining
publicly available whole-genome databases with a candidate gene approach to study
cancer epigenetics.

PMCID: PMC4625569
PMID: 26510686  [PubMed - in process]


130. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 1;22(5):1130-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-1534.
Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Sensitive Detection of Mono- and Polyclonal ESR1 Mutations in Primary Tumors,
Metastatic Lesions, and Cell-Free DNA of Breast Cancer Patients.

Wang P(1), Bahreini A(2), Gyanchandani R(3), Lucas PC(4), Hartmaier RJ(3),
Watters RJ(3), Jonnalagadda AR(5), Trejo Bittar HE(4), Berg A(4), Hamilton RL(4),
Kurland BF(6), Weiss KR(7), Mathew A(8), Leone JP(8), Davidson NE(9), Nikiforova 
MN(4), Brufsky AM(9), Ambros TF(8), Stern AM(10), Puhalla SL(9), Lee AV(11),
Oesterreich S(12).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, People's Republic of China. 
Womens Cancer Research Center, Magee-Women Research Institute, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. (2)Womens Cancer Research Center, Magee-Women Research Institute,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (3)Womens Cancer Research Center, Magee-Women Research 
Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Department of Pharmacology and Chemical
Biology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (4)Department of
Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (5)Womens Cancer
Research Center, Magee-Women Research Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. (7)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center (UPMC) Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (8)Department of
Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute and UPMC Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (9)Womens Cancer
Research Center, Magee-Women Research Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Pittsburgh
Cancer Institute and UPMC Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (10)Drug
Discovery Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(11)Womens Cancer Research Center, Magee-Women Research Institute, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. oesterreichs@upmc.edu leeav@upmc.edu.
(12)Womens Cancer Research Center, Magee-Women Research Institute, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. oesterreichs@upmc.edu leeav@upmc.edu.

PURPOSE: Given the clinical relevance of ESR1 mutations as potential drivers of
resistance to endocrine therapy, this study used sensitive detection methods to
determine the frequency of ESR1 mutations in primary and metastatic breast
cancer, and in cell-free DNA (cfDNA).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Six ESR1 mutations (K303R, S463P, Y537C, Y537N, Y537S,
D538G) were assessed by digital droplet PCR (ddPCR), with lower limits of
detection of 0.05% to 0.16%, in primary tumors (n = 43), bone (n = 12) and brain 
metastases (n = 38), and cfDNA (n = 29). Correlations between ESR1 mutations in
metastatic lesions and single (1 patient) or serial blood draws (4 patients) were
assessed.
RESULTS: ESR1 mutations were detected for D538G (n = 13), Y537S (n = 3), and
Y537C (n = 1), and not for K303R, S463P, or Y537N. Mutation rates were 7.0% (3/43
primary tumors), 9.1% (1/11 bone metastases), 12.5% (3/24 brain metastases), and 
24.1% (7/29 cfDNA). Two patients showed polyclonal disease with more than one
ESR1 mutation. Mutation allele frequencies were 0.07% to 0.2% in primary tumors, 
1.4% in bone metastases, 34.3% to 44.9% in brain metastases, and 0.2% to 13.7% in
cfDNA. In cases with both cfDNA and metastatic samples (n = 5), mutations were
detected in both (n = 3) or in cfDNA only (n = 2). Treatment was associated with 
changes in ESR1 mutation detection and allele frequency.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 mutations were detected at very low allele frequencies in some 
primary breast cancers, and at high allele frequency in metastases, suggesting
that in some tumors rare ESR1-mutant clones are enriched by endocrine therapy.
Further studies should address whether sensitive detection of ESR1 mutations in
primary breast cancer and in serial blood draws may be predictive for development
of resistant disease. Clin Cancer Res; 22(5); 1130-7. ©2015 AACR.See related
commentary by Gu and Fuqua, p. 1034.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4775406 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26500237  [PubMed - in process]


131. Mediators Inflamm. 2015;2015:204975. doi: 10.1155/2015/204975. Epub 2015 Sep 27.

Anti-Inflammatory Effects of a Methanol Extract from the Marine Sponge Geodia
cydonium on the Human Breast Cancer MCF-7 Cell Line.

Costantini S(1), Romano G(2), Rusolo F(1), Capone F(1), Guerriero E(1), Colonna
G(3), Ianora A(2), Ciliberto G(4), Costantini M(5).

Author information: 
(1)CROM, Istituto Nazionale Tumori "Fondazione G. Pascale", IRCCS, 80131 Napoli, 
Italy. (2)Department of Integrative Marine Ecology, Stazione Zoologica Anton
Dohrn, Villa Comunale, 80121 Napoli, Italy. (3)Servizio di Informatica Medica,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, Seconda Università di Napoli, 80138 Napoli,
Italy. (4)Direzione Scientifica, Istituto Nazionale Tumori "Fondazione G.
Pascale", IRCCS, 80131 Napoli, Italy. (5)Department of Biology and Evolution of
Marine Organisms, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Villa Comunale, 80121 Napoli,
Italy.

Many research groups are working to find new possible anti-inflammatory
molecules, and marine sponges represent a rich source of biologically active
compounds with pharmacological applications. In the present study, we tested
different concentrations of the methanol extract from the marine sponge, Geodia
cydonium, on normal human breast epithelial cells (MCF-10A) and human breast
cancer cells (MCF-7). Our results show that this extract has no cytotoxic effects
on both cell lines whereas it induces a decrease in levels of VEGF and five
proinflammatory cytokines (CCL2, CXCL8, CXCL10, IFN-<U+03B3>, and TNF-a) only in MCF-7
cells in a dose-dependent manner, thereby indicating an anti-inflammatory effect.
Moreover, interactomic analysis suggests that all six cytokines are involved in a
network and are connected with some HUB nodes such as NF-kB subunits and ESR1
(estrogen receptor 1). We also report a decrease in the expression of two NFKB1
and c-Rel subunits by RT-qPCR experiments only in MCF-7 cells after extract
treatment, confirming NF-kB inactivation. These data highlight the potential of
G. cydonium for future drug discovery against major diseases, such as breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4600500
PMID: 26491222  [PubMed - in process]


132. Aquat Toxicol. 2015 Dec;169:19-26. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2015.10.002. Epub 2015 
Oct 18.

Evaluation of whole-mount in situ hybridization as a tool for pathway-based
toxicological research with early-life stage fathead minnows.

Cavallin JE(1), Schroeder AL(2), Jensen KM(3), Villeneuve DL(3), Blackwell BR(4),
Carlson K(5), Kahl MD(3), LaLone CA(3), Randolph EC(3), Ankley GT(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota-Duluth, Integrated Biosciences Graduate Program, 1035 
University Drive, Duluth, MN 55812, USA. Electronic address:
cavallin.jenna@epa.gov. (2)University of Minnesota-Water Resources Center, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, National
Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, Mid-Continent Ecology
Division, 6201 Congdon Blvd., Duluth, MN 55804, USA. (3)U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, National Health and
Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, Mid-Continent Ecology Division, 6201
Congdon Blvd., Duluth, MN 55804, USA. (4)ORISE Research Participation Program,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development,
National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, Mid-Continent
Ecology Division, 6201 Congdon Blvd., Duluth, MN 55804, USA. (5)University of St.
Thomas, Department of Biology, 2115 Summit Ave., St. Paul, MN 55105, USA.

Early-life stage fish can be more sensitive to toxicants than adults, so
delineating mechanisms of perturbation of biological pathways by chemicals during
this life stage is crucial. Whole-mount in situ hybridization (WISH) paired with 
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (QPCR) assays can enhance
pathway-based analyses through determination of specific tissues where changes in
gene expression are occurring. While WISH has frequently been used in zebrafish
(Danio rerio), this technology has not previously been applied to fathead minnows
(Pimephales promelas), another well-established small fish model species. The
objective of the present study was to adapt WISH to fathead minnow embryos and
larvae, and use the approach to evaluate the effects of estrone, an
environmentally-relevant estrogen receptor (ER) agonist. Embryos were exposed via
the water to 0, 18 or 1800 ng estrone/L (0, 0.067 and 6.7nM) for 3 or 6 days in a
solvent-free, flow-through test system. Relative transcript abundance of three
estrogen-responsive genes, estrogen receptor-a (esr1), cytochrome P450-aromatase 
B (cyp19b), and vitellogenin (vtg) was examined in pooled whole embryos using
QPCR, and the spatial distribution of up-regulated gene transcripts was examined 
in individual fish using WISH. After 3 days of exposure to 1800 ng estrone/L,
esr1 and cyp19b were significantly up-regulated, while vtg mRNA expression was
not affected. After 6 days of exposure to 1800 ng estrone/L, transcripts for all 
three genes were significantly up-regulated. Corresponding WISH assays revealed
spatial distribution of esr1 and vtg in the liver region, an observation
consistent with activation of the hepatic ER. This study clearly demonstrates the
potential utility of WISH, in conjunction with QPCR, to examine the mechanistic
basis of the effects of toxicants on early-life stage fathead minnows.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26485527  [PubMed - in process]


133. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2016 Feb;36(2):120-8. doi: 10.1089/jir.2014.0223. Epub
2015 Oct 20.

A Lower PBMC Estrogen Receptor a Gene Expression in Chronic Hepatitis B Is
Associated with a Sustained Virological Response to Pegylated Interferon.

Zhang T(1), Zhang Z(2), Zhang Y(2), Ye J(3), Li X(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Infectious Diseases, First People's Hospital of Lianyungang
City , Lianyungang, China . (2)2 Department of Infectious Diseases, First
Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei , China . (3)3 Department of
Infectious Diseases, Second Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical University ,
Hefei, China .

The aim of this study was to investigate possible involvement of estrogen
receptor a (ESR1) in responding to pegylated interferon alpha-2a (PEG IFNa-2a)
therapy in chronic hepatitis B (CHB) patients. A total of 106 HBeAg-positive
patients and 52 healthy controls were enrolled into this study. ESR1 messenger
RNA (mRNA) expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells was quantified at the
baseline, during treatment (weeks 4 and 12), and at the end of treatment (week
48) by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay (RT-PCR). 
The sequence polymorphism of ESR1 (rs2077647, rs2234693, rs9340799, and
rs9322354) was analyzed using the Sequenom MassARRAY Analyzer. Our results
suggested that the most accurate prediction of nonresponder in female patients
was the baseline alanine aminotransferase (ALT) in combination with ESR1
expression at week 4 of treatment (area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve [AUC]<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.908). Combining the baseline ALT with ESR1 mRNA
expression at the end of treatment showed the best prediction of sustained
virological response in male patients (AUC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.818). Internal validation was
assessed by bootstrap cross-validation. These results may have clinical relevance
and warrant future validation in studies with larger cohorts.

PMID: 26485345  [PubMed - in process]


134. Genes Brain Behav. 2015 Nov;14(8):641-54. doi: 10.1111/gbb.12252. Epub 2015 Oct
14.

Genes located in a chromosomal inversion are correlated with territorial song in 
white-throated sparrows.

Zinzow-Kramer WM(1), Horton BM(1), McKee CD(1), Michaud JM(1), Tharp GK(2),
Thomas JW(3), Tuttle EM(4,)(5), Yi S(6), Maney DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA. (2)Yerkes Nonhuman
Primate Genomics Core, Emory University, Atlanta, GA. (3)NIH Intramural
Sequencing Center, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Rockville, MD. 
(4)Department of Biology, Indiana State University, Terre Haute, IN. (5)The
Center for Genomic Advocacy, Indiana State University, Terre Haute, IN. (6)School
of Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.

The genome of the white-throated sparrow (Zonotrichia albicollis) contains an
inversion polymorphism on chromosome 2 that is linked to predictable variation in
a suite of phenotypic traits including plumage color, aggression and parental
behavior. Differences in gene expression between the two color morphs, which
represent the two common inversion genotypes (ZAL2/ZAL2 and ZAL2/ZAL2(m) ), may
therefore advance our understanding of the molecular underpinnings of these
phenotypes. To identify genes that are differentially expressed between the two
morphs and correlated with behavior, we quantified gene expression and
terrirorial aggression, including song, in a population of free-living
white-throated sparrows. We analyzed gene expression in two brain regions, the
medial amygdala (MeA) and hypothalamus. Both regions are part of a 'social
behavior network', which is rich in steroid hormone receptors and previously
linked with territorial behavior. Using weighted gene co-expression network
analyses, we identified modules of genes that were correlated with both morph and
singing behavior. The majority of these genes were located within the inversion, 
showing the profound effect of the inversion on the expression of genes captured 
by the rearrangement. These modules were enriched with genes related to retinoic 
acid signaling and basic cellular functioning. In the MeA, the most prominent
pathways were those related to steroid hormone receptor activity. Within these
pathways, the only gene encoding such a receptor was ESR1 (estrogen receptor 1), 
a gene previously shown to predict song rate in this species. The set of
candidate genes we identified may mediate the effects of a chromosomal inversion 
on territorial behavior.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and International Behavioural and Neural Genetics
Society.

PMCID: PMC4785874 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26463687  [PubMed - in process]


135. Biol Open. 2015 Oct 12;4(11):1436-47. doi: 10.1242/bio.014308.

Genome-wide ChIP-seq analysis of human TOP2B occupancy in MCF7 breast cancer
epithelial cells.

Manville CM(1), Smith K(1), Sondka Z(1), Rance H(1), Cockell S(2), Cowell IG(1), 
Lee KC(1), Morris NJ(3), Padget K(4), Jackson GH(5), Austin CA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (2)The Bioinformatics Support Unit, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2
4HH, UK. (4)Department of Applied Biology, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon
Tyne NE1 8ST, UK. (5)Institute for Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (6)Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK
caroline.austin@ncl.ac.uk.

We report the whole genome ChIP seq for human TOP2B from MCF7 cells. Using three 
different peak calling methods, regions of binding were identified in the
presence or absence of the nuclear hormone estradiol, as TOP2B has been reported 
to play a role in ligand-induced transcription. TOP2B peaks were found across the
whole genome, 50% of the peaks fell either within a gene or within 5 kb of a
transcription start site. TOP2B peaks coincident with gene promoters were less
frequently associated with epigenetic features marking active promoters in
estradiol treated than in untreated cells. Significantly enriched transcription
factor motifs within the DNA sequences underlying the peaks were identified.
These included SP1, KLF4, TFAP2A, MYF, REST, CTCF, ESR1 and ESR2. Gene ontology
analysis of genes associated with TOP2B peaks found neuronal development terms
including axonogenesis and axon guidance were significantly enriched. In the
absence of functional TOP2B there are errors in axon guidance in the zebrafish
eye. Specific heparin sulphate structures are involved in retinal axon targeting.
The glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis-heparin sulphate/heparin pathway is
significantly enriched in the TOP2B gene ontology analysis, suggesting changes in
this pathway in the absence of TOP2B may cause the axon guidance faults.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4728365
PMID: 26459242  [PubMed]


136. Steroids. 2015 Dec;104:129-36. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2015.09.005. Epub 2015 Oct
9.

Prognostic value of estrogen receptors mRNA expression in non-small cell lung
cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Li W(1), Tse LA(2), Wang F(3).

Author information: 
(1)JC School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. Electronic address:
waveofocean99@gmail.com. (2)JC School of Public Health and Primary Care, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
Electronic address: shelly@cuhk.edu.hk. (3)JC School of Public Health and Primary
Care, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region.

The prognostic value of estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2) mRNA expression in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains controversial.
Therefore, a systematic review with meta-analysis was conducted. A systematic
literature search was conducted in both Pubmed and Embase. Studies that reported 
association of ESR and survival in NSCLC patients in the form of hazard ratio
(HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) were included. Pooled HR was taken as the
effect size to reflect the association. Five eligible articles provided six
separate studies for ESR1 and four for ESR2. For ESR1, the pooled HR of overall
survival was 0.72 (95% CI 0.41-1.27) by univariate analysis and was 0.33 (95% CI:
0.20-0.53) by multivariate analysis. For ESR2, the pooled HR was 0.95 (95% CI
0.73-1.23) by univariate analysis. Sub-group analysis suggested that the disease 
stages and cut-off point may explain heterogeneity among studies of ESR1. Results
of the meta-analysis revealed a potential benefit of positive ESR1 mRNA
expression in survival in patients with NSCLC, especially in those of advanced
stage. No statistically significant association was found between ESR2 mRNA
expression and NSCLC patients' prognosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26456481  [PubMed - in process]


137. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Dec 15;418 Pt 3:220-34. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.09.035.
Epub 2015 Oct 9.

Endocrine resistance in breast cancer - An overview and update.

Clarke R(1), Tyson JJ(2), Dixon JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington DC
20057, USA. Electronic address: clarker@georgetown.edu. (2)Department of
Biological Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic and State University, Blacksburg, VA
24061, USA. (3)Edinburgh Breast Unit, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.

Tumors that express detectable levels of the product of the ESR1 gene (estrogen
receptor-a; ERa) represent the single largest molecular subtype of breast cancer.
More women eventually die from ERa+ breast cancer than from either HER2+ disease 
(almost half of which also express ERa) and/or from triple negative breast cancer
(ERa-negative, progesterone receptor-negative, and HER2-negative). Antiestrogens 
and aromatase inhibitors are largely indistinguishable from each other in their
abilities to improve overall survival and almost 50% of ERa+ breast cancers will 
eventually fail one or more of these endocrine interventions. The precise reasons
why these therapies fail in ERa+ breast cancer remain largely unknown.
Pharmacogenetic explanations for Tamoxifen resistance are controversial. The role
of ERa mutations in endocrine resistance remains unclear. Targeting the growth
factors and oncogenes most strongly correlated with endocrine resistance has
proven mostly disappointing in their abilities to improve overall survival
substantially, particularly in the metastatic setting. Nonetheless, there are new
concepts in endocrine resistance that integrate molecular signaling, cellular
metabolism, and stress responses including endoplasmic reticulum stress and the
unfolded protein response (UPR) that provide novel insights and suggest
innovative therapeutic targets. Encouraging evidence that drug combinations with 
CDK4/CDK6 inhibitors can extend recurrence free survival may yet translate to
improvements in overall survival. Whether the improvements seen with
immunotherapy in other cancers can be achieved in breast cancer remains to be
determined, particularly for ERa+ breast cancers. This review explores the basic 
mechanisms of resistance to endocrine therapies, concluding with some new
insights from systems biology approaches further implicating autophagy and the
UPR in detail, and a brief discussion of exciting new avenues and future
prospects.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4684757 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 26455641  [PubMed - in process]


138. Biol Reprod. 2015 Nov;93(5):123. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.131110. Epub 2015
Oct 7.

Deletion of Lysophosphatidic Acid Receptor 3 (Lpar3) Disrupts Fine Local Balance 
of Progesterone and Estrogen Signaling in Mouse Uterus During Implantation.

Diao H(1), Li R(2), El Zowalaty AE(2), Xiao S(2), Zhao F(2), Dudley EA(2), Ye
X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia Reproductive Medical Center, Renmin
Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, Hubei, China. (2)Department of
Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Georgia, Athens, Georgia Interdisciplinary Toxicology Program, University of
Georgia, Athens, Georgia. (3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, College
of Veterinary Medicine, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia Interdisciplinary 
Toxicology Program, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia ye@uga.edu.

Lpar3 encodes LPA3, the third G protein-coupled receptor for lysophosphatidic
acid (LPA). Lpar3(-/-) female mice had delayed embryo implantation. Their serum
progesterone and estrogen levels were comparable with control on Gestation Day
3.5 (D3.5) at 1100 h. There was reduced cell proliferation in D3.5 and D4.5
Lpar3(-/-) stroma. Progesterone receptor (PGR) disappeared from D4.5 Lpar3(+/+)
uterine luminal epithelium (LE) but remained highly expressed in D4.5 Lpar3(-/-) 
LE. Pgr and PGR- target genes but not estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha [Esr1]) or
ESR target genes, were upregulated in D4.5 Lpar3(-/-) LE. It was hypothesized
that suppression of PGR activity in LE could restore on-time uterine receptivity 
in Lpar3(-/-) mice. A low dose of RU486 (5 µg/mouse) given on D3.5 at 900 h
rescued delayed implantation in all pregnant Lpar3(-/-) females and significantly
increased number of implantation sites compared to vehicle-treated pregnant
Lpar3(-/-) females detected on D4.5. E2 (25 ng/mouse) had a similar effect as 5
µg RU486 on embryo implantation in Lpar3(-/-) females. However, when the ovaries 
were removed on late D2.5 to create an experimentally induced delayed
implantation model, 25 ng E2 activated implantation in Lpar3(+/+) but not
Lpar3(-/-) females detected on D4.5. These results demonstrate that deletion of
Lpar3 leads to an increased ratio of progesterone signaling/estrogen signaling
that can be optimized by low doses of RU486 or E2 to restore on-time implantation
in Lpar3(-/-) females.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4712008 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26447143  [PubMed - in process]


139. J Ovarian Res. 2015 Oct 7;8:66. doi: 10.1186/s13048-015-0193-8.

Identification of germ cell-specific VASA and IFITM3 proteins in human ovarian
endometriosis.

Fraunhoffer NA(1,)(2,)(3), Meilerman Abuelafia A(4,)(5), Stella I(5), Galliano
S(5,)(6), Barrios M(5), Vitullo AD(4,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Estudios Biomédicos, Biotecnológicos, Ambientales y Diagnóstico,
CEBBAD- Universidad Maimónides, Hidalgo 775, Buenos Aires, C1405BCK, Argentina.
fraunhoffer.nicolas@maimonides.edu. (2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Científicas y Técnicas, CONICET-Argentina, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
fraunhoffer.nicolas@maimonides.edu. (3)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
Maimónides, Buenos Aires, Argentina. fraunhoffer.nicolas@maimonides.edu.
(4)Centro de Estudios Biomédicos, Biotecnológicos, Ambientales y Diagnóstico,
CEBBAD- Universidad Maimónides, Hidalgo 775, Buenos Aires, C1405BCK, Argentina.
(5)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Maimónides, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(6)Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Eva Perón, Merlo, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (7)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas,
CONICET-Argentina, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Endometriosis is a gynaecological disorder that affects 6-10 % of
female population. It is characterized by the presence of endometrial tissue
outside the uterus, most often in the pelvic peritoneum or ovaries. Recent
studies have indicated that mesenchymal endometrial stem cells might get involved
in endometriosis progression. Although germ line stem cells have been proved to
exist in the ovary, their involvement in ovarian endometriosis has not been
investigated. In this preliminary report we aimed to identify germinal stem cell 
markers in ovarian endometriosis.
FINDINGS: Ten paraffin-embedded ovarian endometriosis samples were screened for
germ cell-specific proteins DDX4 (VASA) and IFITM3, and its relation with stem
cell marker OCT4, proliferation marker PCNA and estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1),
by immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence and PCR. DDX4 and IFITM3 proteins
were expressed in isolated cells and clusters of cells in the cortical region of 
ovarian endometriotic cysts. DDX4 and IFITM3 co-localized in cells from
endometriotic stroma, and DDX4/IFITM3-expressing cells were positive for ESR1,
OCT4 and PCNA. No cells expressing neither DDX4 nor IFITM3 were detected in
normal endometrial tissue.
CONCLUSION: The identification of germ cell-specific proteins DDX4 and IFITM3
provides the first evidence of ovarian-sourced cells in ovarian endometriotic
lesions and opens up new directions towards understanding the still confusing
pathogenesis of endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC4597381
PMID: 26446766  [PubMed - in process]


140. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):37169-84. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5951.

Remarkable similarities of chromosomal rearrangements between primary human
breast cancers and matched distant metastases as revealed by whole-genome
sequencing.

Tang MH(1), Dahlgren M(1), Brueffer C(1), Tjitrowirjo T(1), Winter C(1), Chen
Y(1), Olsson E(1), Wang K(1), Törngren T(1), Sjöström M(1,)(2), Grabau D(3),
Bendahl PO(1), Rydén L(2), Niméus E(1,)(2), Saal LH(1,)(4), Borg Å(1,)(4),
Gruvberger-Saal SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. (2)Division of Surgery, Department of Clinical
Sciences, Lund University and Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Department of Pathology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. (4)CREATE
Health Strategic Center for Translational Cancer Research, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden.

To better understand and characterize chromosomal structural variation during
breast cancer progression, we enumerated chromosomal rearrangements for 11
patients by performing low-coverage whole-genome sequencing of 11 primary breast 
tumors and their 13 matched distant metastases. The tumor genomes harbored a
median of 85 (range 18-404) rearrangements per tumor, with a median of 82
(26-310) in primaries compared to 87 (18-404) in distant metastases. Concordance 
between paired tumors from the same patient was high with a median of 89% of
rearrangements shared (range 61-100%), whereas little overlap was found when
comparing all possible pairings of tumors from different patients (median 3%).
The tumors exhibited diverse genomic patterns of rearrangements: some carried
events distributed throughout the genome while others had events mostly within
densely clustered chromothripsis-like foci at a few chromosomal locations.
Irrespectively, the patterns were highly conserved between the primary tumor and 
metastases from the same patient. Rearrangements occurred more frequently in
genic areas than expected by chance and among the genes affected there was
significant enrichment for cancer-associated genes including disruption of TP53, 
RB1, PTEN, and ESR1, likely contributing to tumor development. Our findings are
most consistent with chromosomal rearrangements being early events in breast
cancer progression that remain stable during the development from primary tumor
to distant metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4741922
PMID: 26439695  [PubMed - in process]


141. J Nutrigenet Nutrigenomics. 2015;8(3):114-27. doi: 10.1159/000439382. Epub 2015
Oct 7.

Phytochemical Indicaxanthin Inhibits Colon Cancer Cell Growth and Affects the DNA
Methylation Status by Influencing Epigenetically Modifying Enzyme Expression and 
Activity.

Naselli F(1), Belshaw NJ, Gentile C, Tutone M, Tesoriere L, Livrea MA, Caradonna 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biologiche Chimiche e Farmaceutiche
(STEBICEF), Universitx00E0; di Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Recently, we have shown anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects 
of indicaxanthin associated with epigenetic modulation of the onco-suppressor
p16INK4a in the human colon cancer cell line CACO2. In the present study, the
epigenetic activity of indicaxanthin and the mechanisms involved were further
investigated in other colorectal cancer cell lines.
METHODS: LOVO1, CACO2, HT29, HCT116, and DLD1 cells were used to evaluate the
potential influence of consistent dietary concentrations of indicaxanthin on DNA 
methylation, and the epigenetic mechanisms involved were researched.
RESULTS: Indicaxanthin exhibited anti-proliferative activity in all cell lines
but HT29, induced demethylation in the promoters of some methylation-silenced
onco-suppressor genes involved in colorectal carcinogenesis (p16INK4a, GATA4, and
ESR1), and left unchanged others which were basally hypermethylated (SFRP1 and
HPP1). In apparent contrast, cell exposure to indicaxanthin increased DNMT gene
expression, although indicaxanthin appeared to be an inhibitor of DNMT activity. 
Indicaxanthin also increased the expression of genes involved in DNA
demethylation. Finally, an in silico molecular modelling approach suggested
stable binding of indicaxanthin at the DNMT1 catalytic site.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings contribute to new knowledge in the field of
phytochemicals and specifically suggest dietary indicaxanthin as a potential
epigenetic agent to protect colon cells against tumoral alterations.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26439130  [PubMed - in process]


142. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 20;112(42):12986-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1513550112. Epub 2015 Oct 5.

Epithelial estrogen receptor 1 intrinsically mediates squamous differentiation in
the mouse vagina.

Miyagawa S(1), Iguchi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic
Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan;
Department of Basic Biology, Faculty of Life Science, SOKENDAI (The Graduate
University for Advanced Studies), Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan. (2)Okazaki
Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic Biology,
National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan;
Department of Basic Biology, Faculty of Life Science, SOKENDAI (The Graduate
University for Advanced Studies), Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan
taisen@nibb.ac.jp.

Estrogen-mediated actions in female reproductive organs are tightly regulated,
mainly through estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1). The mouse vaginal epithelium
cyclically exhibits cell proliferation and differentiation in response to
estrogen and provides a unique model for analyzing the homeostasis of stratified 
squamous epithelia. To address the role of ESR1-mediated tissue events during
homeostasis, we analyzed mice with a vaginal epithelium-specific knockout of Esr1
driven by keratin 5-Cre (K5-Esr1KO). We show here that loss of epithelial ESR1 in
the vagina resulted in aberrant epithelial cell proliferation in the suprabasal
cell layers and led to failure of keratinized differentiation. Gene expression
analysis showed that several known estrogen target genes, including erbB growth
factor ligands, were not induced by estrogen in the K5-Esr1KO mouse vagina. Organ
culture experiments revealed that the addition of erbB growth factor ligands,
such as amphiregulin, could activate keratinized differentiation in the absence
of epithelial ESR1. Thus, epithelial ESR1 integrates estrogen and growth factor
signaling to mediate regulation of cell proliferation in squamous
differentiation, and our results provide new insights into estrogen-mediated
homeostasis in female reproductive organs.

PMCID: PMC4620905 [Available on 2016-04-20]
PMID: 26438838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Med Sci Monit. 2015 Oct 4;21:2986-96. doi: 10.12659/MSM.894010.

Association Between ESR1 PvuII, XbaI, and P325P Polymorphisms and Breast Cancer
Susceptibility: A Meta-Analysis.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang M(1), Yuan X(1), Zhang Z(2), Zhang P(3), Chao H(1), Jiang L(1),
Jiang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Changzhou Maternal and Child Health Care
Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Changzhou, Jiangsu, China
(mainland). (2)Jing Jiang College Affiliated to Jiang Su University, Zhengjiang, 
Jiangsu, China (mainland). (3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Changzhou No. 2 
People's Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Changzhou, Jiangsu,
China (mainland).

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths
for women. Numerous studies have shown that single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) on the ESR1 gene are associated to this disease. However, data and
conclusions are inconsistent and controversial.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: To investigate the association between PvuII (rs2234693),
XbaI (rs9340799) and P325P (rs1801132) polymorphisms of ESR1 gene with the risk
of breast cancer under different population categorizations, we searched multiple
databases for data collection, and performed the meta-analysis on a total of 25
case-control studies. Three different comparison models - dominant model,
recessive model, and homozygote comparison model - were applied to evaluate the
association.
RESULTS: Our results indicated that people with TT+TC or TT genotype were at a
greater risk of developing breast cancer than those with CC genotype in the PvuII
polymorphism. While for XbaI and P325P polymorphisms, no significance was found
using any of the 3 models. Furthermore, the data were also stratified into
different subgroups according to the ethnicity (white or Asian) and source of
controls (hospital-based or population-based), and separate analyses were
conducted to assess the association. The ethnicity subgroup assessment showed
that the higher risk of breast cancer for TT genotype of PvuII polymorphism than 
CC genotype only occurred in Asian people, but not in white populations. For the 
source-stratified subgroup analysis, significant association suggested that
people with TT + TC genotype were at a greater risk of developing breast cancer
than those with CC genotype in the hospital-based subgroup.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, this meta-analysis clarified the inconsistent conclusions from
previous studies, conducted analyses for the entire population as well as for
different subgroups using diverse population categorization strategies, and has
the potential to help provide a personalized risk estimate for breast cancer
susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4599181
PMID: 26434778  [PubMed - in process]


144. Transl Res. 2015 Dec;166(6):540-553.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.09.003. Epub
2015 Sep 14.

Droplet digital polymerase chain reaction assay for screening of ESR1 mutations
in 325 breast cancer specimens.

Takeshita T(1), Yamamoto Y(2), Yamamoto-Ibusuki M(1), Inao T(1), Sueta A(2),
Fujiwara S(1), Omoto Y(3), Iwase H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. (2)Department of
Molecular-Targeting Therapy for Breast Cancer, Kumamoto University Hospital,
Kumamoto, Japan. (3)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School
of Medical Science, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan; Department of
Endocrinological and Breast Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kyoto
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan. (4)Department of Breast and
Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address: hiwase@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR), which could perform thousands 
of PCRs on a nanoliter scale simultaneously, would be an attractive method to
massive parallel sequencing for identifying and studying the significance of
low-frequency rare mutations. Recent evidence has shown that the key potential
mechanisms of the failure of aromatase inhibitors-based therapy involve
identifying activating mutations affecting the ligand-binding domain of the ESR1 
gene. Therefore, the detection of ESR1 mutations may be useful as a biomarker
predicting an effect of the treatment. We aimed to develop a ddPCR-based method
for the sensitive detection of ESR1 mutations in 325 breast cancer specimens, in 
which 270 primary and 55 estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) metastatic breast
cancer (MBC) specimens. Our ddPCR assay could detect the ESR1 mutant molecules
with low concentration of 0.25 copies/µL. According to the selected cutoff, ESR1 
mutations occurred in 7 (2.5%) of 270 primary breast cancer specimens and in 11
(20%) of 55 ER+ MBC specimens. Among the 11 MBC specimens, 5 specimens (45.5%)
had the most common ESR1 mutation, Y537S, 4 specimens (36.3%) each had D538G,
Y537N, and Y537C. Interestingly, 2 patients had 2 ESR1 mutations, Y537N/D538G and
Y537S/Y537C, and 2 patients had 3 ESR1 mutations, Y537S/Y537N/D538G. Biopsy was
performed in heterochrony in 8 women twice. In 8 women, 4 women had primary
breast cancer and MBC specimens and 4 women had 2 specimens when treatment was
failure. Four of these 8 women acquired ESR1 mutation, whereas no ESR1 mutation
could be identified at first biopsy. ddPCR technique could be a promising tool
for the next-generation sequencing-free precise detection of ESR1 mutations in
endocrine therapy resistant cases and may assist in determining the treatment
strategy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26434753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Reproduction. 2015 Dec;150(6):507-16. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0371. Epub 2015 Oct 2.

Estradiol promotes cells invasion by activating ß-catenin signaling pathway in
endometriosis.

Xiong W(1), Zhang L(1), Yu L(1), Xie W(1), Man Y(1), Xiong Y(1), Liu H(1), Liu
Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and GynecologyTongji Medical College, Union Hospital,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, ChinaDepartment of
Obstetrics and GynecologyUnion Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, 1277 JieFang Road, Wuhan, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
GynecologyTongji Medical College, Union Hospital, Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology, Wuhan 430022, ChinaDepartment of Obstetrics and GynecologyUnion
Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1277 JieFang Road,
Wuhan, China Department of Obstetrics and GynecologyTongji Medical College, Union
Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022,
ChinaDepartment of Obstetrics and GynecologyUnion Hospital, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, 1277 JieFang Road, Wuhan, China liqun94@163.com.

Endometriosis is an estrogen-dependent disease that involves the adhesion,
invasion, and angiogenesis of endometrial tissues outside of the uterine cavity. 
We hypothesized that a link exists between estrogen and beta-catenin (ß-catenin) 
signaling in the pathogenesis of endometriosis. Human endometrial stromal cells
(HESCs) were separated from eutopic endometrial tissues that were obtained from
patients with endometriosis. ß-catenin expression and cells invasiveness ability 
were up-regulated by 17ß-estradiol (E2) in an estrogen receptor (ESR)-dependent
manner, whereas ß-catenin siRNA abrogated this phenomenon. Moreover,
co-immunoprecipitation and dual immunofluorescence studies confirmed ESR1,
ß-catenin, and lymphoid enhancer factor 1/T cell factor 3 co-localization in the 
nucleus in HESCs after E2 treatment. To determine the role of ß-catenin signaling
in the implantation of ectopic endometrium, we xenotransplanted eutopic
endometrium from endometriosis patients into ovariectomized severe combined
immunodeficiency mice. The implantation of the endometrium was suppressed by
ß-catenin siRNA. Collectively, studies regarding ß-catenin signaling are critical
for improving our understanding of the pathogenesis of estrogen-induced
endometriosis, which can translate into the development of treatments and
therapeutic strategies for endometriosis.

© 2015 The authors.

PMCID: PMC4633770
PMID: 26432349  [PubMed - in process]


146. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 24;6(37):39865-76. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5399.

Long non-coding RNA profiling links subgroup classification of endometrioid
endometrial carcinomas with trithorax and polycomb complex aberrations.

Jiang Y(1), Malouf GG(2), Zhang J(3), Zheng X(3), Chen Y(4), Thompson EJ(5),
Weinstein JN(3), Yuan Y(6), Spano JP(2), Broaddus R(7), Tannir NM(4), Khayat
D(2), Lu KH(1), Su X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, UT MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Groupe
Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, University Pierre and Marie Curie (Paris VI),
Institut Universitaire de Cancérologie, AP-HP, Paris, France. (3)Department of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
TX, USA. (4)Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, UT MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (5)Department of Genetics, UT MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (6)Department of Biostatistics, UT MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (7)Department of Pathology, UT MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Integrative analysis of endometrioid endometrial carcinoma (EEC)
using multiple platforms has distinguished four molecular subgroups. However, the
landscape of expressed long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) and their role in charting
EEC subgroups and determining clinical aggressiveness remain largely unknown.
RESULTS: Using stringent criteria, we identified 1,931 expressed lncRNAs and
predicted potential drivers through integrative analysis. Unsupervised clustering
of lncRNA expression revealed three robust categories: basal-like, luminal-like
and CTNNB1-enriched subgroups. Basal-like subgroup was enriched for aggressive
tumors with higher pathological grade (p < 0.0001), TNM stage (p = 0.01), and
somatic mutations in trithorax-group genes (MLL, MLL2 and MLL3); and it
overexpressed polycomb genes EZH2 and CBX2. In contrast to the luminal-like
subgroup, progesterone (PGR) and estrogen receptor (ESR1) genes were highly
down-regulated in the EEC basal-like subgroup. Consistent with its enrichment for
CTNNB1 mutations (69%), lncRNA profile of the CTNNB1-enriched EEC subgroup was
highly similar to that of the CTNNB1-enriched liver cancer subgroup.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed integrative analysis of lncRNAs in EEC using 
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) molecular RNAseq profiles of 191 primary tumors
for which genomic data were also available. We established lncRNA subgroup
classification, correlated it with chromatin modifying gene expression, and
described correlations between our lncRNA classification and clinico-genomic
tumor features.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal the utility of systematic characterization of
clinically annotated EEC in three clinically relevant subgroups. They also
highlight the convergence of aberrations in polycomb- and trithorax-group genes
in aggressive basal EEC subtypes, providing a rationale for further investigation
of epigenetic therapy in this setting.

PMCID: PMC4741866
PMID: 26431491  [PubMed - in process]


147. Pak J Med Sci. 2015 Jul-Aug;31(4):880-5. doi: 10.12669/pjms.314.7541.

Estrogen Receptor Alpha (ESR1) Gene Polymorphisms in Pre-eclamptic Saudi
Patients.

El-Beshbishy HA(1), Tawfeek MA(2), Al-Azhary NM(3), Mariah RA(4), Habib FA(5),
Aljayar L(6), Alahmadi AF(7).

Author information: 
(1)Hesham A. El-Beshbishy, Center for Genetics and Inherited Diseases, Taibah
University, Madina, Saudi Arabia. Medical Laboratories Technology Department,
Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Taibah University, Madina, Saudi Arabia.
Biochemistry Department, Al-Azhar University, Nasr City, Cairo 11751, Egypt.
(2)Manal A. Tawfeek, Clinical Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta
University, Tanta, Egypt. Biochemistry & Molecular Medicine Department, College
of Medicine, Taibah University, Madina, Saudi Arabia. (3)Nevin M. Al-Azhary,
Clinical Pathology Department, National Cancer Institute, Cairo University,
Cairo, Egypt. Biochemistry & Molecular Medicine Department, College of Medicine, 
Taibah University, Madina, Saudi Arabia. (4)Reham A. Mariah, Medical Biochemistry
Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt. Biochemistry &
Molecular Medicine Department, College of Medicine, Taibah University, Madina,
Saudi Arabia. (5)Fawzia A. Habib, Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, College
of Medicine, Taibah University, Madina, Saudi Arabia. (6)Lamya Aljayar,
Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, Madina Maternity Children Hospital, Madina,
Saudi Arabia. (7)Abrar F. Alahmadi, Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, Madina 
Maternity Children Hospital, Madina, Saudi Arabia.

OBJECTIVES: Pre-eclampsia causes maternal mortality worldwide. Estrogen receptor 
alpha (ESR1) gene polymorphisms were responsible for cardiovascular diseases.
This case control study was conducted to investigate whether 2 polymorphic genes 
of ESR1 are associated with pre-eclampsia among Saudi women in Madina city, Saudi
Arabia.
METHODS: Blood samples from 97 pre-eclamptic and 94 healthy pregnant women were
analyzed using restriction fragment length polymorphism-polymerase chain reaction
method. All the subjects were recruited randomly from outpatient clinics of
Madina Maternity Children Hospital (MMCH), Madina, Saudi Arabia, between Dec.
2012 and Jan. 2014.
RESULTS: There was no association between pre-eclampsia and PvuII and XbaI ESR1
gene polymorphisms individually. TT/AA and TT/AG genotype combination existed
significantly in pre-eclamptic patients compared to control. The frequency of
PvuII and XbaI combined TT/AA genotypes between pre-eclamptic women was 36.1% vs 
9.6%, however, frequency of PvuII and XbaI combined TT/AG genotypes between
pre-eclamptic women was 3.1% vs 17%, compared to control. The homozygous T-A
haplotype carriers showed high pre-eclampsia risk, independent of pregnancy, BMI 
and smoking status (adjusted odds ratio (OR): 3.26, 95% confidence interval
(CI):1.71-9.21). The heterozygous T-A haplotype carriers did not differ from that
of non-carriers (adjusted OR: 1.12, 95% CI: 0.47-2.75). No association was
observed between pre-eclampsia and T-G, C-G and C-A haplotype of PvuII and
XbaIESR1 gene polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: T-A haplotype of homozygous associated with pre eclampsia not
heterozygous carriers of ESR 1 PvuII and XbaI gene polymorphisms elicited high
risk of pre-eclampsia. GG genotype of XbaI polymorphism decreased pre-eclampsia
risk. Further studies using larger sample size are recommended to investigate the
ESR 1 gene polymorphisms associated with pre-eclampsia.

PMCID: PMC4590376
PMID: 26430422  [PubMed]


148. Nucl Recept Signal. 2015 Jul 21;13:e003. doi: 10.1621/nrs.13003. eCollection
2015.

Transmembrane helices in "classical" nuclear reproductive steroid receptors: a
perspective.

Morrill GA(1), Kostellow AB(1), Gupta RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, NY 10461 USA.

Steroid receptors of the nuclear receptor superfamily are proposed to be either: 
1) located in the cytosol and moved to the cell nucleus upon activation, 2)
tethered to the inside of the plasma membrane, or 3) retained in the nucleus
until free steroid hormone enters and activates specific receptors. Using
computational methods to analyze peptide receptor topology, we find that the
"classical" nuclear receptors for progesterone (PRB/PGR), androgen (ARB/AR) and
estrogen (ER1/ESR1) contain two transmembrane helices (TMH) within their
ligand-binding domains (LBD).The MEMSAT-SVM algorithm indicates that ARB and ER2 
(but not PRB or ER1) contain a pore-lining (channel-forming) region which may
merge with other pore-lining regions to form a membrane channel. ER2 lacks a TMH,
but contains a single pore-lining region. The MemBrain algorithm predicts that
PRB, ARB and ER1 each contain one TMH plus a half TMH separated by 51 amino
acids.ER2 contains two half helices. The TM-2 helices of ARB, ER1 and ER2 each
contain 9-13 amino acid motifs reported to translocate the receptor to the plasma
membrane, as well as cysteine palmitoylation sites. PoreWalker analysis of X-ray 
crystallographic data identifies a pore or channel within the LBDs of ARB and ER1
and predicts that 70 and 72 residues are pore-lining residues, respectively. The 
data suggest that (except for ER2), cytosolic receptors become anchored to the
plasma membrane following synthesis. Half-helices and pore-lining regions in turn
form functional ion channels and/or facilitate passive steroid uptake into the
cell. In perspective, steroid-dependent insertion of "classical" receptors
containing pore-lining regions into the plasma membrane may regulate permeability
to ions such as Ca(2+), Na(+) or K(+), as well as facilitate steroid
translocation into the nucleus.

PMCID: PMC4590301
PMID: 26430393  [PubMed - in process]


149. Science. 2015 Oct 2;350(6256):82-7. doi: 10.1126/science.aac7368.

Multiple repressive mechanisms in the hippocampus during memory formation.

Cho J(1), Yu NK(2), Choi JH(2), Sim SE(2), Kang SJ(2), Kwak C(2), Lee SW(2), Kim 
JI(2), Choi DI(2), Kim VN(3), Kaang BK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for RNA Research, Institute for Basic Science, Seoul 151-742, Korea.
Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-747, Korea. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, College
of Natural Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-747, Korea. (3)Center
for RNA Research, Institute for Basic Science, Seoul 151-742, Korea. Department
of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-747, Korea. narrykim@snu.ac.kr kaang@snu.ac.kr. (4)Department of
Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National University,
Seoul 151-747, Korea. narrykim@snu.ac.kr kaang@snu.ac.kr.

Memory stabilization after learning requires translational and transcriptional
regulations in the brain, yet the temporal molecular changes that occur after
learning have not been explored at the genomic scale. We used ribosome profiling 
and RNA sequencing to quantify the translational status and transcript levels in 
the mouse hippocampus after contextual fear conditioning. We revealed three types
of repressive regulations: translational suppression of ribosomal protein-coding 
genes in the hippocampus, learning-induced early translational repression of
specific genes, and late persistent suppression of a subset of genes via
inhibition of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1/ERa) signaling. In behavioral analyses,
overexpressing Nrsn1, one of the newly identified genes undergoing rapid
translational repression, or activating ESR1 in the hippocampus impaired memory
formation. Collectively, this study unveils the yet-unappreciated importance of
gene repression mechanisms for memory formation.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26430118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Int J Genomics. 2015;2015:197603. doi: 10.1155/2015/197603. Epub 2015 Sep 3.

Exploring the Functional Disorder and Corresponding Key Transcription Factors in 
Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasms Progression.

Bai G(1), Wu C(2), Gao Y(3), Shu G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tianjin Third Central Hospital, Tianjin 300179, China 
; Key Laboratory of Artificial Cell Institute of Hepatobiliary Disease, Tianjin
Third Central Hospital, Tianjin 300179, China. (2)Department of Oncology, Tianjin
Third Central Hospital, Tianjin 300179, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Artificial
Cell Institute of Hepatobiliary Disease, Tianjin Third Central Hospital, Tianjin 
300179, China. (4)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Tianjin Third Central
Hospital, Tianjin 300179, China.

This study has analyzed the gene expression patterns of an IPMN microarray
dataset including normal pancreatic ductal tissue (NT), intraductal papillary
mucinous adenoma (IPMA), intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma (IPMC), and
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) samples. And eight clusters of differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) with similar expression pattern were detected by k-means
clustering. Then a survey map of functional disorder in IPMN progression was
established by functional enrichment analysis of these clusters. In addition,
transcription factors (TFs) enrichment analysis was used to detect the key TFs in
each cluster of DEGs, and three TFs (FLI1, ERG, and ESR1) were found to
significantly regulate DEGs in cluster 1, and expression of these three TFs was
validated by qRT-PCR. All these results indicated that these three TFs might play
key roles in the early stages of IPMN progression.

PMCID: PMC4573622
PMID: 26425543  [PubMed]


151. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Dec;19(12):2874-87. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12681. Epub 2015 Sep
28.

Analysis of the miRNA-mRNA-lncRNA networks in ER+ and ER- breast cancer cell
lines.

Wu Q(1,)(2,)(3), Guo L(4), Jiang F(5), Li L(2), Li Z(5), Chen F(4).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China. (2)Department of Hygienic Analysis and Detection, School of
Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (3)Department of
Enviromental Health Sciences, Bloomburg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics
and Ministry of Education Key Lab for Modern Toxicology, School of Public Health,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (5)Department of Nutrition and Food
Hygiene and Ministry of Education Key Lab for Modern Toxicology, School of Public
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Recently, rapid advances in bioinformatics analysis have expanded our
understanding of the transcriptome to a genome-wide level. miRNA-mRNA-lncRNA
interactions have been shown to play critical regulatory role in cancer biology. 
In this study, we discussed the use of an integrated systematic approach to
explore new facets of the oestrogen receptor (ER)-regulated transcriptome. The
identification of RNAs that are related to the expression status of the ER may be
useful in clinical therapy and prognosis. We used a network modelling strategy.
First, microarray expression profiling of mRNA, lncRNA and miRNA was performed in
MCF-7 (ER-positive) and MDA-MB-231 cells (ER- negative). A co-expression network 
was then built using co-expression relationships of the differentially expressed 
mRNAs and lncRNAs. Finally, the selected miRNA-mRNA network was added to the
network. The key miRNA-mRNA-lncRNA interaction can be inferred from the network. 
The mRNA and non-coding RNA expression profiles of the cells with different ER
phenotypes were distinct. Among the aberrantly expressed miRNAs, the expression
levels of miR-19a-3p, miR-19b-3p and miR-130a-3p were much lower in the MCF-7
cells, whereas that of miR-148b-3p was much higher. In a cluster of miR-17-92,
the expression levels of six of seven miRNAs were lower in the MCF-7 cells, in
addition to miR-20b in the miR-106a-363 cluster. However, the levels of all the
miRNAs in the miR-106a-25 cluster were higher in the MCF-7 cells. In the
co-expression networking, CD74 and FMNL2 gene which is involved in the immune
response and metastasis, respectively, had a stronger correlation with ER. Among 
the aberrantly expressed lncRNAs, lncRNA-DLEU1 was highly expressed in the MCF-7 
cells. A statistical analysis revealed that there was a co-expression
relationship between ESR1 and lncRNA-DLEU1. In addition, miR-19a and lncRNA-DLEU1
are both located on the human chromosome 13q. We speculate that miR-19a might be 
co-expressed with lncRNA-DLEU1 to co-regulate the expression of ESR1, which
influences the occurrence and development of breast cancer cells with different
levels of ER expression. Our findings reveal that the status of ER is mainly due 
to the differences in the mRNA and ncRNA profile between the breast cancer cell
lines, and highlight the importance of studying the miRNA-mRNA-lncRNA
interactions to completely illustrate the intricate transcriptome.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4687702
PMID: 26416600  [PubMed - in process]


152. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 25;10(9):e0138738. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138738.
eCollection 2015.

Polymorphisms in Genes of Relevance for Oestrogen and Oxytocin Pathways and Risk 
of Barrett's Oesophagus and Oesophageal Adenocarcinoma: A Pooled Analysis from
the BEACON Consortium.

Lagergren K(1), Ek WE(2), Levine D(3), Chow WH(4), Bernstein L(5), Casson AG(6), 
Risch HA(7), Shaheen NJ(8), Bird NC(9), Reid BJ(10), Corley DA(11), Hardie
LJ(12), Wu AH(13), Fitzgerald RC(14), Pharoah P(15), Caldas C(16), Romero Y(17), 
Vaughan TL(18), MacGregor S(19), Whiteman D(20), Westberg L(21), Nyren O(22),
Lagergren J(23).

Author information: 
(1)Upper Gastrointestinal Surgery, Department of Molecular medicine and Surgery, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Statistical Genetics, QIMR Berghofer
Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland, Australia; Department of
Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America. (4)Department of Epidemiology, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (5)Department of Population
Sciences, Beckman Research Institute and City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Duarte, California, United States of America. (6)Department of Surgery,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada. (7)Yale School of Public
Health, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America. (8)Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, UNC School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. (9)Department of
Oncology, The Medical School, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(10)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America. (11)Kaiser Permanente Northern California, 
Division of Research, Oakland, California, United States of America. (12)Division
of Epidemiology, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. (13)Department of
Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Los Angeles, California, United States of America. (14)Medical
Research Council (MRC) Cancer Unit, Hutchison-MRC Research Centre, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (15)Department of Public Health, University
of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (16)Cancer Research UK Cambridge
Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (17)Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States
of America. (18)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America. (19)Statistical
Genetics, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland,
Australia. (20)Cancer Control Group, Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Herston, Queensland, Australia. (21)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of
Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden. (22)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (23)Upper Gastrointestinal Surgery,
Department of Molecular medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden; Division of Cancer Studies, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The strong male predominance in oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC) and 
Barrett's oesophagus (BO) continues to puzzle. Hormonal influence, e.g. oestrogen
or oxytocin, might contribute.
METHODS: This genetic-epidemiological study pooled 14 studies from three
continents, Australia, Europe, and North America. Polymorphisms in 3 key genes
coding for the oestrogen pathway (receptor alpha (ESR1), receptor beta (ESR2),
and aromatase (CYP19A1)), and 3 key genes of the oxytocin pathway (the oxytocin
receptor (OXTR), oxytocin protein (OXT), and cyclic ADP ribose hydrolase
glycoprotein (CD38)), were analysed using a gene-based approach, versatile
gene-based test association study (VEGAS).
RESULTS: Among 1508 OAC patients, 2383 BO patients, and 2170 controls, genetic
variants within ESR1 were associated with BO in males (p = 0.0058) and an
increased risk of OAC and BO combined in males (p = 0.0023). Genetic variants
within OXTR were associated with an increased risk of BO in both sexes combined
(p = 0.0035) and in males (p = 0.0012). We followed up these suggestive findings 
in a further smaller data set, but found no replication. There were no
significant associations between the other 4 genes studied and risk of OAC, BO,
separately on in combination, in males and females combined or in males only.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variants in the oestrogen receptor alpha and the oxytocin
receptor may be associated with an increased risk of BO or OAC, but replication
in other large samples are needed.

PMCID: PMC4583498
PMID: 26406593  [PubMed - in process]


153. Equine Vet J. 2015 Sep 25. doi: 10.1111/evj.12514. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular changes in the equine follicle in relation to variations in antral
follicle count and anti-Müllerian hormone concentrations.

Claes A(1), Ball BA(1), Troedsson MH(1), Curry TE Jr(2), Squires EL(2), Scoggin
KE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gluck Equine Research Center, Department of Veterinary Science, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, USA. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University 
of Kentucky, Lexington, USA.

REASONS FOR PERFORMING STUDY: The wide variation in circulating anti-Müllerian
hormone (AMH) concentrations between mares is attributed to differences in antral
follicle count (AFC) which may reflect follicular function. There are few data
regarding variations in AFC and associated regulatory factors for AMH in the
equine follicle during follicular development.
OBJECTIVES: To examine molecular and hormonal differences in the equine follicle 
in relation to variations in AFC and circulating AMH concentrations during
follicular development and to identify genes co-expressed with AMH in the equine 
follicle.
STUDY DESIGN: Observational study.
METHODS: Plasma AMH concentrations and AFC were determined in 30 cyclic mares.
Granulosa cells, theca cells and follicular fluid were recovered from growing (n 
= 17) or dominant follicles (n = 13). The expression of several genes, known to
be involved in folliculogenesis and steroidogenesis, was examined using real-time
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
Intrafollicular oestradiol and AMH concentrations were determined by immunoassay.
RESULTS: Within growing follicles, the expression of AMH, AMHR2, ESR2 and INHA in
granulosa cells was positively correlated with AFC and plasma AMH concentrations.
In addition, the expression of ESR1 and FSHR was positively associated with
plasma AMH concentrations. No significant associations were detected in dominant 
follicles. Furthermore, there was no association between AMH or oestradiol
concentrations in follicular fluid and variations in AFC. Finally, the expression
of AMH and genes co-expressed with AMH (AMHR2, ESR2 and FSHR) in granulosa cells 
as well as intrafollicular AMH concentrations decreased during follicular
development while intrafollicular oestradiol concentrations increased and were
inversely related to intrafollicular AMH concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that variations in AFC and circulating AMH
concentrations are associated with molecular changes in the growing equine
follicle.

© 2015 EVJ Ltd.

PMID: 26403213  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


154. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2015 Jul;23(7):527-32. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2015.07.012.

[MiR-211 promotes invasion of hepatoma cells by targeting estrogen receptor
alpha].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan Y(1), Wang Q, Li W, Li X, Kan P, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of clinical laboratory, Huanhu Hospital of Tianjin, Tianjin 300060,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the regulatory functions and molecular mechanisms of
miR211 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: Real-time reverse transcription-PCR was used to analyze the expression
of miR-211 in 20 paired clinical specimens of HCC and adjacent noncancerous
tissues.QGY7703 and HepG2 cells with stimulation or inhibition of miR-211
expression were used to evaluate the effects on malignant phenotypes with the
transwell invasion assay. Candidate target genes of miR-211 were identified by
bioinformatic screening and verified by the EGFP report assay, real-time PCR and 
western blotting. Moreover, the regulatory functions of miR-211 on the target
genes were investigated by RNA interference and cell phenotype assays.
RESULTS: miR-211 was up-regulated in HCC tissue specimens (t =6.26, P < 0.01).HCC
cells overexpressing miR-211 showed greater invasive capacity than cells with
inhibited expression (QGY-7703:t =12.59, P < 0.01; HepG2: t =17.82, P < 0.01).
Estrogen receptor a (ESR1) was identified and validated as a target gene of
miR-211; knockdown of ESR 1 promoted HCC invasive capacity (QGY-7703:t =8.97, P <
0.01; HepG2:t =29.31, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: miR-211 promotes invasion of carcinoma cells by directly targeting
ESR1.

PMID: 26398845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Jul 15;5(8):2467-75. eCollection 2015.

Association of five single nucleotide polymorphisms at 6q25.1 with breast cancer 
risk in northwestern China.

Zhou L(1), He N(2), Feng T(3), Geng T(3), Jin T(4), Chen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Northwest University Xi'an, Shaanxi 710069, China ;
National Engineering Research Center for Miniaturized Detection Systems Xi'an
710069, China. (2)Key Laboratory of High Altitude Environment and Genes Related
to Diseases of Tibet Autonomous Region, School of Medicine, Tibet University for 
Nationalities Xianyang 712082, China ; Key Laboratory for Basic Life Science
Research of Tibet Autonomous Region, School of Medicine, Xizang Minzu University 
for Nationalities Xianyang, Shaanxi 712082, China. (3)National Engineering
Research Center for Miniaturized Detection Systems Xi'an 710069, China. (4)School
of Life Sciences, Northwest University Xi'an, Shaanxi 710069, China ; National
Engineering Research Center for Miniaturized Detection Systems Xi'an 710069,
China ; Key Laboratory of High Altitude Environment and Genes Related to Diseases
of Tibet Autonomous Region, School of Medicine, Tibet University for
Nationalities Xianyang 712082, China ; Key Laboratory for Basic Life Science
Research of Tibet Autonomous Region, School of Medicine, Xizang Minzu University 
for Nationalities Xianyang, Shaanxi 712082, China.

CCDC170 and ESR1, located at 6q25.1, were associated with breast cancer (BC) risk
by genome-wide association studies. Our goal was to validate the association
between CCDC170-ESR1 polymorphisms and BC risk in the population of northwestern 
China. A case-control study of 551 patients with BC and 577 control individuals
was conducted from January 2011 to November 2014. We analyzed five BC-associated 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) identified in CCDC170-ESR1 by previous
studies. Logistic regression models were used to derive odds ratios (ORs) and 95%
confidence intervals after adjusting for body mass index and age. The minor
alleles of rs3757318, rs3734805, and rs2046210 were associated with increased BC 
risk (OR = 1.30, p = 0.005; OR = 1.28, p = 0.006; OR = 1.20, p = 0.033,
respectively) in an allelic model analysis. Those three SNPs had a coincident
significant association with increased BC risk in genetic models and
stratification analyses. A new haplotype, "CT", was associated with a 1.31-fold
increased risk of BC (OR = 1.31, p = 0.006). The "C" allele of rs9383951 was
associated with a reduced risk of BC (OR = 0.69, p = 0.048) in estrogen
receptor-positive individuals under the log-additive model. Our data provide new 
evidence of the association between CCDC170-ESR1 and BC susceptibility in the
population of northwestern China.

PMCID: PMC4568782
PMID: 26396922  [PubMed]


156. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 17;17:128. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0630-z.

Expression profiling of in vivo ductal carcinoma in situ progression models
identified B cell lymphoma-9 as a molecular driver of breast cancer invasion.

Elsarraj HS(1), Hong Y(2), Valdez KE(3), Michaels W(4), Hook M(5), Smith WP(6),
Chien J(7), Herschkowitz JI(8), Troester MA(9), Beck M(10), Inciardi M(11),
Gatewood J(12), May L(13), Cusick T(14), McGinness M(15), Ricci L(16), Fan F(17),
Tawfik O(18), Marks JR(19), Knapp JR(20), Yeh HW(21), Thomas P(22), Carrasco
DR(23), Fields TA(24), Godwin AK(25), Behbod F(26).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow
Blvd, Mail Stop 3003, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. helsarraj@kumc.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow
Blvd, Mail Stop 3003, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. yhong@kumc.edu. (3)Department 
of Pathology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Mail Stop
3003, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. kvaldez@kumc.edu. (4)School of Medicine,
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.
wmichaels@kumc.edu. (5)School of Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center,
Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. mhook@kumc.edu. (6)Department of Radiology,
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.
wsmith2@kumc.edu. (7)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. jchien@kumc.edu. (8)Department of Biomedical
Sciences, University at Albany-SUNY, Rensselaer, NY, 12144, USA.
jherschkowitz@albany.edu. (9)School of Public Health, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. troester@unc.edu. (10)Department of
Chemistry, Wichita State University, Wichita, KS, 67260, USA.
Moriah.Beck@wichita.edu. (11)Department of Radiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. minciardi@kumc.edu. (12)Department
of Radiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.
jgatewood@kumc.edu. (13)School of Medicine, University of Kansas, Wichita, KS,
67214, USA. lisasmay@cox.net. (14)School of Medicine, University of Kansas,
Wichita, KS, 67214, USA. tcusick@wsspa.com. (15)Department of Surgery, University
of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. mmcginness@kumc.edu.
(16)Department of Radiology, Truman Medical Center, Kansas City, MO, 64108, USA. 
lawrence.ricci@tmcmed.org. (17)Department of Pathology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Mail Stop 3003, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.
FFAN@kumc.edu. (18)Department of Pathology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 
3901 Rainbow Blvd, Mail Stop 3003, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. OTAWFIK@kumc.edu.
(19)Department of Surgery, Duke University, Durham, NC, 27710, USA.
marks003@mc.duke.edu. (20)Kansas Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities
Research Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160,
USA. jknapp5@kumc.edu. (21)Department of Biostatistics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. hyeh@kumc.edu. (22)Department of
Pathology, University of Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Mail Stop
3003, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA. PTHOMAS@kumc.edu. (23)Department of Pathology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115-5450,
USA. Ruben_Carrasco@dfci.harvard.edu. (24)Department of Pathology, University of 
Kansas Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Mail Stop 3003, Kansas City, KS, 66160,
USA. tfields@kumc.edu. (25)Department of Pathology, University of Kansas Medical 
Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Mail Stop 3003, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.
agodwin@kumc.edu. (26)Department of Pathology, University of Kansas Medical
Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Mail Stop 3003, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.
fbehbod@kumc.edu.

INTRODUCTION: There are an estimated 60,000 new cases of ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS) each year. A lack of understanding in DCIS pathobiology has led to
overtreatment of more than half of patients. We profiled the temporal molecular
changes during DCIS transition to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) using in vivo
DCIS progression models. These studies identified B cell lymphoma-9 (BCL9) as a
potential molecular driver of early invasion. BCL9 is a newly found co-activator 
of Wnt-stimulated ß-catenin-mediated transcription. BCL9 has been shown to
promote progression of multiple myeloma and colon carcinoma. However BCL9 role in
breast cancer had not been previously recognized.
METHODS: Microarray and RNA sequencing were utilized to characterize the
sequential changes in mRNA expression during DCIS invasive transition. BCL9-shRNA
knockdown was performed to assess the role of BCL9 in in vivo invasion,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and canonical Wnt-signaling.
Immunofluorescence of 28 patient samples was used to assess a correlation between
the expression of BCL9 and biomarkers of high risk DCIS. The cancer genome atlas 
data were analyzed to assess the status of BCL9 gene alterations in breast
cancers.
RESULTS: Analysis of BCL9, by RNA and protein showed BCL9 up-regulation to be
associated with DCIS transition to IDC. Analysis of patient DCIS revealed a
significant correlation between high nuclear BCL9 and pathologic characteristics 
associated with DCIS recurrence: Estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor
(PR) negative, high nuclear grade, and high human epidermal growth factor
receptor2 (HER2). In vivo silencing of BCL9 resulted in the inhibition of DCIS
invasion and reversal of EMT. Analysis of the TCGA data showed BCL9 to be altered
in 26 % of breast cancers. This is a significant alteration when compared to HER2
(ERBB2) gene (19 %) and estrogen receptor (ESR1) gene (8 %). A significantly
higher proportion of basal like invasive breast cancers compared to luminal
breast cancers showed BCL9 amplification.
CONCLUSION: BCL9 is a molecular driver of DCIS invasive progression and may
predispose to the development of basal like invasive breast cancers. As such,
BCL9 has the potential to serve as a biomarker of high risk DCIS and as a
therapeutic target for prevention of IDC.

PMCID: PMC4574212
PMID: 26384318  [PubMed - in process]


157. Digestion. 2015;92(4):192-202. doi: 10.1159/000431254. Epub 2015 Sep 18.

Hsp27 Acts as a Master Molecular Chaperone and Plays an Essential Role in
Hepatocellular Carcinoma Progression.

Cheng J(1), Lv Z, Weng X, Ye S, Shen K, Li M, Qin Y, Hu C, Zhang C, Wu J, Zheng
S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, The
First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China.

AIMS: Hsp27, a master molecular chaperone, plays an important role in cancer.
However, the specific co-chaperones that partner with Hsp27 and the role of Hsp27
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are not fully enumerated. The present study
focuses on the role of Hsp27 in HCC and explores its potential co-chaperones in
HCC development.
METHODS: Gene overexpression or knockdown was used to observe the role of Hsp27
in HCC. Co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry were used to explore
apoptosis resistance by regulating multiple co-chaperones of Hsp27. Hsp27
protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks were constructed by the MetaCore
software.
RESULTS: Hsp27 was upregulated in HCC tissues, and Hsp27 overexpression
significantly facilitated formation of HCC cell colony and invasion in normoxia
and tolerance in hypoxia by interacting with HIF-1a. Next, the analysis of
microarrays revealed that Hsp27 regulated several cellular signaling pathways,
including Wnt, ErbB and TGF-ß signaling. Moreover, we characterized the Hsp27 PPI
map, which indicated that Hsp27 along with its co-chaperones formed different
complexes and exerts transcription regulation activity by activating sp1, c-Myc, 
p53 and ESR1.
CONCLUSIONS: Hsp27 along with its co-chaperones was related to the development of
HCC by regulating multiple signaling pathways, and drugs that target Hsp27 along 
with its co-chaperones may be a potential therapy for HCC.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26381739  [PubMed - in process]


158. Endocrinology. 2015 Dec;156(12):4448-57. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1448. Epub 2015 Sep
15.

Identification of California Condor Estrogen Receptors 1 and 2 and Their
Activation by Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals.

Felton RG(1), Steiner CC(1), Durrant BS(1), Keisler DH(1), Milnes MR(1), Tubbs
CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research (R.G.F., C.C.S., B.S.D.,
C.W.T.), Escondido, California 92027; Division of Animal Sciences (D.H.K.),
University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211; and Department of Natural
Sciences (M.R.M.), Mars Hill University, Mars Hill, North Carolina 28754.

Recently, California condors (Gymnogyps californianus) have been reintroduced to 
coastal regions of California where they feed on marine mammal carcasses. There
is evidence that coastal-dwelling condors experience reproductive issues, such as
eggshell thinning, likely resulting from exposure to endocrine-disrupting
chemicals (EDCs). To address this problem, we have identified and cloned condor
estrogen receptors (ESRs) 1 and 2 and characterized their activation by EDCs
present in the coastal habitats where condors reside.
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) and its metabolites all activated ESR1 and 
ESR2, although their relative potency differed between the receptors. Bisphenol
A, dieldrin, trans-nonachlor, and polychlorinated biphenyl 52 (PCB52) moderately 
activated both ESRs, whereas PCB138 and PCB153 stimulated little to no
activation. Overall, EDC activation of condor ESR2, which is the first ESR2
cloned from a raptor species, was greater than that of ESR1. Significant
activation of both condor ESRs by EDCs occurred at high concentrations (=1µM),
which are within the range of plasma levels of certain EDCs (eg,
dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene [p'p-DDE]) in coastal-dwelling condors. Finally,
phylogenetic analyses of ESRs of 41 avian species identified a single amino acid 
position in ESR2 under positive selection. Mutation of this amino acid affected
receptor activation by EDCs, suggesting the identity of this amino acid may
influence EDC sensitivity of avian species. Together, these findings broaden our 
understanding of EDC interactions with ESRs in avian species. For condors
specifically, these data could be used to evaluate EDC exposure risk at future
release sites to identify those least likely to compromise the continued recovery
of this species.

PMID: 26372180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Sep 8;16(9):21539-54. doi: 10.3390/ijms160921539.

Polymorphisms in the LPL and CETP Genes and Haplotype in the ESR1 Gene Are
Associated with Metabolic Syndrome in Women from Southwestern Mexico.

Cahua-Pablo JÁ(1), Cruz M(2), Méndez-Palacios A(3), Antúnez-Ortiz DL(4),
Vences-Velázquez A(5), del Carmen Alarcón-Romero L(6), Parra EJ(7), Tello-Flores 
VA(8), Leyva-Vázquez MA(9), Valladares-Salgado A(10), Pérez-Macedonio CP(11),
Flores-Alfaro E(12).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Investigación en Epidemiología Clínica y Molecular, Unidad
Académica de Ciencias Químico Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero,
Chilpancingo, Guerrero 39089, Mexico. jose9@hotmail.com. (2)Unidad de
Investigación Médica en Bioquímica, Hospital de Especialidades "Bernardo
Sepúlveda", Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro
Social, Distrito Federal 06725, Mexico. mcruzl@yahoo.com. (3)Laboratorio de
Investigación en Epidemiología Clínica y Molecular, Unidad Académica de Ciencias 
Químico Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Guerrero
39089, Mexico. abymendezp@hotmail.com. (4)Laboratorio de Investigación en
Epidemiología Clínica y Molecular, Unidad Académica de Ciencias Químico
Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Guerrero 39089,
Mexico. diana_antunez84@hotmail.com. (5)Laboratorio de Investigación en
Epidemiología Clínica y Molecular, Unidad Académica de Ciencias Químico
Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Guerrero 39089,
Mexico. avences_2003@yahoo.com.mx. (6)Laboratorio de Biomedicina Molecular,
Unidad Académica de Ciencias Químico Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de
Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Guerrero 39089, Mexico. luzdelcarmen14@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Anthropology, University of Toronto at Mississauga, Mississauga,
ON L5L 1C6, Canada. esteban.parra@utoronto.ca. (8)Laboratorio de Investigación en
Epidemiología Clínica y Molecular, Unidad Académica de Ciencias Químico
Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Guerrero 39089,
Mexico. vatellof@gmail.com. (9)Laboratorio de Biomedicina Molecular, Unidad
Académica de Ciencias Químico Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero,
Chilpancingo, Guerrero 39089, Mexico. leyvamarco13@gmail.com. (10)Unidad de
Investigación Médica en Bioquímica, Hospital de Especialidades "Bernardo
Sepúlveda", Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro
Social, Distrito Federal 06725, Mexico. adanval@gmail.com. (11)Laboratorio de
Investigación en Epidemiología Clínica y Molecular, Unidad Académica de Ciencias 
Químico Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Guerrero
39089, Mexico. permac10@hotmail.com. (12)Laboratorio de Investigación en
Epidemiología Clínica y Molecular, Unidad Académica de Ciencias Químico
Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma de Guerrero, Chilpancingo, Guerrero 39089,
Mexico. efloresa_2@hotmail.com.

Metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a combination of metabolic disorders associated with
an increased risk for cardiovascular disease (CVD). Studies in women reported
associations between polymorphisms in ESR1, LPL and CETP genes and MetS. Our aim 
was to evaluate the association between variants in ESR1, LPL and CETP genes with
MetS and its components. Four hundred and eighty women were analyzed,
anthropometric features and biochemical profiles were evaluated, and genotyping
was performed by real-time PCR. We found an association with elevated glucose
levels (odds ratio (OR) = 2.9; p = 0.013) in carrying the AA genotype of
rs1884051 in the ESR1 gene compared with the GG genotype, and the CC genotype of 
rs328 in the LPL gene was associated with MetS compared to the CG or GG genotype 
(OR = 2.8; p = 0.04). Moreover, the GA genotype of rs708272 in the CETP gene is
associated with MetS compared to the GG or AA genotype (OR = 1.8; p = 0.006). In 
addition the ACTCCG haplotype in the ESR1 gene is associated with a decrease in
the risk of MetS (OR = 0.02; p < 0.001). In conclusion, our results show the
involvement of the variants of ESR1, LPL and CETP genes in metabolic events
related to MetS or some of its features.

PMCID: PMC4613266
PMID: 26370976  [PubMed - in process]


160. BMC Vet Res. 2015 Sep 15;11:235. doi: 10.1186/s12917-015-0546-y.

Endocrine control of canine mammary neoplasms: serum reproductive hormone levels 
and tissue expression of steroid hormone, prolactin and growth hormone receptors.

Spoerri M(1,)(2), Guscetti F(3), Hartnack S(4), Boos A(5), Oei C(6), Balogh O(7),
Nowaczyk RM(8), Michel E(9), Reichler IM(10), Kowalewski MP(11).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Reproductive Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 260, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. mspoerri@vetclinics.uzh.ch.
(2)Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 260, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. mspoerri@vetclinics.uzh.ch.
(3)Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 268/272, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland.
franco.guscetti@vetpath.uzh.ch. (4)Section of Epidemiology, Vetsuisse Faculty,
Winterthurerstrasse 270, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. sonja.hartnack@access.uzh.ch.
(5)Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 260, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. boosa@vetanat.uzh.ch.
(6)Department of Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, P.O Box 80125, Utrecht, 3508 TC, The Netherlands. C.H.Y.Oei@uu.nl.
(7)Clinic of Reproductive Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 260, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. obalogh@vetclinics.uzh.ch.
(8)Division of Animal Anatomy, Department of Animal Physiology and Biostructure, 
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life
Sciences, Wroclaw, Poland. renatanowaczyk@o2.pl. (9)Clinic of Reproductive
Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 260,
Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. erikamichel@bluewin.ch. (10)Clinic of Reproductive
Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 260,
Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. ireichler@vetclinics.uzh.ch. (11)Institute of
Veterinary Anatomy, Vetsuisse Faculty University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse
260, Zurich, 8057, Switzerland. kowalewski@vetanat.uzh.ch.

BACKGROUND: Neoplasms of the mammary gland are among the most common diseases in 
female domestic dogs (Canis familiaris). It is assumed that reproductive hormones
influence tumorigenesis in this species, although the precise role of the
endocrine milieu and reproductive state is subject to continuing discussion. In
line with this, a recent systematic review of available data on the development
of mammary neoplasms revealed weak evidence for risk reduction after neutering
and an effect of age at neutering. Investigation of several hormone receptors has
revealed decreased expression of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERa, ESR1),
progesterone (P4) receptor (PGR), prolactin (PRL) receptor (PRLR) and growth
hormone receptor (GHR) associated with neoplastic differentiation of mammary
tissues. In other studies, increased levels of estrogens, progesterone and
prolactin were found in serum and/or tissue homogenates of dogs with malignant
neoplasms. However, the association between these entities within one animal
population was never previously examined. Therefore, this study investigated the 
association between circulating serum concentrations of estradiol-17ß,
progesterone and prolactin, and gene expression of ERa (ESR1), ERß (ESR2), PGR,
PRLR, PRL and GHR, with respect to reproductive state (spayed vs. intact) and
cycle stage (anestrus vs. diestrus). Additionally, the expression of E-cadherin
(CDH-1) was evaluated as a possible indicator of metastatic potential.
RESULTS: For all receptors, the lowest gene expression was found in malignant
tumors compared to normal tissues of affected dogs. Steroid levels were not
influenced by their corresponding receptor expression in mammary neoplasms, but
increased PRL levels were negatively associated with low PRLR gene expression in 
malignant tumors. The expression of CDH-1 was influenced by tumor malignancy and 
cycle stage, i.e., the highest gene expression was found in benign mammary tumors
in diestrous dogs compared to normal and malignant mammary tissues of anestrous
and spayed dogs.
CONCLUSIONS: Herein, it has been confirmed that transformation towards malignant 
neoplasms is associated with significant reduction of gene expression of
particular hormone receptors. Only PRLR in malignant tumors seems to be
influenced by circulating PRL levels. In dogs, CDH-1 can be used as a prognostic 
factor; its expression, however, in benign tumors is influenced by cycle stage.

PMCID: PMC4570623
PMID: 26370564  [PubMed - in process]


161. Toxicol In Vitro. 2015 Dec 25;30(1 Pt B):492-505. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2015.09.012.
Epub 2015 Sep 11.

The mining chemical Polydadmac is cytotoxic but does not interfere with
Cu-induced toxicity in Atlantic salmon hepatocytes.

Olsvik PA(1), Berntssen MH(2), Waagbø R(2), Hevrøy E(3), Søfteland L(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Nutrition and Seafood Research, N-5817 Bergen, Norway.
Electronic address: pal.olsvik@nifes.no. (2)National Institute of Nutrition and
Seafood Research, N-5817 Bergen, Norway. (3)National Institute of Nutrition and
Seafood Research, N-5817 Bergen, Norway; EWOS AS, N-5803 Bergen, Norway.

To speed up sedimentation of suspended solids the mining industry often uses
flocculent chemicals. In this work we evaluated the cytotoxic and mechanistic
effects of Polydadmac, and its basic component Dadmac, on fish cells.
Dose-response effects, temperature-dependent effects and impact of Dadmac and
Polydadmac on Cu toxicity were studied in Atlantic salmon hepatocytes. We used
the xCELLigence system and the MTT test for cytotoxicity assessments, and
real-time RT-qPCR to evaluate molecular effects. The results showed a cytotoxic
response for Polydadmac but not for Dadmac. Elevated levels of Cu were cytotoxic.
Moderately cytotoxic concentrations of Cu (100-1000µM) induced significant
responses on the transcription of a number of genes in the cells, i.e. cuznsod
(sod1), cat, mnsod (sod2), nfe2l2, hmox1, mta, casp3b, casp6, bclx, cyp1a, ccs,
atp7a, app, mmp13, esr1, ppara, fads2 and ptgs2. A factorial PLS regression model
for mnsod transcription showed a synergistic effect between Dadmac and Cu
exposure in the cells, indicating an interaction effect between Dadmac and Cu on 
mitochondrial ROS scavenging. No interaction effects were seen for Polydadmac on 
Cu toxicity. In conclusion, Polydadmac is cytotoxic at elevated concentrations
but appears to have low ability to interfere with Cu toxicity in Atlantic salmon 
liver cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26368670  [PubMed - in process]


162. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 10;10(9):e0135988. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135988.
eCollection 2015.

G Protein-Coupled Estrogen Receptor 1 Mediates Acute Estrogen-Induced
Cardioprotection via MEK/ERK/GSK-3ß Pathway after Ischemia/Reperfusion.

Kabir ME(1), Singh H(2), Lu R(3), Olde B(4), Leeb-Lundberg LM(4), Bopassa JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, TX 78229, United States of America. (2)Department 
of Pharmacology and Physiology, Drexel University College of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19102, United States of America. (3)Department of
Anesthesiology, Division of Molecular Medicine, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1778, United States of America. (4)Department of
Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, 22184 Lund, Sweden.

Three types of estrogen receptors (ER) exist in the heart, Esr1, Esr2 and the G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1, Gper1. However, their relative importance in
mediating estrogen protective action is unknown. We found that, in the male mouse
ventricle, Gper1 transcripts are three- and seventeen-fold more abundant than
Esr1 and Esr2 mRNAs, respectively. Analysis of the three ER knockouts (Esr1-/-,
Esr2-/- and Gper1-/-) showed that only the Gper1-/- hearts lost their ability to 
be protected by 40 nM estrogen as measured by heart function, infarct size and
mitochondrial Ca2+ overload, an index of mitochondrial permeability transition
pore (mPTP) activity. Analysis of Akt, ERK1/2 and GSK-3ß salvage kinases
uncovered Akt and ERK1/2 transient activation by estrogen whose phosphorylation
increased during the first 5 min of non-ischemic perfusion. All these increase in
phosphorylation effects were abrogated in Gper1-/-. Inhibition of MEK1/2/ERK1/2
(1 µM U0126) and PI-3K/Akt (10 µM LY294002) signaling showed that the
MEK1/2/ERK1/2 pathway via GSK-3ß exclusively was responsible for cardioprotection
as an addition of U0126 prevented estrogen-induced GSK-3ß increased
phosphorylation, resistance to mitochondrial Ca2+-overload, functional recovery
and protection against infarction. Further, inhibiting PKC translocation (1 µM
chelerythrin-chloride) abolished estrogen-induced cardioprotection. These data
indicate that estrogen-Gper1 acute coupling plays a key role in cardioprotection 
against ischemia/reperfusion injury in male mouse via a cascade involving PKC
translocation, ERK1/2/GSK-3ß phosphorylation leading to the inhibition of the
mPTP opening.

PMCID: PMC4565659
PMID: 26356837  [PubMed - in process]


163. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Aug 10;14(3):9361-9. doi: 10.4238/2015.August.10.17.

Estrogen receptor 1 PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms and susceptibility to
Alzheimer's disease: a meta-analysis.

Lee YH(1), Song GG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

The aim of this study was to explore whether estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) PvuII and
XbaI polymorphisms are associated with susceptibility to Alzheimer's disease
(AD). We conducted a meta-analysis of the associations between AD and ESR1 PvuII 
and XbaI polymorphisms as well as haplotypes of the ESR1 PvuII and XbaI
polymorphisms. A total of 1359 patients and 1387 controls from 9 studies on the
ESR1 PvuII polymorphism and 1525 patients and 1575 controls from 8 studies on the
ESR1 XbaI polymorphism were included in this meta-analysis. Gender-specific
meta-analysis showed an association between the ESR1 PP+Pp genotype and AD in
males (OR = 0.302, 95%CI = 0.100-0.914, P = 0.034), but not in females. No
association was observed between AD and the ESR1 XbaI X allele (OR = 1.114, 95%CI
= 0.868-1.429, P = 0.397). However, country-specific meta-analysis identified an 
association between AD and the ESR1 X allele in Japanese (OR = 1.386, 95%CI =
1.055-1.822, P = 0.019), but not Chinese or Italian populations. Meta-analyses
results indicated an association between the PP/XX haplotypes and AD in Chinese
population (OR for PP/XX vs others = 2.758, 95%CI = 1.750-4.346, P = 1.2 x
10(-6)). This meta-analysis showed associations between the ESR1 PvuII
polymorphism and AD susceptibility in males, between AD risk and the ESR1 XbaI
polymorphism in the Japanese population, and between the PP/XX haplotype and AD
susceptibility in the Chinese population.

PMID: 26345870  [PubMed - in process]


164. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2015 Dec;27(12):720-7. doi:
10.1016/j.clon.2015.08.001. Epub 2015 Sep 4.

Epigenetic Alteration by DNA Methylation of ESR1, MYOD1 and hTERT Gene Promoters 
is Useful for Prediction of Response in Patients of Locally Advanced Invasive
Cervical Carcinoma Treated by Chemoradiation.

Sood S(1), Patel FD(2), Ghosh S(3), Arora A(4), Dhaliwal LK(5), Srinivasan R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Department of Cytology and Gynecological
Pathology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, 
India. (2)Department of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India. (3)Department of Experimental 
Medicine and Biotechnology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh, India. (4)Scientist Fellow, Microbial Type Culture
Collection and Gene Bank, Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh, India.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigarh, India. (6)Molecular Pathology Laboratory,
Department of Cytology and Gynecological Pathology, Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address:
drsradhika@gmail.com.

AIMS: Locally advanced invasive cervical cancer [International Federation of
Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) IIB/III] is treated by chemoradiation. The
response to treatment is variable within a given FIGO stage. Therefore, the aim
of the present study was to evaluate the gene promoter methylation profile and
corresponding transcript expression of a panel of six genes to identify genes
which could predict the response of patients treated by chemoradiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In total, 100 patients with invasive cervical cancer in
FIGO stage IIB/III who underwent chemoradiation treatment were evaluated. Ten
patients developed systemic metastases during therapy and were excluded. On the
basis of patient follow-up, 69 patients were chemoradiation-sensitive, whereas 21
were chemoradiation-resistant. Gene promoter methylation and gene expression was 
determined by TaqMan assay and quantitative real-time PCR, respectively, in
tissue samples.
RESULTS: The methylation frequency of ESR1, BRCA1, RASSF1A, MLH1, MYOD1 and hTERT
genes ranged from 40 to 70%. Univariate and hierarchical cluster analysis
revealed that gene promoter methylation of MYOD1, ESR1 and hTERT could predict
for chemoradiation response. A pattern of unmethylated MYOD1, unmethylated ESR1
and methylated hTERT promoter as well as lower ESR1 transcript levels predicted
for chemoradiation resistance.
CONCLUSION: Methylation profiling of a panel of three genes that includes MYOD1, 
ESR1 and hTERT may be useful to predict the response of invasive cervical
carcinoma patients treated with standard chemoradiation therapy.

Copyright © 2015 The Royal College of Radiologists. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26344356  [PubMed - in process]


165. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Sep;94(35):e0976. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000976.

Impact of ESR1 Gene Polymorphisms on Migraine Susceptibility: A Meta-Analysis.

Li L(1), Liu R, Dong Z, Wang X, Yu S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Haidan
District, Beijing (LL, RL, ZD, XW, SY), and Department of Neurology, General
Hospital of Jincheng Anthracite Coal Mining Group Co. Ltd, Jincheng, Shanxi
Province, China (LL).

An increasing number of studies have explored genetic associations between the
functionally important polymorphisms in estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene and
migraine susceptibility. The previously reported associations have nevertheless
been inconsistent.The present work incorporating the published data derived from 
8 publications was performed to assess the impact of these polymorphisms on
incident migraine. Strength of the genetic risk was estimated by means of an odds
ratio along with the 95% confidence interval (OR and 95% CI).From the results, we
found individuals who harbored the 325-GG genotype, compared with those harboring
the CC genotype or CG and CC combined genotypes, had almost 50% greater risk of
migraine. The same genetic models showed notable associations in subgroups of
Caucasians and migraine with aura (MA). For 594G>A, a moderately increased risk
of migraine was seen under AG versus GG. The AA + AG versus GG model, however,
showed a borderline association with migraine. Subgroup analyses according to
ethnicity and subtype of migraine provided statistical evidence of significantly 
increased risk of migraine in Caucasians and of a marginal association with MA,
respectively. Both 325C>G and 594G>A polymorphisms showed no major effects either
in males or in females.Based on the statistical data, we conclude some of the
ESR1 gene polymorphisms may have major contributions to the pathogenesis of
migraine in Caucasian populations.

PMCID: PMC4616512
PMID: 26334887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):28173-82. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4405.

Whole-transcriptome analysis links trastuzumab sensitivity of breast tumors to
both HER2 dependence and immune cell infiltration.

Triulzi T(1), De Cecco L(2), Sandri M(1), Prat A(3,)(4), Giussani M(1), Paolini
B(5), Carcangiu ML(5), Canevari S(2), Bottini A(6), Balsari A(1,)(7), Menard
S(1), Generali D(6), Campiglio M(1), Di Cosimo S(8), Tagliabue E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Molecular
Targeting Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Functional
Genomics Core Facility, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan,
Italy. (3)Translational Genomics Group, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology,
Barcelona, Spain. (4)Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Clínic i Provincial,
Barcelona, Spain. (5)Department of Pathology, Anatomic Pathology A Unit,
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy. (6)Dipartimento di 
Terapia Molecolare e Farmacogenomica, Istituti Ospitalieri di Cremona, Italy.
(7)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche per la Salute, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Italy. (8)Department of Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori, Milan, Italy.

While results thus far demonstrate the clinical benefit of trastuzumab, some
patients do not respond to this therapy. To identify a molecular predictor of
trastuzumab benefit, we conducted whole-transcriptome analysis of primary HER2+
breast carcinomas obtained from patients treated with trastuzumab-containing
therapies and correlated the molecular portrait with treatment benefit. The
estimated association between gene expression and relapse-free survival allowed
development of a trastuzumab risk model (TRAR), with ERBB2 and ESR1 expression as
core elements, able to identify patients with high and low risk of relapse.
Application of the TRAR model to 24 HER2+ core biopsies from patients treated
with neo-adjuvant trastuzumab indicated that it is predictive of trastuzumab
response. Examination of TRAR in available whole-transcriptome datasets indicated
that this model stratifies patients according to response to trastuzumab-based
neo-adjuvant treatment but not to chemotherapy alone. Pathway analysis revealed
that TRAR-low tumors expressed genes of the immune response, with higher numbers 
of CD8-positive cells detected immunohistochemically compared to TRAR-high
tumors. The TRAR model identifies tumors that benefit from trastuzumab-based
treatment as those most enriched in CD8-positive immune infiltrating cells and
with high ERBB2 and low ESR1 mRNA levels, indicating the requirement for both
features in achieving trastuzumab response.

PMCID: PMC4695052
PMID: 26334217  [PubMed - in process]


167. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Oct;22(5):851-61. doi: 10.1530/ERC-15-0319.

Comprehensive genetic assessment of the ESR1 locus identifies a risk region for
endometrial cancer.

O'Mara TA(1), Glubb DM(1), Painter JN(1), Cheng T(1), Dennis J(1); Australian
National Endometrial Cancer Study Group (ANECS), Attia J(1), Holliday EG(1),
McEvoy M(1), Scott RJ(1), Ashton K(1), Proietto T(1), Otton G(1), Shah M(1),
Ahmed S(1), Healey CS(1), Gorman M(1), Martin L(1); National Study of Endometrial
Cancer Genetics Group (NSECG), Hodgson S(1), Fasching PA(1), Hein A(1), Beckmann 
MW(1), Ekici AB(1), Hall P(1), Czene K(1), Darabi H(1), Li J(1), Dürst M(1),
Runnebaum I(1), Hillemanns P(1), Dörk T(1), Lambrechts D(1), Depreeuw J(1),
Annibali D(1), Amant F(1), Zhao H(1), Goode EL(1), Dowdy SC(1), Fridley BL(1),
Winham SJ(1), Salvesen HB(1), Njølstad TS(1), Trovik J(1), Werner HM(1), Tham
E(1), Liu T(1), Mints M(1); RENDOCAS, Bolla MK(1), Michailidou K(1), Tyrer JP(1),
Wang Q(1), Hopper JL(1); AOCS Group, Peto J(1), Swerdlow AJ(1), Burwinkel B(1),
Brenner H(1), Meindl A(1), Brauch H(1), Lindblom A(1), Chang-Claude J(1), Couch
FJ(1), Giles GG(1), Kristensen VN(1), Cox A(1), Pharoah PD(1), Dunning AM(1),
Tomlinson I(1), Easton DF(1), Thompson DJ(1), Spurdle AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Computational Biology QIMR Berghofer Medical
Research Institute, 300 Herston Road, Herston, Brisbane, Queensland 4006,
Australia Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics University of Oxford, Oxford
OX3 7BN, UK Department of Public Health and Primary Care Centre for Cancer
Genetic Epidemiology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK Hunter
Medical Research Institute John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, New South Wales 2305,
Australia School of Medicine and Public Health Centre for Clinical Epidemiology
and Biostatistics, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales 2305,
Australia Hunter Area Pathology Service John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, New
South Wales 2305, Australia Centre for Information Based Medicine School of
Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy School of Medicine and Public Health University 
of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales 2308, Australia Department of Oncology
Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1
8RN, UK Department of Clinical Genetics St George's, University of London, London
SW17 0RE, UK Division of Hematology/Oncology Department of Medicine, David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics University Hospital
Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen 91054,
Germany Institute of Human Genetics University Hospital Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen 91054, Germany
Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm SE-171 77, Sweden Department of Gynaecology Jena University Hospital - 
Friedrich Schiller University, Jena 07743, Germany Hannover Medical School
Clinics of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Hannover 30625, Germany Gynaecology
Research Unit Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany Vesalius Research 
Center Leuven 3000, Belgium Laboratory for Translational Genetics

Excessive exposure to estrogen is a well-established risk factor for endometrial 
cancer (EC), particularly for cancers of endometrioid histology. The
physiological function of estrogen is primarily mediated by estrogen receptor
alpha, encoded by ESR1. Consequently, several studies have investigated whether
variation at the ESR1 locus is associated with risk of EC, with conflicting
results. We performed comprehensive fine-mapping analyses of 3633 genotyped and
imputed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 6607 EC cases and 37 925
controls. There was evidence of an EC risk signal located at a potential
alternative promoter of the ESR1 gene (lead SNP rs79575945, P=1.86×10(-5)), which
was stronger for cancers of endometrioid subtype (P=3.76×10(-6)). Bioinformatic
analysis suggests that this risk signal is in a functionally important region
targeting ESR1, and eQTL analysis found that rs79575945 was associated with
expression of SYNE1, a neighbouring gene. In summary, we have identified a single
EC risk signal located at ESR1, at study-wide significance. Given SNPs located at
this locus have been associated with risk for breast cancer, also a hormonally
driven cancer, this study adds weight to the rationale for performing informed
candidate fine-scale genetic studies across cancer types.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4559752 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26330482  [PubMed - in process]


168. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 28;10(8):e0136407. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136407.
eCollection 2015.

Exome Sequencing of Cell-Free DNA from Metastatic Cancer Patients Identifies
Clinically Actionable Mutations Distinct from Primary Disease.

Butler TM(1), Johnson-Camacho K(1), Peto M(1), Wang NJ(1), Macey TA(1), Korkola
JE(1), Koppie TM(1), Corless CL(1), Gray JW(1), Spellman PT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Sciences University, Portland,
Oregon, United States of America.

The identification of the molecular drivers of cancer by sequencing is the
backbone of precision medicine and the basis of personalized therapy; however,
biopsies of primary tumors provide only a snapshot of the evolution of the
disease and may miss potential therapeutic targets, especially in the metastatic 
setting. A liquid biopsy, in the form of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) sequencing, has
the potential to capture the inter- and intra-tumoral heterogeneity present in
metastatic disease, and, through serial blood draws, track the evolution of the
tumor genome. In order to determine the clinical utility of cfDNA sequencing we
performed whole-exome sequencing on cfDNA and tumor DNA from two patients with
metastatic disease; only minor modifications to our sequencing and analysis
pipelines were required for sequencing and mutation calling of cfDNA. The first
patient had metastatic sarcoma and 47 of 48 mutations present in the primary
tumor were also found in the cell-free DNA. The second patient had metastatic
breast cancer and sequencing identified an ESR1 mutation in the cfDNA and
metastatic site, but not in the primary tumor. This likely explains tumor
progression on Anastrozole. Significant heterogeneity between the primary and
metastatic tumors, with cfDNA reflecting the metastases, suggested separation
from the primary lesion early in tumor evolution. This is best illustrated by an 
activating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R) which was clonal in the primary tumor, but
completely absent from either the metastasis or cfDNA. Here we show that cfDNA
sequencing supplies clinically actionable information with minimal risks compared
to metastatic biopsies. This study demonstrates the utility of whole-exome
sequencing of cell-free DNA from patients with metastatic disease. cfDNA
sequencing identified an ESR1 mutation, potentially explaining a patient's
resistance to aromatase inhibition, and gave insight into how metastatic lesions 
differ from the primary tumor.

PMCID: PMC4552879
PMID: 26317216  [PubMed - in process]


169. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):25135-48. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4722.

Estrogen related receptor a (ERRa) a promising target for the therapy of
adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC).

Casaburi I(1), Avena P(1), De Luca A(1), Chimento A(1), Sirianni R(1), Malivindi 
R(1), Rago V(1), Fiorillo M(1), Domanico F(1), Campana C(1), Cappello AR(1),
Sotgia F(2), Lisanti MP(2), Pezzi V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of
Calabria, Italy. (2)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Unit and the
Manchester Centre for Cellular Metabolism, Institute of Cancer Sciences,
University of Manchester, UK.

The pathogenesis of the adrenocortical cancer (ACC) involves integration of
molecular signals and the interplay of different downstream pathways (i.e.
IGFII/IGF1R, ß-catenin, Wnt, ESR1). This tumor is characterized by limited
therapeutic options and unsuccessful treatments. A useful strategy to develop an 
effective therapy for ACC is to identify a common downstream target of these
multiple pathways. A good candidate could be the transcription factor
estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRa) because of its ability to regulate energy 
metabolism, mitochondrial biogenesis and signalings related to cancer
progression. In this study we tested the effect of ERRa inverse agonist, XCT790, 
on the proliferation of H295R adrenocortical cancer cell line. Results from in
vitro and in vivo experiments showed that XCT790 reduced H295R cell growth. The
inhibitory effect was associated with impaired cell cycle progression which was
not followed by any apoptotic event. Instead, incomplete autophagy and cell death
by a necrotic processes, as a consequence of the cell energy failure, induced by 
pharmacological reduction of ERRa was evidenced. Our results indicate that
therapeutic strategies targeting key factors such as ERRa that control the
activity and signaling of bioenergetics processes in high-energy demanding tumors
could represent an innovative/alternative therapy for the treatment of ACC.

PMCID: PMC4694820
PMID: 26312764  [PubMed - in process]


170. Pharmacogenomics J. 2015 Aug 25. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2015.60. [Epub ahead of print]

ESR1 polymorphisms and statin therapy: a sex-specific approach.

Smiderle L(1), Fiegenbaum M(1,)(2), Hutz MH(3), Van Der Sand CR(4), Van Der Sand 
LC(4), Ferreira ME(4), Pires RC(4), Almeida S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre - UFCSPA, Porto Alegre, Brazil. (2)Departamento
de Ciências Básicas da Saúde, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto 
Alegre - UFCSPA, Porto Alegre, Brazil. (3)Departamento de Genética, Universidade 
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul - UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil. (4)Centro de
Diagnóstico Cardiológico, Porto Alegre, Brazil.

Lipid-lowering therapy has shown a high degree of variability in clinical
response and there is evidence that the variability in drug response between
individuals is due to genetic factors. Thirteen single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) within the ESR1 gene were evaluated with basal lipid and lipoprotein
levels, as well as response to lipid-lowering therapy, in 495
hypercholesterolemic individuals of European descent receiving simvastatin or
atorvastatin. Significant associations were detected between rs4870061 (P=0.040, 
corrected P-value (PC)=0.440), rs1801132 (P=0.002, PC=0.022) and the SNP
rs3020314 (P=0.013, PC=0.143) with triglyceride (TG) baseline levels. The
rs4870061 was also associated with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C)
baseline levels (P=0.045, PC=0.495). Regarding statin efficacy, rs2234693 C/C was
associated with greater HDL-C increase (P=0.037; PC=0.407) and rs3798577 T allele
was associated with greater total cholesterol (TC) reduction (P=0.019; PC=0.209) 
and greater TG reduction (P=0.026; PC=0.286). These associations suggest that
ESR1 polymorphisms are in part responsible for the TC, HDL-C and TG variation
levels and this effect may be sex-specific.The Pharmacogenomics Journal advance
online publication, 25 August 2015; doi:10.1038/tpj.2015.60.

PMID: 26302681  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


171. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Oct;10(10):1413-20. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000646.

Estrogen Receptor Gene Polymorphisms and Lung Adenocarcinoma Risk in
Never-Smoking Women.

Chen KY(1), Hsiao CF, Chang GC, Tsai YH, Su WC, Chen YM, Huang MS, Tsai FY, Jiang
SS, Chang IS, Chen CY, Hsiung CA, Chen CJ, Yang PC; GELAC Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, National
Taiwan University Hospital and College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of 
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Institute of Population Health Sciences,
National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan; Division of Chest Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan; §Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan; <U+2016>Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan;
¶Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan; #Department of Chest Medicine, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, and Taipei
Cancer Center, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; **Department of
Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, School of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; National Institute of Cancer
Research, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan; Institute of
Population Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan; 
§§Institute of Medicine, Chung-Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan;
<U+2016><U+2016>Department of Thoracic Surgery, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan; ¶¶Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan;
and ##Graduate Institute of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

INTRODUCTION: The association between estrogen receptor (ER) gene polymorphism
and lung cancer risk is rarely studied. This study aimed to explore the ER gene
polymorphisms associated with the lung adenocarcinoma risk in never-smoking
women.
METHODS: This study evaluated 532 never-smoking female patients with lung
adenocarcinoma and 532 healthy controls. The ESR1 and ESR2 single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) data were retrieved from a genome-wide association study.
Using a multivariate-adjusted logistic regression assay, the associations of ESR1
and ESR2 SNPs with the lung adenocarcinoma risk were estimated. Expression
quantitative trait loci analysis was performed to investigate the possible
functional roles of ER gene SNPs.
RESULTS: For ESR1, seven tagged SNPs were identified. Among them, rs7753153 and
rs985192 were associated with lung adenocarcinoma risk (rs7753153: odds ratios
[OR], 1.509; 95% confidence intervals [CI], 1.168-1.950; rs985192: OR, 1.309; 95%
CI, 1.001-1.712). For ESR2, only rs3020450 was associated with lung
adenocarcinoma risk (OR, 2.110; 95% CI, 1.007-4.422). Subjects without hormone
replacement therapy (HRT) use carrying at-risk genotypes had a significantly
higher lung adenocarcinoma risk than subjects with HRT carrying no at-risk
genotypes (rs7753153 GG: OR, 2.133; 95% CI, 1.415-3.216; rs985192 AA/AC, OR:
1.752, 95% CI: 1.109-2.768; rs3020450 AG/GG, OR: 7.162, 95% CI: 1.608-31.90).
Risk genotypes of rs7753153 (p = 0.0248) and rs9479122 (p = 0.0251) were
associated with decreased ESR1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: ER gene SNPs are associated with lung adenocarcinoma risk in
never-smoking women. The joint effects of ER gene SNPs and HRT use on lung
adenocarcinoma risk highlight the importance of the gene-environment interaction 
in lung carcinogenesis.

PMID: 26301798  [PubMed - in process]


172. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Oct;42(10):1457. doi: 10.1007/s11033-015-3892-8.

Retraction Note to: Genetic polymorphisms in VDR, ESR1 and ESR2 genes may
contribute to susceptibility to Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Gao Z, Fu HJ, Xue JJ, Wu ZX, Zhao LB. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jul;41(7):4463-74.

PMID: 26285929  [PubMed - in process]


173. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 16;17:110. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0625-9.

A comprehensive evaluation of interaction between genetic variants and use of
menopausal hormone therapy on mammographic density.

Rudolph A(1), Fasching PA(2,)(3), Behrens S(4), Eilber U(5), Bolla MK(6), Wang
Q(7), Thompson D(8), Czene K(9), Brand JS(10), Li J(11), Scott C(12), Pankratz
VS(13), Brandt K(14), Hallberg E(15), Olson JE(16), Lee A(17), Beckmann MW(18),
Ekici AB(19), Haeberle L(20), Maskarinec G(21), Le Marchand L(22), Schumacher
F(23), Milne RL(24,)(25), Knight JA(26,)(27), Apicella C(28), Southey MC(29),
Kapuscinski MK(30), Hopper JL(31), Andrulis IL(32,)(33), Giles GG(34,)(35),
Haiman CA(36), Khaw KT(37), Luben R(38), Hall P(39), Pharoah PD(40,)(41), Couch
FJ(42), Easton DF(43,)(44), Dos-Santos-Silva I(45), Vachon C(46), Chang-Claude
J(47).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 581, D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany. a.rudolph@dkfz.de.
(2)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center
Erlangen-EMN, Erlangen, Germany. peter.fasching@uk-erlangen.de. (3)David Geffen
School of Medicine, Department of Medicine Division of Hematology and Oncology,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
peter.fasching@uk-erlangen.de. (4)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer 
Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
s.behrens@dkfz.de. (5)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany.
u.eilber@dkfz.de. (6)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public
Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
mkh39@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (7)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
qw232@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (8)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
djt25@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (9)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Kamila.Czene@ki.se. (10)Department of
Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
judith.brand@ki.se. (11)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. jingmei@gmail.com. (12)Division of
Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Scott.Christopher@mayo.edu.
(13)Division of Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
vpankratz@salud.unm.edu. (14)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA. brandt.kathy@mayo.edu. (15)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Hallberg.emily@mayo.edu. (16)Department of Health
Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. olsonj@mayo.edu.
(17)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. lee.adam@mayo.edu. (18)Department of Gynaecology and 
Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center Erlangen-EMN, Erlangen, Germany. 
Fk-direktion@uk-erlangen.de. (19)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital
Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer
Center Erlangen-EMN, Erlangen, Germany. Arif.Ekici@humgenet.uni-erlangen.de.
(20)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center
Erlangen-EMN, Erlangen, Germany. lothar.haeberle@uk-erlangen.de. (21)University
of Hawaii Cancer Center, Honolulu, HI, USA. Gertraud@cc.hawaii.edu.
(22)University of Hawaii Cancer Center, Honolulu, HI, USA. loic@crch.hawaii.edu. 
(23)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. fschumac@usc.edu. (24)Cancer
Epidemiology Centre, Cancer Council Victoria, Melbourne, Australia.
Roger.Milne@cancervic.org.au. (25)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia. Roger.Milne@cancervic.org.au. (26)Prosserman Centre for
Health Research, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute of Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, Canada. knight@lunenfeld.ca. (27)Division of Epidemiology, Dalla Lana
School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
knight@lunenfeld.ca. (28)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne
School of Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia. capic@unimelb.edu.au. (29)Department of Pathology, The University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. msouthey@unimelb.edu.au. (30)Centre for
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and Global Health,
The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. kmk@unimelb.edu.au. (31)Centre
for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and Global
Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
j.hopper@unimelb.edu.au. (32)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute of Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada. andrulis@lunenfeld.ca. (33)Department of
Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
andrulis@lunenfeld.ca. (34)Cancer Epidemiology Centre, Cancer Council Victoria,
Melbourne, Australia. Graham.Giles@cancervic.org.au. (35)Centre for Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Graham.Giles@cancervic.org.au.
(36)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Christopher.Haiman@med.usc.edu.
(37)MRC Centre for Nutritional Epidemiology in Cancer Prevention and Survival
(CNC), University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. kk101@medschl.cam.ac.uk.
(38)Clinical Gerontology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Robert.luben@phpc.cam.ac.uk.
(39)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden. Per.Hall@ki.se. (40)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology,
Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK. pp10001@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (41)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology,
Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
pp10001@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (42)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. couch.fergus@mayo.edu. (43)Centre for Cancer
Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. dfe20@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (44)Centre for Cancer Genetic 
Epidemiology, Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
dfe20@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (45)Department of Non-Communicable Disease Epidemiology,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
isabel.silva@lshtm.ac.uk. (46)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Vachon.celine@mayo.edu. (47)Division of Cancer
Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581,
D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany. j.chang-claude@dkfz.de.

INTRODUCTION: Mammographic density is an established breast cancer risk factor
with a strong genetic component and can be increased in women using menopausal
hormone therapy (MHT). Here, we aimed to identify genetic variants that may
modify the association between MHT use and mammographic density.
METHODS: The study comprised 6,298 postmenopausal women from the Mayo Mammography
Health Study and nine studies included in the Breast Cancer Association
Consortium. We selected for evaluation 1327 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) showing the lowest P-values for interaction (P int) in a meta-analysis of 
genome-wide gene-environment interaction studies with MHT use on risk of breast
cancer, 2541 SNPs in candidate genes (AKR1C4, CYP1A1-CYP1A2, CYP1B1, ESR2, PPARG,
PRL, SULT1A1-SULT1A2 and TNF) and ten SNPs (AREG-rs10034692, PRDM6-rs186749,
ESR1-rs12665607, ZNF365-rs10995190, 8p11.23-rs7816345, LSP1-rs3817198,
IGF1-rs703556, 12q24-rs1265507, TMEM184B-rs7289126, and SGSM3-rs17001868)
associated with mammographic density in genome-wide studies. We used multiple
linear regression models adjusted for potential confounders to evaluate
interactions between SNPs and current use of MHT on mammographic density.
RESULTS: No significant interactions were identified after adjustment for
multiple testing. The strongest SNP-MHT interaction (unadjusted P int <0.0004)
was observed with rs9358531 6.5kb 5' of PRL. Furthermore, three SNPs in PLCG2
that had previously been shown to modify the association of MHT use with breast
cancer risk were found to modify also the association of MHT use with
mammographic density (unadjusted P int <0.002), but solely among cases
(unadjusted P int SNP×MHT×case-status <0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: The study identified potential interactions on mammographic density 
between current use of MHT and SNPs near PRL and in PLCG2, which require
confirmation. Given the moderate size of the interactions observed, larger
studies are needed to identify genetic modifiers of the association of MHT use
with mammographic density.

PMCID: PMC4537547
PMID: 26275715  [PubMed - in process]


174. Breast. 2015 Nov;24 Suppl 2:S60-6. doi: 10.1016/j.breast.2015.07.015. Epub 2015
Aug 10.

The changing role of ER in endocrine resistance.

Nardone A(1), De Angelis C(2), Trivedi MV(3), Osborne CK(1), Schiff R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, USA; Dan L.
Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, USA; Department of Medicine,
Baylor College of Medicine, USA; Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Baylor College of Medicine, USA. (2)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, USA; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, USA; Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, USA;
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, USA;
Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Chirurgia, Università degli Studi di Napoli
Federico II, Italy. (3)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, USA; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, USA;
Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, USA; Department of Pharmacy
Practice and Translational Research, University of Houston, College of Pharmacy, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of 
Medicine, USA; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, USA;
Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, USA; Department of Molecular 
and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, USA. Electronic address:
rschiff@bcm.edu.

Estrogen receptor (ER) is expressed in approximately 70% of newly diagnosed
breast tumors. Although endocrine therapy targeting ER is highly effective,
intrinsic or acquired resistance is common, significantly jeopardizing treatment 
outcomes and minimizing overall survival. Even in the presence of endocrine
resistance, a continued role of ER signaling is suggested by several lines of
clinical and preclinical evidence. Indeed, inhibition or down-regulation of ER
reduces tumor growth in preclinical models of acquired endocrine resistance, and 
many patients with recurrent ER+ breast tumors progressing on one type of
ER-targeted treatment still benefit from sequential endocrine treatments that
target ER by a different mechanism. New insights into the nature and biology of
ER have revealed several mechanisms sustaining altered ER signaling in
endocrine-resistant tumors, including deregulated growth factor receptor
signaling that results in ligand-independent ER activation, unbalanced ER
co-regulator activity, and genomic alterations involving the ER gene ESR1.
Therefore, biopsies of recurrent lesions are needed to assess the changes in
epi/genomics and signaling landscape of ER and associated pathways in order to
tailor therapies to effectively overcome endocrine resistance. In addition, more 
completely abolishing the levels and activity of ER and its co-activators, in
combination with selected signal transduction inhibitors or agents blocking the
upstream or downstream targets of the ER pathway, may provide a better
therapeutic strategy in combating endocrine resistance.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4666002 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26271713  [PubMed - in process]


175. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 15;22(4):993-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-0943.
Epub 2015 Aug 10.

ESR1 Mutations in Circulating Plasma Tumor DNA from Metastatic Breast Cancer
Patients.

Chu D(1), Paoletti C(2), Gersch C(2), VanDenBerg DA(1), Zabransky DJ(1), Cochran 
RL(1), Wong HY(1), Toro PV(1), Cidado J(1), Croessmann S(1), Erlanger B(1),
Cravero K(1), Kyker-Snowman K(1), Button B(1), Parsons HA(1), Dalton WB(1),
Gillani R(1), Medford A(1), Aung K(2), Tokudome N(2), Chinnaiyan AM(2), Schott
A(2), Robinson D(2), Jacks KS(3), Lauring J(1), Hurley PJ(1), Hayes DF(2), Rae
JM(4), Park BH(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)The University of Michigan
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (3)Comprehensive Cancer Centers
of Nevada, Las Vegas, Nevada. (4)The University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan. bpark2@jhmi.edu jimmyrae@umich.edu. (5)The Sidney
Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. The Whiting School of Engineering, Department of
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland. bpark2@jhmi.edu jimmyrae@umich.edu.

PURPOSE: Mutations in the estrogen receptor (ER)a gene, ESR1, have been
identified in breast cancer metastases after progression on endocrine therapies. 
Because of limitations of metastatic biopsies, the reported frequency of ESR1
mutations may be underestimated. Here, we show a high frequency of ESR1 mutations
using circulating plasma tumor DNA (ptDNA) from patients with metastatic breast
cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We retrospectively obtained plasma samples from eight
patients with known ESR1 mutations and three patients with wild-type ESR1
identified by next-generation sequencing (NGS) of biopsied metastatic tissues.
Three common ESR1 mutations were queried for using droplet digital PCR (ddPCR).
In a prospective cohort, metastatic tissue and plasma were collected
contemporaneously from eight ER-positive and four ER-negative patients. Tissue
biopsies were sequenced by NGS, and ptDNA ESR1 mutations were analyzed by ddPCR.
RESULTS: In the retrospective cohort, all corresponding mutations were detected
in ptDNA, with two patients harboring additional ESR1 mutations not present in
their metastatic tissues. In the prospective cohort, three ER-positive patients
did not have adequate tissue for NGS, and no ESR1 mutations were identified in
tissue biopsies from the other nine patients. In contrast, ddPCR detected seven
ptDNA ESR1 mutations in 6 of 12 patients (50%).
CONCLUSIONS: We show that ESR1 mutations can occur at a high frequency and
suggest that blood can be used to identify additional mutations not found by
sequencing of a single metastatic lesion. Clin Cancer Res; 22(4); 993-9. ©2015
AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26261103  [PubMed - in process]


176. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 10;10(8):e0135339. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135339.
eCollection 2015.

MicroRNA and transcription factor mediated regulatory network analysis reveals
critical regulators and regulatory modules in myocardial infarction.

Zhang G(1), Shi H(2), Wang L(2), Zhou M(2), Wang Z(2), Liu X(1), Cheng L(2), Li
W(3), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, PR China. (2)College of Bioinformatics
Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081,
PR China. (3)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, PR China.

Myocardial infarction (MI) is a severe coronary artery disease and a leading
cause of mortality and morbidity worldwide. However, the molecular mechanisms of 
MI have yet to be fully elucidated. In this study, we compiled MI-related genes, 
MI-related microRNAs (miRNAs) and known human transcription factors (TFs), and we
then identified 1,232 feed-forward loops (FFLs) among these miRNAs, TFs and their
co-regulated target genes through integrating target prediction. By merging these
FFLs, the first miRNA and TF mediated regulatory network for MI was constructed, 
from which four regulators (SP1, ESR1, miR-21-5p and miR-155-5p) and three
regulatory modules that might play crucial roles in MI were then identified.
Furthermore, based on the miRNA and TF mediated regulatory network and literature
survey, we proposed a pathway model for miR-21-5p, the miR-29 family and SP1 to
demonstrate their potential co-regulatory mechanisms in cardiac fibrosis,
apoptosis and angiogenesis. The majority of the regulatory relations in the model
were confirmed by previous studies, which demonstrated the reliability and
validity of this miRNA and TF mediated regulatory network. Our study will aid in 
deciphering the complex regulatory mechanisms involved in MI and provide putative
therapeutic targets for MI.

PMCID: PMC4530868
PMID: 26258537  [PubMed - in process]


177. J Endocrinol Invest. 2016 Apr;39(4):389-400. doi: 10.1007/s40618-015-0374-8. Epub
2015 Aug 11.

17ß-Estradiol in the systemic circulation derives mainly from the parietal cells 
in cholestatic female rats.

Kobayashi H(1), Yoshida S(2), Sun YJ(2), Shirasawa N(3), Naito A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Structural Science, Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata
University, 2-2-2 Iida-nishi, Yamagata, 990-9585, Japan.
kob-h@med.id.yamagata-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Anatomy and Structural Science,
Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata University, 2-2-2 Iida-nishi, Yamagata, 990-9585,
Japan. (3)Department of Rehabilitation, Faculty of Medical Science and Welfare,
Tohoku Bunka Gakuen University, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8579, Japan.

PURPOSE: Estrogenic symptoms of liver disease patients including biliary tract
disorder with high frequency is observed in clinical cases. However, the origin
of 17ß-estradiol which is abundant enough to cause symptoms remains uncertain. In
male rats, it has been reported that the parietal cells which have an abundance
of aromatase-synthesized 17ß-estradiol, and a part of 17ß-estradiol secreted into
the portal vein, may flow into the systemic circulation under a
pathophysiological condition of the liver including bile duct ligation (BDL). The
aim of this study is to reveal the origin of 17ß-estradiol increment in female
rats and to investigate the effect of BDL on the ovary during the estrus cycle.
METHODS: Wistar female rats were used, and the common bile duct was ligated twice
and transected completely at 7 days before termination. Serum portal venous and
arterial 17ß-estradiol levels, Cyp19a1 expressions, aromatase protein levels, and
estrogen receptor (ER) a levels in the liver were measured during the estrus
cycle.
RESULTS: Both arterial and portal venous 17ß-estradiol levels increased 2.9 times
at proestrus and maintained constant levels during the cycle. The expression of
Cyp19a1 and aromatase protein in the stomach maintained constant levels, and
significantly decreased during the estrus cycle in the ovary. Hepatic ERa protein
and Esr1 expressions decrease by BDL in all stages.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the increment of serum 17ß-estradiol
levels in obstructive cholestasis induced by BDL is derived from 17ß-estradiol
secreted from the parietal cells in females as well as males.

PMID: 26256408  [PubMed - in process]


178. J Nucl Med. 2015 Oct;56(10):1487-93. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.115.160739. Epub 2015
Aug 6.

Clinical Relevance of Targeting the Gastrin-Releasing Peptide Receptor,
Somatostatin Receptor 2, or Chemokine C-X-C Motif Receptor 4 in Breast Cancer for
Imaging and Therapy.

Dalm SU(1), Sieuwerts AM(2), Look MP(2), Melis M(3), van Deurzen CH(4), Foekens
JA(2), de Jong M(3), Martens JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Nuclear Medicine and Radiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands s.dalm@erasmusmc.nl. (2)Department of Medical Oncology and Cancer
Genomics Netherlands, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands; and. (3)Departments of Nuclear Medicine and Radiology, Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

Imaging and therapy using radioligands targeting receptors overexpressed on tumor
cells is successfully applied in neuroendocrine tumor patients. Because
expression of the gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRPR), somatostatin
receptor 2 (SSTR2), and chemokine C-X-C motif receptor 4 (CXCR4) has been
demonstrated in breast cancer, targeting these receptors using radioligands might
offer new imaging and therapeutic opportunities for breast cancer patients. The
aim of this study was to correlate messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of GRPR,
SSTR2, and CXCR4 with clinicopathologic and biologic factors, and with prognosis 
and prediction to therapy response, in order to identify specific breast cancer
patient groups suited for the application of radioligands targeting these
receptors.METHODS: First, we studied GRPR and SSTR2 expression in 13 clinical
breast cancer specimens by in vitro autoradiography and correlated this with
corresponding mRNA levels to investigate whether mRNA levels reliably represent
cell surface expression. Next, GRPR, SSTR2, and CXCR4 mRNA levels were measured
by quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction in 915 primary
breast cancer tissues and correlated with known clinicopathologic and biologic
factors, disease-free survival, distant metastasis-free survival, and overall
survival (DFS, MFS, and OS, respectively). In 224 adjuvant hormonal
treatment-naïve estrogen receptor (ER, ESR1)-positive patients who received
tamoxifen as first-line therapy for recurrent or metastatic disease, the
expression levels of the receptors were correlated with progression-free
survival.
RESULTS: Our results showed a significant positive correlation between GRPR and
SSTR2 expression analyzed by in vitro autoradiography and by quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (Spearman's rank correlation coefficient 
[Rs]=0.94, P<0.001, and Rs=0.73, P=0.0042, respectively). Furthermore, high GRPR 
and SSTR2 mRNA levels were observed more frequently in ESR1-positive specimens,
whereas high CXCR4 expression was associated with ESR1-negative specimens. Also, 
high mRNA expression of CXCR4 was associated with a prolonged DFS, MFS, and OS
(multivariate hazard ratio MFS=0.76 [95% confidence interval, 0.64-0.90],
P=0.001), whereas high mRNA levels of GRPR were associated with a prolonged
progression-free survival after the start of first-line tamoxifen treatment
(multivariate hazard ratio=0.68 [95% confidence interval, 0.48-0.97], P=0.031).
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that imaging and therapy using GRPR or SSTR2
radioligands might especially be beneficial for ESR1-positive breast cancer and
CXCR4 radioligands for ESR1-negative breast cancer.

© 2015 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Inc.

PMID: 26251419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Environ Health Prev Med. 2015 Sep;20(5):332-7. doi: 10.1007/s12199-015-0471-5.
Epub 2015 Aug 7.

Associations between estrogen receptor genetic polymorphisms, smoking status, and
prostate cancer risk: a case-control study in Japanese men.

Lu X(1), Yamano Y, Takahashi H, Koda M, Fujiwara Y, Hisada A, Miyazaki W, Katoh
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto University,
1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-Ku, Kumamoto, 860-8556, Japan, lucyk1984@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Prostate cancer (PCa) is one of the major causes of death among men.
Our study investigated the association of ESR1 and ESR2 genotypes with
susceptibility to PCa in relation to smoking status in Japanese.
METHOD: A case-control study was performed with 750 Japanese prostate cancer
patients and 870 healthy controls. After age-matching in case-controls, 352
controls and 352 cases were enrolled in this study. By using logistic regression 
analysis, the different genotypes from ESR1 and ESR2 were analyzed according to
case/control status.
RESULT: ESR2 rs4986938 AG and AG + AA genotypes were associated with
significantly decreased risk of PCa (AG: OR = 0.68, 95 % CI 0.47-0.97, P < 0.05
and AG + AA: OR = 0.67, 95 % CI 0.47-0.94, P < 0.05). However, there was no
significant association between ESR1 rs2234693 and PCa risk. When patients were
grouped according to smoking status, the ESR2 rs1256049 AA genotype (OR = 0.48,
95 % CI 0.25-0.95, P < 0.05) and ESR2 rs4986938 AG + AA genotype (OR = 0.64, 95 %
CI 0.41-1.00, P < 0.05) showed significantly decreased PCa risk in the
ever-smoker group.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the estrogen receptor ESR2 has a very
important function to predict PCa and that different SNPs have different
predictive values. Smoking may influence estrogenic activity and may influence
PCa together with the estrogen receptor.

PMCID: PMC4550607 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26251204  [PubMed - in process]


180. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 6;10(8):e0134351. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134351.
eCollection 2015.

Estrogens Correlate with PELP1 Expression in ER Positive Breast Cancer.

Flågeng MH(1), Knappskog S(2), Gjerde J(1), Lønning PE(2), Mellgren G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Laboratory, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway; Department 
of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. (2)Department of
Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway; Department of Oncology,
Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

The Proline-, glutamic acid- and leucine-rich protein 1 (PELP1) is an estrogen
receptor (ER) coactivator and a proto-oncogene known to be deregulated in
endocrine cancers. In breast cancer, PELP1 overexpression has been associated
with endocrine therapy resistance. Although PELP1 is known to be regulated by
estrogens in vitro, its association with estrogen levels within the tissue of
breast cancer patients has not previously been assessed. Here, we determined
PELP1 mRNA expression levels in paired samples of normal and malignant breast
tissue obtained from 32 postmenopausal and 11 premenopausal women. In the total
sample set, PELP1 levels were higher in tumors compared to normal breast tissue
(P = 0.041). Among postmenopausal women, PELP1 tumor levels correlated positively
with estrone (E1) and estradiol (E2) levels in both normal tissue (r = 0.543, P =
0.003 and r = 0.601, P = 0.001, respectively) and plasma (r = 0.392, P = 0.053
and r = 0.403, P = 0.046, respectively). Analyzing all ER+ tumors (n = 26), PELP1
correlated positively with E1 and E2 in tumor tissue (r = 0.562, P = 0.003 and r 
= 0.411, P = 0.037, respectively) and normal tissue (r = 0.461, P = 0.018 and r =
0.427, P = 0.030, respectively) in addition to plasma E1, E2 and estrone sulphate
(E1S) concentrations (r = 0.576, P = 0.003, r = 0.456, P = 0.025 and r = 0.406, P
= 0.049, respectively). Finally, PELP1 correlated positively with ER mRNA (ESR1) 
(r = 0.553, P = 0.026) in ER+ tumors, whereas a negative association between
PELP1 and ESR1 (r = -0.733, P = 0.010) was observed in ER- breast tumors. Taken
together, tumor PELP1 mRNA expression is associated with estrogen levels in
breast cancer, suggesting a potentially important role of PELP1 in ER+ breast
cancer growth in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4527840
PMID: 26247365  [PubMed - in process]


181. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Sep;29(9):1362-74. doi: 10.1210/me.2015-1142. Epub 2015 Aug 
4.

Uterine Epithelial Estrogen Receptor-a Controls Decidualization via a Paracrine
Mechanism.

Pawar S(1), Laws MJ(1), Bagchi IC(1), Bagchi MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular and Integrative Physiology (S.P., M.K.B.) and
Comparative Biosciences (M.J.L., I.C.B.), University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801.

Steroid hormone-regulated differentiation of uterine stromal cells, known as
decidualization, is essential for embryo implantation. The role of the estrogen
receptor-a (ESR1) during this differentiation process is unclear. Development of 
conditional Esr1-null mice showed that deletion of this gene in both epithelial
and stromal compartments of the uterus leads to a complete blockade of
decidualization, indicating a critical role of ESR1 during this process. To
further elucidate the cell type-specific function of ESR1 in the uterus, we
created WE(d/d) mice in which Esr1 is ablated in uterine luminal and glandular
epithelia but is retained in the stroma. Uteri of WE(d/d) mice failed to undergo 
decidualization, indicating that epithelial ESR1 contributes to stromal
differentiation via a paracrine mechanism. We noted markedly reduced production
of the leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) in WE(d/d) uteri. Supplementation with
LIF restored decidualization in WE(d/d) mice. Our study indicated that LIF acts
synergistically with progesterone to induce the expression of Indian hedgehog
(IHH) in uterine epithelium and its receptor patched homolog 1 in the stroma. IHH
then induces the expression of chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription 
factor II, a transcription factor that promotes stromal differentiation. To
address the mechanism by which LIF induces IHH expression, we used mice lacking
uterine epithelial signal transducer and activator of transcription 3, a
well-known mediator of LIF signaling. Our study revealed that LIF-mediated
induction of IHH occurs without the activation of epithelial signal transducer
and activator of transcription 3 but uses an alternate pathway involving the
activation of the ERK1/2 kinase. Collectively our results provide unique insights
into the paracrine mechanisms by which ESR1 directs epithelial-stromal dialogue
during pregnancy establishment.

PMCID: PMC4552438 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26241389  [PubMed - in process]


182. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Nov 1;294:43-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.07.060. Epub 2015
Aug 1.

Changes in estrogen receptor signaling alters the timekeeping system in male
mice.

Blattner MS(1), Mahoney MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL
61802, United States; Medical Scholars Program, University of Illinois at Urbana 
Champaign, Urbana, IL 61802, United States. (2)Neuroscience Program, University
of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL 61802, United States; Comparative
Biosciences, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, 2001 S. Lincoln Ave,
Urbana, IL 61802, United States. Electronic address: Mmm1@illinois.edu.

Circadian rhythms are modulated by steroid hormones; however, the mechanisms of
this action are not fully understood, particularly in males. In females estradiol
regulates activity level, pattern of expression, and free running period (tau).
We tested the hypothesis that activity level and distribution in male mice
includes both classical and "non-classical" actions of estrogens at the estrogen 
receptor subtype 1 (ESR1). We used transgenic mice with mutations in their
estrogen response pathways: ESR1 knock-out (ERKO) mice lack the ability to
respond to estrogens via ESR1. "Non-classical" estrogen receptor knock-in (NERKI)
mice have an inserted ESR1 receptor with a mutation in the
estrogen-response-element binding domain, allowing activation via non-genomic and
second messenger pathways. Gonadectomized male NERKI, ERKO, and wildtype (WT)
littermates were given oil, or low or high dose estradiol and daily activity
parameters were quantified. Estradiol shortened the ratio of activity in the
light relative to dark (LD ratio), shortened tau, advanced the time of activity
onset, and altered responsiveness to light cues administered in the late
subjective night, suggesting modulation by an ESR1-independent mechanism.
Estradiol treatment in NERKI but not WT males altered the timing of activity
onset, LD ratio, and the behavioral response to light cues. These results may
represent disruptions in the balance of genomic/nongenomic or ESR1/ESR2 signaling
pathways. We also found a significant genotype effect on total activity, LD
ratio, tau, and activity duration. These data provide new information about the
role of ESR1-dependent and independent signaling pathways on the timekeeping
system in male mice.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26241171  [PubMed - in process]


183. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Aug 18;112(33):10407-12. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1505675112. Epub 2015 Aug 3.

Pleiotropic age-dependent effects of mitochondrial dysfunction on epidermal stem 
cells.

Velarde MC(1), Demaria M(1), Melov S(1), Campisi J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, CA 94945. (2)Buck Institute for 
Research on Aging, Novato, CA 94945 Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA 94720 jcampisi@buckinstitute.org.

Tissue homeostasis declines with age partly because stem/progenitor cells fail to
self-renew or differentiate. Because mitochondrial damage can accelerate aging,
we tested the hypothesis that mitochondrial dysfunction impairs stem cell renewal
or function. We developed a mouse model, Tg(KRT14-cre/Esr1) (20Efu/J) × Sod2
(tm1Smel) , that generates mitochondrial oxidative stress in keratin
14-expressing epidermal stem/progenitor cells in a temporally controlled manner
owing to deletion of Sod2, a nuclear gene that encodes the mitochondrial
antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase 2 (Sod2). Epidermal Sod2 loss induced
cellular senescence, which irreversibly arrested proliferation in a fraction of
keratinocytes. Surprisingly, in young mice, Sod2 deficiency accelerated wound
closure, increasing epidermal differentiation and reepithelialization, despite
the reduced proliferation. In contrast, at older ages, Sod2 deficiency delayed
wound closure and reduced epidermal thickness, accompanied by epidermal stem cell
exhaustion. In young mice, Sod2 deficiency accelerated epidermal thinning in
response to the tumor promoter 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, phenocopying
the reduced regeneration of older Sod2-deficient skin. Our results show a
surprising beneficial effect of mitochondrial dysfunction at young ages, provide 
a potential mechanism for the decline in epidermal regeneration at older ages,
and identify a previously unidentified age-dependent role for mitochondria in
skin quality and wound closure.

PMCID: PMC4547253
PMID: 26240345  [PubMed - in process]


184. Fertil Steril. 2015 Oct;104(4):953-963.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.06.046.
Epub 2015 Aug 1.

Aberrant expression and localization of deoxyribonucleic acid methyltransferase
3B in endometriotic stromal cells.

Dyson MT(1), Kakinuma T(2), Pavone ME(2), Monsivais D(2), Navarro A(2), Malpani
SS(2), Ono M(2), Bulun SE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois. Electronic address:
m-dyson@northwestern.edu. (2)Division of Reproductive Biology Research,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.

OBJECTIVE: To define the expression and function of DNA methyltransferases
(DNMTs) in response to decidualizing stimuli in endometriotic cells compared with
healthy endometrial stroma.
DESIGN: Basic science.
SETTING: University research center.
PATIENT(S): Premenopausal women with or without endometriosis.
INTERVENTION(S): Primary cultures of stromal cells from healthy endometrium
(E-IUM) or endometriomas (E-OSIS) were subjected to in vitro decidualization
(IVD) using 1 µM medroxyprogesterone acetate, 35 nM 17ß-estradiol, and 0.05 mM
8-Br-cAMP.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Expression of DNMT1, DNMT3A, and DNMT3B in E-IUM and
E-OSIS were assessed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and
immunoblotting. Recruitment of DNMT3B to the promoters of steroidogenic factor 1 
(SF-1) and estrogen receptor a (ESR1) was examined by chromatin
immunoprecipitation.
RESULT(S): IVD treatment reduced DNMT3B messenger RNA (74%) and protein levels
(81%) only in E-IUM; DNMT1 and DNMT3A were unchanged in both cell types.
Significantly more DNMT3B bound to the SF-1 promoter in E-IUM compared with
E-OSIS, and IVD treatment reduced binding in E-IUM to levels similar to those in 
E-OSIS. Enrichment of DNMT3B across 3 ESR1 promoters was reduced in E-IUM after
IVD, although the more-distal promoter showed increased DNMT3B enrichment in
E-OSIS after IVD.
CONCLUSION(S): The inability to downregulate DNMT3B expression in E-OSIS may
contribute to an aberrant epigenetic fingerprint that misdirects gene expression 
in endometriosis and contributes to its altered response to steroid hormones.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4603532 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26239024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Ethnopharmacol. 2015 Nov 4;174:45-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2015.07.043. Epub 2015
Jul 29.

Systems pharmacology to decipher the combinational anti-migraine effects of
Tianshu formula.

Li Y(1), Zhang J(2), Zhang L(3), Chen X(4), Pan Y(5), Chen SS(6), Zhang S(5),
Wang Z(7), Xiao W(8), Yang L(9), Wang Y(10).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE),
Faculty of Chemical, Environmental and Biological Science and Technology, Dalian 
University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning 116024, PR China. Electronic address: 
yanli@dlut.edu.cn. (2)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental
Engineering (MOE), Faculty of Chemical, Environmental and Biological Science and 
Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning 116024, PR China;
School of Chemistry and Environmental Engineering, Hubei University for
Nationalities, Enshi, Hubei 445000, China. (3)School of Chemistry and
Environmental Engineering, Hubei University for Nationalities, Enshi, Hubei
445000, China. (4)Center of Bioinformatics, College of Life Science, Northwest
A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, PR China. (5)Key Laboratory of
Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), Faculty of Chemical,
Environmental and Biological Science and Technology, Dalian University of
Technology, Dalian, Liaoning 116024, PR China. (6)Computer Information Science
and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32608, USA. (7)State Key 
Laboratory of New-tech for Chinese Medicine Pharmaceutical Process, Lianyungang, 
Jiangsu 222001, PR China. Electronic address: kanionlunwen@163.com. (8)State Key 
Laboratory of New-tech for Chinese Medicine Pharmaceutical Process, Lianyungang, 
Jiangsu 222001, PR China. (9)Lab of Pharmaceutical Resource Discovery, Dalian
Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, Liaoning
116023, PR China. (10)Center of Bioinformatics, College of Life Science,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, PR China. Electronic address:
yh_wang@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

Migraine is the most common neurovascular disorder that imparts a considerable
burden to health care system around the world. However, currently there are still
no effective and widely applicable pharmacotherapies for migraine patients.
Herbal formulae, characterized as multiple herbs, constituents and targets, have 
been acknowledged with clinical effects in treating migraine, which attract more 
and more researchers' attention although their exact molecular mechanisms are
still unclear. In this work, a novel systems pharmacology-based method which
integrates pharmacokinetic filtering, target fishing and network analysis was
developed and exemplified by a probe, i.e. Tianshu formula, a widely clinically
used anti-migraine herbal formula in China which comprises of Rhizoma chuanxiong 
and Gastrodia elata. The results exhibit that 20 active ingredients of Tianshu
formula possess favorable pharmacokinetic profiles, which have interactions with 
48 migraine-related targets to provide potential synergistic therapeutic effects.
Additionally, from systematic analysis, we speculate that R. chuanxiong as the
monarch herb mediates the major targets like PTGS2, ESR1, NOS2, HTR1B and NOS3 to
regulate the vascular and nervous systems, as well as the inflammation and
pain-related pathways to benefit migraine patients. Meanwhile, as an adjuvant
herb, G. elata may not only assist the monarch herb to improve the outcome of
migraine patients, but also regulate multiple targets like ABAT, HTR1D, ALOX15
and KCND3 to modify migraine accompanying symptoms like vomiting, vertigo and
gastrointestinal disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26231449  [PubMed - in process]


186. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Jul 13;8:1707-17. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S85899. eCollection
2015.

The prognostic significance of protein tyrosine phosphatase 4A2 in breast cancer.

Zhao D(1), Guo L(2), Neves H(3), Yuen HF(4), Zhang SD(5), McCrudden CM(6), Wen
Q(5), Zhang J(2), Zeng Q(4), Kwok HF(7), Lin Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Continuing Education, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and
Astronautics, Nanjing, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. (2)College of Life
Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian, People's Republic of China.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Avenida de Universidade,
Taipa, Macau Special Administrative Region, People's Republic of China.
(4)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Biopolis Drive, Proteos, Singapore.
(5)Center for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University of Belfast,
Belfast, UK. (6)School of Pharmacy, Queen's University of Belfast, Belfast, UK.
(7)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Avenida de Universidade,
Taipa, Macau Special Administrative Region, People's Republic of China ; Center
for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University of Belfast, Belfast, UK 
; School of Pharmacy, Queen's University of Belfast, Belfast, UK.

Although PTP4A3 has been shown to be a very important factor in promoting cancer 
progression, the role of its close family member PTP4A2 is still largely unknown.
Recent reports have shown contradicting results on the role of PTP4A2 in breast
cancer progression. Considering this, we aimed to investigate the prognostic
value of PTP4A2 in five independent breast cancer data sets (minimum 198 patients
per cohort, totaling 1,124 patients) in the Gene Expression Omnibus Database. We 
found that high expression of PTP4A2 was a favorable prognostic marker in all
five independent breast cancer data sets, as well as in the combined cohort, with
a hazard ratio of 0.68 (95% confidence interval =0.56-0.83; P<0.001). Low PTP4A2 
expression was associated with estrogen receptor-negative tumors and tumors with 
higher histological grading; furthermore, low expression was inversely correlated
with the expression of genes involved in proliferation, including MKI67 and the
MCM gene family encoding the minichromosome maintenance proteins. These findings 
suggest that PTP4A2 may play a role in breast cancer progression by dysregulating
cell proliferation. PTP4A2 expression was positively correlated with ESR1, the
gene encoding estrogen receptor-alpha, and inversely correlated with EGFR
expression, suggesting that PTP4A2 may be involved in these two important
oncogenic pathways. Together, our results suggest that expression of PTP4A2 is a 
favorable prognostic marker in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4508076
PMID: 26203261  [PubMed]


187. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 23;5:11966. doi: 10.1038/srep11966.

Identification of a multi-cancer gene expression biomarker for cancer clinical
outcomes using a network-based algorithm.

Martinez-Ledesma E(1), Verhaak RG(2), Treviño V(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Grupo de Enfoque e Investigación en Bioinformática, Departamento de
Investigación e Innovación, Escuela Nacional de Medicina, Tecnológico de
Monterrey, Monterrey, Nuevo León 64849, México [2] Department of Genomic
Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. (2)1] Department of Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Department of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (3)Grupo de Enfoque e Investigación en 
Bioinformática, Departamento de Investigación e Innovación, Escuela Nacional de
Medicina, Tecnológico de Monterrey, Monterrey, Nuevo León 64849, México.

Cancer types are commonly classified by histopathology and more recently through 
molecular characteristics such as gene expression, mutations, copy number
variations, and epigenetic alterations. These molecular characterizations have
led to the proposal of prognostic biomarkers for many cancer types. Nevertheless,
most of these biomarkers have been proposed for a specific cancer type or even
specific subtypes. Although more challenging, it is useful to identify biomarkers
that can be applied for multiple types of cancer. Here, we have used a
network-based exploration approach to identify a multi-cancer gene expression
biomarker highly connected by ESR1, PRKACA, LRP1, JUN and SMAD2 that can be
predictive of clinical outcome in 12 types of cancer from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) repository. The gene signature of this biomarker is highly supported by
cancer literature, biological terms, and prognostic power in other cancer types. 
Additionally, the signature does not seem to be highly associated with specific
mutations or copy number alterations. Comparisons with cancer-type specific and
other multi-cancer biomarkers in TCGA and other datasets showed that the
performance of the proposed multi-cancer biomarker is superior, making the
proposed approach and multi-cancer biomarker potentially useful in research and
clinical settings.

PMID: 26202601  [PubMed - in process]


188. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015 Dec;12(12):693-704. doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2015.123.
Epub 2015 Jul 21.

Precision medicine for metastatic breast cancer--limitations and solutions.

Arnedos M(1), Vicier C(2), Loi S(3), Lefebvre C(2), Michiels S(4), Bonnefoi H(5),
Andre F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy and Université Paris Sud, 94800
Villejuif, France. (2)INSERM Unit U981, Gustave Roussy and Université Paris Sud, 
94800 Villejuif, France. (3)Division of Research and Cancer Medicine, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, University of Melbourne, East Melbourne, VIC 3002,
Australia. (4)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Gustave Roussy and
Université Paris Sud, 94800 Villejuif, France. (5)Department of Medical Oncology 
and INSERM U916, Institut Bergonié, 229 Cours de l'Argonne, 33000, Bordeaux,
France.

The development of precision medicine for the management of metastatic breast
cancer is an appealing concept; however, major scientific and logistical
challenges hinder its implementation in the clinic. The identification of driver 
mutational events remains the biggest challenge, because, with the few exceptions
of ER, HER2, PIK3CA and AKT1, no validated oncogenic drivers of breast cancer
exist. The development of bioinformatic tools to help identify driver mutations, 
together with assessment of pathway activation and dependency should help resolve
this issue in the future. The occurrence of secondary resistance, such as ESR1
mutations, following endocrine therapy poses a further challenge. Ultra-deep
sequencing and monitoring of circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) could permit early
detection of the genetic events underlying resistance and inform on combination
therapy approaches. Beside these scientific challenges, logistical and
operational issues are a major limitation to the development of precision
medicine. For example, the low incidence of most candidate genomic alterations
hinders randomized trials, as the number of patients to be screened would be too 
high. We discuss these limitations and the solutions, which include scaling-up
the number of patients screened for identifying a genomic alteration, the
clustering of genomic alterations into pathways, and the development of
personalized medicine trials.

PMID: 26196250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Aug;152(3):667-73. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3491-3. 
Epub 2015 Jul 21.

The prognostic impact of age in different molecular subtypes of breast cancer.

Liedtke C(1), Rody A, Gluz O, Baumann K, Beyer D, Kohls EB, Lausen K, Hanker L,
Holtrich U, Becker S, Karn T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital
Schleswig-Holstein/Campus Luebeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538, Lüebeck,
Germany, cornelia.liedtke@uksh.de.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous entity composed of distinct molecular subgroups 
with different molecular and clinical features. We analyzed the association
between molecular breast cancer subgroups, age at diagnosis, and prognosis in a
compilation of publicly available gene expression datasets. Affymetrix gene
expression data (U133A or U133Plus2.0 arrays) of 4467 breast cancers from 40
datasets were compiled and homogenized. Breast cancer subgroups were defined
based on expression of ESR1, PR, HER2, and Ki67. Event-free survival was
calculated as recurrence-free survival or distant metastasis-free survival if
recurrence-free survival was not available. Young age at diagnosis is associated 
with higher frequency of triple negative and HER2 subtypes and lower frequency of
luminal A breast cancers. The 5-year event-free survival rates of patients aged
less than 40, between 40 and 50, and >50 years were 54.3 ± 3.5, 68.5 ± 1.9, and
70.4 ± 1.3 %, respectively. When controlling for breast cancer subtype, we found 
that age <40 years remained significantly associated with poor prognosis in
triple negative breast cancer. The effect was modest in luminal tumors and not
found in HER2 subtype. Both subtypes and age retained their significances in
multivariate analysis. Association of age at diagnosis with molecular breast
cancer subtype contributes to its important role as prognostic factor among
patients with breast cancer. Still, within the group of triple negative breast
cancer, young age <40 years has a significant prognostic value which was retained
in multivariate analysis.

PMID: 26195120  [PubMed - in process]


190. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 Oct;173(4):447-54. doi: 10.1530/EJE-15-0460. Epub 2015 Jul
20.

Is idiopathic hirsutism (IH) really idiopathic? mRNA expressions of skin
steroidogenic enzymes in women with IH.

Taheri S(1), Zararsiz G(1), Karaburgu S(2), Borlu M(2), Ozgun MT(2), Karaca Z(2),
Tanriverdi F(2), Dundar M(2), Kelestimur F(2), Unluhizarci K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical BiologyStatisticsEndocrinologyDermatologyObstetrics and
GynecologyGeneticsErciyes University Medical School, Kayseri 38039,
TurkeyBetul-Ziya Eren Genome and Stem Cell CenterErciyes University, Kayseri,
Turkey Departments of Medical BiologyStatisticsEndocrinologyDermatologyObstetrics
and GynecologyGeneticsErciyes University Medical School, Kayseri 38039,
TurkeyBetul-Ziya Eren Genome and Stem Cell CenterErciyes University, Kayseri,
Turkey. (2)Departments of Medical
BiologyStatisticsEndocrinologyDermatologyObstetrics and GynecologyGeneticsErciyes
University Medical School, Kayseri 38039, TurkeyBetul-Ziya Eren Genome and Stem
Cell CenterErciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey. (3)Departments of Medical
BiologyStatisticsEndocrinologyDermatologyObstetrics and GynecologyGeneticsErciyes
University Medical School, Kayseri 38039, TurkeyBetul-Ziya Eren Genome and Stem
Cell CenterErciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey kursad@erciyes.edu.tr.

OBJECTIVE: Hirsutism results from hyperandrogenemia and/or exaggerated androgen
responsiveness. Among various causes of hirsutism, some patients do not exhibit
androgen excess which is called idiopathic hirsutism (IH). The pathogenesis of IH
could not so far be clearly established.
DESIGN: To investigate the mRNA expression of aromatase enzyme and the other
enzymes having functional roles in the steroidogenic pathway, in freshly obtained
skin tissue from subumbilical skin and the arm of the patients with IH and
healthy women.
METHODS: Twenty-one women with IH and 15 healthy women were included in the
study. We aimed to determine mRNA expressions of genes associated with local
androgen synthesis and metabolism (CYP11A1, STS, CYP19A1, SRD5A1, SRD5A2, HSD3B1,
AR, COMT, ESR1, ESR2, HSD3B2, CYP17A1, SULT2A1, SULT1E1, HSD17B2, IL6, TGFB1,
TNFA) from skin biopsy and blood samples of patients with IH and the data
compared with healthy subjects.
RESULTS: Patients with IH exhibit significantly lower interleukin 6 (IL6) mRNA
expression and higher steroid sulphatase (STS) and hydroxysteroid (17beta)
dehydrogenase 2 (HSD17B2), gene mRNA expression, respectively, in the
subumbilical region skin biopsies. Similarly, patients with IH exhibit
significantly lower IL6 mRNA expression and higher STS and HSD17B2 gene mRNA
expression, respectively, in the arm skin compared to healthy women's
subumbilical region.
CONCLUSIONS: In both arm and subumbilical skin biopsy of patients with IH, we
observed an up-regulation of HSD17B2 and STS, decreased IL6 mRNA expression,
probably determining an increase in the local amount of active androgens, which
could then be used as substrate for other androgen metabolic routes.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 26194504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Jul 8;8:1691-9. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S81621. eCollection
2015.

Screening of potential diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets against
colorectal cancer.

Tian X(1), Sun D(1), Zhao S(1), Xiong H(1), Fang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Renji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify genes with aberrant promoter methylation for developing
novel diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets against primary colorectal
cancer (CRC).
METHODS: Two paired CRC and adjacent normal tissues were collected from two CRC
patients. A Resi: MBD2b protein-sepharose-4B column was used to enrich the
methylated DNA fragments. Difference in the average methylation level of each DNA
methylation region between the tumor and control samples was determined by log2
fold change (FC) in each patient to screen the differentially methylated DNA
regions. Genes with log2FC value =4 or =-4 were identified to be hypermethylated 
and hypomethylated, respectively. Then, the underlying functions of methylated
genes were speculated by Gene Ontology database and pathway enrichment analyses. 
Furthermore, a protein-protein interaction network was built using Search Tool
for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins database, and the transcription
factor binding sites were screened via the Encyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) 
database.
RESULTS: Totally, 2,284 and 1,142 genes were predicted to have aberrant promoter 
hypermethylation or hypomethylation, respectively. MAP3K5, MAP3K8, MAPK14, and
MAPK9 with promoter hypermethylation functioned via MAPK signaling pathway, focal
adhesion, or Wnt signaling pathway, whereas MAP2K1, MAPK3, MAPK11, and MAPK7 with
promoter hypomethylation functioned via TGF-beta signaling pathway, neurotrophin 
signaling pathway, and chemokine signaling pathway. CREBBP, PIK3R1, MAPK14, APP, 
ESR1, MAPK3, and HRAS were the seven hubs in the constructed protein-protein
interaction network. RPL22, RPL36, RPLP2, RPS7, and RPS9 were commonly regulated 
by transcription factors, and YY1 and IRF4 were hypermethylated.
CONCLUSION: MAPK14, MAPK3, HRAS, YY1, and IRF4 may be considered as potential
biomarkers for early diagnosis and therapy of CRC.

PMCID: PMC4501159
PMID: 26185457  [PubMed]


192. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Sep;26(9):467-76. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2015.06.007.
Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Estrogen receptor mutations and functional consequences for breast cancer.

Thomas C(1), Gustafsson JÅ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell 
Signaling, University of Houston, 3605 Cullen Boulevard, Houston, TX 77204, USA. 
Electronic address: chthomas@uh.edu. (2)Department of Biology and Biochemistry,
Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, University of Houston, 3605
Cullen Boulevard, Houston, TX 77204, USA. Electronic address: jgustafsson@uh.edu.

A significant number of estrogen receptor a (ERa)-positive breast tumors develop 
resistance to endocrine therapy and recur with metastatic disease. Several
mechanisms of endocrine resistance have been proposed, including genetic
alterations that lead to ERs with altered protein sequence. By altering the
conformation of the protein and increasing the interaction with coactivators,
point mutations in ESR1, the gene encoding ERa, promote an active form of the
receptor in the absence of hormone that assists tumor cells to evade hormonal
treatments. Recent studies have confirmed that ESR1 point mutations frequently
occur in metastatic breast tumors that are refractory to endocrine therapy, and
suggest the development of novel strategies that may be more effective in
controlling ER signaling and benefit patients with recurrent and metastatic
disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26183887  [PubMed - in process]


193. J Exp Zool A Ecol Genet Physiol. 2015 Nov;323(9):627-36. doi: 10.1002/jez.1953.
Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Rapid changes in ovarian mRNA induced by brief photostimulation in Siberian
hamsters (Phodopus sungorus).

Shahed A(1), McMichael CF(1), Young KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Biology Group, Department of Biological Sciences, California
State University Long Beach, Long Beach, California.

This study sought to characterize the rapid intraovarian mRNA response of key
folliculogenic factors that may contribute to the restoration of folliculogenesis
during 2-10 days of photostimulation in Siberian hamsters. Adult hamsters were
exposed to short photoperiod (8L:16D) for 14 weeks (SD). A subset were then
transferred to long photoperiod (16L:8D) for 2 (PT day-2), 4 (PT day-4), or 10
days (PT day-10). Quantitative real-time PCR was used to measure intraovarian
mRNA expression of: gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH), follicle stimulating
hormone ß-subunit (FSHß-subunit), luteinizing hormone ß-subunit (LHß-subunit),
FSH and LH receptors, estrogen receptors a and ß (Esr1 and Esr2), matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and -9, anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), inhibin-a
subunit, fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) and proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA). Compared to SD, plasma FSH concentrations increased on PT day-4
and the number of antral follicles and corpora lutea increased on PT day-10. FSHR
and inhibin-a mRNA expression also increased on PT day-4, whereas LHR and
proliferation marker PCNA both increased on PT day-10 as compared to SD. Esr1
mRNA increased on PT day-2 and remained significantly increased as compared to
SD, whereas Esr1 mRNA increased only on PT day-2, similar to FGF-2 and MMP-2
results. No differences were observed in mRNA expression in ovarian GnRH, FSHß-
and LHß-subunits, AMH, and MMP-9 mRNA with 2-10 days of photostimulation. Rapid
increases in intraovarian FSHR and inhibin-a mRNA and antral follicle/corpora
lutea numbers suggest that the ovary is primed to react quickly to the FSH
released in response to brief periods of photostimulation.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26174001  [PubMed - in process]


194. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2015 Dec;50(12):1893-904. doi:
10.1007/s00127-015-1087-1. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

The role of allelic variation in estrogen receptor genes and major depression in 
the Nurses Health Study.

Keyes K(1), Agnew-Blais J(2), Roberts AL(3), Hamilton A(4), De Vivo I(2), Ranu
H(5), Koenen K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University, Mailman School of Public
Health, 722 West 168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA. kmk2104@columbia.edu.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard University, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston,
MA, 02115, USA. (3)Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Harvard
University, 677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. (4)Department of
Epidemiology, Columbia University, Mailman School of Public Health, 722 West
168th Street, New York, NY, 10032, USA. (5)Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health, Harvard University, 655 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

PURPOSE: The role of exogenous and endogenous sex hormones in the etiology of
depression remains elusive, in part because sex hormone variation is often
correlated with behaviors, life stage changes, and other factors that may
influence depression. Estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) are known to
regulate gene expression and estrogen response in areas of the brain associated
with major depression and are unlikely to be correlated with exogenous factors
that may influence depression.
METHODS: We examined whether functional polymorphisms in these genes are
associated with lifetime major depression and chronic major depression among a
sample of women from the Nurses' Health Study II (N = 2527). DSM-IV depressive
disorder symptoms were assessed by structured interview in 2007. Genotyping was
performed on DNA extracted from blood using Taq-man.
RESULTS: Women with the AA alleles of ESR2 RS4986938 had the higher prevalence of
lifetime major depression than women with other allele frequencies (36.7 % for
those with AA versus 28.5 % with GA and 29.1 % with GG, p = 0.02) and chronic
major depression (14.7 % for those with AA versus 9.3 % with GA and 9.1 % with
GG, p = 0.01). History of post-menopausal hormone (PMH) use modified the
association of ESR1 polymorphism RS2234693 with any lifetime depression;
specifically, those with the TT allele had the highest risk of lifetime
depression among PMH users, and the lowest risk of depression among non-PMH users
(p value for interaction = 0.02). Further, carriers of the AA alleles in ESR1
polymorphism RS9340799 had increased prevalence of lifetime major depression only
among lifetime PMH users (p = 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the hypothesis that estrogen receptor
polymorphisms influence risk for major depression; the role of estrogen receptors
and other sex steroid-related genetic factors may provide unique insights into
etiology.

PMCID: PMC4655148 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26169989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 14;6:7758. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8758.

DNA methylation of oestrogen-regulated enhancers defines endocrine sensitivity in
breast cancer.

Stone A(1), Zotenko E(1), Locke WJ(1), Korbie D(2), Millar EK(3), Pidsley R(1),
Stirzaker C(1), Graham P(4), Trau M(2), Musgrove EA(5), Nicholson RI(6), Gee
JM(6), Clark SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Epigenetics Research Program, Genomics and Epigenetics Division, Garvan
Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia [2]
Faculty of Medicine, St Vincent's Clinical School, UNSW, NSW 2052 &St Vincent's
Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia. (2)Australian Institute for
Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland
4072, Australia. (3)1] Translational Breast Cancer Research, The Kinghorn Cancer 
Centre, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales 2010,
Australia [2] Department of Anatomical Pathology, South Eastern Area Laboratory
Service, St George Hospital, Kogarah, Sydney, New South Wales 2217, Australia [3]
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Western Sydney,
Campbelltown, Sydney, New South Wales 2560, Australia [4] Faculty of Medicine,
UNSW, Kensington, New South Wales 2052, Australia. (4)1] Faculty of Medicine,
UNSW, Kensington, New South Wales 2052, Australia [2] Department of Radiation
Oncology, Cancer Care Centre, St George Hospital, Kogarah, Sydney, New South
Wales 2217, Australia. (5)1] Faculty of Medicine, St Vincent's Clinical School,
UNSW, NSW 2052 &St Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia
[2] Translational Breast Cancer Research, The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Garvan
Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New South Wales 2010, Australia [3]
Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1BD, UK. 
(6)Breast Cancer Molecular Pharmacology Group, School of Pharmacy and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Cardiff University, Wales CF10 3NB, UK.

Expression of oestrogen receptor (ESR1) determines whether a breast cancer
patient receives endocrine therapy, but does not guarantee patient response. The 
molecular factors that define endocrine response in ESR1-positive breast cancer
patients remain poorly understood. Here we characterize the DNA methylome of
endocrine sensitivity and demonstrate the potential impact of differential DNA
methylation on endocrine response in breast cancer. We show that DNA
hypermethylation occurs predominantly at oestrogen-responsive enhancers and is
associated with reduced ESR1 binding and decreased gene expression of key
regulators of ESR1 activity, thus providing a novel mechanism by which endocrine 
response is abated in ESR1-positive breast cancers. Conversely, we delineate that
ESR1-responsive enhancer hypomethylation is critical in transition from normal
mammary epithelial cells to endocrine-responsive ESR1-positive cancer.
Cumulatively, these novel insights highlight the potential of ESR1-responsive
enhancer methylation to both predict ESR1-positive disease and stratify
ESR1-positive breast cancer patients as responders to endocrine therapy.

PMCID: PMC4510968
PMID: 26169690  [PubMed - in process]


196. Bone. 2015 Dec;81:138-44. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2015.07.011. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

Influence of vitamin D and estrogen receptor gene polymorphisms on calcium
absorption: BsmI predicts a greater decrease during energy restriction.

Chang B(1), Schlussel Y(1), Sukumar D(2), Schneider SH(3), Shapses SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ,
USA. (2)Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)Department of Medicine,
Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital, USA. (4)Department of
Nutritional Sciences, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA. Electronic
address: shapses@aesop.rutgers.edu.

Low calcium absorption is associated with low bone mass and fracture. In this
study, we use gold standard methods of fractional calcium absorption (FCA) to
determine whether polymorphisms of intestinal receptors, vitamin D receptor (VDR)
and estrogen receptor a (ESR1), influence the response to energy restriction.
Fractional calcium absorption was measured using dual stable isotopes ((42)Ca and
(43)Ca) in women given adequate calcium and vitamin D and examined at baseline
and after 6 weeks of energy restriction or no intervention. After genotyping, the
relationship between VDR and ESR1 genotypes/haplotypes and FCA response was
assessed using several genetic models. One-hundred and sixty-eight women (53 ± 11
years of age) were included in this analysis. The ESR1 polymorphisms, PvuII and
XbaI and VDR polymorphisms (TaqI, ApaI) did not significantly influence FCA. The 
BB genotype of the VDR polymorphism, BsmI, was associated with a greater decrease
in FCA than the Bb/bb genotype. Multiple linear regression showed that the BsmI
polymorphism or the VDR haplotype, BAt, in addition to changes in weight and
vitamin D intake explained ~16% of the variation in changes in FCA. In
conclusion, the reduction in calcium absorption due to energy restriction is
greatest for those with the BB genotype. Previous candidate gene studies show
that VDR polymorphisms are associated with higher risk for osteoporosis, and the 
current study supports the notion that the BsmI polymorphism in intestinal VDR
may be contributing to alterations in bone health.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4641000 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26165414  [PubMed - in process]


197. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Oct;22(5):713-24. doi: 10.1530/ERC-15-0287. Epub 2015
Jul 10.

Evaluation of the pharmacological activities of RAD1901, a selective estrogen
receptor degrader.

Wardell SE(1), Nelson ER(1), Chao CA(1), Alley HM(1), McDonnell DP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University School of
Medicine, Box 3813, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA. (2)Department of
Pharmacology and Cancer Biology Duke University School of Medicine, Box 3813,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA donald.mcdonnell@duke.edu.

Endocrine therapy, using tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor, remains a
first-line treatment for estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) positive breast cancer.
However, tumor resistance limits the duration of response. The clinical efficacy 
of fulvestrant, a selective ER degrader (SERD) that triggers receptor
degradation, has confirmed that ESR1 often remains engaged in endocrine therapy
resistant cancers. Recently developed, selective ER modulators (SERMs)/SERD
hybrids (SSHs) that facilitate ESR1 degradation in breast cancer cells and
reproductive tissues have been advanced as an alternative treatment for advanced 
breast cancer, particularly in the metastatic setting. RAD1901 is one SSH
currently being evaluated clinically that is unique among ESR1 modulators in that
it readily enters the brain, a common site of breast cancer metastasis. In this
study, RAD1901 inhibited estrogen activation of ESR1 in vitro and in vivo,
inhibited estrogen-dependent breast cancer cell proliferation and xenograft tumor
growth, and mediated dose-dependent downregulation of ESR1 protein. However,
doses of RAD1901 insufficient to induce ESR1 degradation were shown to result in 
the activation of ESR1 target genes and in the stimulation of xenograft tumor
growth. RAD1901 is an SSH that exhibits complex pharmacology in breast cancer
models, having dose-dependent agonist/antagonist activity displayed in a
tissue-selective manner. It remains unclear how this unique pharmacology will
impact the utility of RAD1901 for breast cancer treatment. However, being the
only SERD currently known to access the brain, RAD1901 merits evaluation as a
targeted therapy for the treatment of breast cancer brain metastases.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4545300 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26162914  [PubMed - in process]


198. Reproduction. 2015 Oct;150(4):331-41. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0137. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

Estradiol increases IP3 by a nongenomic mechanism in the smooth muscle cells from
the rat oviduct.

Reuquén P(1), Oróstica ML(1), Rojas I(1), Díaz P(1), Parada-Bustamante A(2),
Orihuela PA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología,
Universidad de Santiago de ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y
Nanotecnología-CEDENNAInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de
Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33 Santiago, Chile Laboratorio de
Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología, Universidad de
Santiago de ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y
Nanotecnología-CEDENNAInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de
Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33 Santiago, Chile. (2)Laboratorio de
Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología, Universidad de
Santiago de ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y
Nanotecnología-CEDENNAInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de
Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33 Santiago, Chile. (3)Laboratorio de
Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología, Universidad de
Santiago de ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y
Nanotecnología-CEDENNAInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de
Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33 Santiago, Chile Laboratorio de
Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología, Universidad de
Santiago de ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y
Nanotecnología-CEDENNAInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de
Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33 Santiago, Chile
pedro.orihuela@usach.cl.

Estradiol (E2) accelerates egg transport by a nongenomic action, requiring
activation of estrogen receptor (ER) and successive cAMP and IP3 production in
the rat oviduct. Furthermore, E2 increases IP3 production in primary cultures of 
oviductal smooth muscle cells. As smooth muscle cells are the mechanical
effectors for the accelerated oocyte transport induced by E2 in the oviduct,
herein we determined the mechanism by which E2 increases IP3 in these cells.
Inhibition of protein synthesis by Actinomycin D did not affect the E2-induced
IP3 increase, although this was blocked by the ER antagonist ICI182780 and the
inhibitor of phospholipase C (PLC) ET-18-OCH3. Immunoelectron microscopy for ESR1
or ESR2 showed that these receptors were associated with the plasma membrane,
indicating compatible localization with E2 nongenomic actions in the smooth
muscle cells. Furthermore, ESR1 but not ESR2 agonist mimicked the effect of E2 on
the IP3 level. Finally, E2 stimulated the activity of a protein associated with
the contractile tone, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), in
the smooth muscle cells. We conclude that E2 increases IP3 by a nongenomic action
operated by ESR1 and that involves the activation of PLC in the smooth muscle
cells of the rat oviduct. This E2 effect is associated with CaMKII activation in 
the smooth muscle cells, suggesting that IP3 and CaMKII are involved in the
contractile activity necessary to accelerate oviductal egg transport.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 26159830  [PubMed - in process]


199. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jul 7;16:501. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1642-x.

Reorganization of metastamiRs in the evolution of metastatic aggressive
neuroblastoma cells.

Khan FH(1), Pandian V(2), Ramraj S(3), Aravindan S(4), Herman TS(5,)(6),
Aravindan N(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, 940, Stanton L. Young Boulevard, BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
Faizan-Khan@ouhsc.edu. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940, Stanton L. Young Boulevard, BMSB 737,
Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. Vijayabaskar-Pandian@ouhsc.edu. (3)Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940, Stanton
L. Young Boulevard, BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
Satish-Ramraj@ouhsc.edu. (4)Stephenson Cancer Center, 975 NE 10th Street, BRC
1468, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. Sheeja-Aravindan@ouhsc.edu. (5)Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940, Stanton
L. Young Boulevard, BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
Terence-Herman@ouhsc.edu. (6)Stephenson Cancer Center, 975 NE 10th Street, BRC
1468, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. Terence-Herman@ouhsc.edu. (7)Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 940, Stanton
L. Young Boulevard, BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. naravind@ouhsc.edu.

BACKGROUND: MetastamiRs have momentous clinical relevance and have been
correlated with disease progression in many tumors. In this study, we identified 
neuroblastoma metastamiRs exploiting unique mouse models of favorable and
high-risk metastatic human neuroblastoma. Further, we related their deregulation 
to the modulation of target proteins and established their association with
clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: Whole genome miRNA microarray analysis identified 74 metastamiRs across 
the manifold of metastatic tumors. RT-qPCR on select miRNAs validated profile
expression. Results from bio-informatics across the ingenuity pathway, miRCancer,
and literature data-mining endorsed the expression of these miRNAs in multiple
tumor systems and showed their role in metastasis, identifying them as
metastamiRs. Immunoblotting and TMA-IHC analyses revealed alterations in the
expression/phosphorylation of metastamiRs' targets, including ADAMTS-1, AKT1/2/3,
ASK1, AURKß, Birc1, Birc2, Bric5, ß-CATENIN, CASP8, CD54, CDK4, CREB, CTGF,
CXCR4, CYCLIN-D1, EGFR, ELK1, ESR1, CFOS, FOSB, FRA, GRB10, GSK3ß, IL1a, JUND,
kRAS, KRTAP1, MCP1, MEGF10, MMP2, MMP3, MMP9, MMP10, MTA2, MYB, cMYC, NF2, NOS3, 
P21, pP38, PTPN3, CLEAVED PARP, PKC, SDF-1ß, SEMA3D, SELE, STAT3, TLR3, TNFa,
TNFR1, and VEGF in aggressive cells ex vivo and in a manifold of metastatic
tumors in vivo. miRNA mimic (hsa-miR-125b, hsa-miR-27b, hsa-miR-93, hsa-miR-20a) 
and inhibitor (hsa-miR-1224-3p, hsa-miR-1260) approach for select miRNAs revealed
the direct influence of the altered metastamiRs in the regulation of identified
protein targets. Clinical outcome association analysis with the validated
metastamiRs' targets corresponded strongly with poor overall and relapse-free
survival.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, these results identified a comprehensive list of
neuroblastoma metastamiRs, related their deregulation to altered expression of
protein targets, and established their association with poor clinical outcomes.
The identified set of distinctive neuroblastoma metastamiRs could serve as
potential candidates for diagnostic markers for the switch from favorable to
high-risk metastatic disease.

PMCID: PMC4491873
PMID: 26148557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 6;10(7):e0132113. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132113.
eCollection 2015.

In an Ovine Model of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS) Prenatal Androgens Suppress
Female Fetal Renal Gluconeogenesis.

Connolly F(1), Rae MT(2), Späth K(1), Boswell L(1), McNeilly AS(1), Duncan WC(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Reproductive Health, the University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom. (2)School of Health, Life and Social Sciences, Edinburgh Napier
University, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Increased maternal androgen exposure during pregnancy programmes a polycystic
ovary syndrome (PCOS)-like condition, with metabolic dysfunction, in adult female
offspring. Other in utero exposures associated with the development of insulin
resistance, such as intrauterine growth restriction and exposure to prenatal
glucocorticoids, are associated with altered fetal gluconeogenesis. We therefore 
aimed to assess the effect of maternal androgenisation on the expression of PEPCK
and G6PC in the ovine fetus. Pregnant Scottish Greyface sheep were treated with
twice weekly testosterone propionate (TP; 100mg) or vehicle control from day 62
to day 102 of gestation. At day 90 and day 112 fetal plasma and liver and kidney 
tissue was collected for analysis. PEPCK and G6PC expression were analysed by
quantitative RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry and western blotting. PEPCK and G6PC
were localised to fetal hepatocytes but maternal androgens had no effect on
female or male fetuses. PEPCK and G6PC were also localised to the renal tubules
and renal PEPCK (P<0.01) and G6PC (P = 0.057) were lower in females after
prenatal androgenisation with no change in male fetuses. These tissue and sex
specific observations could not be explained by alterations in fetal insulin or
cortisol. The sexual dimorphism may be related to the increase in circulating
estrogen (P<0.01) and testosterone (P<0.001) in females but not males. The tissue
specific effects may be related to the increased expression of ESR1 (P<0.01) and 
AR (P<0.05) in the kidney when compared to the fetal liver. After discontinuation
of maternal androgenisation female fetal kidney PEPCK expression normalised.
These data further highlight the fetal and sexual dimorphic effects of maternal
androgenisation, an antecedent to adult disease and the plasticity of fetal
development.

PMCID: PMC4492923
PMID: 26148093  [PubMed - in process]


201. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 7;6(22):19190-203.

GPER agonist G-1 decreases adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) cell growth in vitro
and in vivo.

Chimento A(1), Sirianni R(1), Casaburi I(1), Zolea F(1), Rizza P(1), Avena P(1), 
Malivindi R(1), De Luca A(1), Campana C(1), Martire E(1), Domanico F(1), Fallo
F(2), Carpinelli G(3), Cerquetti L(4), Amendola D(5), Stigliano A(4), Pezzi V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of
Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende, Cosenza, Italy. (2)Department of Medicine-DIMED,
University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (3)Department of Cell Biology and
Neurosciences, National Institute of Health, Rome, Italy. (4)Department of
Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Sant'Andrea Hospital, Faculty of Medicine and
Psychology, Rome, Italy. (5)Research Center, San Pietro
Hospital-Fatebenefratelli, Rome, Italy.

We have previously demonstrated that estrogen receptor (ER) alpha (ESR1)
increases proliferation of adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) through both an
estrogen-dependent and -independent (induced by IGF-II/IGF1R pathways) manner.
Then, the use of tamoxifen, a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM),
appears effective in reducing ACC growth in vitro and in vivo. However, tamoxifen
not only exerts antiestrogenic activity, but also acts as full agonist on the G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER). Aim of this study was to investigate
the effect of a non-steroidal GPER agonist G-1 in modulating ACC cell growth. We 
found that G-1 is able to exert a growth inhibitory effect on H295R cells both in
vitro and, as xenograft model, in vivo. Treatment of H295R cells with G-1 induced
cell cycle arrest, DNA damage and cell death by the activation of the intrinsic
apoptotic mechanism. These events required sustained extracellular regulated
kinase (ERK) 1/2 activation. Silencing of GPER by a specific shRNA partially
reversed G-1-mediated cell growth inhibition without affecting ERK activation.
These data suggest the existence of G-1 activated but GPER-independent effects
that remain to be clarified. In conclusion, this study provides a rational to
further study G-1 mechanism of action in order to include this drug as a
treatment option to the limited therapy of ACC.

PMCID: PMC4662484
PMID: 26131713  [PubMed - in process]


202. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015 Oct;12(10):573-83. doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2015.117. Epub
2015 Jun 30.

ESR1 mutationsa mechanism for acquired endocrine resistance in breast cancer.

Jeselsohn R(1), Buchwalter G(2), De Angelis C(3), Brown M(1), Schiff R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Oncology Center, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA. (2)Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (3)Lester &Sue
Smith Breast Center and Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Departments of Medicine and 
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, BCM
600, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Approximately 70% of breast cancers are oestrogen receptor a (ER) positive, and
are, therefore, treated with endocrine therapies. However, about 25% of patients 
with primary disease and almost all patients with metastases will present with or
eventually develop endocrine resistance. Despite the magnitude of this clinical
challenge, the mechanisms underlying the development of resistance remain largely
unknown. In the past 2 years, several studies unveiled gain-of-function mutations
in ESR1, the gene encoding the ER, in approximately 20% of patients with
metastatic ER-positive disease who received endocrine therapies, such as
tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors. These mutations are clustered in a 'hotspot' 
within the ligand-binding domain (LBD) of the ER and lead to ligand-independent
ER activity that promotes tumour growth, partial resistance to endocrine therapy,
and potentially enhanced metastatic capacity; thus, ER LBD mutations might
account for a mechanism of acquired endocrine resistance in a substantial
fraction of patients with metastatic disease. In general, the absence of
detectable ESR1 mutations in patients with treatment-naive disease, and the
correlation between the frequency of patients with tumours harbouring these
mutations and the number of endocrine treatments received suggest that, under
selective treatment pressure, clonal expansion of rare mutant clones occurs,
leading to resistance. Preclinical and clinical development of rationale-based
novel therapeutic strategies that inhibit these ER mutants has the potential to
substantially improve treatment outcomes. We discuss the contribution of ESR1
mutations to the development of acquired resistance to endocrine therapy, and
evaluate how mutated ER can be detected and targeted to overcome resistance and
improve patient outcomes.

PMID: 26122181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2015 Oct;53:60-9. doi: 10.1016/j.domaniend.2015.05.003.
Epub 2015 Jun 5.

Placental development during early pregnancy in sheep: estrogen and progesterone 
receptor messenger RNA expression in pregnancies derived from in vivo-produced
and in vitro-produced embryos.

Reynolds LP(1), Haring JS(2), Johnson ML(3), Ashley RL(4), Redmer DA(3), Borowicz
PP(3), Grazul-Bilska AT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND 58108,
USA; Center for Nutrition and Pregnancy, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND
58108, USA. Electronic address: Larry.Reynolds@ndsu.edu. (2)Department of Animal 
Sciences, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND 58108, USA. (3)Department of
Animal Sciences, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND 58108, USA; Center for 
Nutrition and Pregnancy, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND 58108, USA.
(4)Department of Animal and Range Sciences, New Mexico State University, Las
Cruces, NM, USA.

Sex steroids are important regulators of angiogenesis and growth in reproductive 
tissues, including the placenta. In experiment (exp.) 1, to examine the
expression of a suite of sex steroid receptors throughout early pregnancy,
maternal (caruncular [CAR]) and fetal (fetal membranes [FM]) placental tissues
were collected on days 14 to 30 after mating and on day 10 after estrus
(nonpregnant controls). In exp. 2, to examine the hypothesis that assisted
reproductive technology would affect the expression of the same suite of sex
steroid receptors, pregnancies were achieved through natural mating (NAT) or
transfer of embryos from natural mating (NAT-ET), in vitro fertilization (IVF),
or in vitro activation (IVA), and CAR and FM were collected on day 22. In exp. 1,
for CAR messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of estrogen receptors (ESR) 1 and 2,
nuclear (n) progesterone receptors (PGR) and membrane (m) PGRa, ß, and <U+03B3> were
affected (P < 0.02) by pregnancy stage, as were ESR1, nPGR, and mPGRa, ß, and <U+03B3>
for FM (P < 0.03). In exp. 2, for CAR, mRNA expression of ESR1 and nPGR was
decreased (P < 0.001) in NAT-ET, IVF, and IVA groups compared with NAT. For FM,
mRNA expression of ESR1 tended to be greater (P = 0.10) in the IVA group compared
with NAT and NAT-ET, and GPER1 was greater (P < 0.05) in NAT-ET and IVF compared 
with NAT. These data establish the normal pattern of sex steroid receptor mRNA
expression in maternal and fetal placenta during early pregnancy in sheep, and in
addition, suggest that altered expression of placental sex steroid receptors may 
be an early event leading to poor placental vascularization and growth after
assisted reproductive technology.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26119037  [PubMed - in process]


204. J Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Aug;55(1):69-79. doi: 10.1530/JME-15-0079. Epub 2015 Jun
24.

CYP11A1 expression in bone is associated with aromatase inhibitor-related bone
loss.

Rodríguez-Sanz M(1), García-Giralt N(2), Prieto-Alhambra D(3), Servitja S(1),
Balcells S(1), Pecorelli R(4), Díez-Pérez A(4), Grinberg D(1), Tusquets I(1),
Nogués X(4).

Author information: 
(1)IMIM (Hospital del Mar Research Institute)Red Temática de Investigación
Cooperativa en Envejecimiento y Fragilidad (RETICEF), ISCIII, Carrer del Doctor
Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, SpainInternal Medicine DepartmentHospital del Mar, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainIDIAP Jordi Gol Primary Care
Research InstituteUniversitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainNuffield
Department of OrthopaedicsRheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, Oxford NIHR 
Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKMRC
Lifecourse Epidemiology UnitUniversity of Southampton, Southampton, UKMedical
Oncology DepartmentIMIM (Hospital del Mar Research Institute), Hospital del Mar, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainDepartament de
GenèticaUniversitat de Barcelona, IBUB, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red 
de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain. (2)IMIM (Hospital del 
Mar Research Institute)Red Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en
Envejecimiento y Fragilidad (RETICEF), ISCIII, Carrer del Doctor Aiguader 88,
08003 Barcelona, SpainInternal Medicine DepartmentHospital del Mar, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainIDIAP Jordi Gol Primary Care Research
InstituteUniversitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainNuffield Department
of OrthopaedicsRheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, Oxford NIHR
Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKMRC
Lifecourse Epidemiology UnitUniversity of Southampton, Southampton, UKMedical
Oncology DepartmentIMIM (Hospital del Mar Research Institute), Hospital del Mar, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainDepartament de
GenèticaUniversitat de Barcelona, IBUB, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red 
de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain ngarcia@imim.es.
(3)IMIM (Hospital del Mar Research Institute)Red Temática de Investigación
Cooperativa en Envejecimiento y Fragilidad (RETICEF), ISCIII, Carrer del Doctor
Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, SpainInternal Medicine DepartmentHospital del Mar, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainIDIAP Jordi Gol Primary Care
Research InstituteUniversitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainNuffield
Department of OrthopaedicsRheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, Oxford NIHR 
Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKMRC
Lifecourse Epidemiology UnitUniversity of Southampton, Southampton, UKMedical
Oncology DepartmentIMIM (Hospital del Mar Research Institute), Hospital del Mar, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainDepartament de
GenèticaUniversitat de Barcelona, IBUB, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red 
de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain IMIM (Hospital del Mar 
Research Institute)Red Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Envejecimiento y 
Fragilidad (RETICEF), ISCIII, Carrer del Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona,
SpainInternal Medicine DepartmentHospital del Mar, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainIDIAP Jordi Gol Primary Care Research
InstituteUniversitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainNuffield Department
of OrthopaedicsRheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, Oxford NIHR
Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKMRC
Lifecourse Epidemiology UnitUniversity of Southampton, Southampton, UKMedical
Oncology DepartmentIMIM (Hospital del Mar Research Institute), Hospital del Mar, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainDepartament de
GenèticaUniversitat de Barcelona, IBUB, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red 
de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain IMIM (Hospital del Mar 
Research Institute)Red Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Envejecimiento y 
Fragilidad (RETICEF), ISCIII, Carrer del Doctor Ai (4)IMIM (Hospital del Mar
Research Institute)Red Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Envejecimiento y 
Fragilidad (RETICEF), ISCIII, Carrer del Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona,
SpainInternal Medicine DepartmentHospital del Mar, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainIDIAP Jordi Gol Primary Care Research
InstituteUniversitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainNuffield Department
of OrthopaedicsRheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, Oxford NIHR
Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKMRC
Lifecourse Epidemiology UnitUniversity of Southampton, Southampton, UKMedical
Oncology DepartmentIMIM (Hospital del Mar Research Institute), Hospital del Mar, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainDepartament de
GenèticaUniversitat de Barcelona, IBUB, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red 
de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain IMIM (Hospital del Mar 
Research Institute)Red Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Envejecimiento y 
Fragilidad (RETICEF), ISCIII, Carrer del Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona,
SpainInternal Medicine DepartmentHospital del Mar, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainIDIAP Jordi Gol Primary Care Research
InstituteUniversitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainNuffield Department
of OrthopaedicsRheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, Oxford NIHR
Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKMRC
Lifecourse Epidemiology UnitUniversity of Southampton, Southampton, UKMedical
Oncology DepartmentIMIM (Hospital del Mar Research Institute), Hospital del Mar, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, SpainDepartament de
GenèticaUniversitat de Barcelona, IBUB, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red 
de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain.

Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) used as adjuvant therapy in postmenopausal women with 
hormone receptor-positive breast cancer cause diverse musculoskeletal side
effects that include bone loss and its associated fracture. About half of the 391
patients treated with AIs in the Barcelona-Aromatase induced bone loss in early
breast cancer cohort suffered a significant bone loss at lumbar spine (LS) and/or
femoral neck (FN) after 2 years on AI-treatment. In contrast, up to one-third
(19.6% LS, 38.6% FN) showed no decline or even increased bone density. The
present study aimed to determine the genetic basis for this variability. SNPs in 
candidate genes involved in vitamin D and estrogen hormone-response pathways
(CYP11A1, CYP17A1, HSD3B2, HSD17B3, CYP19A1, CYP2C19, CYP2C9, ESR1, DHCR7, GC,
CYP2R1, CYP27B1, VDR and CYP24A1) were genotyped for association analysis with
AI-related bone loss (AIBL). After multiple testing correction, 3 tag-SNPs
(rs4077581, s11632698 and rs900798) located in the CYP11A1 gene were
significantly associated (P<0.005) with FN AIBL at 2 years of treatment. Next,
CYP11A1 expression in human fresh bone tissue and primary osteoblasts was
demonstrated by RT-PCR. Both common isoforms of human cholesterol side-chain
cleavage enzyme (encoded by CYP11A1 gene) were detected in osteoblasts by western
blot. In conclusion, the genetic association of CYP11A1 gene with AIBL and its
expression in bone tissue reveals a potential local function of this enzyme in
bone metabolism regulation, offering a new vision of the steroidogenic ability of
this tissue and new understanding of AI-induced bone loss.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 26108486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. BMC Genomics. 2015;16 Suppl 7:S19. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-16-S7-S19. Epub 2015
Jun 11.

Co-modulation analysis of gene regulation in breast cancer reveals complex
interplay between ESR1 and ERBB2 genes.

Chiu YC, Wu CT, Hsiao TH, Lai YP, Hsiao C, Chen Y, Chuang EY.

BACKGROUND: Gene regulation is dynamic across cellular conditions and disease
subtypes. From the aspect of regulation under modulation, regulation strength
between a pair of genes can be modulated by (dependent on) expression abundance
of another gene (modulator gene). Previous studies have demonstrated the
involvement of genes modulated by single modulator genes in cancers, including
breast cancer. However, analysis of multi-modulator co-modulation that can
further delineate the landscape of complex gene regulation is, to our knowledge, 
unexplored previously. In the present study we aim to explore the joint effects
of multiple modulator genes in modulating global gene regulation and dissect the 
biological functions in breast cancer.
RESULTS: To carry out the analysis, we proposed the Covariability-based Multiple 
Regression (CoMRe) method. The method is mainly built on a multiple regression
model that takes expression levels of multiple modulators as inputs and
regulation strength between genes as output. Pairs of genes were divided into
groups based on their co-modulation patterns. Analyzing gene expression profiles 
from 286 breast cancer patients, CoMRe investigated ten candidate modulator genes
that interacted and jointly determined global gene regulation. Among the
candidate modulators, ESR1, ERBB2, and ADAM12 were found modulating the most
numbers of gene pairs. The largest group of gene pairs was composed of ones that 
were modulated by merely ESR1. Functional annotation revealed that the group was 
significantly related to tumorigenesis and estrogen signaling in breast cancer.
ESR1-ERBB2 co-modulation was the largest group modulated by more than one
modulators. Similarly, the group was functionally associated with hormone
stimulus, suggesting that functions of the two modulators are performed, at least
partially, through modulation. The findings were validated in majorities of
patients (> 99%) of two independent breast cancer datasets.
CONCLUSIONS: We have showed CoMRe is a robust method to discover critical
modulators in gene regulatory networks, and it is capable of achieving
reproducible and biologically meaningful results. Our data reveal that gene
regulatory networks modulated by single modulator or co-modulated by multiple
modulators play important roles in breast cancer. Findings of this report
illuminate complex and dynamic gene regulation under modulation and its
involvement in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4474423
PMID: 26100352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. BMC Genomics. 2015;16 Suppl 7:S12. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-16-S7-S12. Epub 2015
Jun 11.

Comprehensive genome-wide transcription factor analysis reveals that a
combination of high affinity and low affinity DNA binding is needed for human
gene regulation.

Wang J, Malecka A, Trøen G, Delabie J.

BACKGROUND: High-throughput in vivo protein-DNA interaction experiments are
currently widely used in gene regulation studies. Hitherto, comprehensive data
analysis remains a challenge and for that reason most computational methods only 
consider the top few hundred or thousand strongest protein binding sites whereas 
weak protein binding sites are completely ignored.
RESULTS: A new biophysical model of protein-DNA interactions, BayesPI2+, was
developed to address the above-mentioned challenges. BayesPI2+ can be run in
either a serial computation model or a parallel ensemble learning framework.
BayesPI2+ allowed us to analyze all binding sites of the transcription factors,
including weak binding that cannot be analyzed by other models. It is evaluated
in both synthetic and real in vivo protein-DNA binding experiments. Analysing
ESR1 and SPIB in breast carcinoma and activated B cell-like diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma cell lines, respectively, revealed that the concerted binding to high
and low affinity sites correlates best with gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: BayesPI2+ allows us to analyze transcription factor binding on a
larger scale than hitherto achieved. By this analysis, we were able to
demonstrate that genes are regulated by concerted binding to high and low
affinity binding sites. The program and output results are publicly available at:
http://folk.uio.no/junbaiw/BayesPI2Plus.

PMCID: PMC4474539
PMID: 26099425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Clin Invest. 2015 Jul 1;125(7):2861-76. doi: 10.1172/JCI80941. Epub 2015 Jun
22.

Estrogen receptor-a in medial amygdala neurons regulates body weight.

Xu P, Cao X, He Y, Zhu L, Yang Y, Saito K, Wang C, Yan X, Hinton AO Jr, Zou F,
Ding H, Xia Y, Yan C, Shu G, Wu SP, Yang B, Feng Y, Clegg DJ, DeMarchi R, Khan
SA, Tsai SY, DeMayo FJ, Wu Q, Tong Q, Xu Y.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2015 Jul 1;125(7):2576-8.

Estrogen receptor-a (ERa) activity in the brain prevents obesity in both males
and females. However, the ERa-expressing neural populations that regulate body
weight remain to be fully elucidated. Here we showed that single-minded-1 (SIM1) 
neurons in the medial amygdala (MeA) express abundant levels of ERa. Specific
deletion of the gene encoding ERa (Esr1) from SIM1 neurons, which are mostly
within the MeA, caused hypoactivity and obesity in both male and female mice fed 
with regular chow, increased susceptibility to diet-induced obesity (DIO) in
males but not in females, and blunted the body weight-lowering effects of a
glucagon-like peptide-1-estrogen (GLP-1-estrogen) conjugate. Furthermore,
selective adeno-associated virus-mediated deletion of Esr1 in the MeA of adult
male mice produced a rapid body weight gain that was associated with remarkable
reductions in physical activity but did not alter food intake. Conversely,
overexpression of ERa in the MeA markedly reduced the severity of DIO in male
mice. Finally, an ERa agonist depolarized MeA SIM1 neurons and increased their
firing rate, and designer receptors exclusively activated by designer
drug-mediated (DREADD-mediated) activation of these neurons increased physical
activity in mice. Collectively, our results support a model where ERa signals
activate MeA neurons to stimulate physical activity, which in turn prevents body 
weight gain.

PMCID: PMC4563687
PMID: 26098212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Jun 17;11(6):e1004202. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004202. 
eCollection 2015.

Deciphering Signaling Pathway Networks to Understand the Molecular Mechanisms of 
Metformin Action.

Sun J(1), Zhao M(2), Jia P(2), Wang L(3), Wu Y(4), Iverson C(5), Zhou Y(6),
Bowton E(7), Roden DM(8), Denny JC(2), Aldrich MC(9), Xu H(4), Zhao Z(10).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science
Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America; Department of
Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America. (2)Department of Biomedical Informatics,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of 
America. (3)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America. (4)School of Biomedical
Informatics, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston,
Texas, United States of America. (5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America;
Center for Human Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, 
United States of America. (6)National Center for Drug Screening, Shanghai
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China. (7)Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, School
of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of
America. (8)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America; Department of Pharmacology,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of 
America. (9)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America; Center for Human
Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of 
America; Division of Epidemiology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America. (10)Department of Biomedical
Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee,
United States of America; Center for Quantitative Sciences, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America; Department of
Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee,
United States of America.

A drug exerts its effects typically through a signal transduction cascade, which 
is non-linear and involves intertwined networks of multiple signaling pathways.
Construction of such a signaling pathway network (SPNetwork) can enable
identification of novel drug targets and deep understanding of drug action.
However, it is challenging to synopsize critical components of these interwoven
pathways into one network. To tackle this issue, we developed a novel
computational framework, the Drug-specific Signaling Pathway Network (DSPathNet).
The DSPathNet amalgamates the prior drug knowledge and drug-induced gene
expression via random walk algorithms. Using the drug metformin, we illustrated
this framework and obtained one metformin-specific SPNetwork containing 477 nodes
and 1,366 edges. To evaluate this network, we performed the gene set enrichment
analysis using the disease genes of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and cancer, one T2D
genome-wide association study (GWAS) dataset, three cancer GWAS datasets, and one
GWAS dataset of cancer patients with T2D on metformin. The results showed that
the metformin network was significantly enriched with disease genes for both T2D 
and cancer, and that the network also included genes that may be associated with 
metformin-associated cancer survival. Furthermore, from the metformin SPNetwork
and common genes to T2D and cancer, we generated a subnetwork to highlight the
molecule crosstalk between T2D and cancer. The follow-up network analyses and
literature mining revealed that seven genes (CDKN1A, ESR1, MAX, MYC, PPARGC1A,
SP1, and STK11) and one novel MYC-centered pathway with CDKN1A, SP1, and STK11
might play important roles in metformin's antidiabetic and anticancer effects.
Some results are supported by previous studies. In summary, our study 1) develops
a novel framework to construct drug-specific signal transduction networks; 2)
provides insights into the molecular mode of metformin; 3) serves a model for
exploring signaling pathways to facilitate understanding of drug action, disease 
pathogenesis, and identification of drug targets.

PMCID: PMC4470683
PMID: 26083494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Physiol Genomics. 2015 Sep;47(9):420-31. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00123.2014.
Epub 2015 Jun 16.

Identification of conserved hepatic transcriptomic responses to 17ß-estradiol
using high-throughput sequencing in brown trout.

Uren Webster TM(1), Shears JA(1), Moore K(1), Santos EM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences, College of Life & Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter,
Exeter, United Kingdom. (2)Biosciences, College of Life & Environmental Sciences,
University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom E.Santos@exeter.ac.uk.

Estrogenic chemicals are major contaminants of surface waters and can threaten
the sustainability of natural fish populations. Characterization of the global
molecular mechanisms of toxicity of environmental contaminants has been conducted
primarily in model species rather than species with limited existing
transcriptomic or genomic sequence information. We aimed to investigate the
global mechanisms of toxicity of an endocrine disrupting chemical of
environmental concern [17ß-estradiol (E2)] using high-throughput RNA sequencing
(RNA-Seq) in an environmentally relevant species, brown trout (Salmo trutta). We 
exposed mature males to measured concentrations of 1.94, 18.06, and 34.38 ng E2/l
for 4 days and sequenced three individual liver samples per treatment using an
Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. Exposure to 34.4 ng E2/L resulted in 2,113
differentially regulated transcripts (FDR < 0.05). Functional analysis revealed
upregulation of processes associated with vitellogenesis, including lipid
metabolism, cellular proliferation, and ribosome biogenesis, together with a
downregulation of carbohydrate metabolism. Using real-time quantitative PCR, we
validated the expression of eight target genes and identified significant
differences in the regulation of several known estrogen-responsive transcripts in
fish exposed to the lower treatment concentrations (including esr1 and zp2.5). We
successfully used RNA-Seq to identify highly conserved responses to estrogen and 
also identified some estrogen-responsive transcripts that have been less well
characterized, including nots and tgm2l. These results demonstrate the potential 
application of RNA-Seq as a valuable tool for assessing mechanistic effects of
pollutants in ecologically relevant species for which little genomic information 
is available.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4556936
PMID: 26082144  [PubMed - in process]


210. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Aug;14(8):1824-36. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0980-T.
Epub 2015 Jun 15.

Selective Inhibition of SIN3 Corepressor with Avermectins as a Novel Therapeutic 
Strategy in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer.

Kwon YJ(1), Petrie K(2), Leibovitch BA(1), Zeng L(3), Mezei M(3), Howell L(2),
Gil V(2), Christova R(2), Bansal N(1), Yang S(3), Sharma R(3), Ariztia EV(1),
Frankum J(2), Brough R(2), Sbirkov Y(2), Ashworth A(2), Lord CJ(2), Zelent A(4), 
Farias E(1), Zhou MM(3), Waxman S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. (2)The Institute of Cancer Research,
London, United Kingdom. (3)Structural and Chemical Biology, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. (4)The Institute of Cancer Research,
London, United Kingdom. Division of Hemato-Oncology, Sylvester Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, Florida. (5)Division of Hematology and
Oncology, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, New York. Samuel.waxman@mssm.edu.

Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) lacking estrogen, progesterone, and HER2
receptors account for 10% to 20% of breast cancer and are indicative of poor
prognosis. The development of effective treatment strategies therefore represents
a pressing unmet clinical need. We previously identified a molecularly targeted
approach to target aberrant epigenetics of TNBC using a peptide corresponding to 
the SIN3 interaction domain (SID) of MAD. SID peptide selectively blocked binding
of SID-containing proteins to the paired a-helix (PAH2) domain of SIN3, resulting
in epigenetic and transcriptional modulation of genes associated with
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). To find small molecule inhibitor (SMI)
mimetics of SID peptide, we performed an in silico screen for PAH2 domain-binding
compounds. This led to the identification of the avermectin macrocyclic lactone
derivatives selamectin and ivermectin (Mectizan) as candidate compounds. Both
selamectin and ivermectin phenocopied the effects of SID peptide to block
SIN3-PAH2 interaction with MAD, induce expression of CDH1 and ESR1, and restore
tamoxifen sensitivity in MDA-MB-231 human and MMTV-Myc mouse TNBC cells in vitro.
Treatment with selamectin or ivermectin led to transcriptional modulation of
genes associated with EMT and maintenance of a cancer stem cell phenotype in TNBC
cells. This resulted in impairment of clonogenic self-renewal in vitro and
inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. Underlining the potential of
avermectins in TNBC, pathway analysis revealed that selamectin also modulated the
expression of therapeutically targetable genes. Consistent with this, an unbiased
drug screen in TNBC cells identified selamectin-induced sensitization to a number
of drugs, including those targeting modulated genes.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4529816 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26078298  [PubMed - in process]


211. Tumour Biol. 2015 Jul;36(7):4905-12. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3567-z. Epub 2015
Jun 16.

DNA methylation as a promising landscape: A simple blood test for breast cancer
prediction.

Khakpour G(1), Pooladi A, Izadi P, Noruzinia M, Tavakkoly Bazzaz J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women worldwide. Risk
assessment is one of the main services delivered by cancer clinics. Biomarker
analysis on different tissues including the peripheral blood can provide crucial 
information. One of the potential epigenetic biomarkers (epimarkers) is
introduced as the peripheral blood DNA methylation pattern. This study was
conducted to evaluate the potential value of peripheral blood epimarkers as an
accessible tool to predict the risk of breast cancer development. WBC's DNA was
the focus of several case-control studies at both genome wide and candidate gene 
levels to reveal epigenetic changes accounting for predisposition to breast
cancer, leading to suggest that ATM, TITF1, SFRP1, NUP155, NEUROD1, ZNF217, DBC2,
DOK7 and ESR1 genes and the LINE1, Alu and Sat2 DNA elements could be considered 
as the potential epimarkers. To address that by which mechanisms WBC's DNA
methylation patterns could be linked to the propensity to breast cancer, several 
contemplations have been offered. Constitutional epimutation during embryonic
life, and methylation changes secondary to either environmental exposures or
tumor-mediated immune response, are the two main mechanisms. One can deduce that 
epimarkers based on their potential properties or regulatory impacts on
cancer-related genes may be employed for risk prediction, prognosis, and survival
inferences that are highly required for breast cancer management toward
personalized medicine.

PMID: 26076810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2015;36(2):178-82.

Estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1) regulates aromatase (Cyp19a1) expression in the
mouse brain.

Yilmaz MB(1), Zhao H(1), Brooks DC(1), Fenkci IV(1), Imir-Yenicesu G(1), Attar
E(1), Akbal E(2), Kaynak BA(3), Bulun SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine at
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (2)Department of Medical Biology
and Genetics, School of Medicine at Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey.
(3)Institute of Health Sciences, Toros University, Mersin, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: Local estrogen production in the brain regulates critical functions
including neuronal development, gonadotropin secretion and sexual behavior. In
the mouse brain, a 36 kb distal promoter (l.f) regulates the Cyp19a1 gene that
encodes aromatase, the key enzyme for estrogen biosynthesis. In vitro, promoter
l.f interacts with estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1) to mediate Cyp19a1 mRNA
expression and enzyme activity in mouse hypothalamic neuronal cell lines. The in 
vivo mechanisms that control mammalian brain aromatase expression during fetal
and adult development, however, are not thoroughly understood. Our aim was to
elucidate the basis of the in vivo connection between Esr1 and Cyp19a1.
METHODS: Pregnant mice were sacrificed at gestational days 9, 11, 13, 15, 16, 19,
21 and the brain tissues of the fetuses were harvested along with five newborns
at the age of postnatal day 2. Esr1KO (female) were also sacrificed and their
hypothalamus were excised out. Then both fetuses and adults RNA were isolated,
reverse transcribed and amplified employing primers specific for Esr1 and Cyp19a1
with Real time PCR.
RESULTS: In the fetal mouse brain, Cyp19a1 mRNA levels are inversely correlated
with estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1) mRNA levels in a temporal manner. Moreover,
Cyp19a1 mRNA levels increased in the hypothalamus of estrogen receptor-alpha
knockout female mice (Esr1KO).
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our findings might indicate that Esr1 has crucial
roles in the in vivo regulation of aromatase expression in the brain during fetal
and adult life.

PMID: 26071589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Jun;54(3):339-49. doi: 10.1530/JME-15-0086.

Estrogen receptor ESR1 mediates activation of ERK1/2, CREB, and ELK1 in the
corpus of the epididymis.

Cavalcanti FN(1), Lucas TF(1), Lazari MF(1), Porto CS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental EndocrinologyDepartment of Pharmacology, Escola
Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Três de maio 100,
INFAR, Vila Clementino, São Paulo, São Paulo 04044-020, Brazil. (2)Section of
Experimental EndocrinologyDepartment of Pharmacology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Rua Três de maio 100, INFAR, Vila
Clementino, São Paulo, São Paulo 04044-020, Brazil csporto@unifesp.br
csegretiporto@gmail.com.

Expression of the estrogen receptor ESR1 is higher in the corpus than it is in
the initial segment/caput and cauda of the epididymis. ESR1 immunostaining in the
corpus has been localized not only in the nuclei but also in the cytoplasm and
apical membrane, which indicates that ESR1 plays a role in membrane-initiated
signaling. The present study investigated whether ESR1 mediates the activation of
rapid signaling pathways by estradiol (E2) in the epididymis. We investigated the
effect of E2 and the ESR1-selective agonist
(4,4',4''-(4-propyl-(1H)-pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl)trisphenol (PPT) on the activation 
of extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases (ERK1/2), CREB protein, and ETS
oncogene-related protein (ELK1). Treatment with PPT did not affect ERK1/2
phosphorylation in the cauda, but it rapidly increased ERK1/2 phosphorylation in 
the initial segment/caput and corpus of the epididymis. PPT also activated CREB
and ELK1 in the corpus of the epididymis. The PPT-induced phosphorylation of
ERK1/2, CREB, and ELK1 was blocked by the ESR1-selective antagonist MPP and by
pretreatment with a non-receptor tyrosine kinase SRC inhibitor, an EGFR kinase
inhibitor, an MEK1/2 inhibitor, and a phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase inhibitor. In
conclusion, these results indicate that the corpus, which is a region with high
expression of the estrogen receptor ESR1, is a major target in the epididymis for
the activation of rapid signaling by E2. The sequence of events that follow E2
interaction with ESR1 includes the SRC-mediated transactivation of EGFR and the
phosphorylation of ERK1/2, CREB, and ELK1. This rapid estrogen signaling may
modulate gene expression in the corpus of the epididymis, and it may play a role 
in the dynamic microenvironment of the epididymal lumen.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 26069273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. BMC Med. 2015 Jun 9;13:137. doi: 10.1186/s12916-015-0369-5.

Targeted therapies for ER+/HER2- metastatic breast cancer.

Yamamoto-Ibusuki M(1), Arnedos M(2,)(3), André F(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. mibusuki@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif,
France. monica.arnedos@gustaveroussy.fr. (3)INSERM Unit U981, Gustave Roussy
Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France. monica.arnedos@gustaveroussy.fr. (4)Department 
of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France.
fabrice.andre@gustaveroussy.fr. (5)INSERM Unit U981, Gustave Roussy Cancer
Campus, Villejuif, France. fabrice.andre@gustaveroussy.fr. (6)Department of
Medical Oncology and INSERM Unit U981, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, 114 Rue
Edouard Vaillant, Villejuif, 94800, France. fabrice.andre@gustaveroussy.fr.

The majority of breast cancers present with estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and
human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER2)-negative features and might benefit
from endocrine therapy. Although endocrine therapy has notably evolved during the
last decades, the invariable appearance of endocrine resistance, either primary
or secondary, remains an important issue in this type of tumor. The improvement
of our understanding of the cancer genome has identified some promising targets
that might be responsible or linked to endocrine resistance, including
alterations affecting main signaling pathways like PI3K/Akt/mTOR and CCND1/CDK4-6
as well as the identification of new ESR1 somatic mutations, leading to an array 
of new targeted therapies that might circumvent or prevent endocrine resistance. 
In this review, we have summarized the main targeted therapies that are currently
being tested in ER+ breast cancer, the rationale behind them, and the new agents 
and combinational treatments to come.

PMCID: PMC4462184
PMID: 26059247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Br J Cancer. 2015 Jul 14;113(2):290-8. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2015.206. Epub 2015 Jun
9.

miR-30e* is an independent subtype-specific prognostic marker in breast cancer.

D'Aiuto F(1), Callari M(1), Dugo M(1), Merlino G(1), Musella V(1), Miodini P(1), 
Paolini B(2), Cappelletti V(1), Daidone MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Via Amadeo, 42 20133 Milan, Italy. (2)Department
of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Via Venezian, 1
20133 Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer clinical outcome is affected by tumor molecular
features, and the identification of subtype-specific prognostic biomarkers is
relevant for breast cancer translational research. Gene expression signatures
proved to be able to complement prognostic information provided by classical
clinico-pathological features. Recently, microRNAs (miRNAs) have been causally
linked to tumorigenesis and cancer progression and have been associated with
patient outcome, also in breast cancer.
METHODS: MicroRNAs associated with the development of distant metastasis were
identified in a cohort of 92 ESR1+/ERBB2- lymph node-negative breast cancers from
patients not receiving adjuvant treatment. Results were confirmed and further
investigated in a total of 1246 miRNA and gene expression profiles of the
Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium data set. Moderated 
t-test, univariable and multivariable Cox regression models were used for
statistical analyses.
RESULTS: miR-30e* was identified as independent protective prognostic factor in
lymph node-negative untreated patients with ESR1+/ERBB2- tumours and retained a
significant association with a good prognosis in treated patients with the same
tumor subtype as well as in the ERBB2+ subtype, but not in ESR1-/ERBB2- tumours.
CONCLUSIONS: We highlighted a relevant and subtype-specific role in breast cancer
for miR-30e* and demonstrated that adding miRNA markers to gene signatures and
clinico-pathological features can help for a better prognostication.

PMCID: PMC4506390
PMID: 26057454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Meat Sci. 2015 Oct;108:67-73. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2015.05.025. Epub 2015 May
27.

Preliminary study of FMO1, FMO5, CYP21, ESR1, PLIN2 and SULT2A1 as candidate gene
for compounds related to boar taint.

Neuhoff C(1), Gunawan A(2), Farooq MO(3), Cinar MU(4), Große-Brinkhaus C(5),
Sahadevan S(6), Frieden L(7), Tesfaye D(8), Tholen E(9), Looft C(10), Schellander
K(11), Uddin MJ(12).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University
of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. Electronic address: cneu@itw.uni-bonn.de.
(2)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University
of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany; Department of Animal Production and Technology,
Faculty of Animal Science, Bogor Agricultural University, 16680 Bogor, Indonesia.
Electronic address: agun@itw.uni-bonn.de. (3)Institute of Animal Science, Animal 
Breeding and Husbandry Group, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. Electronic
address: omer2081@hotmail.com. (4)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding
and Husbandry Group, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany; Department of
Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Erciyes University, 38039 Kayseri,
Turkey. Electronic address: ucin@itw.uni-bonn.de. (5)Institute of Animal Science,
Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany.
Electronic address: cgro@itw.uni-bonn.de. (6)Institute of Animal Science, Animal 
Breeding and Husbandry Group, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. Electronic
address: ssud@itw.uni-bonn.de. (7)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding
and Husbandry Group, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. Electronic address:
lfri@itw.uni-bonn.de. (8)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and
Husbandry Group, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. Electronic address:
dtes@itw.uni-bonn.de. (9)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and
Husbandry Group, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. Electronic address:
etho@itw.uni-bonn.de. (10)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and
Husbandry Group, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. Electronic address:
cloo@itw.uni-bonn.de. (11)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and
Husbandry Group, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. Electronic address:
ksch@itw.uni-bonn.de. (12)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and
Husbandry Group, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. Electronic address:
judd@itw.uni-bonn.de.

An association study between polymorphisms of six genes and boar taint related
compounds androstenone, skatole and indole was performed in a boar population
(n=370). Significant association (P<0.05) was detected for SNP of FMO5 (g.494A>G)
with all boar taint compounds, SNP of CYP21 (g.3911T>C) with skatole and indole, 
and SNP of ESR1 (g.672C>T) with androstenone and indole. mRNA expression of CYP21
and ESR1 was higher in CAB (castrated boar) compared to non-castrated boars;
whereas, the expression of FMO5 and ESR1 was higher in LBT (low boar taint)
compared to HBT (high boar taint) in liver tissue. FMO5, CYP21 and ESR1 proteins 
were less detectable in HBT compared with LBT and CAB in liver tissues. These
findings suggest that FMO5, CYP21 and ESR1 gene variants might have effects on
the boar taint compounds.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26047979  [PubMed - in process]


217. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 3;17:75. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0591-2.

Identification of two novel mammographic density loci at 6Q25.1.

Brand JS(1), Li J(2), Humphreys K(3), Karlsson R(4), Eriksson M(5), Ivansson
E(6,)(7), Hall P(8), Czene K(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Nobels Väg 12A, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden. Judith.brand@ki.se. (2)Department of
Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Nobels Väg 12A,
171 77, Stockholm, Sweden. Jingmei.Li@ki.se. (3)Department of Medical
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Nobels Väg 12A, 171 77,
Stockholm, Sweden. Keith.Humphreys@ki.se. (4)Department of Medical Epidemiology
and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Nobels Väg 12A, 171 77, Stockholm,
Sweden. Robert.Karlsson@ki.se. (5)Department of Medical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Nobels Väg 12A, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Mikael.Eriksson@ki.se. (6)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Nobels Väg 12A, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden.
Emma.Ivansson@ki.se. (7)Swedish eScience Research Centre (SeRC), Karolinska
Institutet, Nobels Väg 12A, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden. Emma.Ivansson@ki.se.
(8)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Nobels Väg 12A, 171 77, Stockholm, Sweden. Per.Hall@ki.se. (9)Department of
Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Nobels Väg 12A,
171 77, Stockholm, Sweden. Kamila.Czene@ki.se.

INTRODUCTION: Mammographic density (MD) is a strong heritable and intermediate
phenotype for breast cancer, but much of its genetic variation remains
unexplained. We performed a large-scale genetic association study including 8,419
women of European ancestry to identify MD loci.
METHODS: Participants of three Swedish studies were genotyped on a custom
Illumina iSelect genotyping array and percent and absolute mammographic density
were ascertained using semiautomated and fully automated methods from film and
digital mammograms. Linear regression analysis was used to test for SNP-MD
associations, adjusting for age, body mass index, menopausal status and six
principal components. Meta-analyses were performed by combining P values taking
sample size, study-specific inflation factor and direction of effect into
account.
RESULTS: Genome-wide significant associations were observed for two previously
identified loci: ZNF365 (rs10995194, P = 2.3 × 10(-8) for percent MD and P = 8.7 
× 10(-9) for absolute MD) and AREG (rs10034692, P = 6.7 × 10(-9) for absolute
MD). In addition, we found evidence of association for two variants at 6q25.1,
both of which are known breast cancer susceptibility loci: rs9485370 in the TAB2 
gene (P = 4.8 × 10(-9) for percent MD and P = 2.5 × 10(-8) for absolute MD) and
rs60705924 in the CCDC170/ESR1 region (P = 2.2 × 10(-8) for absolute MD). Both
regions have been implicated in estrogen receptor signaling with TAB2 being a
potential regulator of tamoxifen response.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified two novel MD loci at 6q25.1. These findings underscore
the importance of 6q25.1 as a susceptibility region and provide more insight into
the mechanisms through which MD influences breast cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC4501298
PMID: 26036842  [PubMed - in process]


218. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2015 Jul;31(7):516-21. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2015.1031102.
Epub 2015 Jun 2.

Association of estrogen receptor gene polymorphisms with human precocious
puberty: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Luo Y(1), Liu Q, Lei X, Wen Y, Yang YL, Zhang R, Hu MY.

Author information: 
(1)a School of Public Health and Management, Research Center for Medicine and
Social Development, Innovation Center for Social Risk Governance in Health,
Chongqing Medical University , Chongqing , P.R. China.

This study aims to estimate the association between ESR1 polymorphisms (PvuII and
XbaI) and ESR2 polymorphisms (RsaI and AluI) with precocious puberty. Relevant
studies published before March 2014 were retrieved by a electronic search among
nine databases. Meta-analysis of the pooled odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) was calculated. Four eligible case-control studies including 491 
precocious puberty patients and 370 healthy controls were identified. Three
studies reported ESR1 PvuII and XbaI polymorphism and one study reported ESR2
RsaI and AluI polymorphism. Increment of precocious puberty risk was associated
with PvuII polymorphism in the heterosis model ((CT) versus TT: OR 1.42, 95% CI: 
1.05-1.91, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02). Risk of precocious puberty was associated with XbaI
polymorphism in the dominant model (GG<U+2009>+<U+2009>GA versus AA: OR 1.48, 95% CI:
1.11-1.97, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007) and the heterosis model (GA versus AA: OR 1.68, 95% CI:
1.23-2.29, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). This meta-analysis suggests that ESR1 XbaI and PvuII
polymorphisms are associated with precocious puberty susceptibility, and the
relationship between ESR2 RsaI and AluI polymorphism with precocious puberty
remains to be further investigated. Well-designed studies with large sample size 
among different polymorphisms and ethnicities are in urgent need to provide and
update reliable data for comprehensive and definite conclusion.

PMID: 26036718  [PubMed - in process]


219. Environ Sci Technol. 2015 Jun 16;49(12):7439-47. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.5b00704.
Epub 2015 Jun 2.

Understanding the molecular basis for differences in responses of fish estrogen
receptor subtypes to environmental estrogens.

Tohyama S(1,)(2), Miyagawa S(2), Lange A, Ogino Y(2), Mizutani T(2), Tatarazako
N(3), Katsu Y(4), Ihara M(5), Tanaka H(5), Ishibashi H(6), Kobayashi T(1), Tyler 
CR, Iguchi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Integrated Pharmaceutical and Nutritional Sciences,
University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan. (2)Okazaki Institute for
Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes
of Natural Sciences, SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies),
Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan. (3)<U+2225>Center for Environmental Risk Research,
National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8506, Japan.
(4)<U+22A5>Department of Biological Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0810,
Japan. (5)#Research Center for Environmental Quality Management, Kyoto
University, Otsu, Shiga 520-0811, Japan. (6)<U+2207>Department of Life Environmental
Conservation, Faculty of Agriculture, Ehime University, Matsuyama, Ehime
790-8566, Japan.

Exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) can elicit adverse effects on
development, sexual differentiation, and reproduction in fish. Teleost species
exhibit at least three subtypes of estrogen receptor (ESR), ESR1, ESR2a, and
ESR2b; thus, estrogenic signaling pathways are complex. We applied in vitro
reporter gene assays for ESRs in five fish species to investigate the ESR
subtype-specificity for better understanding the signaling pathway of estrogenic 
EDCs. Responses to bisphenol A, 4-nonylphenol, and o,p'-DDT varied among ESR
subtypes, and the response pattern of ESRs was basically common among the
different fish species. Using a computational in silico docking model and through
assays quantifying transactivation of the LBD (using GAL-LBD fusion proteins and 
chimera proteins for the ESR2s), we found that the LBD of the different ESR
subtypes generally plays a key role in conferring responsiveness of the ESR
subtypes to EDCs. These results also indicate that responses of ESR2s to EDCs
cannot necessarily be predicted from the LBD sequence alone, and an additional
region is required for full transactivation of these receptors. Our data thus
provide advancing understanding on receptor functioning for both basic and
applied research.

PMID: 26032098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Neurosci. 2015 May 27;35(21):8042-58. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3053-14.2015.

Role of DNA methylation in the nucleus accumbens in incubation of cocaine
craving.

Massart R(1), Barnea R(2), Dikshtein Y(2), Suderman M(3), Meir O(2), Hallett
M(4), Kennedy P(5), Nestler EJ(5), Szyf M(6), Yadid G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec
H3G 1Y6, Canada. (2)Leslie and Susan Gonda (Goldschmied) Multidisciplinary Brain 
Research Center, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan 52900, Israel, Mina and Everard
Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel.
(3)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec
H3G 1Y6, Canada, McGill Centre for Bioinformatics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec H3G 0B1, Canada. (4)McGill Centre for Bioinformatics, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec H3G 0B1, Canada. (5)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience and
Friedman Brain Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, and. (6)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada, Sackler Program for Epigenetics and
Psychobiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3G 0B1, Canada
moshe.szyf@mcgill.ca yadidg@gmail.comgmail.com. (7)Leslie and Susan Gonda
(Goldschmied) Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat
Gan 52900, Israel, Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan
University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel, moshe.szyf@mcgill.ca
yadidg@gmail.comgmail.com.

One of the major challenges of cocaine addiction is the high rate of relapse to
drug use after periods of withdrawal. During the first few weeks of withdrawal,
cue-induced cocaine craving intensifies, or "incubates," and persists over
extended periods of time. Although several brain regions and molecular mechanisms
were found to be involved in this process, the underlying epigenetic mechanisms
are still unknown. Herein, we used a rat model of incubation of cocaine craving, 
in which rats were trained to self-administer cocaine (0.75 mg/kg, 6 h/d, 10 d), 
and cue-induced cocaine-seeking was examined in an extinction test after 1 or 30 
d of withdrawal. We show that the withdrawal periods, as well as cue-induced
cocaine seeking, are associated with broad, time-dependent enhancement of DNA
methylation alterations in the nucleus accumbens (NAc). These gene methylation
alterations were partly negatively correlated with gene expression changes.
Furthermore, intra-NAc injections of a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor (RG108,
100 µm) abolished cue-induced cocaine seeking on day 30, an effect that persisted
1 month, whereas the methyl donor S-adenosylmethionine (500 µm) had an opposite
effect on cocaine seeking. We then targeted two proteins whose genes were
demethylated by RG108-estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and cyclin-dependent kinase 5
(CDK5). Treatment with an intra-NAc injection of the ESR1 agonist propyl pyrazole
triol (10 nm) or the CDK5 inhibitor roscovitine (28 µm) on day 30 of withdrawal
significantly decreased cue-induced cocaine seeking. These results demonstrate a 
role for NAc DNA methylation, and downstream targets of DNA demethylation, in
incubation of cocaine craving.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/358042-17$15.00/0.

PMID: 26019323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Int J Cancer Clin Res. 2015;2(1). pii: 013.

Gene-Specific Promoter Methylation Status in Hormone-Receptor-Positive Breast
Cancer Associates with Postmenopausal Body Size and Recreational Physical
Activity.

McCullough LE(1), Chen J(2), White AJ(1), Xu X(3), Cho YH(4), Bradshaw PT(5), Eng
SM(6), Teitelbaum SL(7), Terry MB(6), Garbowski G(4), Neugut AI(8), Hibshoosh
H(9), Santella RM(4), Gammon MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill;
Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA. (2)Department of Preventive Medicine, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai; New York, NY, 10016, USA ; Department of Pediatrics, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai; New York, NY, 10016, USA ; Department of
Oncological Science, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai; New York, NY,
10016, USA. (3)Research Center for Translational Medicine; Shanghai East Hospital
of Tongji University School of Medicine; Shanghai, China. (4)Department of
Environmental Health Sciences, Columbia University; New York, NY, 10027, USA.
(5)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Chapel
Hill, NC, 27599, USA. (6)Department of Epidemiology, Columbia University; New
York, NY, 10027, USA. (7)Department of Preventive Medicine, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai; New York, NY, 10016, USA. (8)Department of Epidemiology,
Columbia University; New York, NY, 10027, USA ; Department of Medicine, Columbia 
University; New York, NY, 10027, USA. (9)Department of Pathology, Columbia
University; New York, NY, 10027, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer, the leading cancer diagnosis among American women,
is positively associated with postmenopausal obesity and little or no
recreational physical activity (RPA). However, the underlying mechanisms of these
associations remain unresolved. Aberrant changes in DNA methylation may represent
an early event in carcinogenesis, but few studies have investigated associations 
between obesity/RPA and gene methylation, particularly in postmenopausal breast
tumors where these lifestyle factors are most relevant.
METHODS: We used case-case unconditional logistic regression to estimate odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the associations between body 
mass index (BMI=weight [kg]/height [m(2)]) in the year prior to diagnosis, or RPA
(average hours/week), and methylation status (methylated vs. unmethylated) of 13 
breast cancer-related genes in 532 postmenopausal breast tumor samples from the
Long Island Breast Cancer Study Project. We also explored whether the association
between BMI/RPA and estrogen/progesterone-receptor status (ER+PR+ vs. all others)
was differential with respect to gene methylation status. Methylation-specific
PCR and the MethyLight assay were used to assess gene methylation.
RESULTS: BMI 25-29.9kg/m(2), and perhaps BMI=30kg/m(2), was associated with
methylated HIN1 in breast tumor tissue. Cases with BMI=30kg/m(2) were more likely
to have ER+PR+ breast tumors in the presence of unmethylated ESR1 (OR=2.63, 95%
CI 1.32-5.25) and women with high RPA were more likely to have ER+PR+ breast
tumors with methylated GSTP1 (OR=2.33, 95% CI 0.79-6.84).
DISCUSSION: While biologically plausible, our findings that BMI is associated
with methylated HIN1 and BMI/RPA are associated with ER+PR+ breast tumors in the 
presence of unmethylated ESR1 and methylated GSTP1, respectively, warrant further
investigation. Future studies would benefit from enrolling greater numbers of
postmenopausal women and examining a larger panel of breast cancer-related genes.

PMCID: PMC4440485
PMID: 26005715  [PubMed]


222. J Reprod Dev. 2015;61(4):351-9. doi: 10.1262/jrd.2014-143. Epub 2015 May 23.

Central estrogen action sites involved in prepubertal restraint of pulsatile
luteinizing hormone release in female rats.

Uenoyama Y(1), Tanaka A, Takase K, Yamada S, Pheng V, Inoue N, Maeda K, Tsukamura
H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya
464-8601, Japan.

The present study aimed to determine estrogen feedback action sites to mediate
prepubertal restraint of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)/luteinizing
hormone (LH) release in female rats. Wistar-Imamichi strain rats were
ovariectomized (OVX) and received a local estradiol-17ß (estradiol) or
cholesterol microimplant in several brain areas, such as the medial preoptic area
(mPOA), paraventricular nucleus, ventromedial nucleus and arcuate nucleus (ARC), 
at 20 or 35 days of age. Six days after receiving the estradiol microimplant,
animals were bled to detect LH pulses at 26 or 41 days of age, representing the
pre- or postpubertal period, respectively. Estradiol microimplants in the mPOA or
ARC, but not in other brain regions, suppressed LH pulses in prepubertal OVX
rats. Apparent LH pulses were found in the postpubertal period in all animals
bearing estradiol or cholesterol implants. It is unlikely that pubertal changes
in responsiveness to estrogen are due to a change in estrogen receptor (ER)
expression, because the number of ERa-immunoreactive cells and mRNA levels of
Esr1, Esr2 and Gpr30 in the mPOA and ARC were comparable between the pre- and
postpubertal periods. In addition, kisspeptin or GnRH injection overrode
estradiol-dependent prepubertal LH suppression, suggesting that estrogen inhibits
the kisspeptin-GnRH cascade during the prepubertal period. Thus,
estrogen-responsive neurons located in the mPOA and ARC may play key roles in
estrogen-dependent prepubertal restraint of GnRH/LH secretion in female rats.

PMCID: PMC4547993
PMID: 26004302  [PubMed - in process]


223. Neurosci Res. 2015 Oct;99:8-15. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2015.05.003. Epub 2015 May 
21.

Gene expression in the CNS of lactating rats with different patterns of maternal 
behavior.

de Moura AC(1), Lazzari VM(1), Becker RO(1), Gil MS(2), Ruthschilling CA(1),
Agnes G(1), Almeida S(1), da Veiga AB(3), Lucion AB(4), Giovenardi M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (2)Biomédica,
Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil. (3)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Patologia, Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (4)Programa de
Pós-Graduação em Ciências Biológicas: Fisiologia, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (5)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências
da Saúde, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil. Electronic address: giovenardi.marcia@gmail.com.

For most mammalian species, maternal behavior has an essential role in the
development of the offspring. The frequency of licking/grooming (LG) the pups has
been used as a parameter to evaluate maternal care, having mothers with high (HL)
or low (LL) frequencies of LG. This study aimed to analyze the gene expression of
the receptors for dopamine (Drd1a), prolactin (Prlr), serotonin (Htr1a, Htr1b),
estrogen (Esr1, Esr2), and of Bdnf in the olfactory bulb (OB), hippocampus (HP), 
prefrontal cortex (PFC), and striatum (ST) of Wistar rats from three groups: LL
(n = 8); HL (n = 8); virgin females in diestrus (D; n = 6). Maternal behavior was
studied between the 1st and 7th postpartum days. Brain parts were analyzed by
qRT-PCR. LL showed a decrease in the frequency of nursing, and an increase of
remaining off the pups. There was an increase in gene expression of Drd1a, Prlr, 
Htr1a, Htr1b and Esr1 in the OB of HL, compared to LL. In the HP, Drd1a, Prlr and
Htr1a were differently expressed when comparing HL, or LL, with D. The main
finding is that HL had higher gene expression levels in the OB, which is a
crucial structure to promote behavioral differences.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26003743  [PubMed - in process]


224. Int J Biol Sci. 2015 May 1;11(6):701-11. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.11431. eCollection
2015.

HOXB5 Promotes the Proliferation and Invasion of Breast Cancer Cells.

Lee JY(1), Hur H(2), Yun HJ(1), Kim Y(3), Yang S(1), Kim SI(4), Kim MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, and Brain Korea 21 plus
project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul
120-752, Korea. (2)2. Department of Surgery, National Health Insurance Service
Ilsan Hospital, Goyang 410-719, Korea ; 3. Department of Surgery, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea. (3)4. Department of
Pathology, National Health Insurance Service Ilsan Hospital, Goyang 410-719,
Korea. (4)3. Department of Surgery, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
120-752, Korea.

HOX transcription factors play an important role in determining body patterning
and cell fate during embryogenesis. Accumulating evidence has shown that these
genes act as positive and/or negative modulators in many types of cancer,
including breast cancer, in a tissue-specific manner. We have previously reported
that HOXB5 is aberrantly overexpressed in breast cancer tissues and cell lines.
Here, we investigated the biological roles and clinical relevance of HOXB5 in
breast cancer. Immunohistochemical analysis of HOXB5 on tissue microarray (TMA)
including 34 normal and 67 breast cancer specimens revealed that HOXB5 was highly
expressed in cancer tissues, particularly from estrogen receptor (ER)-positive
breast cancer patients. An online survival analysis confirmed the correlation
between HOXB5 expression and poor distant metastasis-free survival in
ER-positive, but not in ER-negative, breast cancer. In vitro studies indicated
that HOXB5 silencing in ER-positive cells significantly decreased cell
proliferation and anchorage-independent cell growth. In contrast, overexpression 
of HOXB5 displayed EMT characteristics with a greater invasive ability, higher
cell proliferation and colony formation in soft agar. HOXB5 knockdown or
overexpression led to changes in the expression levels of RET, ERBB2, and EGFR,
but not of ESR1. In conclusion, we suggest that HOXB5 acts as a positive
modulator most likely by promoting cell proliferative response and invasiveness
in ER-positive breast cancer. These results would help predict prognosis of
breast cancer and identify a new valuable therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4440260
PMID: 25999793  [PubMed - in process]


225. Int J Cancer. 2015 Nov 15;137(10):2513-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29612. Epub 2015 Jun
11.

Short report: Monitoring ESR1 mutations by circulating tumor DNA in aromatase
inhibitor resistant metastatic breast cancer.

Sefrioui D(1,)(2,)(3), Perdrix A(3,)(4), Sarafan-Vasseur N(1,)(3), Dolfus
C(3,)(5), Dujon A(6), Picquenot JM(4,)(7), Delacour J(1,)(3), Cornic M(4), Bohers
E(7), Leheurteur M(8), Rigal O(8), Tennevet I(8), Thery JC(3,)(8), Alexandru
C(8), Guillemet C(8), Moldovan C(8), Veyret C(8), Frebourg T(1), Di Fiore
F(1,)(2,)(3,)(8), Clatot F(3,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1079, Rouen, France. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Rouen
University Hospital, Rouen, France. (3)Equipe De Recherche En Oncologie (IRON),
Rouen University Hospital and Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France.
(4)Department of Bio-Pathology, Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France.
(5)Department of Pathology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(6)Department of Surgery, Clinique Du Cèdre, Bois-Guillaume, France. (7)INSERM
U918, Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France. (8)Department of Medical Oncology,
Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France.

Acquired estrogen receptor gene (ESR1) mutations have been recently reported as a
marker of resistance to aromatase inhibitors in hormone receptor positive
metastatic breast cancer. We retrospectively considered seven patients treated
for metastatic breast cancer with available samples from the primary tumor before
any treatment, cryopreserved metastasis removed during progression and
concomitant plasmas. All these seven patients were in disease progression after
previous exposure to aromatase inhibitors for at least 6 months, and were
assessed for ESR1 mutations detection in tumor and circulating DNA. For these
patients, Sanger sequencing identified four metastases with clear ESR1 mutation
and one possible, whereas digital PCR identified six mutated metastases. Then,
under blind conditions and using digital PCR, corresponding circulating ESR1
mutations were successfully detected in four of these six metastatic breast
cancer patients. Moreover, in two patients with serial blood samples following
treatments exposure, the monitoring of circulating ESR1 mutations clearly
predicted disease evolution. In the context of high interest for ESR1 mutations, 
our results highlight that these acquired recurrent mutations may be tracked in
circulating tumor DNA and may be of clinical relevance for metastatic breast
cancer patient monitoring.

© 2015 UICC.

PMID: 25994408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2015:e2-7. doi: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2015.35.e2.

Precision medicine for metastatic breast cancer.

Deluche E(1), Onesti E(1), Andre F(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Genomic studies have shown that large numbers of candidate targets are observed
in breast cancer. Nevertheless, only a few of them are validated as relevant
targets in clinical studies. Estrogen receptor (ER) and HER2 expressions could be
associated with a level I evidence. Beyond ER and HER2, BRCA and PIK3CA mutations
(when targeted with alpha-specific PI3K inhibitors) could be considered as
promising targets in breast cancer since they have been associated with objective
responses in phase I/II trials. In addition to these four molecular alterations, 
several others have shown promising results in preclinical studies and are being 
investigated in clinical trials. These genomic alterations include AKT1, ERBB2,
and ESR1 mutations. These considerations highlight the lack of evidence for using
multiplex technologies to individualize therapy in metastatic breast cancer.
Sequencing multiple genes to treat metastatic breast cancer is very promising but
should be done in the context of clinical trials, either to enrich phase I/II
trials in patients with genomic alterations or to show medical usefulness of new 
biotechnologies like next-generation sequencing (NGS). Although most current
approaches of precision medicine are aiming at targeting drivers, additional
applications could be developed in the future. This includes the identification
of DNA repair deficiencies, mechanisms of immune suppression, and identification 
of minority lethal subclones. Finally, one of the very promising applications of 
genomics for metastatic breast cancer is the identification of pathway activation
or defects at the individual level. For example, gene expression and single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) signatures are being developed to detect kinase
(such as mammalian target of rapamycin [mTOR]/CDK4) activations or DNA repair
deficiencies.

PMID: 25993174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Nov 15;21(22):5121-30. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-0360. 
Epub 2015 May 19.

Efficacy of SERD/SERM Hybrid-CDK4/6 Inhibitor Combinations in Models of Endocrine
Therapy-Resistant Breast Cancer.

Wardell SE(1), Ellis MJ(2), Alley HM(1), Eisele K(3), VanArsdale T(3), Dann
SG(3), Arndt KT(4), Primeau T(5), Griffin E(5), Shao J(5), Crowder R(5), Lai
JP(6), Norris JD(1), McDonnell DP(7), Li S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina. (2)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (3)Pfizer Oncology Research Unit, La Jolla, 
California. (4)Pfizer Oncology Research Unit, Pearl River, New York. (5)Division 
of Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University in St Louis, 
Saint Louis, Missouri. (6)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University, Saint 
Louis, Missouri. (7)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke
University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina. donald.mcdonnell@duke.edu 
SQLI@DOM.wustl.edu. (8)Division of Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Washington University in St Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri. Siteman Cancer Center
Breast Cancer Program, Washington University in St. Louis, Saint Louis, Missouri.
donald.mcdonnell@duke.edu SQLI@DOM.wustl.edu.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Nov 15;21(22):4999-5001.

PURPOSE: Endocrine therapy, using tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor, remains
first-line therapy for the management of estrogen receptor (ESR1)-positive breast
cancer. However, ESR1 mutations or other ligand-independent ESR1 activation
mechanisms limit the duration of response. The clinical efficacy of fulvestrant, 
a selective estrogen receptor downregulator (SERD) that competitively inhibits
agonist binding to ESR1 and triggers receptor downregulation, has confirmed that 
ESR1 frequently remains engaged in endocrine therapy-resistant cancers. We
evaluated the activity of a new class of selective estrogen receptor modulators
(SERM)/SERD hybrids (SSH) that downregulate ESR1 in relevant models of
endocrine-resistant breast cancer. Building on the observation that concurrent
inhibition of ESR1 and the cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK4/6)
significantly increased progression-free survival in advanced patients, we
explored the activity of different SERD- or SSH-CDK4/6 inhibitor combinations in 
models of endocrine therapy-resistant ESR1(+) breast cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: SERDs, SSHs, and the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib were
evaluated as single agents or in combination in established cellular and animal
models of endocrine therapy-resistant ESR1(+) breast cancer.
RESULTS: The combination of palbociclib with a SERD or an SSH was shown to
effectively inhibit the growth of MCF7 cell or ESR1-mutant patient-derived tumor 
xenografts. In tamoxifen-resistant MCF7 xenografts, the palbociclib/SERD or SSH
combination resulted in an increased duration of response as compared with either
drug alone.
CONCLUSIONS: A SERD- or SSH-palbociclib combination has therapeutic potential in 
breast tumors resistant to endocrine therapies or those expressing ESR1
mutations. See related commentary by DeMichele and Chodosh, p. 4999.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4644714 [Available on 2016-11-15]
PMID: 25991817  [PubMed - in process]


228. PLoS One. 2015 May 18;10(5):e0126978. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126978.
eCollection 2015.

The Arabidopsis KH-Domain RNA-Binding Protein ESR1 Functions in Components of
Jasmonate Signalling, Unlinking Growth Restraint and Resistance to Stress.

Thatcher LF(1), Kamphuis LG(2), Hane JK(1), Oñate-Sánchez L(1), Singh KB(2).

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Agriculture Flagship, Centre for Environment and Life Sciences, Wembley,
Western Australia, Australia. (2)CSIRO Agriculture Flagship, Centre for
Environment and Life Sciences, Wembley, Western Australia, Australia; The
Institute of Agriculture, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western
Australia, Australia.

Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) play important roles in the protection of cells
against toxins and oxidative damage where one Arabidopsis member, GSTF8, has
become a commonly used marker gene for early stress and defense responses. A
GSTF8 promoter fragment fused to the luciferase reporter gene was used in a
forward genetic screen for Arabidopsis mutants with up-regulated GSTF8 promoter
activity. This identified the esr1-1 (enhanced stress response 1) mutant which
also conferred increased resistance to the fungal pathogen Fusarium oxysporum.
Through positional cloning, the ESR1 gene was found to encode a KH-domain
containing RNA-binding protein (At5g53060). Whole transcriptome sequencing of
esr1-1 identified altered expression of genes involved in responses to biotic and
abiotic stimuli, hormone signaling pathways and developmental processes. In
particular was an overall significant enrichment for jasmonic acid (JA) mediated 
processes in the esr1-1 down-regulated dataset. A subset of these genes were
tested for MeJA inducibility and we found the expression of some but not all were
reduced in esr1-1. The esr1-1 mutant was not impaired in other aspects of
JA-signalling such as JA- sensitivity or development, suggesting ESR1 functions
in specific components of the JA-signaling pathway. Examination of salicylic acid
(SA) regulated marker genes in esr1-1 showed no increase in basal or SA induced
expression suggesting repression of JA-regulated genes is not due to antagonistic
SA-JA crosstalk. These results define new roles for KH-domain containing proteins
with ESR1 unlinking JA-mediated growth and defense responses.

PMCID: PMC4436139
PMID: 25985302  [PubMed - in process]


229. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2015 Oct;34(10):2335-46. doi: 10.1002/etc.3064. Epub 2015
Sep 11.

Using molecular biomarkers and traditional morphometric measurements to assess
the health of slimy sculpin (Cottus cognatus) from streams with elevated selenium
in North-Eastern British Columbia.

Miller LL(1), Isaacs MA(2), Martyniuk CJ(3), Munkittrick KR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Protection Division, BC Ministry of Environment, Prince George, 
British Columbia, Canada. (2)Canadian Rivers Institute and Department of Biology,
University of New Brunswick, Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada. (3)Center for
Environmental and Human Toxicology and the Department of Physiological Sciences, 
UF Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Canadian fish-based environmental effects monitoring programs use individual and 
population-level endpoints to assess aquatic health. Impacts of coal mining and
selenium (Se) exposure were assessed in slimy sculpin (Cottus cognatus) from
reference streams located both inside and outside of a coal zone, and from 1
stream with a history of coal mining, using traditional environmental effects
monitoring endpoints. In addition, physical characteristics of the streams and
benthic macro-invertebrate communities were assessed. To determine whether the
assessment of effects could be improved by including molecular markers, real-time
polymerase chain reaction assays were optimized for genes associated with
reproduction (vtg, esr1, star, cyp19a1, and gys2), and oxidative and cellular
stress (sod1, gpx, gsr, cat, and hsp 90). Water Se levels exceeded guidelines in 
the stream with historical mining (4<U+2009>µg/L), but benthic macroinvertebrates did
not exceed dietary thresholds (2-3<U+2009>µg/g dry wt). Whole-body Se levels were above 
British Columbia's tissue guideline in fish from all streams, but only above the 
draft US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) criterion (7.91<U+2009>µg/g dry wt) at 
the reference stream inside the coal zone. Some markers of cellular and oxidative
stress were elevated in fish liver at the exposed site (sod1, gpx), but some were
lower (cat, sod1, gpx, gsr, hsp90) in the gonads of fish inside the coal zone.
Some of the differences in gene expression levels between the reference and
impacted sites were sex dependent. Based on benthic macroinvertebrate
assessments, the authors hypothesize that traditional and molecular differences
in slimy sculpin at impacted sites may be driven by food availability rather than
Se exposure. The present study is the first to adapt molecular endpoints in the
slimy sculpin for aquatic health assessments.

© 2015 SETAC.

PMID: 25982233  [PubMed - in process]


230. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Jun;151(3):607-18. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3428-x. 
Epub 2015 May 16.

Correlating transcriptional networks with pathological complete response
following neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer.

Liu R(1), Lv QL, Yu J, Hu L, Zhang LH, Cheng Y, Zhou HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, 410008, People's Republic of China, yezi19870127@163.com.

We aimed to investigate the association between gene co-expression modules and
responses to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer by using a systematic
biological approach. The gene expression profiles and clinico-pathological data
of 508 (discovery set) and 740 (validation set) patients with breast cancer who
received neoadjuvant chemotherapy were analyzed. Weighted gene co-expression
network analysis was performed and identified seven co-regulated gene modules.
Each module and gene signature were evaluated with logistic regression models for
pathological complete response (pCR). The association between modules and pCR in 
each intrinsic molecular subtype was also investigated. Two transcriptional
modules were correlated with tumor grade, estrogen receptor status, progesterone 
receptor status, and chemotherapy response in breast cancer. One module that
constitutes upregulated cell proliferation genes was associated with a high
probability for pCR in the whole (odds ratio (OR) = 5.20 and 3.45 in the
discovery and validation datasets, respectively), luminal B, and basal-like
subtypes. The prognostic potentials of novel genes, such as MELK, and pCR-related
genes, such as ESR1 and TOP2A, were identified. The upregulation of another gene 
co-expression module was associated with weak chemotherapy responses (OR = 0.19
and 0.33 in the discovery and validation datasets, respectively). The novel gene 
CA12 was identified as a potential prognostic indicator in this module. A systems
biology network-based approach may facilitate the discovery of biomarkers for
predicting chemotherapy responses in breast cancer and contribute in developing
personalized medicines.

PMID: 25981901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Jun;151(3):709-15. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3427-y. 
Epub 2015 May 16.

Status of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene in mastopathy predicts subsequent
development of breast cancer.

Soysal SD(1), Kilic IB, Regenbrecht CR, Schneider S, Muenst S, Kilic N, Güth U,
Dietel M, Terracciano LM, Kilic E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University Hospital Basel, Spitalstrasse 21, 4031,
Basel, Switzerland, S.SOYSAL@gmx.de.

Mastopathy is a common disease of the breast likely associated with elevated
estrogen levels and a putative risk factor for breast cancer. The role of
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) in mastopathy has not been investigated
previously. Here, we investigated the prevalence of ESR1 gene amplification in
mastopathy and its prediction for breast cancer. Paraffin-embedded tissues from
58 women with invasive breast cancer were analyzed. For all women, tissues with
mastopathy taken at least 1.5 years before first diagnosis of breast cancer were 
available. Tissue from 46 women with mastopathy without a diagnosis of breast
carcinoma in the observed time frame (12-18 years) was used as control.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis revealed that ESR1 was amplified in
nine of 58 (15.5 %) breast cancers. All ESR1-amplified breast cancers were
strongly positive for estrogen receptor with ER immunohistochemistry.
Interestingly, in women with ESR1 amplification in breast cancer, the
amplification was detectable in mastopathic tissues prior to the first diagnosis 
of breast cancer but was absent in tissues from women with mastopathy who did not
develop breast cancer. Our study suggests that ESR1 gene amplification is an
early event in breast pathology and might be a helpful predictive marker to
identify patients at high risk of developing breast cancer.

PMID: 25981900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Clin Chem. 2015 Jul;61(7):974-82. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2015.238717. Epub 2015
May 15.

Noninvasive detection of activating estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) mutations in
estrogen receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer.

Guttery DS(1), Page K(1), Hills A(2), Woodley L(3), Marchese SD(2), Rghebi B(1), 
Hastings RK(4), Luo J(4), Pringle JH(1), Stebbing J(2), Coombes RC(2), Ali S(2), 
Shaw JA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Studies and Cancer Research UK Leicester Centre,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK; (2)Imperial College, Department of
Surgery and Cancer, Charing Cross Hospital, London, UK; (3)Experimental Cancer
Medicine Centre Network, Imperial College, Charing Cross Hospital, London, UK;
(4)Cancer Research UK Leicester Centre, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(5)Department of Cancer Studies and Cancer Research UK Leicester Centre,
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK; js39@le.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Activating mutations in the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene are
acquired on treatment and can drive resistance to endocrine therapy. Because of
the spatial and temporal limitations of needle core biopsies, our goal was to
develop a highly sensitive, less invasive method of detecting activating ESR1
mutations via circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and tumor cells as a "liquid
biopsy."
METHODS: We developed a targeted 23-amplicon next-generation sequencing (NGS)
panel for detection of hot-spot mutations in ESR1,
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase, catalytic subunit alpha (PIK3CA),
tumor protein p53 (TP53), fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), and
fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) in 48 patients with estrogen
receptor-a-positive metastatic breast cancer who were receiving systemic therapy.
Selected mutations were validated using droplet digital PCR (ddPCR).
RESULTS: Nine baseline cfDNA samples had an ESR1 mutation. NGS detected 3
activating mutations in ESR1, and 3 hot-spot mutations in PIK3CA, and 3 in TP53
in baseline cfDNA, and the ESR1 p.D538G mutation in 1 matched circulating tumor
cell sample. ddPCR analysis was more sensitive than NGS and identified 6
additional baseline cfDNA samples with the ESR1 p.D538G mutation at a frequency
of <1%. In serial blood samples from 11 patients, 4 showed changes in cfDNA, 2
with emergence of a mutation in ESR1. We also detected a low frequency ESR1
mutation (1.3%) in cfDNA of 1 primary patient who was thought to have metastatic 
disease but was clear by scans.
CONCLUSIONS: Early identification of ESR1 mutations by liquid biopsy might allow 
for cessation of ineffective endocrine therapies and switching to other
treatments, without the need for tissue biopsy and before the emergence of
metastatic disease.

© 2015 American Association for Clinical Chemistry.

PMID: 25979954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. PLoS One. 2015 May 13;10(5):e0124612. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124612.
eCollection 2015.

Immune response gene expression in colorectal cancer carries distinct prognostic 
implications according to tissue, stage and site: a prospective retrospective
translational study in the context of a hellenic cooperative oncology group
randomised trial.

Pentheroudakis G(1), Raptou G(2), Kotoula V(2), Wirtz RM(3), Vrettou E(4),
Karavasilis V(5), Gourgioti G(6), Gakou C(7), Syrigos KN(8), Bournakis E(9),
Rallis G(5), Varthalitis I(10), Galani E(11), Lazaridis G(5), Papaxoinis G(12),
Pectasides D(12), Aravantinos G(13), Makatsoris T(14), Kalogeras KT(15),
Fountzilas G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Ioannina University Hospital, Ioannina,
Greece. (2)Department of Pathology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School
of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece; Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Hellenic
Foundation for Cancer Research, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of
Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece. (3)STRATIFYER Molecular Pathology GmbH, Cologne, 
Germany. (4)Department of Pathology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School 
of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece. (5)Department of Medical Oncology,
"Papageorgiou" Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of Medicine,
Thessaloniki, Greece. (6)Section of Biostatistics, Hellenic Cooperative Oncology 
Group, Data Office, Athens, Greece. (7)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Hellenic
Foundation for Cancer Research, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of
Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece. (8)Oncology Unit GPP, "Sotiria" General Hospital,
Athens School of Medicine, Athens, Greece. (9)Department of Clinical
Therapeutics, "Alexandra" Hospital, University of Athens School of Medicine,
Athens, Greece. (10)Oncology Department, General Hospital of Chania, Crete,
Greece. (11)Second Department of Medical Oncology, "Metropolitan" Hospital,
Piraeus, Greece. (12)Oncology Section, Second Department of Internal Medicine,
"Hippokration" Hospital, Athens, Greece. (13)Second Department of Medical
Oncology, "Agii Anargiri" Cancer Hospital, Athens, Greece. (14)Division of
Oncology, Department of Medicine, University Hospital, University of Patras
Medical School, Patras, Greece. (15)Department of Medical Oncology,
"Papageorgiou" Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of Medicine,
Thessaloniki, Greece; Translational Research Section, Hellenic Cooperative
Oncology Group, Data Office, Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Although host immune response is an emerging prognostic factor for
colorectal cancer, there is no consensus on the optimal methodology, surrogate
markers or tissue for study.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Tumour blocks were prospectively collected from 344
patients with stage II/III colorectal cancer (CRC) treated with adjuvant
chemotherapy. Whole section lymphocytic infiltration was studied along with mRNA 
expression of CD3Z, CD8, CD4, CXCL9, CXCL13, IGHM, FOXP3, SNAI2 and ESR1 by
qRT-qPCR in tissue microarray (TMA) cores from the centre of tumour, invasive
margin and adjacent normal mucosa.
RESULTS: Lymphocytic infiltration, deficient MMR (10.9%), KRAS (40.7%) and BRAF
(4.9%) mutations or single mRNA gene expression were not prognostic. Tumour ESR1 
gene expression (Hazard Ratio [HR] for relapse 2.33, 95% CI 1.35-4.02; HR for
death 1.74, 95% CI 1.02-2.97) and absence of necrosis (HR for relapse 1.71, 95%
CI 1.05-2.71; HR for death 1.98, 95% CI 1.14-3.43) were adverse prognostic
features. We used CD3Z and CD8 expression in order to devise the mRNA-based
Immune Score (mIS) and proceeded to partitioning analysis in 267 patients, with
age, stage, tumour site (Right vs Left CRC), KRAS mutation and tumour mIS as
input factors. Only in patients with stage III right-sided colon cancer, a low
immune response was associated with inferior disease-free survival (mIS-low, HR
for relapse 2.28, 95% CI 1.05-8.02). No prognostic significance was seen for
tumour mIS in any other stage or site of CRC, or for a similar mIS score derived 
from adjacent normal mucosa. Independent adverse prognostic significance was
retained in multivariable analysis for absence of necrosis, tumour ESR1
expression in all patients and low tumour mIS in stage III right-sided CRC.
CONCLUSIONS: In localised CRC, mRNA-based CD3Z/CD8 profiling of tumour immune
response may have stage, site and tissue-specific prognostic significance, along 
with ESR1 expression.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ANZCTR.org.au ACTRN12610000509066.

PMCID: PMC4430485
PMID: 25970543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Chin J Cancer. 2015 Mar 5;34(3):121-9. doi: 10.1186/s40880-015-0004-z.

Epithelial cell identity in hyperplastic precursors of breast cancer.

Coradini D(1), Boracchi P(2), Oriana S(3), Biganzoli E(4), Ambrogi F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, Medical Statistics,
Biometry and Bioinformatics, University of Milan, Via Vanzetti 5, Milan, 20133,
Italy. danila.coradini@gmail.com. (2)Department of Clinical Sciences and
Community Health, Medical Statistics, Biometry and Bioinformatics, University of 
Milan, Via Vanzetti 5, Milan, 20133, Italy. patrizia.boracchi@unimi.it.
(3)Senology Center, Ambrosiana Clinic, Cesano Boscone, Milan, 20090, Italy.
saroriana@hotmail.it. (4)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health,
Medical Statistics, Biometry and Bioinformatics, University of Milan, Via
Vanzetti 5, Milan, 20133, Italy. elia.biganzoli@unimi.it. (5)Department of
Clinical Sciences and Community Health, Medical Statistics, Biometry and
Bioinformatics, University of Milan, Via Vanzetti 5, Milan, 20133, Italy.
federico.ambrogi@unimi.it.

INTRODUCTION: In the adult human breast, hyperplastic enlarged lobular unit
(HELU) and atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) are two common abnormalities that
frequently coexist with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). For this reason, they
have been proposed as the early steps in a biological continuum toward breast
cancer.
METHODS: We investigated in silico the expression of 369 genes experimentally
recognized as involved in establishing and maintaining epithelial cell identity
and mammary gland remodeling, in HELUs or ADHs with respect to the corresponding 
patient-matched normal tissue.
RESULTS: Despite the common luminal origin, HELUs and ADHs proved to be
characterized by distinct gene profiles that overlap for 5 genes only. While
HELUs were associated with the overexpression of progesterone receptor (PGR),
ADHs were characterized by the overexpression of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)
coupled with the overexpression of some proliferation-associated genes.
CONCLUSIONS: This unexpected finding contradicts the notion that in
differentiated luminal cells the expression of estrogen receptor (ER) is
dissociated from cell proliferation and suggests that the establishing of an
ER-dependent signaling is able to sustain cell proliferation in an autocrine
manner as an early event in tumor initiation. Although clinical evidence
indicates that only a fraction of HELUs and ADHs evolve to invasive cancer,
present findings warn that exposure to synthetic progestins, frequently
administered as hormone-replacement therapy, and estrogens, when abnormally
produced by adipose cells and persistently present in the stroma surrounding the 
mammary gland, may cause these hyperplastic lesions.

PMCID: PMC4593345
PMID: 25962646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Reprod Sci. 2015 Dec;22(12):1488-95. doi: 10.1177/1933719115585147. Epub 2015 May
6.

GDM Alters Expression of Placental Estrogen Receptor a in a Cell Type and
Gender-Specific Manner.

Knabl J(1), Hiden U(2), Hüttenbrenner R(3), Riedel C(4), Hutter S(3), Kirn V(5), 
Günthner-Biller M(3), Desoye G(2), Kainer F(1), Jeschke U(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig Maximilians Universität
München, Campus Innenstadt, Munich, Germany Klinik Hallerwiese, Department of
Obstetrics, Nuremberg, Germany. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Ludwig Maximilians Universität München, Campus Innenstadt, Munich, Germany
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria. 
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig Maximilians Universität
München, Campus Innenstadt, Munich, Germany. (4)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Ludwig Maximilians Universität München, Campus Innenstadt, Munich,
Germany Institut für Soziale Pädiatrie und Jugendmedizin,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Gemany. (5)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ludwig Maximilians Universität München, Campus
Innenstadt, Munich, Germany Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University
Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (6)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Ludwig Maximilians Universität München, Campus Innenstadt, Munich,
Germany udo.jeschke@med.uni-muenchen.de.

OBJECTIVE: The nuclear receptor estrogen receptor a (ERa) is one of the key
players in energy balance, insulin resistance, and trophoblast differentiation.
We tested the hypothesis that gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) alters
expression of placental ERa in a cell type-specific manner and that this
regulation may involve epigenetic changes.
STUDY DESIGN: Expression of ERa was analyzed by immunohistochemistry using the
semiquantitative immunoreactive score in 80 placentas (40 GDM/40 controls).
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) measured ERa messenger RNA
(mRNA) in decidual tissue. Methylation-specific PCR was performed to analyze
cytosine-phosphatidyl-guanine-island methylation of the ERa promoter.
RESULTS: Expression of ERa protein is upregulated (P = .011) in GDM in
extravillous trophoblasts but not in syncytiotrophoblast. Gestational diabetes
mellitus downregulated ERa in decidual vessels only in pregnancies with male but 
not female fetuses. Furthermore, mRNA of the ERa encoding gene estrogen receptor 
gene 1 (ESR1) was increased (+1.77 fold) in GDM decidua when compared to controls
(P = .024). In parallel, the promoter of ESR1 was methylated only in decidua of
healthy control individuals but not in GDM.
CONCLUSION: Gestational diabetes mellitus affects expression of placental ERa in 
a cell type-dependent way, on epigenetic level. These data link GDM with
epigenetic deregulations of ERa expression and open new insights into the
intrauterine programming hypothesis of GDM.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25947892  [PubMed - in process]


236. BMC Cancer. 2015 Apr 17;15:300. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1310-1.

SNAI2/SLUG and estrogen receptor mRNA expression are inversely correlated and
prognostic of patient outcome in metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.

Atmaca A(1), Wirtz RW(2), Werner D(3), Steinmetz K(4), Claas S(5), Brueckl WM(6),
Jäger E(7), Al-Batran SE(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Krankenhaus Nordwest, UCT-University
Cancer Center, Steinbacher Hohl 2-26, 60488, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
atmaca.akin@khnw.de. (2)STRATIFYER Molecular Pathology GmbH, Werthmannstraße 1,
50935, Cologne, Germany. ralph.wirtz@stratifyer.de. (3)Institute of clinical
research (IKF) at Krankenhaus Nordwest, UCT-University Cancer Center, Steinbacher
Hohl 2-26, 60488, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. dominiquewerner@arcor.de.
(4)Institute of clinical research (IKF) at Krankenhaus Nordwest, UCT-University
Cancer Center, Steinbacher Hohl 2-26, 60488, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
steinmetz.kristina@khnw.de. (5)STRATIFYER Molecular Pathology GmbH,
Werthmannstraße 1, 50935, Cologne, Germany. silke.claas@stratifyer.de.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine 3, Klinikum Nürnberg,
Prof.-Ernst-Nathan-Straße 1, 90419, Nuermberg, Germany.
Wolfgang.Brueckl@klinikum-nuernberg.de. (7)Department of Hematology and Oncology,
Krankenhaus Nordwest, UCT-University Cancer Center, Steinbacher Hohl 2-26, 60488,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. jaeger.elke@khnw.de. (8)Institute of clinical
research (IKF) at Krankenhaus Nordwest, UCT-University Cancer Center, Steinbacher
Hohl 2-26, 60488, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. albatran.salah@khnw.de.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is involved in important
malignant features of cancer cells, like invasion, metastatic potential,
anti-apoptotic and stem-cell like phenotypes. Among several transcription
factors, SNAI2/SLUG is supposed to play an essential role for EMT.
METHODS: Paraffin embedded tumor samples from 63 patients with metastatic
non-small cell lung cancer, enrolled in a randomized phase II trial, were
prospectively collected, 53 samples qualified for further analysis. Automated RNA
extraction from paraffin and RT-quantitative PCR was used for evaluation of
SNAI2/SLUG, estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and matrix-metalloproteinases (MMP) mRNA
expression.
RESULTS: Clinical features like age, gender, performance status, histological
subtype and stage were similarly distributed among SNAI2/SLUG positive and
negative patients. SNAI2/SLUG was significantly, inversely correlated with ESR1
mRNA expression (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). In contrast, MMP2 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.387), MMP7 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.396) and
MMP9 mRNA expression (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.366) did not correlate with SNAI2/SLUG. Patients with
high SNAI2/SLUG expression (grouped by median expression) had a worse outcome.
Median overall survival in patients with high SNAI2/SLUG expression was
5.7 months versus 11.6 months with low SNAI2/SLUG expression (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>.038).
Inversely, patients with high ESR1 expression (grouped by median expression) had 
an improved median OS with 10.9 months vs. 5.0 months in the low expression group
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>.032). In multivariate analysis, SNAI2/SLUG2 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>.022) and ESR1 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>.017) 
separately were independent prognostic factors for survival.
CONCLUSION: SNAI2/SLUG is prognostic of patients' outcome. The strong inverse
correlation with ESR1 indicates a significant impact of estrogen receptor pathway
regarding these malignant features.

PMCID: PMC4404179
PMID: 25928859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. BMC Cancer. 2015 May 1;15:337. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1335-5.

Transcriptional implications of intragenic DNA methylation in the oestrogen
receptor alpha gene in breast cancer cells and tissues.

Shenker NS(1), Flower KJ(2), Wilhelm-Benartzi CS(3), Dai W(4,)(5), Bell E(6),
Gore E(7), El Bahrawy M(8), Weaver G(9), Brown R(10), Flanagan JM(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Epigenetics Unit, Division of Cancer,
Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, 4th Floor IRDB, Hammersmith Campus,
Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK. natalie.shenker09@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Epigenetics Unit, Division of Cancer,
Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, 4th Floor IRDB, Hammersmith Campus,
Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK. k.flower@imperial.ac.uk. (3)Department of
Surgery and Cancer, Epigenetics Unit, Division of Cancer, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, 4th Floor IRDB, Hammersmith Campus, Du Cane Road,
London, W12 0NN, UK. c.wilhelm-benartzi@imperial.ac.uk. (4)Department of Surgery 
and Cancer, Epigenetics Unit, Division of Cancer, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College London, 4th Floor IRDB, Hammersmith Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12
0NN, UK. weidai2@hku.hk. (5)Current Address: The University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, P. R. China. weidai2@hku.hk. (6)Department of Surgery and
Cancer, Epigenetics Unit, Division of Cancer, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College London, 4th Floor IRDB, Hammersmith Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12
0NN, UK. e.bell12@imperial.ac.uk. (7)Department of Surgery and Cancer,
Epigenetics Unit, Division of Cancer, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College
London, 4th Floor IRDB, Hammersmith Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK.
edmund.gore12@imperial.ac.uk. (8)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Epigenetics
Unit, Division of Cancer, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, 4th Floor
IRDB, Hammersmith Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK.
m.elbahrawy@imperial.ac.uk. (9)Queen Charlotte and Chelsea Hospital Milk Bank, Du
Cane Road, London, UK. gillian.weaver@imperial.nhs.uk. (10)Department of Surgery 
and Cancer, Epigenetics Unit, Division of Cancer, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College London, 4th Floor IRDB, Hammersmith Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12
0NN, UK. b.brown@imperial.ac.uk. (11)Department of Surgery and Cancer,
Epigenetics Unit, Division of Cancer, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College
London, 4th Floor IRDB, Hammersmith Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK.
j.flanagan@imperial.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation variability regions (MVRs) across the oestrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1) gene have been identified in peripheral blood cells from
breast cancer patients and healthy individuals. In contrast to promoter
methylation, gene body methylation may be important in maintaining active
transcription. This study aimed to assess MVRs in ESR1 in breast cancer cell
lines, tumour biopsies and exfoliated epithelial cells from expressed breast milk
(EBM), to determine their significance for ESR1 transcription.
METHODS: DNA methylation levels in eight MVRs across ESR1 were assessed by
pyrosequencing bisulphite-converted DNA from three oestrogen receptor
(ER)-positive and three ER-negative breast cancer cell lines. DNA methylation and
expression were assessed following treatment with DAC (1 µM), or DMSO (controls).
ESR1 methylation levels were also assayed in DNA from 155 invasive ductal
carcinoma biopsies provided by the Breast Cancer Campaign Tissue Bank, and
validated with DNA methylation profiles from the TCGA breast tumours (n = 356
ER-pos, n = 109 ER-neg). DNA methylation was profiled in exfoliated breast
epithelial cells from EBM using the Illumina 450 K (n = 36) and pyrosequencing in
a further 53 donor samples. ESR1 mRNA levels were measured by qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: We show that ER-positive cell lines had unmethylated ESR1 promoter
regions and highly methylated intragenic regions (median, 80.45%) while
ER-negative cells had methylated promoters and lower intragenic methylation
levels (median, 38.62%). DAC treatment increased ESR1 expression in ER-negative
cells, but significantly reduced methylation and expression of ESR1 in
ER-positive cells. The ESR1 promoter was unmethylated in breast tumour biopsies
with high levels of intragenic methylation, independent of ER status. However,
ESR1 methylation in the strongly ER-positive EBM DNA samples were very similar to
ER-positive tumour cell lines.
CONCLUSION: DAC treatment inhibited ESR1 transcription in cells with an
unmethylated ESR1 promoter and reduced intragenic DNA methylation. Intragenic
methylation levels correlated with ESR1 expression in homogenous cell populations
(cell lines and exfoliated primary breast epithelial cells), but not in
heterogeneous tumour biopsies, highlighting the significant differences between
the in vivo tumour microenvironment and individual homogenous cell types. These
findings emphasise the need for care when choosing material for epigenetic
research and highlights the presence of aberrant intragenic methylation levels in
tumour tissue.

PMCID: PMC4424887
PMID: 25927974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 29;6:6966. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7966.

A cluster of noncoding RNAs activates the ESR1 locus during breast cancer
adaptation.

Tomita S(1), Abdalla MO(2), Fujiwara S(1), Matsumori H(2), Maehara K(3), Ohkawa
Y(3), Iwase H(4), Saitoh N(2), Nakao M(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan [2] Department of Breast 
and Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, 
Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. (2)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Institute of
Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.
(3)Department of Advanced Initiative Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (4)Department of Breast and Endocrine
Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto
860-8556, Japan. (5)1] Department of Medical Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular
Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan [2]
Program for Leading Graduate Schools 'HIGO (Health life science:
Interdisciplinary and Glocal Oriented) Program', Kumamoto University, Kumamoto
860-8556, Japan [3] Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST),
Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan.

Estrogen receptor-a (ER)-positive breast cancer cells undergo hormone-independent
proliferation after deprivation of oestrogen, leading to endocrine therapy
resistance. Up-regulation of the ER gene (ESR1) is critical for this process, but
the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here we show that the combination of
transcriptome and fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses revealed that
oestrogen deprivation induced a cluster of noncoding RNAs that defined a large
chromatin domain containing the ESR1 locus. We termed these RNAs as Eleanors
(ESR1 locus enhancing and activating noncoding RNAs). Eleanors were present in
ER-positive breast cancer tissues and localized at the transcriptionally active
ESR1 locus to form RNA foci. Depletion of one Eleanor, upstream (u)-Eleanor,
impaired cell growth and transcription of intragenic Eleanors and ESR1 mRNA,
indicating that Eleanors cis-activate the ESR1 gene. Eleanor-mediated gene
activation represents a new type of locus control mechanism and plays an
essential role in the adaptation of breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4421845
PMID: 25923108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2015 May 15;216:46-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2015.04.010.
Epub 2015 Apr 21.

Matrix metalloproteinase inhibition influences aspects of photoperiod stimulated 
ovarian recrudescence in Siberian hamsters.

Shahed A(1), Simmons JJ(1), Featherstone SL(1), Young KA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Biology Group, Department of Biological Sciences, California
State University Long Beach, Long Beach, CA 90840, United States. (2)Reproductive
Biology Group, Department of Biological Sciences, California State University
Long Beach, Long Beach, CA 90840, United States. Electronic address:
kelly.young@csulb.edu.

Blocking matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity in vivo with inhibitor GM6001
impedes photostimulated ovarian recrudescence in photoregressed Siberian
hamsters. Since direct and indirect effects of MMPs influence a myriad of ovarian
functions, we investigated the effect of in vivo MMP inhibition during
recrudescence on ovarian mRNA expression of steroidogenic acute regulatory
protein (StAR), 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3ß-HSD), Cyp19a1 aromatase,
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), amphiregulin (Areg), estrogen receptors 
(Esr1 and Esr2), tissue inhibitors of MMPs (TIMP-1,-2,-3), proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA), vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), its
receptor VEGFR-2, and angiopoietin-2 (Ang-2). Female Siberian hamsters were
randomly assigned to one of four photoperiod groups: stimulatory long (LD) or
inhibitory short (SD) photoperiods, or transferred from SD to LD for 2 weeks
(post-transfer, PT). Half of the PT hamsters were injected (ip) daily with GM6001
(PTG). SD exposure reduced ovarian StAR, 3ß-HSD, Cyp19a1, Esr1, Esr2, TIMPs 2-3, 
PCNA, VEGFR-2 and Ang-2 mRNA expression (p<0.05), and 2 weeks of photostimulation
restored mRNA expression of 3ß-HSD and PCNA and increased Areg and VEGFA mRNA
expression in the PT group. GM6001 treatment during photostimulation (PTG)
increased TIMP-1, -2 and -3 and PCNA mRNA, but inhibited Areg mRNA expression
compared to PT. Neither photoperiod nor GM6001 altered EGFR expression. Results
of this study suggest that in vivo inhibition of MMP activity by GM6001 may
impede ovarian recrudescence, particularly follicular growth, in two ways: (1)
directly by partially inhibiting the release of EGFR ligands like Areg, thereby
potentially affecting EGFR activation and its downstream pathway, and (2)
indirectly by its effect on TIMPs which themselves can affect proliferation,
angiogenesis and follicular growth.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4457603 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25910436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Oncologist. 2015 May;20(5):474-82. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0372. Epub
2015 Apr 23.

Defining breast cancer intrinsic subtypes by quantitative receptor expression.

Cheang MC(1), Martin M(1), Nielsen TO(1), Prat A(1), Voduc D(1),
Rodriguez-Lescure A(1), Ruiz A(1), Chia S(1), Shepherd L(1), Ruiz-Borrego M(1),
Calvo L(1), Alba E(1), Carrasco E(1), Caballero R(1), Tu D(1), Pritchard KI(1),
Levine MN(1), Bramwell VH(1), Parker J(1), Bernard PS(1), Ellis MJ(1), Perou
CM(1), Di Leo A(1), Carey LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Genetics, University 
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA; Clinical Trials and
Statistics Unit at The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom;
Servicio de Oncología Médica, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria Hospital
Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense,
Madrid, Spain; Department of Pathology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Translation Genomics Unit, Vall d´Hebron
Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain; British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital
General Universitario de Elche, Alicante, Spain; Department of Medical Oncology, 
Instituto Valenciano de Oncologia, Valencia, Spain; National Cancer Institute of 
Canada Clinical Trials Group, Kingston, Ontario, Canada; Department of Medical
Oncology, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio, Seville, Spain; Department of 
Medical Oncology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario A Coruña, Coruña, Spain;
Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Victoria,
Málaga, Spain; GEICAM, Madrid, Spain; Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre, University
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada; Department of Oncology, Tom Baker Cancer Centre, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Pathology, University of Utah Health
Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA; Department of Medicine, Washington
University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA; Department of Oncology, Hospital of Prato, 
Istituto Toscani Tumori, Florence, Italy. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center and Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, USA; Clinical Trials and Statistics Unit at The Institute of
Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom; Servicio de Oncología Médica, Instituto 
de Investigacion Sanitaria Hospital Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain; Department of Pathology,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Translation 
Genomics Unit, Vall d´Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain; British
Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of
Medical Oncology, Hospital General Universitario de Elche, Alicante, Spain;
Department of Medical Oncology, Instituto Valenciano de Oncologia, Valencia,
Spain; National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada; Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Universitario Virgen
del Rocio, Seville, Spain; Department of Medical Oncology, Complejo Hospitalario 
Universitario A Coruña, Coruña, Spain; Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital
Universitario Virgen de la Victoria, Málaga, Spain; GEICAM, Madrid, Spain;
Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada; Department of Oncology, Tom Baker
Cancer Centre, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of
Pathology, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA; 
Department of Medicine, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA;
Department of Oncology, Hospital of Prato, Istituto Toscani Tumori, Florence,
Italy lisa_carey@med.unc.edu.

PURPOSE: To determine intrinsic breast cancer subtypes represented within
categories defined by quantitative hormone receptor (HR) and HER2 expression.
METHODS: We merged 1,557 cases from three randomized phase III trials into a
single data set. These breast tumors were centrally reviewed in each trial for
quantitative ER, PR, and HER2 expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) stain and 
by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR), with
intrinsic subtyping by research-based PAM50 RT-qPCR assay.
RESULTS: Among 283 HER2-negative tumors with <1% HR expression by IHC, 207 (73%) 
were basal-like; other subtypes, particularly HER2-enriched (48, 17%), were
present. Among the 1,298 HER2-negative tumors, borderline HR (1%-9% staining) was
uncommon (n = 39), and these tumors were heterogeneous: 17 (44%) luminal A/B, 12 
(31%) HER2-enriched, and only 7 (18%) basal-like. Including them in the
definition of triple-negative breast cancer significantly diminished enrichment
for basal-like cancer (p < .05). Among 106 HER2-positive tumors with <1% HR
expression by IHC, the HER2-enriched subtype was the most frequent (87, 82%),
whereas among 127 HER2-positive tumors with strong HR (>10%) expression, only 69 
(54%) were HER2-enriched and 55 (43%) were luminal (39 luminal B, 16 luminal A). 
Quantitative HR expression by RT-qPCR gave similar results. Regardless of
methodology, basal-like cases seldom expressed ER/ESR1 or PR/PGR and were
associated with the lowest expression level of HER2/ERBB2 relative to other
subtypes.
CONCLUSION: Significant discordance remains between clinical assay-defined
subsets and intrinsic subtype. For identifying basal-like breast cancer, the
optimal HR IHC cut point was <1%, matching the American Society of Clinical
Oncology and College of American Pathologists guidelines. Tumors with borderline 
HR staining are molecularly diverse and may require additional assays to clarify 
underlying biology.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4425383
PMID: 25908555  [PubMed - in process]


241. Biol Reprod. 2015 Jun;92(6):140. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.130260. Epub 2015
Apr 22.

Krüppel-Like Factor 13 Deficiency in Uterine Endometrial Cells Contributes to
Defective Steroid Hormone Receptor Signaling but Not Lesion Establishment in a
Mouse Model of Endometriosis.

Heard ME(1), Velarde MC(2), Giudice LC(2), Simmen FA(1), Simmen RC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas. (2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology &
Reproductive Sciences, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California. (3)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas simmenrosalia@uams.edu.

Krüppel-like Factor (KLF) 13 and the closely related KLF9 are members of the
Sp/KLF family of transcription factors that have collectively emerged as
essential regulators of tissue development, differentiation, proliferation, and
programmed cell death. Steroid hormone-responsive tissues express multiple KLFs
that are linked to progesterone receptor (PGR) and estrogen receptor (ESR)
actions either as integrators or as coregulators. Endometriosis is a chronic
disease characterized by progesterone resistance and dysregulated estradiol
signaling; nevertheless, distinct KLF members' contributions to endometriosis
remain largely undefined. We previously demonstrated promotion of ectopic lesion 
establishment by Klf9 null endometrium in a mouse model of endometriosis. Here we
evaluated whether KLF13 loss of expression in endometrial cells may equally
contribute to lesion formation. KLF13 transcript levels were lower in the eutopic
endometria of women with versus women without endometriosis at menstrual
midsecretory phase. In wild-type (WT) mouse recipients intraperitoneally
administered WT or Klf13 null endometrial fragments, lesion incidence did not
differ with donor genotype. No differences were noted for lesion volume, number, 
proliferation status, and apoptotic index as well. Klf13 null lesions displayed
reduced total PGR and ESR1 (RNA and immunoreactive protein) and altered
expression of several PGR and ESR1 target genes, relative to WT lesions. Unlike
for Klf9 null lesions, changes in transcript levels for PGR-A, ESR1, and
Notch/Hedgehog-associated pathway components were not observed for Klf13 null
lesions. Results demonstrate lack of a causative relationship between endometrial
KLF13 deficiency and lesion establishment in mice, and they support the broader
participation of multiple signaling pathways, besides those mediated by steroid
receptors, in the pathology of endometriosis.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4652611 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25904015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Pharmacogenomics. 2015;16(6):569-72. doi: 10.2217/pgs.15.27. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Elucidating the genomic landscape of breast cancer: how will this affect
treatment?

Stjepanovic N(1), Bedard PL.

Author information: 
(1)Bras Drug Development Program, Division of Medical Oncology & Hematology,
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, 5-125, 610 University Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G
2M9, Canada.

PMID: 25893859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. BMC Genomics. 2015 Mar 19;16:215. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1405-8.

Global gene expression profiling of brown to white adipose tissue transformation 
in sheep reveals novel transcriptional components linked to adipose remodeling.

Basse AL(1,)(2), Dixen K(3,)(4), Yadav R(5,)(6), Tygesen MP(7), Qvortrup K(8),
Kristiansen K(9), Quistorff B(10), Gupta R(11), Wang J(12,)(13,)(14,)(15), Hansen
JB(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200,
Copenhagen, Denmark. astrid.basse@bio.ku.dk. (2)Department of Systems Biology,
Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark,
DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. astrid.basse@bio.ku.dk. (3)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200, Copenhagen, Denmark.
dixen.karen@gmail.com. (4)Department of Systems Biology, Center for Biological
Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby,
Denmark. dixen.karen@gmail.com. (5)Department of Biology, University of
Copenhagen, DK-2100, Copenhagen, Denmark. rachita@cbs.dtu.dk. (6)Department of
Systems Biology, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University of
Denmark, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. rachita@cbs.dtu.dk. (7)Department of
Veterinary Clinical and Animal Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-1870,
Frederiksberg, Denmark. mpt@stevnslam.dk. (8)Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, DK-2200, Copenhagen, Denmark. qvortrup@sund.ku.dk.
(9)Department of Systems Biology, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis,
Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
karsten.kristiansen@bio.ku.dk. (10)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University 
of Copenhagen, DK-2200, Copenhagen, Denmark. bqui@sund.ku.dk. (11)Department of
Biology, University of Copenhagen, DK-2100, Copenhagen, Denmark.
ramneek@cbs.dtu.dk. (12)Department of Systems Biology, Center for Biological
Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby,
Denmark. wangj@genomics.org.cn. (13)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083, China.
wangj@genomics.org.cn. (14)Princess Al Jawhara Center of Excellence in the
Research of Hereditary Disorders, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, 21589, Saudi
Arabia. wangj@genomics.org.cn. (15)Macau University of Science and Technology,
Avenida Wai Long, Taipa, Macau, 999078, China. wangj@genomics.org.cn.
(16)Department of Systems Biology, Center for Biological Sequence Analysis,
Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
jacob.hansen@bio.ku.dk.

BACKGROUND: Large mammals are capable of thermoregulation shortly after birth due
to the presence of brown adipose tissue (BAT). The majority of BAT disappears
after birth and is replaced by white adipose tissue (WAT).
RESULTS: We analyzed the postnatal transformation of adipose in sheep with a time
course study of the perirenal adipose depot. We observed changes in tissue
morphology, gene expression and metabolism within the first two weeks of
postnatal life consistent with the expected transition from BAT to WAT. The
transformation was characterized by massively decreased mitochondrial abundance
and down-regulation of gene expression related to mitochondrial function and
oxidative phosphorylation. Global gene expression profiling demonstrated that the
time points grouped into three phases: a brown adipose phase, a transition phase 
and a white adipose phase. Between the brown adipose and the transition phase 170
genes were differentially expressed, and 717 genes were differentially expressed 
between the transition and the white adipose phase. Thirty-eight genes were
shared among the two sets of differentially expressed genes. We identified a
number of regulated transcription factors, including NR1H3, MYC, KLF4, ESR1, RELA
and BCL6, which were linked to the overall changes in gene expression during the 
adipose tissue remodeling. Finally, the perirenal adipose tissue expressed both
brown and brite/beige adipocyte marker genes at birth, the expression of which
changed substantially over time.
CONCLUSIONS: Using global gene expression profiling of the postnatal BAT to WAT
transformation in sheep, we provide novel insight into adipose tissue plasticity 
in a large mammal, including identification of novel transcriptional components
linked to adipose tissue remodeling. Moreover, our data set provides a useful
resource for further studies in adipose tissue plasticity.

PMCID: PMC4407871
PMID: 25887780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. BMC Cancer. 2015 Apr 14;15:278. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1263-4.

Association of high obesity with PAM50 breast cancer intrinsic subtypes and gene 
expression.

Kwan ML(1), Kroenke CH(2), Sweeney C(3,)(4), Bernard PS(5,)(6), Weltzien EK(7),
Castillo A(8), Factor RE(9,)(10), Maxfield KS(11), Stijleman IJ(12), Kushi
LH(13), Quesenberry CP Jr(14), Habel LA(15), Caan BJ(16).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, 2000 Broadway,
Oakland, CA, 94612, USA. Marilyn.L.Kwan@kp.org. (2)Division of Research, Kaiser
Permanente Northern California, 2000 Broadway, Oakland, CA, 94612, USA.
Candyce.H.Kroenke@kp.org. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of
Epidemiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
Carol.Sweeney@hsc.utah.edu. (4)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, UT, 84112, USA. Carol.Sweeney@hsc.utah.edu. (5)Huntsman Cancer
Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 84112, USA.
Philip.Bernard@hci.utah.edu. (6)The Associated Regional and University
Pathologist Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake City,
UT, USA. Philip.Bernard@hci.utah.edu. (7)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente 
Northern California, 2000 Broadway, Oakland, CA, 94612, USA.
Erin.K.Weltzien@kp.org. (8)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern
California, 2000 Broadway, Oakland, CA, 94612, USA. Adrienne.Castillo@kp.org.
(9)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, 84112, USA.
Rachel.Factor@path.utah.edu. (10)The Associated Regional and University
Pathologist Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake City,
UT, USA. Rachel.Factor@path.utah.edu. (11)Department of Internal Medicine,
Division of Epidemiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
Kaylynn.Maxfield@hsc.utah.edu. (12)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, UT, 84112, USA. Inge.Stijleman@hci.utah.edu. (13)Division of
Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, 2000 Broadway, Oakland, CA,
94612, USA. Larry.Kushi@kp.org. (14)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente
Northern California, 2000 Broadway, Oakland, CA, 94612, USA.
Charles.Quesenberry@kp.org. (15)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern 
California, 2000 Broadway, Oakland, CA, 94612, USA. Laurel.Habel@kp.org.
(16)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, 2000 Broadway,
Oakland, CA, 94612, USA. Bette.Caan@kp.org.

BACKGROUND: Invasive breast cancers are now commonly classified using gene
expression into biologically and clinically distinct tumor subtypes. However, the
role of obesity in breast tumor gene expression and intrinsic subtype is unknown.
METHODS: Early-stage breast cancer (BC) patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1,676) were sampled from
two prospective cohorts. The PAM50 qRT-PCR assay was used to: a) assess tumor
gene expression levels for ESR1, PGR, ERBB2, and 10 proliferation genes and b)
classify tumors into intrinsic subtype (Luminal A, Luminal B, Basal-like,
HER2-enriched, Normal-like). Body mass index (BMI) around BC diagnosis (kg/m(2)) 
was categorized as: underweight (<18.5), normal (18.5-24), overweight (25-29),
mildly obese (30-34), and highly obese (=35). In a cross-sectional analysis, we
evaluated associations of BMI with gene expression using linear regression
models, and associations of BMI with non-Luminal A intrinsic subtypes, compared
with Luminal A subtype, using multinomial logistic regression. Statistical
significance tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Highly obese women had tumors with higher expression of proliferation
genes compared with normal weight women (adjusted mean difference<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.44; 95% CI:
0.18, 0.71), yet mildly obese (adjusted mean difference<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.16; 95% CI: -0.06,
0.38) and overweight (adjusted mean difference<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.18; 95% CI: -0.01, 0.36) women
did not. This association was stronger in postmenopausal women (p for
interaction<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.06). Being highly obese, however, was inversely associated with
ESR1 expression (adjusted mean difference<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.95; 95% CI: -1.47, -0.42) compared
with being normal weight, whereas being mildly obese and overweight were not. In 
addition, women with Basal-like and Luminal B subtypes, relative to those with
Luminal A subtype, were more likely to be highly obese, compared with
normal-weight.
CONCLUSIONS: ER expression may not increase correspondingly with increasing
degree of obesity. Highly obese patients are more likely to have tumor subtypes
associated with high proliferation and poorer prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4403771
PMID: 25884832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. BMC Cancer. 2015 Feb 27;15:86. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1088-1.

HNRNP G and HTRA2-BETA1 regulate estrogen receptor alpha expression with
potential impact on endometrial cancer.

Hirschfeld M(1,)(2,)(3), Ouyang YQ(4), Jaeger M(5), Erbes T(6), Orlowska-Volk
M(7), Zur Hausen A(8,)(9), Stickeler E(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center Freiburg,
Hugstetterstr 55, 79106, Freiburg, Germany.
marc.hirschfeld@uniklinik-freiburg.de. (2)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK),
Heidelberg, Germany. marc.hirschfeld@uniklinik-freiburg.de. (3)German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
marc.hirschfeld@uniklinik-freiburg.de. (4)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
oyy91124@hotmail.com. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University
Medical Center Freiburg, Hugstetterstr 55, 79106, Freiburg, Germany.
markus.jaeger@uniklinik-freiburg.de. (6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
University Medical Center Freiburg, Hugstetterstr 55, 79106, Freiburg, Germany.
thalia.erbes@uniklinik-freiburg.de. (7)Institute of Pathology, University Medical
Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. marzenna.orlowska-volk@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(8)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
axel.zurhausen@mumc.nl. (9)Department of Pathology, Maastricht University Medical
Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands. axel.zurhausen@mumc.nl. (10)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center Freiburg, Hugstetterstr 55, 
79106, Freiburg, Germany. elmar.stickeler@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

BACKGROUND: Estrogen receptor alpha (ERa/ESR1) expression is regulated by
alternative splicing. Its most frequently detectable exon7 skipping isoform
(ERaD7) is a dominant negative variant. Elevated expression of ERaD7 was already 
detected in endometrial cancer (EC), while its potential prognostic significance 
has not been characterized so far. Exon7 contains potential binding sites for the
two functional splicing regulatory opponents, HNRNPG and HTRA2-BETA1 known to
trigger opposite effects on EC outcome. This study served to elucidate the
influence of HNRNPG and HTRA2-BETA1 on ERa exon7 splicing regulation and the
impact of ERaD7 concentration on type 1 EC outcome.
METHODS: Functional in vitro experiments for HNRNPG and HTRA2-BETA1 in regard to 
the regulatory impact on endogenous and exogenous ERaD7 splicing were performed. 
Additionally, real-time PCR determined mRNA levels of ERaD7, HNRNPG and
HTRA2-BETA1 in 116 type 1 EC patients.
RESULTS: HNRNPG and HTRA2-BETA1 were found to be specific regulators of ERa exon7
splicing. While HTRA2-BETA1 promoted exon7 inclusion, HNRNPG antagonized this
effect by inducing exon7 skipping (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004). ERaD7 was detected in 71 out of
116 type 1 EC specimens. Statistical analyses revealed an inverse correlation
between ERaD7 mRNA levels and tumor grading (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.029), FIGO stage (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.033)
as well as lymph node metastases (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.032), respectively. Furthermore, higher
ERaD7 expression could be correlated to an improved disease-specific survival
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.034).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates antagonistic regulatory effects of HNRNPG and
HTRA2-BETA1 on ERa exon7 splicing with potential impact on type 1 EC clinical
outcome due to the consecutively variable expression levels of the ERa isoform
D7.

PMCID: PMC4355463
PMID: 25884434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biol Reprod. 2015 May;92(5):122. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.123463. Epub 2015
Apr 16.

Maximal Dexamethasone Inhibition of Luminal Epithelial Proliferation Involves
Progesterone Receptor (PR)- and Non-PR-Mediated Mechanisms in Neonatal Mouse
Uterus.

Nanjappa MK(1), Medrano TI(1), Lydon JP(2), Bigsby RM(3), Cooke PS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana bigsby@iupui.edu.
(4)Department of Physiological Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida paulscooke@ufl.edu.

Progesterone (P4) and the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone (Dex) inhibit
luminal epithelial (LE) proliferation in neonatal mouse uteri. This study
determined the roles of progesterone receptor and estrogen receptor 1 (PR and
ESR1, respectively) in P4- and Dex-induced inhibition of LE proliferation using
PR knockout (PRKO) and Esr1 knockout (Esr1KO) mice. Wild-type (WT), heterozygous,
and homozygous PRKO female pups were injected with vehicle, P4 (40 µg/g body
weight), or Dex (4 or 40 µg/g body weight) on Postnatal Day 5, then 24 h later
immunostained for markers of cell proliferation. In WT and heterozygous mice, P4 
sharply reduced LE proliferation, and Dex produced dose-responsive decreases
equaling those of P4 at the higher dose. Critically, although both doses of Dex
similarly decreased proliferation compared to vehicle-treated PRKOs, treatment of
PRKO pups with the high Dex dose (40 µg/g) did not inhibit LE as much as
treatments of WT mice with this Dex dose or with P4. Stromal proliferation was
stimulated by P4 in WT but not PRKO mice, and Dex did not alter stromal
proliferation. Uteri of all genotypes strongly expressed glucocorticoid receptor 
(GR), demonstrating that impaired Dex effects in PRKOs did not reflect GR
deficiency. Furthermore, inhibition of LE proliferation by Dex (40 µg/g body
weight) in Esr1KO mice was normal, so this process does not involve ESR1. In
summary, inhibitory Dex effects on LE proliferation occur partially through
non-PR-mediated mechanisms, presumably GR, as indicated by Dex inhibition of LE
proliferation in PRKOs. However, maximal inhibitory Dex effects on uterine LE
proliferation are not seen in PRKO mice with even high Dex, indicating that
maximal Dex effects in WT mice also involve PR.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25882702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. BMC Syst Biol. 2015;9 Suppl 2:S4. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-9-S2-S4. Epub 2015 Apr
15.

Molecular association of pathogenetic contributors to pre-eclampsia
(pre-eclampsia associome).

Glotov AS, Tiys ES, Vashukova ES, Pakin VS, Demenkov PS, Saik OV, Ivanisenko TV, 
Arzhanova ON, Mozgovaya EV, Zainulina MS, Kolchanov NA, Baranov VS, Ivanisenko
VA.

BACKGROUND: Pre-eclampsia is the most common complication occurring during
pregnancy. In the majority of cases, it is concurrent with other pathologies in a
comorbid manner (frequent co-occurrences in patients), such as diabetes mellitus,
gestational diabetes and obesity. Providing bronchial asthma, pulmonary
tuberculosis, certain neurodegenerative diseases and cancers as examples, we have
shown previously that pairs of inversely comorbid pathologies (rare
co-occurrences in patients) are more closely related to each other at the
molecular genetic level compared with randomly generated pairs of diseases. Data 
in the literature concerning the causes of pre-eclampsia are abundant. However,
the key mechanisms triggering this disease that are initiated by other
pathological processes are thus far unknown. The aim of this work was to analyse 
the characteristic features of genetic networks that describe interactions
between comorbid diseases, using pre-eclampsia as a case in point.
RESULTS: The use of ANDSystem, Pathway Studio and STRING computer tools based on 
text-mining and database-mining approaches allowed us to reconstruct associative 
networks, representing molecular genetic interactions between genes, associated
concurrently with comorbid disease pairs, including pre-eclampsia, diabetes
mellitus, gestational diabetes and obesity. It was found that these associative
networks statistically differed in the number of genes and interactions between
them from those built for randomly chosen pairs of diseases. The associative
network connecting all four diseases was composed of 16 genes (PLAT, ADIPOQ,
ADRB3, LEPR, HP, TGFB1, TNFA, INS, CRP, CSRP1, IGFBP1, MBL2, ACE, ESR1, SHBG,
ADA). Such an analysis allowed us to reveal differential gene risk factors for
these diseases, and to propose certain, most probable, theoretical mechanisms of 
pre-eclampsia development in pregnant women. The mechanisms may include the
following pathways: [TGFB1 or TNFA]-[IL1B]-[pre-eclampsia]; [TNFA or
INS]-[NOS3]-[pre-eclampsia]; [INS]-[HSPA4 or CLU]-[pre-eclampsia];
[ACE]-[MTHFR]-[pre-eclampsia].
CONCLUSIONS: For pre-eclampsia, diabetes mellitus, gestational diabetes and
obesity, we showed that the size and connectivity of the associative molecular
genetic networks, which describe interactions between comorbid diseases,
statistically exceeded the size and connectivity of those built for randomly
chosen pairs of diseases. Recently, we have shown a similar result for inversely 
comorbid diseases. This suggests that comorbid and inversely comorbid diseases
have common features concerning structural organization of associative molecular 
genetic networks.

PMCID: PMC4407242
PMID: 25879409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Sci Transl Med. 2015 Apr 15;7(283):283ra51. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa4442.

PI3K inhibition results in enhanced estrogen receptor function and dependence in 
hormone receptor-positive breast cancer.

Bosch A(1), Li Z(1), Bergamaschi A(2), Ellis H(1), Toska E(1), Prat A(3), Tao
JJ(4), Spratt DE(5), Viola-Villegas NT(5), Castel P(1), Minuesa G(6), Morse N(1),
Rodón J(7), Ibrahim Y(8), Cortes J(9), Perez-Garcia J(9), Galvan P(10), Grueso
J(8), Guzman M(8), Katzenellenbogen JA(11), Kharas M(6), Lewis JS(12), Dickler
M(13), Serra V(8), Rosen N(6), Chandarlapaty S(14), Scaltriti M(15), Baselga
J(14).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, 1275 York Avenue, Box 20, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Department of
Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
524 Burrill Hall, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. (3)Translational Genomics Group, Vall
d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Passeig Vall d'Hebron 119-129, Barcelona
08035, Spain. Translational Genomics and Targeted Therapeutics in Solid Tumors,
August Pi i Sunyer Biomedical Research Institute, Hospital Clinic Barcelona,
C/Rosselló 149-153, Barcelona 08035, Spain. (4)Massachusetts General Hospital
Cancer Center and Harvard Medical School, 425 13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129,
USA. (5)Department of Radiology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA. (6)Molecular Pharmacology and Chemistry Program and Center
for Cell Engineering, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065,
USA. (7)Department of Medical Oncology, VHIO, Barcelona 08035, Spain. Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Plaza Cívica, Campus UAB, 08193 Bellaterra, Spain.
(8)Experimental Therapeutics Group, VHIO, Barcelona 08035, Spain. (9)Department
of Medical Oncology, VHIO, Barcelona 08035, Spain. (10)Translational Genomics
Group, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Passeig Vall d'Hebron 119-129,
Barcelona 08035, Spain. (11)Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. (12)Department of Radiology, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. Molecular Pharmacology
and Chemistry Program and Center for Cell Engineering, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (13)Breast Medicine Service, Department
of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(14)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, 1275 York Avenue, Box 20, New York, NY 10065, USA. Breast Medicine
Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA. Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.
chandars@mskcc.org scaltrim@mskcc.org baselgaj@mskcc.org. (15)Human Oncology and 
Pathogenesis Program and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Avenue, Box 20, New York, NY 10065, USA. chandars@mskcc.org scaltrim@mskcc.org
baselgaj@mskcc.org.

Activating mutations of PIK3CA are the most frequent genomic alterations in
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast tumors, and selective phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase a (PI3Ka) inhibitors are in clinical development. The activity of these 
agents, however, is not homogeneous, and only a fraction of patients bearing
PIK3CA-mutant ER-positive tumors benefit from single-agent administration.
Searching for mechanisms of resistance, we observed that suppression of PI3K
signaling results in induction of ER-dependent transcriptional activity, as
demonstrated by changes in expression of genes containing ER-binding sites and
increased occupancy by the ER of promoter regions of up-regulated genes.
Furthermore, expression of ESR1 mRNA and ER protein were also increased upon PI3K
inhibition. These changes in gene expression were confirmed in vivo in xenografts
and patient-derived models and in tumors from patients undergoing treatment with 
the PI3Ka inhibitor BYL719. The observed effects on transcription were enhanced
by the addition of estradiol and suppressed by the anti-ER therapies fulvestrant 
and tamoxifen. Fulvestrant markedly sensitized ER-positive tumors to PI3Ka
inhibition, resulting in major tumor regressions in vivo. We propose that
increased ER transcriptional activity may be a reactive mechanism that limits the
activity of PI3K inhibitors and that combined PI3K and ER inhibition is a
rational approach to target these tumors.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4433148 [Available on 2016-04-15]
PMID: 25877889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Endocrinol. 2015 Jun;225(3):125-34. doi: 10.1530/JOE-15-0001. Epub 2015 Apr 15.

Steroid regulation of early postnatal development in the corpus epididymidis of
pigs.

Katleba KD(1), Legacki EL(1), Conley AJ(1), Berger T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Animal SciencePopulation Health and ReproductionUniversity of
California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, California 95616, USA.
(2)Departments of Animal SciencePopulation Health and ReproductionUniversity of
California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, California 95616, USA
tberger@ucdavis.edu.

Development of the epididymis including blood-epididymal barrier formation is not
required until sperm reach the epididymis peripuberally. Regulation of this
development in the early postnatal period is largely unknown. The current
objectives were to evaluate potential roles of endogenous estrogen and androgen
signaling during early development of the corpus epididymidis and to determine
the timing of formation of the blood-epididymal barrier in the pig. Effects of
endogenous steroids were evaluated using littermates treated with vehicle, an
aromatase inhibitor (letrozole) to reduce endogenous estrogens, an estrogen
receptor antagonist (fulvestrant) or an androgen receptor antagonist (flutamide).
Phosphorylated histone 3 immunohistochemistry was used to identify proliferating 
epithelial cells. Lanthanum nitrate and electron microscopy were used to analyze 
formation of the blood barrier in the corpus epididymidis. Reducing endogenous
estrogens increased the number of proliferating corpus epithelial cells at 6 and 
6.5 weeks of age compared with vehicle-treated boars (P<0.01 and P<0.001
respectively). Blocking androgen receptors did not alter proliferation rate at
6.5 weeks of age. Although barrier formation was similar between 6 and 6.5 weeks 
of age in vehicle-treated animals, intercellular barriers increased in
letrozole-treated littermates at 6.5 weeks of age. Fulvestrant treatment, which
should mimic aromatase inhibition for regulation through ESR1 and ESR2 signaling 
but potentially stimulate endogenous estrogen signaling through the G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER), had the opposite effect on aromatase
inhibition. These responses in conjunction with the presence of GPER in the
corpus epididymidis suggest early corpus epididymal development is regulated
partially by GPER.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25876610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 Jul;173(1):29-36. doi: 10.1530/EJE-15-0054. Epub 2015 Apr 
10.

Impact of estrogen and progesterone receptor expression on the clinical and
molecular features of papillary thyroid cancer.

Vannucchi G(1), De Leo S(2), Perrino M(2), Rossi S(2), Tosi D(2), Cirello V(2),
Colombo C(2), Bulfamante G(3), Vicentini L(2), Fugazzola L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine UnitPadiglione Granelli, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Via F. Sforza,
35, 20122 Milan, ItalyDepartment of Clinical Sciences and Community
HealthUniversity of Milan, Milan, ItalyDivision of PathologySan Paolo Hospital,
Milan, ItalyDepartments of Health SciencesPathophysiology and
TransplantationUniversity of Milan, Milan, ItalyEndocrine Surgery UnitFondazione 
IRCCS Ca' Granda, Milan, Italy guiava@libero.it. (2)Endocrine UnitPadiglione
Granelli, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Via F. Sforza, 35, 20122 Milan,
ItalyDepartment of Clinical Sciences and Community HealthUniversity of Milan,
Milan, ItalyDivision of PathologySan Paolo Hospital, Milan, ItalyDepartments of
Health SciencesPathophysiology and TransplantationUniversity of Milan, Milan,
ItalyEndocrine Surgery UnitFondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Milan, Italy.
(3)Endocrine UnitPadiglione Granelli, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Via F. Sforza,
35, 20122 Milan, ItalyDepartment of Clinical Sciences and Community
HealthUniversity of Milan, Milan, ItalyDivision of PathologySan Paolo Hospital,
Milan, ItalyDepartments of Health SciencesPathophysiology and
TransplantationUniversity of Milan, Milan, ItalyEndocrine Surgery UnitFondazione 
IRCCS Ca' Granda, Milan, Italy Endocrine UnitPadiglione Granelli, Fondazione
IRCCS Ca' Granda, Via F. Sforza, 35, 20122 Milan, ItalyDepartment of Clinical
Sciences and Community HealthUniversity of Milan, Milan, ItalyDivision of
PathologySan Paolo Hospital, Milan, ItalyDepartments of Health
SciencesPathophysiology and TransplantationUniversity of Milan, Milan,
ItalyEndocrine Surgery UnitFondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid cancer is highly prevalent in women during the fertile age,
which suggests a possible impact of hormonal and reproductive factors.
METHODS: We studied the expression of estrogen receptor a (ERa or ESR1) and
progesterone receptor (PR or PGR) in 182 female and male patients with papillary 
thyroid cancer and correlated it to clinical and molecular features.
RESULTS: ERa and PR expression was found in 66.5 and 75.8% of patients
respectively and was significantly correlated with larger tumor size and with a
non-incidental diagnosis. Moreover, a trend toward a higher prevalence of local
metastases was observed in ER- and PR-expressing tumors, which possibly indicates
a more aggressive behavior. Interestingly, the occurrence of the 'receptor
conversion' phenomenon, which has already been reported to have a negative
prognostic effect in breast cancer, was demonstrated for the first time in
thyroid tumors. Indeed, almost all of the ERa-positive primary tumors analyzed
had ERa-negative metastatic lymph nodes. At the genetic analyses, BRAF(V600E)
mutation was detected in 23.2% of the tumors and had a higher prevalence in
larger tumors and in those with a stronger ERa or PR staining.
CONCLUSIONS: The whole of the findings reported in the present study argue for an
association between ERa and PR sex hormone receptor expression and a more
aggressive presentation. Although no impact on outcome was found, the evaluation 
of ERa and PR receptor expression could add insights into the biological behavior
of tumors and could modify the follow-up, particularly in fertile women affected 
with persistent disease.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 25862786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 15;75(12):2457-67. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2012. Epub 
2015 Apr 10.

Novel Associations between Common Breast Cancer Susceptibility Variants and
Risk-Predicting Mammographic Density Measures.

Stone J(1), Thompson DJ(2), Dos Santos Silva I(3), Scott C(4), Tamimi RM(5),
Lindstrom S(6), Kraft P(7), Hazra A(8), Li J(9), Eriksson L(10), Czene K(10),
Hall P(10), Jensen M(4), Cunningham J(11), Olson JE(12), Purrington K(13), Couch 
FJ(14), Brown J(2), Leyland J(2), Warren RM(15), Luben RN(16), Khaw KT(17), Smith
P(18), Wareham NJ(19), Jud SM(20), Heusinger K(20), Beckmann MW(20), Douglas
JA(21), Shah KP(21), Chan HP(22), Helvie MA(22), Le Marchand L(23), Kolonel
LN(23), Woolcott C(24), Maskarinec G(23), Haiman C(25), Giles GG(26), Baglietto
L(27), Krishnan K(28), Southey MC(29), Apicella C(28), Andrulis IL(30), Knight
JA(31), Ursin G(32), Alnaes GI(33), Kristensen VN(33), Borresen-Dale AL(33), Gram
IT(34), Bolla MK(2), Wang Q(34), Michailidou K(2), Dennis J(2), Simard J(35),
Pharoah P(36), Dunning AM(37), Easton DF(36), Fasching PA(38), Pankratz VS(4),
Hopper JL(28), Vachon CM(39).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetic Origins of Health and Disease, University of Western
Australia, Crawley, Western Australia, Australia. (2)Centre for Cancer Genetic
Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Epidemiology and
Population Health, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United
Kingdom. (4)Department of Health Sciences Research, Division of Biostatistics,
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota. (5)Channing Laboratory,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts. (6)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public 
Health, Boston, Massachusetts. Program in Genetic Epidemiology and Statistical
Genetics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts. (7)Department
of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts. Program in Genetic Epidemiology and Statistical Genetics, Harvard 
School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts. Department of Biostatistics,
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts. (8)Department
of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts. (9)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Human Genetics, Genome Institute of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (10)Department of Medical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (11)Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Division of Experimental Pathology, Mayo
Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota. (12)Department of Health
Sciences Research, Division of Epidemiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(13)Department of Oncology, Wayne State University School of Medicine and
Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, Michigan. (14)Department of Laboratory
Medicine and Pathology, Division of Experimental Pathology, Mayo Clinic College
of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota. Department of Health Sciences Research,
Division of Epidemiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (15)Department of
Radiology, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's NHS Foundation Trust,
Cambridge, United Kingdom. (16)Department of Public Health and Primary Care,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (17)MRC Centre for
Nutritional Epidemiology in Cancer Prevention and Survival (CNC), University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (18)Department of Psychiatry, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (19)MRC Epidemiology Unit, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (20)University Breast Center Franconia,
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany. (21)Department of Human
Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(22)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. (23)University of Hawaii Cancer Center, Honolulu, Hawaii.
(24)Department of Obstetrics and Genecology, IWK Health Centre, Halifax, Canada. 
(25)Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California. (26)Cancer Epidemiology Centre, Cancer Council Victoria, Melbourne,
Australia. Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of
Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. 
(27)Cancer Epidemiology Centre, Cancer Council Victoria, Melbourne, Australia.
Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and
Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Centre for
Research in Epidemiology and Population Health, Gustave Roussy Institute,
Villejuif Cedex, France. Paris-South University, Villejuif, France. (28)Centre
for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and Global
Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. (29)Department of
Pathology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. (30)Center for Cancer
Genetics, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (31)Prosserman Centre for Health Research,
Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (32)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Norway.
Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California, California.
(33)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium
Hospital, Montebello, Oslo, Norway. (34)Faculty of Health Sciences, Department of
Community Medicine, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(35)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec Research Center and Laval
University, Quebec, Canada. (36)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology,
Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom. Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Oncology,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (37)Centre for Cancer Genetic
Epidemiology, Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom. (38)University Breast Center Franconia, Department of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany. Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and
Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California. (39)Department of Health Sciences Research,
Division of Epidemiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
vachon.celine@mayo.edu.

Mammographic density measures adjusted for age and body mass index (BMI) are
heritable predictors of breast cancer risk, but few mammographic
density-associated genetic variants have been identified. Using data for 10,727
women from two international consortia, we estimated associations between 77
common breast cancer susceptibility variants and absolute dense area, percent
dense area and absolute nondense area adjusted for study, age, and BMI using
mixed linear modeling. We found strong support for established associations
between rs10995190 (in the region of ZNF365), rs2046210 (ESR1), and rs3817198
(LSP1) and adjusted absolute and percent dense areas (all P < 10(-5)). Of 41
recently discovered breast cancer susceptibility variants, associations were
found between rs1432679 (EBF1), rs17817449 (MIR1972-2: FTO), rs12710696 (2p24.1),
and rs3757318 (ESR1) and adjusted absolute and percent dense areas, respectively.
There were associations between rs6001930 (MKL1) and both adjusted absolute dense
and nondense areas, and between rs17356907 (NTN4) and adjusted absolute nondense 
area. Trends in all but two associations were consistent with those for breast
cancer risk. Results suggested that 18% of breast cancer susceptibility variants 
were associated with at least one mammographic density measure. Genetic variants 
at multiple loci were associated with both breast cancer risk and the
mammographic density measures. Further understanding of the underlying mechanisms
at these loci could help identify etiologic pathways implicated in how
mammographic density predicts breast cancer risk.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4470785
PMID: 25862352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Clin Invest. 2015 May;125(5):1801-14. doi: 10.1172/JCI73743. Epub 2015 Mar 30.

MEL-18 loss mediates estrogen receptor-a downregulation and hormone independence.

Lee JY, Won HY, Park JH, Kim HY, Choi HJ, Shin DH, Kang JH, Woo JK, Oh SH, Son T,
Choi JW, Kim S, Kim HY, Yi K, Jang KS, Oh YH, Kong G.

The polycomb protein MEL-18 has been proposed as a tumor suppressor in breast
cancer; however, its functional relevance to the hormonal regulation of breast
cancer remains unknown. Here, we demonstrated that MEL-18 loss contributes to the
hormone-independent phenotype of breast cancer by modulating hormone receptor
expression. In multiple breast cancer cohorts, MEL-18 was markedly downregulated 
in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). MEL-18 expression positively correlated 
with the expression of luminal markers, including estrogen receptor-a (ER-a,
encoded by ESR1). MEL-18 loss was also associated with poor response to
antihormonal therapy in ER-a-positive breast cancer. Furthermore, whereas MEL-18 
loss in luminal breast cancer cells resulted in the downregulation of expression 
and activity of ER-a and the progesterone receptor (PR), MEL-18 overexpression
restored ER-a expression in TNBC. Consistently, in vivo xenograft experiments
demonstrated that MEL-18 loss induces estrogen-independent growth and tamoxifen
resistance in luminal breast cancer, and that MEL-18 overexpression confers
tamoxifen sensitivity in TNBC. MEL-18 suppressed SUMOylation of the ESR1
transactivators p53 and SP1, thereby driving ESR1 transcription. MEL-18
facilitated the deSUMOylation process by inhibiting BMI-1/RING1B-mediated
ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation of SUMO1/sentrin-specific protease 1 (SENP1).
These findings demonstrate that MEL-18 is a SUMO-dependent regulator of hormone
receptors and suggest MEL-18 expression as a marker for determining the
antihormonal therapy response in patients with breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4463188
PMID: 25822021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Cancer Lett. 2015 Jun 28;362(1):36-44. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.03.020. Epub
2015 Mar 19.

Gene expression profiles of circulating tumor cells versus primary tumors in
metastatic breast cancer.

Onstenk W(1), Sieuwerts AM(2), Weekhout M(2), Mostert B(2), Reijm EA(2), van
Deurzen CH(3), Bolt-de Vries JB(2), Peeters DJ(4), Hamberg P(5), Seynaeve C(2),
Jager A(2), de Jongh FE(6), Smid M(2), Dirix LY(4), Kehrer DF(7), van Galen A(2),
Ramirez-Moreno R(2), Kraan J(2), Van M(2), Gratama JW(2), Martens JW(2), Foekens 
JA(2), Sleijfer S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Cancer Genomics Netherlands, Erasmus MC
Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
w.onstenk@erasmusmc.nl. (2)Department of Medical Oncology and Cancer Genomics
Netherlands, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Translational Cancer Research Unit, Oncology Center, GZA Hospitals
Sint-Augustinus and Department of Oncology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp,
Belgium. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, Sint Franciscus Gasthuis, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands. (6)Department of Internal Medicine, Ikazia Hospital, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands. (7)Department of Internal Medicine, IJsselland Hospital, Capelle
aan den IJssel, The Netherlands.

Before using circulating tumor cells (CTCs) as liquid biopsy, insight into
molecular discrepancies between CTCs and primary tumors is essential. We
characterized CellSearch-enriched CTCs from 62 metastatic breast cancer (MBC)
patients with =5 CTCs starting first-line systemic treatment. Expression levels
of 35 tumor-associated, CTC-specific genes, including ESR1, coding for the
estrogen receptor (ER), were measured by reverse transcription quantitative
polymerase chain reaction and correlated to corresponding primary tumors. In 30
patients (48%), gene expression profiles of 35 genes were discrepant between CTCs
and the primary tumor, but this had no prognostic consequences. In 15 patients
(24%), the expression of ER was discrepant. Patients with ER-negative primary
tumors and ER-positive CTCs had a longer median TTS compared to those with
concordantly ER-negative CTCs (8.5 versus 2.1 months, P = 0.05). From seven
patients, an axillary lymph node metastasis was available. In two patients, the
CTC profiles better resembled the lymph node metastasis than the primary tumor.
Our findings suggest that molecular discordances between CTCs and primary tumors 
frequently occur, but that this bears no prognostic consequences. Alterations in 
ER-status between primary tumors and CTCs might have prognostic implications.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25797316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 Jun;172(6):791-801. doi: 10.1530/EJE-14-0990. Epub 2015
Mar 19.

Expression of estrogen receptor alpha is associated with prolactin pituitary
tumor prognosis and supports the sex-related difference in tumor growth.

Delgrange E(1), Vasiljevic A(2), Wierinckx A(3), François P(4), Jouanneau E(2),
Raverot G(2), Trouillas J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon 169372 Lyon, FranceService d'EndocrinologieCHU
Dinant-Godinne UCL Namur, Université Catholique de Louvain, 5530 Mont-sur-Meuse, 
Namur, BelgiumCentre de Neurosciences de LyonINSERM S1028/CNRS UMR 5292, 69372
Lyon, FranceCentre de Recherche en Cancérologie de LyonINSERM U1052/CNRS UMR
5286, 69008 Lyon, FranceService de NeurochirurgieCHU de Tours, et Université
François Rabelais, Tours, FranceCentre de Pathologie EstService de
NeurochirurgieFédération d'EndocrinologieGroupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices
Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France Etienne.delgrange@uclouvain.be. (2)Université de
Lyon 169372 Lyon, FranceService d'EndocrinologieCHU Dinant-Godinne UCL Namur,
Université Catholique de Louvain, 5530 Mont-sur-Meuse, Namur, BelgiumCentre de
Neurosciences de LyonINSERM S1028/CNRS UMR 5292, 69372 Lyon, FranceCentre de
Recherche en Cancérologie de LyonINSERM U1052/CNRS UMR 5286, 69008 Lyon,
FranceService de NeurochirurgieCHU de Tours, et Université François Rabelais,
Tours, FranceCentre de Pathologie EstService de NeurochirurgieFédération
d'EndocrinologieGroupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France
Université de Lyon 169372 Lyon, FranceService d'EndocrinologieCHU Dinant-Godinne 
UCL Namur, Université Catholique de Louvain, 5530 Mont-sur-Meuse, Namur,
BelgiumCentre de Neurosciences de LyonINSERM S1028/CNRS UMR 5292, 69372 Lyon,
FranceCentre de Recherche en Cancérologie de LyonINSERM U1052/CNRS UMR 5286,
69008 Lyon, FranceService de NeurochirurgieCHU de Tours, et Université François
Rabelais, Tours, FranceCentre de Pathologie EstService de
NeurochirurgieFédération d'EndocrinologieGroupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices
Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France Université de Lyon 169372 Lyon, FranceService
d'EndocrinologieCHU Dinant-Godinne UCL Namur, Université Catholique de Louvain,
5530 Mont-sur-Meuse, Namur, BelgiumCentre de Neurosciences de LyonINSERM
S1028/CNRS UMR 5292, 69372 Lyon, FranceCentre de Recherche en Cancérologie de
LyonINSERM U1052/CNRS UMR 5286, 69008 Lyon, FranceService de NeurochirurgieCHU de
Tours, et Université François Rabelais, Tours, FranceCentre de Pathologie
EstService de NeurochirurgieFédération d'EndocrinologieGroupement Hospitalier
Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. (3)Université de Lyon 169372 Lyon,
FranceService d'EndocrinologieCHU Dinant-Godinne UCL Namur, Université Catholique
de Louvain, 5530 Mont-sur-Meuse, Namur, BelgiumCentre de Neurosciences de
LyonINSERM S1028/CNRS UMR 5292, 69372 Lyon, FranceCentre de Recherche en
Cancérologie de LyonINSERM U1052/CNRS UMR 5286, 69008 Lyon, FranceService de
NeurochirurgieCHU de Tours, et Université François Rabelais, Tours, FranceCentre 
de Pathologie EstService de NeurochirurgieFédération d'EndocrinologieGroupement
Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France Université de Lyon 169372 
Lyon, FranceService d'EndocrinologieCHU Dinant-Godinne UCL Namur, Université
Catholique de Louvain, 5530 Mont-sur-Meuse, Namur, BelgiumCentre de Neurosciences
de LyonINSERM S1028/CNRS UMR 5292, 69372 Lyon, FranceCentre de Recherche en
Cancérologie de LyonINSERM U1052/CNRS UMR 5286, 69008 Lyon, FranceService de
NeurochirurgieCHU de Tours, et Université François Rabelais, Tours, FranceCentre 
de Pathologie EstService de NeurochirurgieFédération d'EndocrinologieGroupement
Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. (4)Université de Lyon
169372 Lyon, FranceService d'EndocrinologieCHU Dinant-Godinne UCL Namur,
Université Catholique de Louvain, 5530 Mont-sur-Meuse, Namur, BelgiumCentre de
Neurosciences de LyonINSERM S1028/CNRS UMR 5292, 69372 Lyon, FranceCentre de
Recherche en Cancérologie de LyonINSERM U1052/CNRS UMR 5286, 69008 Lyon,
FranceService de NeurochirurgieCHU de Tours, et Université François Rabelais,
Tours, FranceCentre de Pathologie EstService de NeurochirurgieFédération
d'EndocrinologieGroupement Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon,
France.

CONTEXT: A sex difference in the progression of prolactin (PRL) tumors has been
disputed for years.
OBJECTIVE: To compare tumor characteristics and postoperative clinical course
between men and women, and correlate data with estrogen receptor alpha (ERa
(ESR1)) expression status.
DESIGN, PATIENTS, AND METHODS: Eighty-nine patients (59 women and 30 men)
operated on for a prolactinoma and followed for at least 5 years were selected.
Tumors were classified into five grades according to their size, invasion, and
proliferation characteristics. The ERa expression was detected by
immunohistochemistry and a score (0-12) calculated as the product of the
percentage of positive nuclei and the staining intensity.
RESULTS: We found a significant preponderance of high-grade tumors among men and 
a lower surgical cure rate in men (23%) than in women (71%). Patients resistant
to medical treatment were mainly men (7/8), six of whom showed tumor progression 
despite postoperative medical treatment, which led to multiple therapies and
eventually death in three. The median score for ERa expression was 1 in men
(range, 0-8) and 8 in women (range, 0-12) (P<0.0001). The expression of ERa was
inversely correlated with tumor size (r=-0.59; P<0.0001) and proliferative
activity. All dopamine agonist-resistant tumors and all grade 2b (invasive and
proliferative) tumors (from ten men and four women) were characterized by low ERa
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: PRL tumors in men are characterized by lower ERa expression, which
is related to higher tumor grades, resistance to treatment, and an overall worse 
prognosis.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 25792376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Front Neurosci. 2015 Mar 3;9:57. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00057. eCollection 2015.

Bisphenol A and phthalate endocrine disruption of parental and social behaviors.

Rosenfeld CS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bond Life Sciences Center, Genetics Area Program, Biomedical Sciences,
University of Missouri Columbia, MO, USA.

Perinatal exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) can induce
promiscuous neurobehavioral disturbances. Bisphenol A and phthalates are two
widely prevalent and persistent EDCs reported to lead to such effects. Parental
and social behaviors are especially vulnerable to endocrine disruption, as these 
traits are programmed by the organizational-activational effects of testosterone 
and estrogen. Exposure to BPA and other EDCs disrupts normal maternal care
provided by rodents and non-human primates, such as nursing, time she spends
hunched over and in the nest, and grooming her pups. Paternal care may also be
affected by BPA. No long-term study has linked perinatal exposure to BPA or other
EDC and later parental behavioral deficits in humans. The fact that the same
brain regions and neural hormone substrates govern parental behaviors in animal
models and humans suggests that this suite of behaviors may also be vulnerable in
the latter. Social behaviors, such as communication, mate choice, pair bonding,
social inquisitiveness and recognition, play behavior, social grooming,
copulation, and aggression, are compromised in animal models exposed to BPA,
phthalates, and other EDCs. Early contact to these chemicals is also correlated
with maladaptive social behaviors in children. These behavioral disturbances may 
originate by altering the fetal or adult gonadal production of testosterone or
estrogen, expression of ESR1, ESR2, and AR in the brain regions governing these
behaviors, neuropeptide/protein hormone (oxytocin, vasopressin, and prolactin)
and their cognate neural receptors, and/or through epimutations. Robust evidence 
exists for all of these EDC-induced changes. Concern also exists for
transgenerational persistence of such neurobehavioral disruptions. In sum,
evidence for social and parental deficits induced by BPA, phthalates, and related
chemicals is strongly mounting, and such effects may ultimately compromise the
overall social fitness of populations to come.

PMCID: PMC4347611
PMID: 25784850  [PubMed]


256. J BUON. 2015 Jan-Feb;20(1):296-308.

Association between estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) genetic variations and cancer
risk: a meta-analysis.

Sun H(1), Deng Q, Pan Y, He B, Ying H, Chen J, Liu X, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China.

PURPOSE: Emerging published reports on the association between estrogen receptor 
1 (ESR1) genetic variation and cancer susceptibility are inconsistent. This
review and meta- analysis was performed to achieve a more precise evaluation of
this relationship.
METHODS: A literature search of PubMed database was conducted from the inception 
of this study through April 1st 2014. Crude odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence
intervals (95% CIs) were calculated to assess the association.
RESULTS: 87 studies were enrolled in this meta-analysis. The results indicated
that PvuII (T>C) polymorphism was associated with an increased risk of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and prostate cancer, in contrast with the
decreased risk of gallbladder cancer. No significant association was found in
Asian and Caucasian populations. Furthermore, XbaI (A>G) genetic variation was
only associated with an increased risk of prostate cancer, but was not related
with race. In addition, T594T (G>A) polymorphisms were significantly associated
with an increased risk of cancer, especially in Asian populations.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis indicated that PvuII (T>C) genetic variation may 
be risk factor for HCC, prostate cancer and gallbladder cancer. Meanwhile, XbaI
(A>G) polymorphism may be potential prognostic factor for prostate cancer.
Furthermore, T594T (G>A) was closely related with cancer susceptibility,
especially in Asian populations.

PMID: 25778331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Neuroendocrinology. 2015;101(3):236-45. doi: 10.1159/000381063. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Effects of Age and Estradiol on Gene Expression in the Rhesus Macaque
Hypothalamus.

Eghlidi DH(1), Urbanski HF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Beaverton, 
Oreg., USA.

BACKGROUND: The hypothalamus plays a key role in mediating the effects of
estrogen on many physiological functions, including reproduction, metabolism, and
thermoregulation. We have previously observed marked estrogen-dependent gene
expression changes within the hypothalamus of rhesus macaques during aging,
especially in the KNDy neurons of the arcuate-median eminence (ARC-ME) that
produce kisspeptin, neurokinin B, and dynorphin A. Little is known, however,
about the mechanisms involved in mediating the feedback from estrogen onto these 
neurons.
METHODS: We used quantitative real-time PCR to profile age- and
estrogen-dependent gene expression changes in the rhesus macaque hypothalamus.
Our focus was on genes that encode steroid receptors (ESR1, ESR2, PGR, and AR)
and on enzymes that contribute to the local synthesis of 17ß-estradiol (E2; STS, 
HSD3B1/2, HSD17B5, and CYP19A). In addition, we used RT(2) Profiler PCR Arrays
to profile a larger set of genes that are integral to hypothalamic function.
RESULTS: KISS1, KISS1R, TAC3, and NPY2R mRNA levels increased in surgically
menopausal (ovariectomized) old females relative to age-matched ovariectomized
animals that received E2 hormone therapy. In contrast, PGR, HSD17B, GNRH2,
SLC6A3, KISS1, TAC3, and NPY2R mRNA levels increased after E2 supplementation.
CONCLUSION: The rhesus macaque ARC-ME expresses many genes that are responsive to
changes in circulating estrogen levels, even during old age, and these may
contribute to causing the normal and pathophysiological changes that occur during
menopause.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC4475460
PMID: 25765287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Apr;150(2):231-42. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3316-4. 
Epub 2015 Mar 12.

Revisiting the estrogen receptor pathway and its role in endocrine therapy for
postmenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer.

Nagaraj G(1), Ma C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology & Hematology, Department of Medicine, Loma Linda 
University, 11175 Campus Street, CSP 11015, Loma Linda, CA, USA,
gnagaraj@llu.edu.

Endocrine therapy (ET) is the most commonly administered first-line systemic
therapy for estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) metastatic breast cancer (MBC).
Manipulation of hormone levels was one of the earliest ET approaches. However,
treatment modalities have since evolved with the growing understanding of
estrogen biosynthesis and ER biology. The current armamentarium of ET includes
selective estrogen receptor modulation, aromatase inhibition, and selective
estrogen receptor downregulation. However, intrinsic or acquired resistance to ET
is frequently observed. Significant strides have been made in recent years in our
understanding of the mechanisms of resistance to ET, and several targeted
approaches including inhibitors against the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase/mammalian target of rapamycin (PI3K/mTOR) pathway and cyclin-dependent
kinase 4/6 (CDK4/6) have shown great promise. The mTOR inhibitor, everolimus, is 
already in clinical use for the treatment of resistant ER+MBC. However, multiple 
levels of evidence indicate that ER signaling remains as an important therapeutic
target even in the resistance setting, providing the rationale for sequencing
multiple lines and combinations of ET. In addition, recurrent mutations in
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), the gene that encodes the ER, have been identified in
the genomic studies of metastatic ER+ breast cancer. ESR1 mutations are an
important mechanism for acquired resistance, and effective ER targeting in this
setting is particularly important.

PMID: 25762475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Apr;98(2):152-7. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.03.004. Epub 2015
Mar 4.

A multiplex allele-specific real-time PCR assay for screening of ESR1 mutations
in metastatic breast cancer.

Wang T(1), Liu JH(1), Zhang J(1), Wang L(2), Chen C(1), Dai PG(3).

Author information: 
(1)The National Engineering Research Center for Miniaturized Detection Systems,
School of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an, PR China. (2)The National
Engineering Research Center for Miniaturized Detection Systems, School of Life
Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an, PR China; The Department of Oncology, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, PR China. (3)The
National Engineering Research Center for Miniaturized Detection Systems, School
of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an, PR China. Electronic address:
daipg@nuw.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Acquired resistance to endocrine-based therapies occurs in virtually 
all estrogen receptor-a (ERa, encoded by ESR1) positive breast cancer patients.
The underlying molecular mechanism is attributed to the activating mutations in
ESR1. These mutations provide an exciting opportunity for the development of new 
antagonists that specifically inhibit the mutant proteins. Therefore, accurate
detection of ESR1 mutations is of critical importance in clinical practice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We carried out a single tube, multiplex allele-specific
real-time PCR assay for the detection of four ESR1 mutations (Y537S, Y537C,
Y537N, and D538G).
RESULTS: The assay was found to be highly specific and sensitive. With this
assay, as low as 1% mutant DNA template in wild type DNA could be detected.
Fifteen DNA samples were prepared from archived formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded 
metastatic breast cancer biopsies. They were further screened with this assay,
and three samples were identified as ESR1 mutant. The results were validated with
pyrosequencing and complete concordance was observed between the two assays.
CONCLUSION: The multiplex allele-specific real-time PCR assay provides a rapid
and reliable diagnostic tool for accurate detection of ESR1 mutations. This
procedure may be used in the clinical treatment of breast cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25746663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 17;112(11):E1382-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1418973112. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

Activation of protein synthesis in mouse uterine epithelial cells by
estradiol-17ß is mediated by a PKC-ERK1/2-mTOR signaling pathway.

Wang Y(1), Zhu L(1), Kuokkanen S(2), Pollard JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Reproductive Biology and Women's Health, Departments
of Developmental and Molecular Biology and. (2)Center for the Study of
Reproductive Biology and Women's Health, Obstetrics and Gynecology and Women's
Health, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461; and. (3)Center for 
the Study of Reproductive Biology and Women's Health, Departments of
Developmental and Molecular Biology and Obstetrics and Gynecology and Women's
Health, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461; and Medical
Research Council Centre for Reproductive Health, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, United Kingdom jeff.pollard@ed.ac.uk.

The uterine epithelium of mice and humans undergoes cyclical waves of cell
proliferation and differentiation under the regulation of estradiol-17ß (E2) and 
progesterone (P4). These epithelial cells respond to E2 with increased protein
and DNA synthesis, whereas P4 inhibits only the E2-induced DNA synthetic
response. Here we show that E2 regulates protein synthesis in these epithelial
cells through activating PKC that in turn stimulates ERK1/2 to phosphorylate and 
thereby activate the central regulator of protein synthesis mechanistic target of
rapamycin (mTOR). This mTOR pathway is not inhibited by P4. Inhibitor studies
with an estrogen receptor (ESR1) antagonist showed the dependence of this mTOR
pathway on ESR1 but that once activated, a phosphorylation cascade independent of
ESR1 propagates the pathway. E2 also stimulates an IGF1 receptor (IGF1R) to PI3
kinase to AKT to GSK-3ß pathway required for activation of the canonical cell
cycle machinery that is inhibited by P4. PKC activation did not stimulate this
pathway nor does inhibition of PKC or ERK1/2 affect it. These studies therefore
indicate a mechanism whereby DNA and protein synthesis are regulated by two
ESR1-activated pathways that run in parallel with only the one responsible for
the initiation of DNA synthesis blocked by P4. Inhibition of mTOR by rapamycin in
vivo resulted in inhibition of E2-induced protein and DNA synthesis.
Proliferative diseases of the endometrium such as endometriosis and cancer are
common and E2 dependent. Thus, defining this mTOR pathway suggests that local
(intrauterine or peritoneal) rapamycin administration might be a therapeutic
option for these diseases.

PMCID: PMC4371960
PMID: 25733860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Chin Med Assoc. 2015 Apr;78(4):249-57. doi: 10.1016/j.jcma.2015.01.004. Epub
2015 Feb 27.

Kisspeptin expression in mouse Leydig cells correlates with age.

Wang JY(1), Hsu MC(1), Tseng TH(1), Wu LS(1), Yang KT(1), Chiu CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Technology, College of Bio-Resources and
Agriculture, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Department of
Animal Science and Technology, College of Bio-Resources and Agriculture, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address:
chiuchihhsien@ntu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Kisspeptin, encoded by the Kiss1 gene, has many forms including
kisspeptin54, kisspeptin14, kisspeptin13, and kisspeptin10, and all these
peptides have the same affinity to their receptor KISS1R encoded by the Kiss1r
gene. The KISS1-KISS1R system was discovered in neurons, and many reports stress 
on their function in the brain. However, recent studies have shown that Kiss1 and
Kiss1r are expressed in the testes. The goal of this study was to demonstrate the
roles of Kiss1 and Kiss1r in testicular function, especially their steroidogenic 
activity.
METHODS: Kisspeptin10 and the kisspeptin10 antagonist peptide234 were used to
determine their effect on testosterone production. Moreover, expression of
steroidogenic genes in mouse testes and their gonadosomatic index (weight of the 
testes divided by the total body weight) and also serum testosterone level were
studied between the ages of 2 weeks and 15 weeks.
RESULTS: Kisspeptin10 and peptide234 did not affect testosterone production in
primary Leydig cells from adult mice. Kiss1 and Esr1 expression also increased
during puberty. The peak gonadosomatic index occurred at 4 weeks of age, and
serum testosterone levels plateaued after the age of 4 weeks.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that kisspeptin10 does not affect steroidogenesis
in adult Leydig cells, but its pattern of expression follows the stages of
testicular development. Future studies should determine if kisspeptin regulates
testicular development during puberty.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Taiwan.

PMID: 25732868  [PubMed - in process]


262. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Feb 13;14(1):1293-300. doi: 10.4238/2015.February.13.8.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene PvuII polymorphism and risk of fracture in
postmenopausal women: a meta-analysis.

Deng W(1), Han JC(1), Chen L(1), Qi WL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The Affiliated Hospital to Changchun University of
Chinese Medicine, Changchun, Jilin, China. (2)Department of Orthopaedics, The
Affiliated Hospital to Changchun University of Chinese Medicine, Changchun,
Jilin, China qiwangli1234@126.com.

Numerous studies have evaluated the association between estrogen receptor alpha
(ESR1) gene PvuII polymorphism and fracture risk in postmenopausal women.
However, the results have been inconsistent. We performed a meta-analysis to
examine the association between the ESR1 gene PvuII polymorphism and fracture
risk in postmenopausal women. Studies published from PubMed, Google Scholar, and 
China National Knowledge Infrastructure data were retrieved. Pooled odds ratios
with 95% confidence intervals were calculated using fixed- or random-effects
models. A total of 6 case-control studies containing 592 patients and 705
controls were included in this meta-analysis. We found no association between the
PvuII polymorphism in the ESR1 gene and fracture in postmenopausal women. Taking 
into account the effect of ethnicity, further stratified analyses were performed.
In the subgroup analysis, no significant association was found in Caucasians and 
in Asians. No publication bias was found in the present study (all P > 0.05). In 
conclusion, the ESR1 gene PvuII polymorphism may not be associated with fracture 
risk in postmenopausal women. Additional larger studies are needed to confirm
this conclusion.

PMID: 25730068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Cell. 2015 Mar 19;57(6):1047-58. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.025. Epub 2015
Feb 26.

Structure of a biologically active estrogen receptor-coactivator complex on DNA.

Yi P(1), Wang Z(2), Feng Q(3), Pintilie GD(2), Foulds CE(3), Lanz RB(3), Ludtke
SJ(2), Schmid MF(2), Chiu W(4), O'Malley BW(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Clayton Foundation for Research, Houston, TX 77056, USA. 
(2)National Center for Macromolecular Imaging, Verna and Marrs McLean Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; National Center for 
Macromolecular Imaging, Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic
address: wah@bcm.edu. (5)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: berto@bcm.edu.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2015 Mar 19;57(6):952-4.

Estrogen receptor (ER/ESR1) is a transcription factor critical for development,
reproduction, metabolism, and cancer. ER function hinges on its ability to
recruit primary and secondary coactivators, yet structural information on the
full-length receptor-coactivator complex to complement preexisting and sometimes 
controversial biochemical information is lacking. Here, we use cryoelectron
microscopy (cryo-EM) to determine the quaternary structure of an active complex
of DNA-bound ERa, steroid receptor coactivator 3 (SRC-3/NCOA3), and a secondary
coactivator (p300/EP300). Our structural model suggests the following assembly
mechanism for the complex: each of the two ligand-bound ERa monomers
independently recruits one SRC-3 protein via the transactivation domain of ERa;
the two SRC-3s in turn bind to different regions of one p300 protein through
multiple contacts. We also present structural evidence for the location of
activation function 1 (AF-1) in a full-length nuclear receptor, which supports a 
role for AF-1 in SRC-3 recruitment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4369429
PMID: 25728767  [PubMed - in process]


264. J Physiol Sci. 2015 May;65(3):253-63. doi: 10.1007/s12576-015-0363-x. Epub 2015
Feb 26.

Aging-induced changes in sex-steroidogenic enzymes and sex-steroid receptors in
the cortex, hypothalamus and cerebellum.

Munetomo A(1), Hojo Y, Higo S, Kato A, Yoshida K, Shirasawa T, Shimizu T, Barron 
A, Kimoto T, Kawato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences, Univ. Tokyo, Komaba 3-8-1, Meguro, Tokyo, 153, Japan.

We investigated age-induced changes in mRNA expression profiles of
sex-steroidogenic enzymes and sex-steroid receptors in 3-, 12-, and 24-month-old 
male rat brain subregions [cerebral cortex (CC), hypothalamus (Hy) and cerebellum
(CL)]. In many cases, the expression levels of mRNA decreased with age for
androgen synthesis enzyme systems, including Cyp17a1, Hsd17b and Srd5a in the CC 
and CL, but not in the Hy. Estradiol synthase Cyp19a1 did not show age-induced
decline in the Hy, and nearly no expression of Cyp19a1 was observed in the CC and
CL over 3-24 m. Androgen receptor Ar increased in the Hy but decreased in the CC 
with age. Estrogen receptor Esr1 increased in the CC and Hy, and did not change
in the CL with age. Esr2 did not change in the CC and Hy, but decreased in the CL
with age. As a comparison, age-induced changes of brain-derived neurotrophic
factor mRNA were also investigated.

PMID: 25715777  [PubMed - in process]


265. Endocrinology. 2015 May;156(5):1887-99. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1852. Epub 2015 Feb 
25.

Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1; ERa), not ESR2 (ERß), modulates estrogen-induced sex
reversal in the American alligator, a species with temperature-dependent sex
determination.

Kohno S(1), Bernhard MC, Katsu Y, Zhu J, Bryan TA, Doheny BM, Iguchi T, Guillette
LJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology (S.K., J.Z., T.A.B., L.J.G.), Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425; Marine
Biomedicine and Environmental Science Center (S.K., M.C.B., T.A.B., B.M.D.,
L.J.G.), Hollings Marine Laboratory, Charleston, South Carolina 29412; Graduate
Program in Marine Biology at the College of Charleston (M.C.B.), Charleston,
South Carolina 29412; Graduate School of Life Science and Department of
Biological Sciences (Y.K.), Hokkaido University, Sapporo, 060-0808 Japan;
Department of Biology (T.A.B.), University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
32611; Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience (T.I.), National Institute
for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, 444-8585
Japan; and Department of Basic Biology (T.I.), The Graduate University for
Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Okazaki, 444-8585 Japan.

All crocodilians and many turtles exhibit temperature-dependent sex determination
where the temperature of the incubated egg, during a thermo-sensitive period
(TSP), determines the sex of the offspring. Estrogens play a critical role in sex
determination in crocodilians and turtles, as it likely does in most nonmammalian
vertebrates. Indeed, administration of estrogens during the TSP induces male to
female sex reversal at a male-producing temperature (MPT). However, it is not
clear how estrogens override the influence of temperature during sex
determination in these species. Most vertebrates have 2 forms of nuclear estrogen
receptor (ESR): ESR1 (ERa) and ESR2 (ERß). However, there is no direct evidence
concerning which ESR is involved in sex determination, because a specific agonist
or antagonist for each ESR has not been tested in nonmammalian species. We
identified specific pharmaceutical agonists for each ESR using an in vitro
transactivation assay employing American alligator ESR1 and ESR2; these were
4,4',4''-(4-propyl-[1H]-pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl)trisphenol (PPT) and
7-bromo-2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-1,3-benzoxazol-5-ol (WAY 200070), respectively.
Alligator eggs were exposed to PPT or WAY 200070 at a MPT just before the TSP,
and their sex was examined at the last stage of embryonic development.
Estradiol-17ß and PPT, but not WAY 200070, induced sex reversal at a MPT.
PPT-exposed embryos exposed to the highest dose (5.0 µg/g egg weight) exhibited
enlargement and advanced differentiation of the Müllerian duct. These results
indicate that ESR1 is likely the principal ESR involved in sex reversal as well
as embryonic Müllerian duct survival and growth in American alligators.

PMID: 25714813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Aquat Toxicol. 2015 Apr;161:146-53. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2015.02.004. Epub 2015
Feb 11.

Mixture effects of levonorgestrel and ethinylestradiol: estrogenic biomarkers and
hormone receptor mRNA expression during sexual programming.

Säfholm M(1), Jansson E(2), Fick J(3), Berg C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Uppsala University, Department of Environmental Toxicology, Centre for
Reproductive Biology in Uppsala, Norbyvägen 18A, 752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.
Electronic address: moa.kvarnryd@ebc.uu.se. (2)Uppsala University, Department of 
Environmental Toxicology, Centre for Reproductive Biology in Uppsala, Norbyvägen 
18A, 752 36 Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address: erika.jansson@ebc.uu.se. (3)Umeå
University, Department of Chemistry, KBC 6A, Linnaeus väg 6, 901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
Electronic address: jerker.fick@umu.se. (4)Uppsala University, Department of
Environmental Toxicology, Centre for Reproductive Biology in Uppsala, Norbyvägen 
18A, 752 36 Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address: cecilia.berg@ebc.uu.se.

Synthetic progesterone (progestins) and estrogens are widely used
pharmaceuticals. Given that their simultaneous unintentional exposure occurs in
wildlife and also in human infants, data on mixture effects of combined exposures
to these hormones during development is needed. Using the Xenopus (Silurana)
tropicalis test system we investigated mixture effects of levonorgestrel (LNG)
and ethinylestradiol (EE2) on hormone sensitive endpoints. After larval exposure 
to LNG (0.1nM), or EE2 (0.1nM) singly, or in combination with LNG (0.01, 0.1,
1.0nM), the gonadal sex ratio was determined histologically and hepatic mRNA
levels of genes encoding vitellogenin (vtg beta1) and the estrogen (esr1, esr2), 
progesterone (ipgr) and androgen (ar) receptors were quantified using
quantitative PCR. All EE2-exposed groups showed female-biased sex ratios and
increased vtg beta1 mRNA levels compared with the controls. Compared with the
EE2-alone group (positive control) there were no significant alterations in vtg
beta1 levels or in sex ratios in the co-exposure groups. Exposure to LNG-alone
caused an increase in ar mRNA levels in females, but not in males, compared to
the controls and the co-exposed groups, indicating that co-exposure to EE2
counteracted the LNG-induced ar levels. No treatment related impacts on the mRNA 
expression of esr1, esr2, and ipgr in female tadpoles were found, suggesting that
these endpoints are insensitive to long-term exposure to estrogen or progestin.
Due to the EE2-induced female-biased sex ratios, the mRNA expression data for the
low number of males in the EE2-exposed groups were not statistically analyzed. In
conclusion, our results suggest that induced vtg expression is a robust biomarker
for estrogenic activity in exposure scenarios involving both estrogens and
progestins. Developmental exposure to LNG caused an induction of hepatic ar mRNA 
expression that was antagonized by combined exposure to EE2 and LNG. To our
knowledge this is the first study to report effects of combined exposures to EE2 
and LNG during the period of sexual programming.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25703176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Front Oncol. 2015 Feb 2;5:19. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00019. eCollection 2015.

Estrogen receptors and their implications in colorectal carcinogenesis.

Caiazza F(1), Ryan EJ(1), Doherty G(1), Winter DC(2), Sheahan K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Colorectal Disease, Saint Vincent's University Hospital , Dublin , 
Ireland ; School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College , Dublin ,
Ireland. (2)Centre for Colorectal Disease, Saint Vincent's University Hospital , 
Dublin , Ireland ; Department of Surgery, St. Vincent's University Hospital, Elm 
Park , Dublin , Ireland. (3)Centre for Colorectal Disease, Saint Vincent's
University Hospital , Dublin , Ireland ; School of Medicine and Medical Science, 
University College , Dublin , Ireland ; Department of Pathology, Saint Vincent's 
University Hospital , Dublin , Ireland.

Upon binding their cognate receptors, ERa (ESR1) and ERß (ESR2), estrogens
activate intracellular signaling cascades that have important consequences for
cellular behavior. Historically linked to carcinogenesis in reproductive organs, 
estrogens have also been implicated in the pathogenesis of different cancer types
of non-reproductive tissues including the colon. ERß is the predominant estrogen 
receptor expressed in both normal and malignant colonic epithelium. However,
during colon cancer progression, ERß expression is lost, suggesting that estrogen
signaling may play a role in disease progression. Estrogens may in fact exert an 
anti-tumor effect through selective activation of pro-apoptotic signaling
mediated by ERß, inhibition of inflammatory signals and modulation of the tumor
microenvironment. In this review, we analyze the estrogen pathway as a possible
therapeutic avenue in colorectal cancer, we report the most recent experimental
evidence to explain the cellular and molecular mechanisms of estrogen-mediated
protection against colorectal tumorigenesis, and we discuss future challenges and
potential avenues for targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC4313613
PMID: 25699240  [PubMed]


268. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2015 Jul;67(7):990-6. doi: 10.1111/jphp.12386. Epub 2015 Feb
14.

Alpinumisoflavone and abyssinone V 4'-methylether derived from Erythrina
lysistemon (Fabaceae) promote HDL-cholesterol synthesis and prevent cholesterol
gallstone formation in ovariectomized rats.

Mvondo MA(1), Njamen D(2), Kretzschmar G(3), Imma Bader M(3), Tanee Fomum S(4),
Wandji J(4), Vollmer G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Dschang,
Dschang, Cameroon. (2)Department of Animal Biology and Physiology, Faculty of
Science, University of Yaounde I, Yaounde, Cameroon. (3)Molecular Cell Physiology
and Endocrinology, Institute of Zoology, University of Technology, Dresden,
Germany. (4)Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of
Yaounde I, Yaounde, Cameroon.

OBJECTIVES: Erythrina lysistemon was found to improve lipid profile in
ovariectomized rats. Alpinumisoflavone (AIF) and abyssinone V 4'-methylether
(AME) derived from this plant induced analogous effects on lipid profile and
decreased atherogenic risks. To highlight the molecular mechanism of action of
these natural products, we evaluated their effects on the expression of some
estrogen-sensitive genes associated with cholesterol synthesis (Esr1 and Apoa1)
and cholesterol clearance (Ldlr, Scarb1 and Cyp7a1).
METHODS: Ovariectomized rats were subcutaneously treated for three consecutive
days with either compound at the daily dose of 0.1, 1 and 10<U+2009>mg/kg body weight
(BW). Animals were sacrificed thereafter and their liver was collected. The mRNA 
of genes of interest was analysed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction.
KEY FINDINGS: Both compounds downregulated the mRNA expression of Esr1, a gene
associated with cholesterogenesis and cholesterol gallstone formation. AME leaned
the Apoa1/Scarb1 balance in favour of Apoa1, an effect promoting high-density
lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol formation. It also upregulated the mRNA expression 
of Ldlr at 1<U+2009>mg/kg/BW per day (25%) and 10<U+2009>mg/kg/BW per day (133.17%), an effect 
favouring the clearance of low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol. Both
compounds may also promote the conversion of cholesterol into bile acids as they 
upregulated Cyp7a1 mRNA expression.
CONCLUSION: AIF and AME atheroprotective effects may result from their ability to
upregulate mechanisms promoting HDL-cholesterol and bile acid formation.

© 2015 Royal Pharmaceutical Society.

PMID: 25683903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Tumour Biol. 2015 Jul;36(7):5571-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3227-3. Epub 2015 Feb
14.

Crucial microRNAs and genes of human primary breast cancer explored by
microRNA-mRNA integrated analysis.

Yang Y(1), Xing Y, Liang C, Hu L, Xu F, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan,
430060, China.

This study aimed to screen potential microRNAs (miRNAs) and genes related to
human primary breast cancer. The gene and miRNA expression profile data of
GSE19783 was obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus. The matched messenger RNA
(mRNA) and miRNA expression profiles of 100 human primary breast cancer samples
were chosen for further analysis. The miRNA-gene regulatory modules were screened
via iterative multiplicative updating algorithm. The potential functions of genes
in modules were predicted by functional and pathway enrichment analysis;
meanwhile, the potential functions of miRNAs were predicted by functional
enrichment analysis. Furthermore, miRNA-miRNA functional synergistic network and 
miRNA-miRNA co-regulatory network were constructed. Totally, 16 miRNA-gene
modules were screened, containing 222 miRNA-gene interactions. The genes in these
modules were mainly related to breast cancer. Genes in module 6 (e.g., SFRP1)
were enriched in cell junction assembly; genes in module 8 and 12 (e.g., ESR1 and
ERBB4) were significantly implicated in mammary gland alveolus and lobule
development. Meanwhile, genes in module 12 (e.g., ERBB4) were enriched in the
pathway of endocytosis. Besides, several miRNAs (e.g., miR-375) were enriched in 
inflammatory cell apoptotic process; some other miRNAs (e.g., miR-139-5p and
miR-9) were enriched in response to vitamin D. Additionally, miR-139-5p with
several other miRNAs (e.g., miR-9) co-regulated SFRP1; miR-375, miR-592, and
miR-135a co-regulated ESR1 and ERBB4. Some miRNAs (e.g., miR-139-5p and miR-9)
and their target gene SFRP1, as well as several other miRNAs (e.g., miR-375,
miR-592, and miR-135a) and their target genes (e.g., ESR1 and ERBB4), might be
crucial in the pathogenesis of primary breast cancer.

PMID: 25680412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2015 Mar;186:91-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2014.12.016. Epub 2015 Jan 14.

Predicting of disease genes for gestational diabetes mellitus based on network
and functional consistency.

Zhang Q(1), He M(1), Wang J(1), Liu S(1), Cheng H(1), Cheng Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital of Fudan
University, Shanghai 200090, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female
Reproductive Endocrine Related Diseases, Shanghai 200090, China. (2)Department of
Obstetrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
200090, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine Related
Diseases, Shanghai 200090, China. Electronic address: hdcheng_2003@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is a world-widely prevalent
disease with adverse outcomes. This study aims to identify its disease genes
through bioinformatics analysis.
STUDY DESIGN: The raw gene expression profiling (ID: GSE19649) was downloaded
from Gene Expression Omnibus database, including 3 GDM and 2 healthy control
specimens. Then limma package in R was utilized to identify differentially
expressed genes (DEGs, criteria: p value <0.05 and |log2 FC|>1). Simultaneously, 
known disease genes of GDM were downloaded from Online Mendelian Inheritance in
Man database. Then, DEGs and known disease genes were uploaded to STRING to
investigate their protein-protein interactions (PPIs). Gene pairs with confidence
score >0.8 were utilized to construct PPI network. Furthermore, pathway and
functional enrichment analyses were performed through KOBAS (criterion: p value
<0.05) and DAVID (The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated
Discovery) software (criterion: false discovery rate <0.05), respectively.
RESULTS: A total of 404 DEGs were identified, including 273 up-regulated and 131 
down-regulated DEGs. Moreover, 68 known disease genes of GDM were obtained. Then,
190 gene pairs were identified to significantly interact with each other. After
deleting PPIs between DEGs, PPI network was constructed, consisting of 115 gene
pairs. Furthermore, genes in PPI network were significantly enriched in 10
functions and 8 pathways.
CONCLUSION: Based on PPI network and functional consistency, 6 candidate genes of
GDM were considered to be candidate disease genes of GDM, including CYP1A1, LEPR,
ESR1, GYS2, AGRP, and CACNA1G. However, further studies are required to validate 
these results.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25666344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Metabolism. 2015 May;64(5):611-7. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2015.01.006. Epub 2015
Jan 22.

Associations of estrogen receptor alpha and Beta gene polymorphisms with lipid
levels and insulin resistance in men.

Efstathiadou ZA(1), Sakka C(2), Polyzos SA(3), Goutou M(2), Stakias N(2),
Bargiota A(2), Koukoulis GN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Clinic, "Hippokration" General Hospital of Thessaloniki,
Thessaloniki, Greece. Electronic address: zefsta@endo.gr. (2)Department of
Endocrinology, University of Thessaly School of Medicine, Larissa, Greece.
(3)Endocrine Clinic, "Hippokration" General Hospital of Thessaloniki,
Thessaloniki, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: The association of four single nucleotide polymorphisms in estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) genes with lipid levels and insulin
resistance in men.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Lipids, glucose, insulin and HOMA-IR were determined, in a
population-based, cross-sectional, cohort of 170 apparently healthy middle-aged
Greek men, along with body mass index (BMI), waist circumference (WC) and
percentage of body fat content (%fat). Genotyping of ESR1 for PvuII and XbaI and 
ESR2 for RsaI and AluI polymorphisms was performed.
RESULTS: Associations of AluI with LDL-Chol (mean ± SD, aa 4.3 ± 1.1 vs. Aa 3.7 ±
1.0 and <U+0391><U+0391> 4.2 ± 1.1, p = 0.023) and RsaI with HOMA-IR [median (IQR), RR 1.55
(0.88-2.49) vs. Rr/rr 1.69 (0.72-2.29), p = 0.032] were found. Synergistic
effects of RsaI and AluI of ESR2 gene on LDL-Chol levels, %fat and WC, as well as
a synergistic effect of both ESR1 and ESR2 genes on levels of TChol (p = 0.01)
and LDL-Chol (p = 0.027) were also shown. These findings remained significant
after adjustment for potential confounders. Significant independent associations 
of PvuII with %fat (mean ± SD, pp 24.6 ± 5.3 vs Pp 22.4 ± 5.2 and PP 21.2 ± 6.7, 
p = 0.044), and RsaI with %fat (RR 22.6 ± 5.5 vs. Rr/rr 25.2 ± 6.3, p = 0.015)
and WC (mean ± SD, RR 97.4 ± 10.4 vs. Rr/rr 102.6 ± 12.6, p = 0.013) were found. 
Synergistic effects on %fat, between the ESR1 polymorphisms (p = 0.004), between 
the ESR2 polymorphisms and among all four ESR polymorphisms studied were also
present.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR2 is associated with LDL-Chol levels and HOMA-IR in men
independently of confounders. Body fat is affected by both genes. Furthermore, a 
synergistic effect of ESR1 and ESR2 on TChol, LDL-Chol and %fat, was shown.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25665486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Dec 15;7(12):5772-7. eCollection 2014.

Polymorphisms in the gene encoding estrogen receptor alpha are associated with
osteoarthritis in Han Chinese women.

Liu W(1), Shao FM(1), Yan L(1), Cao HX(1), Qiu D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Henan Provincial People's Hospital, People's
Hospital of Zhengzhou University Zhengzhou 450003, Henan Province, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Henan Medical College Zhengzhou 451191,
Henan Province, P. R. China.

Polymorphisms in the Xba I and Pvu II restriction enzyme recognition sites in the
estrogen receptor-alpha gene (ESR1) have been associated with multiple diseases, 
including osteoarthritis. To determine whether such polymorphisms are associated 
with osteoarthritis in a Han Chinese population, 98 women with osteoarthritis and
196 healthy women were genotyped by PCR-RFLP of ESR1 with Xba I and Pvu II.
Absence of a restriction polymorphism is indicated as an X or P allele; presence 
of the restriction polymorphism is indicated as an x or p allele. Clinical
information was collected on each participant, including body weight, body mass
index (BMI), knee radiograms, and bone mineral density (BMD). Body weight and BMI
were higher for each Xba I genotype (all P < 0.05) in individuals with
osteoarthritis compared to controls (p < 0.05). Femoral BMD was also
significantly higher in the osteoarthritis group (p < 0.05). Additionally, the xx
genotype for ESR1 was a significant risk factor for osteoarthritis (OR=1.98, 95% 
CI: 1.13~4.20, p=0.036). Thus, consistent with findings in other populations, the
estrogen receptor genotype xx appears to be associated with susceptibility to
osteoarthritis among Han Chinese women.

PMCID: PMC4307552
PMID: 25664105  [PubMed]


273. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Feb;149(3):693-703. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3281-y.
Epub 2015 Feb 8.

DC-SCRIPT is a novel regulator of the tumor suppressor gene CDKN2B and induces
cell cycle arrest in ERa-positive breast cancer cells.

Ansems M(1), Søndergaard JN, Sieuwerts AM, Looman MW, Smid M, de Graaf AM, de
Weerd V, Zuidscherwoude M, Foekens JA, Martens JW, Adema GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Immunology, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Medical Center, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands,
Marleen.Ansems@radboudumc.nl.

Breast cancer is one of the most common causes of cancer-related deaths in women.
The estrogen receptor (ERa) is well known for having growth promoting effects in 
breast cancer. Recently, we have identified DC-SCRIPT (ZNF366) as a co-suppressor
of ERa and as a strong and independent prognostic marker in ESR1 (ERa
gene)-positive breast cancer patients. In this study, we further investigated the
molecular mechanism on how DC-SCRIPT inhibits breast cancer cell growth.
DC-SCRIPT mRNA levels from 190 primary ESR1-positive breast tumors were related
to global gene expression, followed by gene ontology and pathway analysis. The
effect of DC-SCRIPT on breast cancer cell growth and cell cycle arrest was
investigated using novel DC-SCRIPT-inducible MCF7 breast cancer cell lines.
Genome-wide expression profiling of DC-SCRIPT-expressing MCF7 cells was performed
to investigate the effect of DC-SCRIPT on cell cycle-related gene expression.
Findings were validated by real-time PCR in a cohort of 1,132 ESR1-positive
breast cancer patients. In the primary ESR1-positive breast tumors, DC-SCRIPT
expression negatively correlated with several cell cycle gene ontologies and
pathways. DC-SCRIPT expression strongly reduced breast cancer cell growth in
vitro, breast tumor growth in vivo, and induced cell cycle arrest. In addition,
in the presence of DC-SCRIPT, multiple cell cycles related genes were
differentially expressed including the tumor suppressor gene CDKN2B. Moreover, in
1,132 primary ESR1-positive breast tumors, DC-SCRIPT expression also correlated
with CDKN2B expression. Collectively, these data show that DC-SCRIPT acts as a
novel regulator of CDKN2B and induces cell cycle arrest in ESR1-positive breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4326655
PMID: 25663546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Development. 2015 Mar 1;142(5):893-904. doi: 10.1242/dev.110403. Epub 2015 Feb 5.

The WNT-controlled transcriptional regulator LBH is required for mammary stem
cell expansion and maintenance of the basal lineage.

Lindley LE(1), Curtis KM(2), Sanchez-Mejias A(3), Rieger ME(1), Robbins DJ(3),
Briegel KJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Braman Family Breast Cancer 
Institute, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine and Bruce W.
Carter Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Miami, FL 33136, USA. (3)Department of
Surgery, Molecular Therapeutics Program, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Braman Family Breast Cancer 
Institute, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA kbriegel@med.miami.edu.

The identification of multipotent mammary stem cells (MaSCs) has provided an
explanation for the unique regenerative capacity of the mammary gland throughout 
adult life. However, it remains unclear what genes maintain MaSCs and control
their specification into the two epithelial lineages: luminal and basal. LBH is a
novel transcription co-factor in the WNT pathway with hitherto unknown
physiological function. LBH is expressed during mammary gland development and
aberrantly overexpressed in aggressive 'basal' subtype breast cancers. Here, we
have explored the in vivo role of LBH in mammopoiesis. We show that in postnatal 
mammary epithelia, LBH is predominantly expressed in the Lin(-)CD29(high)CD24(+) 
basal MaSC population. Upon conditional inactivation of LBH, mice exhibit
pronounced delays in mammary tissue expansion during puberty and pregnancy,
accompanied by increased luminal differentiation at the expense of basal lineage 
specification. These defects could be traced to a severe reduction in the
frequency and self-renewal/differentiation potential of basal MaSCs.
Mechanistically, LBH induces expression of key epithelial stem cell transcription
factor <U+0394>Np63 to promote a basal MaSC state and repress luminal differentiation
genes, mainly that encoding estrogen receptor a (Esr1/ERa). Collectively, these
studies identify LBH as an essential regulator of basal MaSC
expansion/maintenance, raising important implications for its potential role in
breast cancer pathogenesis.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4352974
PMID: 25655704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Biol Reprod. 2015 Mar;92(3):78. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.125724. Epub 2015 Feb
4.

Neonatal uterine and vaginal cell proliferation and adenogenesis are independent 
of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) in the mouse.

Nanjappa MK(1), Medrano TI(1), March AG(1), Cooke PS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida. (2)Department of Physiological
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida paulscooke@ufl.edu.

Neonatal uterus and vagina express estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and respond
mitogenically to exogenous estrogens. However, neonatal ovariectomy does not
inhibit preweaning uterine cell proliferation, indicating that this process is
estrogen independent. Extensive literature suggests that ESR1 can be activated by
growth factors in a ligand-independent manner and drive uterine cell
proliferation. Alternatively, neonatal uterine cell proliferation could be ESR1
independent despite its obligatory role in adult luminal epithelial
proliferation. To determine ESR1's role in uterine and vaginal development, we
analyzed cell proliferation, apoptosis, and uterine gland development
(adenogenesis) in wild-type (WT) and Esr1 knockout (Esr1KO) mice from Postnatal
Day 2 to Postnatal Day 60. Uterine and vaginal cell proliferation, apoptosis, and
uterine adenogenesis were comparable in WT and Esr1KO mice before weaning. By
Days 29-60, glands had regressed, and uterine cell proliferation was reduced in
Esr1KO mice in contrast to continued adenogenesis and proliferation in WT.
Apoptosis in Esr1KO uterine epithelium was not increased compared to WT at any
age, indicating that differences in cell proliferation, rather than apoptosis,
cause divergence of uterine size in these two groups at puberty. Similarly,
vaginal epithelial proliferation was reduced, and the epithelium became atrophic 
in Esr1KO mice by 29 days of age and later in Esr1KO mice. These results indicate
that preweaning uterine and vaginal development is ESR1 independent but becomes
dependent on ESR1 by Day 29 on. It is not yet clear what mechanisms drive
preweaning vaginal and uterine development, but ligand-independent activation of 
ESR1 is not involved.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25653281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. FASEB J. 2015 May;29(5):2022-31. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-265637. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

A kinetic model identifies phosphorylated estrogen receptor-a (ERa) as a critical
regulator of ERa dynamics in breast cancer.

Tian D(1), Solodin NM(1), Rajbhandari P(1), Bjorklund K(1), Alarid ET(1), Kreeger
PK(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA; Department of Oncology, University of Wisconsin School
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA; and University of
Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. (2)*Department of
Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA;
Department of Oncology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA; and University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer
Center, Madison, Wisconsin, USA kreeger@wisc.edu.

Receptor levels are a key mechanism by which cells regulate their response to
stimuli. The levels of estrogen receptor-a (ERa) impact breast cancer cell
proliferation and are used to predict prognosis and sensitivity to endocrine
therapy. Despite the clinical application of this information, it remains unclear
how different cellular processes interact as a system to control ERa levels. To
address this question, experimental results from the ERa-positive human breast
cancer cell line (MCF-7) treated with 17-ß-estradiol or vehicle control were used
to develop a mass-action kinetic model of ERa regulation. Model analysis
determined that RNA dynamics could be captured through phosphorylated ERa
(pERa)-dependent feedback on transcription. Experimental analysis confirmed that 
pERa-S118 binds to the estrogen receptor-1 (ESR1) promoter, suggesting that pERa 
can feedback on ESR1 transcription. Protein dynamics required a separate
mechanism in which the degradation rate for pERa was 8.3-fold higher than
nonphosphorylated ERa. Using a model with both mechanisms, the root mean square
error was 0.078. Sensitivity analysis of this combined model determined that
while multiple mechanisms regulate ERa levels, pERa-dependent feedback elicited
the strongest effect. Combined, our computational and experimental results
identify phosphorylation of ERa as a critical decision point that coordinates the
cellular circuitry to regulate ERa levels.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4415015 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25648997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Acta Med Indones. 2014 Oct;46(4):333-8.

Estrogen and body weight regulation in women: the role of estrogen receptor alpha
(ER-a) on adipocyte lipolysis.

Luglio HF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Nutrition, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta,
Indonesia.

Estrogen has an important role in regulation of fat metabolism. Recent studies
indicated that this process occurred due to inhibition of lipolysis by external
estrogen administration. However, there was limited information regarding
molecular process responsible for this phenomenon. This paper was aimed to
present a brief update on recent studies explaining the effect of estrogen on
adipose tissue lipolysis and the molecular pathway involved in this process. It
is suggested that the effect of estrogen to reduction of lipolysis was through
activation of estrogen receptor alpha (ER-a) in adipose tissue. This finding is
supported by the fact that mice lacking of ESR1 gene (encodes ER-a) accumulate
more fat and ESR1 mRNA in human adipose tissue was inversely correlated with body
mass index (BMI). Future study should be aimed to clarify the role of ER-a on
lipolysis in adipose tissue during weight loss intervention. Additionally, new
pharmacological or nutritional treatment with ability to modulate ER-a
activity/expression could be used as a potential weight loss intervention.

PMID: 25633552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Apr;35(4):973-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2081. Epub 2015 Jan
27.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing predicts p300 binding sites in the MCF7 
human breast cancer cell line.

Wang X(1), Li S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine and Tumor Research, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400016, P.R. China.

The aim of the present study was to identify the distribution characters of p300 
binding sites in estradiol (E2) stimulated MCF7 cell lines and controls, and to
study the roles of transcriptional coactivator p300 in the tumorigenesis and
progression of various human cancers following E2 stimulation. The chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing data of GSES9623 was downloaded from
the Gene Expression Omnibus database, including breast cancer data of GSM986085
and control data of GSM986087. MACS peak-calling software was employed to
identify the p300-bound sites in the two groups. The differential target genes of
p300-bound sites were further analyzed and the concordant factors were predicted.
The Gene Ontology (GO) was used to conduct functional enrichment analysis. There 
were 32,249 p300 binding sites identified in the E2 stimulation group and 43,156 
in the control group. GO enrichment analysis of the target genes showed that
p300-regulated target genes mainly participated in the neural cell
differentiation-associated biology process; while in the E2 stimulation group,
partial functions of the target genes had changed. A total of 24,899 differential
p300-bound sites of the two groups were identified and GO enrichment analysis
demonstrated that E2 stimulation changed p300 binding sites, but did not
influence the regulatory function of p300. The effect of E2 in the MCF7 cells
suggested that E2 affected the binding affinity of DNA and transcription factors 
in a large scale. By analyzing the concordant factors, several important factors 
were discovered, such as BRCA1 and ESR1. Overall, the results of the present
study suggested an association between p300 and carcinogenic genes. This may
provide theoretical guidance for cancer therapy.

PMID: 25625638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Gene. 2015 Apr 10;560(1):44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.01.037. Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms are associated
to metabolic and proinflammatory factors in polycystic ovary syndrome.

Silva FS(1), Sóter MO(1), Sales MF(2), Candido AL(3), Reis FM(3), Silva IF(1),
Sousa MO(1), Ferreira CN(4), Gomes KB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte,
Minas Gerais, Brazil. (2)Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal
de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil. (3)Faculdade de Medicina, 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Colégio Técnico, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas
Gerais, Brazil. (5)Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais,
Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil; Instituto de Ciências Biológicas,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
Electronic address: karinabgb@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex endocrine disorder that
involves multiple factors. Although the etiology of PCOS is unknown, there is an 
involvement of sex steroid hormones in the pathophysiology of this syndrome.
Therefore, polymorphisms in genes involved in the action of estrogen may
contribute to a woman's susceptibility to PCOS.
AIM: This study aimed to evaluate the association between the polymorphisms PvuII
and XbaI in the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene and the occurrence of PCOS.
The study also aimed to assess the influence of these polymorphisms on the
metabolic and inflammatory profiles of women with PCOS.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This case-control study included 99 women with PCOS,
diagnosed according to the Rotterdam criteria, and 104 age-matched healthy women.
The polymorphisms were evaluated using polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism.
RESULTS: No association between the ESR1 gene polymorphisms and the presence of
PCOS was observed. However, we found associations between the PvuII polymorphism 
and C-reactive protein levels, testosterone levels, family history of diabetes,
and waist circumference. The XbaI polymorphism was associated with fasting
glucose and a family history of hypertension.
CONCLUSION: These polymorphisms are not associated with PCOS development, but
they are involved in the phenotype of complications of the syndrome. Therefore,
prior knowledge of these genomic variants might contribute to taking preventive
measures that could delay the metabolic and reproductive complications commonly
seen in women with PCOS.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25617525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Mar 15;21(6):1340-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1178.
Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Pharmacodynamic imaging guides dosing of a selective estrogen receptor degrader.

Heidari P(1), Deng F(2), Esfahani SA(1), Leece AK(1), Shoup TM(3), Vasdev N(3),
Mahmood U(4).

Author information: 
(1)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Athinoula A. Martinos
Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri. (3)Division of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging,
Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. umahmood@mgh.harvard.edu.

PURPOSE: Estrogen receptor (ER) targeting is key in management of
receptor-positive breast cancer. Currently, there are no methods to optimize
anti-ER therapy dosing. This study assesses the use of 16a-(18)F-fluoroestradiol 
((18)F-FES) PET for fulvestrant dose optimization in a preclinical ER(+) breast
cancer model.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In vitro, (18)F-FES retention was compared with ERa protein 
expression (ELISA) and ESR1 mRNA transcription (qPCR) in MCF7 cells (ER(+)) after
treatment with different fulvestrant doses. MCF7 xenografts were grown in
ovariectomized nude mice and assigned to vehicle, low- (0.05 mg), medium- (0.5
mg), or high-dose (5 mg) fulvestrant treatment groups (5-7 per group). Two and 3 
days after fulvestrant treatment, PET/CT was performed using (18)F-FES and
(18)F-FDG, respectively. ER expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry,
ELISA, and qPCR on xenografts. Tumor proliferation was assessed using Ki67
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In vitro, we observed a parallel graded reduction in (18)F-FES uptake
and ER expression with increased fulvestrant doses, despite enhancement of ER
mRNA transcription. In xenografts, ER expression significantly decreased with
increased fulvestrant dose, despite similar mRNA expression and Ki67 staining
among the treatment groups. We observed a significant dose-dependent reduction of
(18)F-FES PET mean standardized uptake value (SUV(mean)) with fulvestrant
treatment but no significant difference among the treatment groups in (18)F-FDG
PET SUV(mean).
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that (18)F-FES uptake mirrors the dose-dependent
changes in functional ER expression with fulvestrant resulting in ER degradation 
and/or blockade; these precede changes in tumor metabolism and proliferation.
Quantitative (18)F-FES PET may be useful for tracking early efficacy of ER
blockade/degradation and guiding ER-targeted therapy dosing in patients with
breast cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4359957
PMID: 25609068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Breast Cancer Res. 2014;16(5):460.

New concepts in breast cancer genomics and genetics.

Goncalves R(1), Warner WA, Luo J, Ellis MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Department of Medical Oncology, Washington University
School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Ave, St Louis 63110, MO, USA; Siteman Cancer
Center, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Ave, St Louis
63110, MO, USA; Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
One Baylor Plaza, 320A Cullen MS600, Houston 77030, TX, USA.

Massively parallel DNA and RNA sequencing approaches have generated data on
thousands of breast cancer genomes. In this review, we consider progress largely 
from the perspective of new concepts and hypotheses raised so far. These include 
challenges to the multistep model of breast carcinogenesis and the discovery of
new defects in DNA repair through sequence analysis. Issues for functional
genomics include the development of strategies to differentiate between mutations
that are likely to drive carcinogenesis and bystander background mutations, as
well as the importance of mechanistic studies that examine the role of mutations 
in genes with roles in splicing, histone methylation, and long non-coding RNA
function. The application of genome-annotated patient-derived breast cancer
xenografts as a potentially more reliable preclinical model is also discussed.
Finally, we address the challenge of extracting medical value from genomic data. 
A weakness of many datasets is inadequate clinical annotation, which hampers the 
establishment of links between the mutation spectra and the efficacy of drugs or 
disease phenotypes. Tools such as dGene and the DGIdb are being developed to
identify possible druggable mutations, but these programs are a work in progress 
since extensive molecular pharmacology is required to develop successful
genome-forward clinical trials. Examples are emerging, however, including
targeting HER2 in HER2 mutant breast cancer and mutant ESR1 in ESR1 endocrine
refractory luminal-type breast cancer. Finally, the integration of DNA- and
RNA-based sequencing studies with mass spectrometry-based peptide sequencing and 
an unbiased determination of post-translational modifications promises a more
complete view of the biochemistry of breast cancer cells and points toward a new 
discovery horizon in our understanding of the pathophysiology of this complex
disease.

PMCID: PMC4384360
PMID: 25606588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2015 Jun 3;59:31-9. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2015.01.006. Epub 2015 Jan 15.

Associations between DNA methylation and schizophrenia-related intermediate
phenotypes - a gene set enrichment analysis.

Hass J(1), Walton E(1), Wright C(2), Beyer A(3), Scholz M(4), Turner J(5), Liu
J(6), Smolka MN(7), Roessner V(1), Sponheim SR(8), Gollub RL(9), Calhoun VD(6),
Ehrlich S(10).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Developmental Neuroscience Section, Department of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Health Sciences Center, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM, USA; The Mind Research Network, Albuquerque, NM USA. (3)Cellular
Networks and Systems Biology, Biotechnology Center, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany;
University of Cologne, CECAD, Cologne, Germany. (4)Institute for Medical
Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology (IMISE), University of Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany; LIFE (Leipzig Interdisciplinary Research Cluster of Genetic Factors,
Phenotypes and Environment), University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (5)The Mind
Research Network, Albuquerque, NM USA; Psychology Department, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA. (6)The Mind Research Network, Albuquerque, NM USA; 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM USA. (7)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, TU
Dresden, Dresden, Germany. (8)Minneapolis VA Health Care System, Department of
Psychiatry, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN USA. (9)Department of
Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA USA; MGH/MIT/HMS Martinos 
Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA
USA. (10)Translational Developmental Neuroscience Section, Department of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany;
Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA USA;
MGH/MIT/HMS Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Charlestown, MA USA. Electronic address:
transden.lab@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

Multiple genetic approaches have identified microRNAs as key effectors in
psychiatric disorders as they post-transcriptionally regulate expression of
thousands of target genes. However, their role in specific psychiatric diseases
remains poorly understood. In addition, epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA
methylation, which affect the expression of both microRNAs and coding genes, are 
critical for our understanding of molecular mechanisms in schizophrenia. Using
clinical, imaging, genetic, and epigenetic data of 103 patients with
schizophrenia and 111 healthy controls of the Mind Clinical Imaging Consortium
(MCIC) study of schizophrenia, we conducted gene set enrichment analysis to
identify markers for schizophrenia-associated intermediate phenotypes. Genes were
ranked based on the correlation between DNA methylation patterns and each
phenotype, and then searched for enrichment in 221 predicted microRNA target gene
sets. We found the predicted hsa-miR-219a-5p target gene set to be significantly 
enriched for genes (EPHA4, PKNOX1, ESR1, among others) whose methylation status
is correlated with hippocampal volume independent of disease status. Our results 
were strengthened by significant associations between hsa-miR-219a-5p target gene
methylation patterns and hippocampus-related neuropsychological variables. IPA
pathway analysis of the respective predicted hsa-miR-219a-5p target genes
revealed associated network functions in behavior and developmental disorders.
Altered methylation patterns of predicted hsa-miR-219a-5p target genes are
associated with a structural aberration of the brain that has been proposed as a 
possible biomarker for schizophrenia. The (dys)regulation of microRNA target
genes by epigenetic mechanisms may confer additional risk for developing
psychiatric symptoms. Further study is needed to understand possible interactions
between microRNAs and epigenetic changes and their impact on risk for brain-based
disorders such as schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4346504 [Available on 2016-06-03]
PMID: 25598502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Apr 1;21(7):1764-71. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-3474.
Epub 2015 Jan 14.

Cross-species antibody microarray interrogation identifies a 3-protein panel of
plasma biomarkers for early diagnosis of pancreas cancer.

Mirus JE(1), Zhang Y(2), Li CI(2), Lokshin AE(3), Prentice RL(2), Hingorani
SR(4), Lampe PD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Program, Public Health Sciences Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington. Human Biology Division,
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington. (2)Translational
Research Program, Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, Washington. (3)University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (4)Translational
Research Program, Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, Washington. Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington. Division of Medical Oncology,
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington. srh@fhcrc.org
plampe@fhcrc.org. (5)Translational Research Program, Public Health Sciences
Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington. Human
Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington.
srh@fhcrc.org plampe@fhcrc.org.

PURPOSE: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related death in the United States, and its incidence is on the rise.
Advanced disease is nearly uniformly lethal, emphasizing the need to identify PDA
at its earliest stages. To discover early biomarkers of PDA, we evaluated the
circulating proteome in murine preinvasive and invasive plasma samples and human 
prediagnostic and diagnostic samples.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using a customized antibody microarray platform containing
>4,000 features, we interrogated plasma samples spanning preinvasive and invasive
disease from a highly faithful mouse model of PDA. In parallel, we mined
prediagnostic plasma from women in the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) who would 
later succumb to PDA together with matched, cancer-free control samples. Samples 
collected after an establishing diagnosis of PDA were also interrogated to
further validate markers.
RESULTS: We identified ERBB2 and TNC in our cross-species analyses, and multiple 
antibodies identified ESR1 in prediagnostic plasma from people that succumb to
PDA. This 3-marker panel had an AUC of 0.86 (95% confidence interval [CI],
0.76-0.96) for the diagnostic cohort that increased to 0.97 (95% CI, 0.92-1.0)
with CA19-9 included. The 3-marker panel also had an AUC of 0.68 (95% CI,
0.58-0.77) for the prediagnostic cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified potential disease detection markers in plasma up to 4 
years before death from PDA with superior performance to CA19-9. These markers
might be especially useful in high-risk cohorts to diagnose early, resectable
disease, particularly in patients that do not produce CA19-9.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4391639
PMID: 25589628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Toxicology. 2015 Mar 2;329:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2015.01.002. Epub 2015 Jan 6.

Adult exposure to bisphenol A (BPA) in Wistar rats reduces sperm quality with
disruption of the hypothalamic-pituitary-testicular axis.

Wisniewski P(1), Romano RM(1), Kizys MM(2), Oliveira KC(2), Kasamatsu T(2),
Giannocco G(2), Chiamolera MI(2), Dias-da-Silva MR(2), Romano MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Toxicology, Department of Pharmacy, State
University of Centro-Oeste, Parana, Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Molecular and
Translational Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Escola Paulista de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo (Unifesp/EPM), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Reproductive Toxicology, Department of Pharmacy, State
University of Centro-Oeste, Parana, Brazil. Electronic address:
maromano17@gmail.com.

Reproductive physiology involves complex biological processes that can be
disrupted by exposure to environmental contaminants. The effects of bisphenol A
(BPA) on spermatogenesis and sperm quality is still unclear. The objective of
this study was to investigate the reproductive toxicity of BPA at dosages
considered to be safe (5 or 25mg BPA/kg/day). We assessed multiple sperm
parameters, the relative expression of genes involved in the central regulation
of the hypothalamic-pituitary-testicular axis, and the serum concentrations of
testosterone, estradiol, LH and FSH. BPA exposure reduced sperm production,
reserves and transit time. Significant damage to the acrosomes and the plasma
membrane with reduced mitochondrial activity and increased levels of defective
spermatozoa may have compromised sperm function and caused faster movement
through the epididymis. BPA exposure reduced the serum concentrations of
testosterone, LH and FSH and increased the concentration of estradiol. The
relative gene expression revealed an increase in gonadotropin releasing hormone
receptor (Gnrhr), luteinizing hormone beta (Lhb), follicle stimulating hormone
beta (Fshb), estrogen receptor beta (Esr2) and androgen receptor (Ar) transcripts
in the pituitary and a reduction in estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1) transcripts in
the hypothalamus. In this study, we demonstrated for the first time that adult
male exposure to BPA caused a reduction in sperm production and specific
functional parameters. The corresponding pattern of gene expression is indicative
of an attempt by the pituitary to reestablish normal levels of LH, FSH and
testosterone serum concentrations. In conclusion, these data suggest that at
dosages previously considered nontoxic to reproductive function, BPA compromises 
the spermatozoa and disrupts the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, causing a
state of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25575453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2014;2014:2464-7. doi:
10.1109/EMBC.2014.6944121.

Effects of genetic variation on the dynamics of neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's 
disease.

Printy BP, Verma N, Cowperthwaite MC, Markey MK; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative.

Although many genetic markers are identified as being associated with Alzheimer's
disease (AD), not much is known about their association with the structural
changes that happen as the disease progresses. In this study, we investigate the 
genetic etiology of neurodegeneration in AD by associating genetic markers with
atrophy profiles obtained using patient data from the Alzheimer's Disease
Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort. The atrophy profiles were quantified using
a linear least-squares regression model over the span of patient enrollment, and 
used as imaging features throughout the analysis. A subset of the imaging
features were selected for genetic association based on their ability to
discriminate between healthy individuals and AD patients in a Support Vector
Machines (SVM) classifier. Each imaging feature was associated with
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using a linear model that included age and
cognitive impairment scores as covariates to correct for normal disease
progression. After false discovery rate correction, we observed 53 significant
associations between SNPs and our imaging features, including associations of
ventricular enlargement with SNPs on estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and
sortilin-related VPS10 domain containing receptor 1 (SORCS1), hippocampal atrophy
with SNPs on ESR1, and cerebral atrophy with SNPs on transferrin (TF) and amyloid
beta precursor protein (APP). This study provides important insights into genetic
predictors of specific types of neurodegeneration that could potentially be used 
to improve the efficacy of treatment strategies for the disease and allow the
development of personalized treatment plans based on each patient's unique
genetic profile.

PMID: 25570489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015 Mar;141(3):257-63. doi:
10.1001/jamaoto.2014.3393.

IGSF4 methylation as an independent marker of human papillomavirus-positive
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Chen KM(1), Stephen JK(1), Havard S(1), Mahan M(2), Divine G(2), Worsham MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Research, Henry Ford Hospital,
Detroit, Michigan. (2)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Hospital, 
Detroit, Michigan.

IMPORTANCE: Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a known causative agent for
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC). Whereas it is becoming more firmly
established that HPV-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma is associated
with better survival outcomes, believed to be because of better response to
chemoradiation therapy, the specific mechanisms for these improved survival
outcomes remain underexplored.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the relationship between HPV status and promoter
methylation in an OPSCC cohort.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction was used to examine oncogenic HPV type 16 in a retrospective cohort of
121 patients with primary OPSCC. Aberrant promoter methylation of IGSF4, DAPK1,
and ESR1 genes, known to be methylated in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, 
including OPSCC, was examined by means of quantitative methylation-specific
polymerase chain reaction.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients received standard therapy.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Univariate associations between HPV and methylation
were analyzed using Fisher exact tests followed by multivariable logistic
regression. Cox proportional-hazards regression was used to model the risk of
death given age, race, sex, HPV status, methylation, stage, smoking, and
treatment.
RESULTS: In univariate logistic regression analyses, HPV-positive status was
significantly associated with Caucasian race (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.02), treatment (radiotherapy
only, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.01; chemoradiotherapy, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.007), and IGSF4 methylation (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.005).
The final multivariate logistic model, after controlling for patient
characteristics (sex, age, smoking, race, and treatment) with backward variable
selection among genes, retained IGSF4 methylation (OR, 4.5 [95% CI, 1.6-12.8];
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.005), Caucasian race (OR, 2.9 [95% CI, 1.0-8.3]; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.053), treatment
(radiotherapy only vs neither: OR, 11.62 [95% CI, 2.02-66.82]; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.02;
chemoradiotherapy vs neither: OR, 11.15 [95% CI, 1.92-64.65]; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.01), male sex 
(OR, 4.7 [95% CI, 1.3-17.0]; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.02), and younger age (OR, 0.9 [95% CI,
0.90-1.0]; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.008) as independent predictors of HPV-positive status. Cox
regression modeling indicated HPV-negative status, age, male sex, smoking, and
radiation treatment as independent predictors of mortality.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Methylation of IGSF4 is an independent predictor of
HPV-positive status. DNA methylation in conjunction with HPV infection appears to
play a role in OPSCC.

PMID: 25569158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Bacteriol. 2015 Mar;197(6):1065-74. doi: 10.1128/JB.02347-14. Epub 2015 Jan 5.

TfoX-based genetic mapping identifies Vibrio fischeri strain-level differences
and reveals a common lineage of laboratory strains.

Brooks JF 2nd(1), Gyllborg MC(1), Kocher AA(1), Markey LE(1), Mandel MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Feinberg School
of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA. (2)Department of Microbiology-Immunology,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA
m-mandel@northwestern.edu.

Bacterial strain variation exists in natural populations of bacteria and can be
generated experimentally through directed or random mutation. The advent of rapid
and cost-efficient whole-genome sequencing has facilitated strain-level
genotyping. Even with modern tools, however, it often remains a challenge to map 
specific traits to individual genetic loci, especially for traits that cannot be 
selected under culture conditions (e.g., colonization level or pathogenicity).
Using a combination of classical and modern approaches, we analyzed strain-level 
variation in Vibrio fischeri and identified the basis by which some strains lack 
the ability to utilize glycerol as a carbon source. We proceeded to reconstruct
the lineage of the commonly used V. fischeri laboratory strains. Compared to the 
wild-type ES114 strain, we identify in ES114-L a 9.9-kb deletion with endpoints
in tadB2 and glpF; restoration of the missing portion of glpF restores the
wild-type phenotype. The widely used strains ESR1, JRM100, and JRM200 contain the
same deletion, and ES114-L is likely a previously unrecognized intermediate
strain in the construction of many ES114 derivatives. ES114-L does not exhibit a 
defect in competitive squid colonization but ESR1 does, demonstrating that
glycerol utilization is not required for early squid colonization. Our genetic
mapping approach capitalizes on the recently discovered chitin-based
transformation pathway, which is conserved in the Vibrionaceae; therefore, the
specific approach used is likely to be useful for mapping genetic traits in other
Vibrio species.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4336346
PMID: 25561715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Nov 15;7(11):4038-50. eCollection 2014.

Regulation of gene expression in HBV- and HCV-related hepatocellular carcinoma:
integrated GWRS and GWGS analyses.

Zhou X(1), Zhu HQ(1), Lu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University Ji'nan 250014, China.

OBJECTIVES: To explore the molecular mechanism of hepatitis B virus-related and
hepatitis C virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma, samples from hepatitis B
virus and hepatitis C virus infected patients and the normal were compared,
respectively.
METHODS: In both experiments, genes with high value were selected based on a
genome-wide relative significance and genome-wide global significance model.
Co-expression network of the selected genes was constructed, and transcription
factors in the network were identified. Molecular complex detection algorithm was
used to obtain sub-networks.
RESULTS: Based on the new model, the top 300 genes were selected. Co-expression
network was constructed and transcription factors were identified. We obtained
two common genes FCN2 and CXCL14, and two common transcription factors RFX5 and
EZH2. In hepatitis B virus experiment, cluster 1 and 3 had the higher value. In
cluster 1, ten of the 17 genes and one transcription factor were all reported
associated with hepatocellular carcinoma. In cluster 3, transcription factor ESR1
was reported related with hepatocellular carcinoma. In hepatitis C virus
experiment, the value of cluster 3 and 4 was higher. In cluster 3, nine genes
were reported to play a key role in hepatocellular carcinoma. In cluster 4, there
were 5 genes in the 34 genes. To compare the relevance of a node in holding
together communicating nodes, centralities based analysis was performed and we
obtained some genes with high stress value.
CONCLUSION: The analysis above helped us to understand the pathogenesis of
hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus associated hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4276171
PMID: 25550913  [PubMed]


289. Aquat Toxicol. 2015 Feb;159:184-97. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2014.12.012. Epub 2014
Dec 18.

Cloning of multiple ERa mRNA variants in killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus), and
differential expression by tissue type, stage of reproduction, and estrogen
exposure in fish from polluted and unpolluted environments.

Cotter KA(1), Nacci D(2), Champlin D(2), Chuprin J(1), Callard GV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Boston University Department of Biology, 5 Cummington Mall, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA. (2)US Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development,
National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, Atlantic Ecology
Division, 27 Tarzwell Drive, Narragansett, RI 02882, USA. (3)Boston University
Department of Biology, 5 Cummington Mall, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic
address: gvc@bu.edu.

To test the hypothesis that alternative splicing could be an adaptive mechanism
for populations subject to multi-generational estrogenic exposures, we compared
estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) splicing variants in two populations of killifish
(Fundulus heteroclitus): one resident in an estrogenic polluted environment (New 
Bedford Harbor, NBH, MA, USA) and one from a relatively uncontaminated reference 
site (Scorton Creek, SC, MA, USA). In total we identified 19 ERa variants, each
with deletions of one or more coding exons. Four of the variants with potential
functional relevance were analyzed by qPCR to test for population differences in 
expression by tissue type, site, sex, seasonal reproductive status and estrogen
treatment. Significantly, a 5'-truncated short form variant (ERaS) was highly
expressed in liver and ovary, and was associated with seasonal reproductive
activity in SC but not NBH fish. Both ERaS and the full-length long variant
(ERaL) were estrogen-inducible (ERaS>ERaL) but the induction response was lower
in NBH than in SC fish. In contrast, NBH killifish were hyper-responsive to
estrogen as measured by expression of two other estrogen responsive genes:
vitellogenin (Vtg) and aromatase B (AroB). Most strikingly, two ERa deletion
variants (<U+0394>6 and <U+0394>6-8), lacking ligand binding and activation function domains,
were identified in a subset of NBH fish, where they were associated with reduced 
responsiveness to estrogen treatment. Together, these results support the
hypothesis that alternative splicing of the esr1 gene of killifish could be an
autoregulatory mechanism by which estrogen modulates the differential expression 
of ERa, and suggests a novel and adaptive mechanistic response to xenoestrogenic 
exposure.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4300264
PMID: 25550165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Reprod Toxicol. 2015 Jan;51:72-8. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2014.12.001. Epub 2014 
Dec 27.

Methoxychlor and its metabolite HPTE inhibit cAMP production and expression of
estrogen receptors a and ß in the rat granulosa cell in vitro.

Harvey CN(1), Chen JC(2), Bagnell CA(2), Uzumcu M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA; Joint Graduate Program in Toxicology, Rutgers, The 
State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA. (2)Department of
Animal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ
08901, USA. (3)Department of Animal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of
New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA; Joint Graduate Program in Toxicology,
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.
Electronic address: uzumcu@aesop.rutgers.edu.

The major metabolite of the estrogenic pesticide methoxychlor (MXC) HPTE is a
stronger ESR1 agonist than MXC and acts also as an ESR2 antagonist. In granulosa 
cells (GCs), FSH stimulates estradiol via the second messenger cAMP. HPTE
inhibits estradiol biosynthesis, and this effect is greater in FSH-treated GCs
than in cAMP-treated GCs. Therefore; we examined the effect of MXC/HPTE on
FSH-stimulated cAMP production in cultured GCs. To test involvement of
ESR-signaling, we used the ESR1 and ESR2 antagonist ICI 182,780, ESR2 selective
antagonist PHTPP, and ESR2 selective agonist DPN. ESR1 and ESR2 mRNA and protein 
levels were quantified. Both HPTE and MXC inhibited the FSH-induced cAMP
production. ICI 182,780 and PHTPP mimicked the inhibitory action of HPTE.
MXC/HPTE reduced FSH-stimulated Esr2 mRNA and protein to basal levels. MXC/HPTE
also inhibited FSH-stimulated Esr1. The greater inhibition on FSH-stimulated GCs 
is likely due to reduced cAMP level that involves ESR-signaling, through ESR2.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4465425
PMID: 25549949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Ginekol Pol. 2014 Oct;85(10):754-9.

[Endometrial cancer in young women--clinical and molecular aspects].

[Article in Polish]

Lapinska-Szumczyk S, Supernat A, Zaczek AJ, Majewska H, Gulczynski J, Sawicki S, 
Biernat W, Wydra D.

OBJECTIVES: The aim the study was to compare two groups of endometrial cancer
patients (below and above 45 years of age) in the aspect of clinicopathological
and molecular data.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study encompassed 456 primary tumour samples
retrospectively collected from a cohort of endometrial cancer patients, primarily
treated by surgery Molecular analysis covered: copy number variations of 10 genes
(TOP2A, ERBB1, ERBB2, ERBB3, ERBB4, MYC, CCND1, ESR1, PIK3CA, RAD21) analyzed by 
quantitative PCR; mRNA expression of 6 genes (SCGB2A2, RAD27, RUNX1, SNAI1,
SNAI2, PROM1) analyzed with the use of reverse transcription quantitative PCR;
protein expression analysis of 8 markers (PGR, ESR1; ERBB1, ERBB2, ERBB3, ERBB4, 
TOP2A, pAKT1) performed with the use of immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The younger group of patients was characterized by less frequent
hypertension (p <0.00007), less frequent myometrial infiltration (p=0.002) and
longer overall survival (p=0.003). Apart from RAD21 gene aberrations, which were 
more frequent in younger patients (p=0.02), the study revealed no statistically
significant differences between the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The study showed no molecular differences in the profile of younger 
and older endometrial cancer patients. Data on both the prognostic and predictive
significance of RAD21 in endometrial cancer are still insufficient. The clinical 
profile of younger patients with endometrial carcinoma was slightly better when
compared to elderly patients. Younger patients were characterized by longer
overall survival.

PMID: 25546926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Aquat Toxicol. 2015 Feb;159:302-16. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2014.11.022. Epub 2014
Dec 4.

Molecular pathways associated with the intersex condition in rainbow darter
(Etheostoma caeruleum) following exposures to municipal wastewater in the Grand
River basin, ON, Canada. Part B.

Bahamonde PA(1), McMaster ME(2), Servos MR(3), Martyniuk CJ(4), Munkittrick
KR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Rivers Institute and Department of Biology, University of New
Brunswick, Saint John, NB, Canada E2L 4L5. Electronic address:
p.bahamondec@gmail.com. (2)Emerging Methods Branch, Aquatic Contaminant Research 
Division, Water Science and Technology Directorate, Environment Canada,
Burlington, ON, Canada L7R 4A6. (3)Canadian Rivers Institute and University of
Waterloo, Department of Biology, Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1. (4)Canadian Rivers
Institute and Department of Biology, University of New Brunswick, Saint John, NB,
Canada E2L 4L5.

Rainbow darter (Etheostoma caeruleum; RBD) is a small benthic fish found in North
America. This species is sensitive to sewage effluent, and intersex is found in
up to 80% of males in near-field areas in the Grand River, Ontario, Canada. To
learn more about the molecular signaling cascades associated with intersex, a
developed customized oligonucleotide microarray (4×180 K) using next generation
sequencing was developed to characterize the transcriptome in the gonad of male
and female RBD. Gene expression profiling was performed in males and females from
both a reference site and a polluted site. Males with and without intersex
condition from the areas closest to effluent outfalls were compared to males and 
females from a reference site. Microarray analysis revealed that there was
increased mRNA abundance for genes associated with oogenesis in intersex males
(i.e. the presence of eggs within the testis), and a decrease in mRNA abundance
for genes associated with spermatid development. In females exposed to effluent, 
cell processes related with hatching and ovulation were down-regulated, and genes
involved in immune responses were increased in abundance. In the non-intersex
males exposed to effluent, cell processes such as sperm cell adhesion were
decreased at the transcript level relative to males from the reference site.
Microarray analysis revealed that heat shock proteins (HSP) were significantly
increased in non-intersex males exposed to effluent; however, HSPs were not
differentially expressed in intersex males exposed to the effluent. Genes
involved in sex differentiation (sox9, foxl2 and dmrt1) and reproduction (esr1,
esrb, ar, vtg, cyp19a1 and cyp11a) were measured in males, females, and intersex 
individuals. Consistent with the intersex condition, many transcripts showed an
intermediate expression level in intersex males when compared to phenotypic males
and females. This study improves our knowledge regarding the molecular pathways
that underlie the intersex condition and develops a suite of qPCR bioassays in
RBD that are able to discriminate pollutant-exposed males without intersex from
those males with intersex. Part A of this study reports on the effects of
municipal wastewater effluents (MWWEs) on RBD in the Grand River and demonstrates
that there are disruptions in higher level endpoints that include altered steroid
levels. Here we develop a new tool for assessing and monitoring the intersex
condition in RBD in polluted natural environments and begin to characterize gene 
networks that are associated with the condition.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25542366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Ovarian Res. 2014 Dec 20;7:114. doi: 10.1186/s13048-014-0114-2.

ESR1 and ESR2 gene polymorphisms are associated with human reproduction outcomes 
in Brazilian women.

de Mattos CS(1), Trevisan CM(2), Peluso C(3), Adami F(4), Cordts EB(5),
Christofolini DM(6), Barbosa CP(7), Bianco B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. dra.clarissa@uol.com.br.
(2)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. camilatrevisan22@gmail.com.
(3)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. carlapeluso@yahoo.com.br.
(4)Division of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Department of Collective Health - 
Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Santo André, SP, Brazil. adamifernando@uol.com.br. 
(5)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. emerson@embryogenesis.com.br. 
(6)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. denise.morf@gmail.com.
(7)Human Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive
Healthcare and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe
de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. caiopb@uol.com.br. (8)Human
Reproduction and Genetics Center - Division of Sexual and Reproductive Healthcare
and Population Genetics - Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Av. Príncipe de Gales,
821, Santo André, SP, 09060-650, Brazil. bianca.bianco@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Important candidate genes involved in the ovarian response to
exogenous FSH are the estrogen receptor genes (ESRs), since the effects of
estrogens on follicle growth, maturation and oocyte release. It is known that
some markers of ovarian stimulation can help to personalize the treatment,
adjusting the dose of exogenous rFSH, thus preventing excessive wear of the
patient. Inspired on this information we aimed to analyze four different
polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor genes ESR1: rs2234693/T-397C (PvuII) and
rs9340799/A-351G (Xbal) and ESR2: rs4986938/G1082A (RsaI) and rs1256049/A<U+2009>+<U+2009>1730G
(AluI), and their association with assisted reproduction outcomes in Brazilian
women that underwent in vitro fertilization (IVF).
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was performed involving 136 infertile women less
than 39 years of age with normal ovarian reserve. Patients were divided according
to the same COH protocol for statistical analysis. The Taqman assay was used for 
PvuII and XbaI of ESR1, and RsaI and AluI of ESR2 genotyping. Serum estradiol and
FSH were measured by Elisa assay.
RESULTS: The PvuII (ESR1) TT and RsaI (ESR2) GG genotypes were associated with a 
longer induction period and higher doses of medication (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.03). The XbaI
(ESR1) AA genotype was associated with better COH results, including a larger
number of follicles, mature oocytes, embryos, and good quality embryos
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The AluI GG genotype showed an association with the Ovarian
Hyperstimulation Syndrome (OHSS) (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03). According to the haplotype analysis 
of ER1 (PvuII/XbaI), we demonstrated that the CA combination increases by 0.68
the number of good quality embryos while the TG decreases it by 0.71 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04).
CONCLUSION: ER polymorphisms have an association with the assisted reproduction
outcomes in Brazilian women.

PMCID: PMC4302593
PMID: 25526766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Onco Targets Ther. 2014 Nov 28;7:2205-13. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S65344. eCollection
2014.

Role of urokinase plasminogen activator and plasminogen activator inhibitor mRNA 
expression as prognostic factors in molecular subtypes of breast cancer.

Witzel I(1), Milde-Langosch K(1), Schmidt M(2), Karn T(3), Becker S(3), Wirtz
R(4), Rody A(5), Laakmann E(1), Schütze D(1), Jänicke F(1), Müller V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, University Medical Center, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital, Mainz, Germany. 
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Hospital, Frankfurt,
Germany. (4)STRATIFYER Molecular Pathology GmbH, Cologne, Germany. (5)Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein,
Luebeck, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Protein levels of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) and its
inhibitor (PAI-1) determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay from
fresh-frozen tumor tissue have been evaluated as prognostic factors in
prospectively randomized trials in breast cancer. However, the role of uPA and
PAI-1 in the context of breast cancer subtypes and for mRNA expression of these
factors is less clear.
METHODS: We evaluated uPA and PAI-1 mRNA expression using the Affymetrix HG-U
133A array within molecular subgroups of breast cancer in cohorts of patients
with systemic treatment (cohort A, n=362) and without systemic treatment (cohort 
B, n=200). We validated mRNA expression in a cohort of HER2-positive breast
cancer patients (cohort C, n=290). Luminal, triple-negative, and HER2-positive
subcohorts were defined by ESR1 and ERBB2 mRNA expression using predefined
cutoffs.
RESULTS: In the entire cohort A, elevated PAI-1 but not uPA mRNA expression was
associated with shorter disease-free survival (P=0.007 for PAI and 0.069 for
uPA). Regarding different molecular subgroups, 67% (n=244) of tumors were
luminal, 14% (n=49) were HER2-positive, and 19% (n=69) were triple-negative.
Elevated PAI-1 mRNA expression was associated with shorter disease-free survival 
only in the HER2-positive subgroup (P=0.031). The same disease-free survival
results were found for uPA in HER2-positive patients (P=0.011). In contrast, no
association between either marker and survival was observed in the luminal or
triple-negative subgroups. In the HER2-positive validation cohort C, elevated uPA
and PAI-1 mRNA expression also showed strong associations with shorter
disease-free survival (P=0.014 for PAI-1, P<0.001 for uPA).
CONCLUSION: In this study, the prognostic impact of uPA and PAI-1 expression was 
mainly observed in patients with HER2-positive tumors.

PMCID: PMC4259258
PMID: 25506225  [PubMed]


295. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Jan;149(1):81-9. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3233-y.
Epub 2014 Dec 12.

HDAC inhibition does not induce estrogen receptor in human triple-negative breast
cancer cell lines and patient-derived xenografts.

de Cremoux P(1), Dalvai M, N'Doye O, Moutahir F, Rolland G, Chouchane-Mlik O,
Assayag F, Lehmann-Che J, Kraus-Berthie L, Nicolas A, Lockhart BP, Marangoni E,
de Thé H, Depil S, Bystricky K, Decaudin D.

Author information: 
(1)APHP Hôpital Saint-Louis, Molecular Oncoloy Unit and University Paris-Diderot,
PRES Paris Cité, INSERM/CNRS UMR944/7212, 1, Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75010,
Paris, France, patricia.de-cremoux@sls.aphp.fr.

Several publications have suggested that histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACis) 
could reverse the repression of estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) in triple-negative 
breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines, leading to the induction of a functional
protein. Using different HDACis, vorinostat, panobinostat, and abexinostat, we
therefore investigated this hypothesis in various human TNBC cell lines and
patient-derived xenografts (PDXs). We used three human TNBC cell lines and three 
PDXs. We analyzed the in vitro toxicity of the compounds, their effects on the
hormone receptors and hormone-related genes and protein expression both in vitro 
and in vivo models. We then explored intra-tumor histone H3 acetylation under
abexinostat in xenograft models. Despite major cytotoxicity of all tested HDAC
inhibitors and repression of deactylation-dependent CCND1 gene, neither ERa nor
ERß, ESR1 or ESR2 genes respectively, were re-expressed in vitro. In vivo, after 
administration of abexinostat for three consecutive days, we did not observe any 
induction of ESR1 or ESR1-related genes and ERa protein expression by RT-qPCR and
immunohistochemical methods in PDXs. This observation was concomitant to the fact
that in vivo administration of abexinostat increased intra-tumor histone H3
acetylation. These observations do not allow us to confirm previous studies which
suggested that HDACis are able to convert ER-negative (ER-) tumors to ER-positive
(ER+) tumors, and that a combination of HDAC inhibitors and hormone therapy could
be proposed in the management of TNBC patients.

PMID: 25503779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 12;9(12):e115263. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115263.
eCollection 2014.

Downstream targets of Lmo4 are modulated by cisplatin in the inner ear of Wistar 
rats.

Jamesdaniel S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Health Sciences and Department of Family Medicine
and Public Health Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan, United
States of America.

Lmo4, a transcriptional regulator, appears to be a key player in mediating the
cochlear pathology in cisplatin ototoxicity, as it controls cellular responses by
modulating the formation of transcriptional complexes. We provided the first
evidence of in vivo nitration of Lmo4 in cisplatin ototoxicity. Our data
suggested that nitration of Lmo4 and associated decrease in its cochlear
expression has the potential to play a pivotal role in cisplatin ototoxicity.
However, the Lmo4 interactomes that signal the downstream events in the cochlea
are poorly understood. Therefore, custom-made gene arrays were employed to
evaluate the modulation of known binding partners or targets of Lmo4, in Wistar
rats treated with 16 mg/kg cisplatin. RT-PCR analysis, 3 days post cisplatin
treatment, indicated that cisplatin induced up/down regulation of multiple
cochlear genes associated with Lmo4 signaling. The cochlear expression of Esr1
was significantly up-regulated by cisplatin treatment, while the expression of
Stat3 was down-regulated. Co-treatment with Trolox, an otoprotective antioxidant,
attenuated the cisplatin-induced modulation of 5 genes in the cochlea. Consistent
with the changes observed at the gene level, immunoblots with anti-Stat3
indicated that cisplatin-induced decrease in cochlear protein levels were
attenuated by Trolox co-treatment. These results suggest that cisplatin-induced
decreases in the cochlear Lmo4 upon nitration, and associated modulation in the
cochlear expression of its binding partners Esr1 and Jak1, probably facilitates
the repression of Stat3, a downstream target of Lmo4 implicated in drug mediated 
apoptosis. Collectively, these findings provide insights on Lmo4 downstream
events and indicate a potential role of Jak/Stat transcriptional machinery in
relaying the Lmo4 protein signaling in cisplatin-induced ototoxicity.

PMCID: PMC4264883
PMID: 25501662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Autophagy. 2014;10(11):2036-52. doi: 10.4161/auto.34398. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Autophagy regulator BECN1 suppresses mammary tumorigenesis driven by WNT1
activation and following parity.

Cicchini M(1), Chakrabarti R, Kongara S, Price S, Nahar R, Lozy F, Zhong H,
Vazquez A, Kang Y, Karantza V.

Author information: 
(1)a Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey ; New Brunswick , NJ USA.

Earlier studies reported allelic deletion of the essential autophagy regulator
BECN1 in breast cancers implicating BECN1 loss, and likely defective autophagy,
in tumorigenesis. Recent studies have questioned the tumor suppressive role of
autophagy, as autophagy-related gene (Atg) defects generally suppress
tumorigenesis in well-characterized mouse tumor models. We now report that, while
it delays or does not alter mammary tumorigenesis driven by Palb2 loss or ERBB2
and PyMT overexpression, monoallelic Becn1 loss promotes mammary tumor
development in 2 specific contexts, namely following parity and in association
with wingless-type MMTV integration site family, member 1 (WNT1) activation. Our 
studies demonstrate that Becn1 heterozygosity, which results in immature mammary 
epithelial cell expansion and aberrant TNFRSF11A/TNR11/RANK (tumor necrosis
factor receptor superfamily, member 11a, NFKB activator) signaling, promotes
mammary tumorigenesis in multiparous FVB/N mice and in cooperation with the
progenitor cell-transforming WNT1 oncogene. Similar to our Becn1(+/-);MMTV-Wnt1
mouse model, low BECN1 expression and an activated WNT pathway gene signature
correlate with the triple-negative subtype, TNFRSF11A axis activation and poor
prognosis in human breast cancers. Our results suggest that BECN1 may have
nonautophagy-related roles in mammary development, provide insight in the
seemingly paradoxical roles of BECN1 in tumorigenesis, and constitute the basis
for further studies on the pathophysiology and treatment of clinically aggressive
triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs).

PMCID: PMC4502817
PMID: 25483966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Anim Reprod Sci. 2014 Dec 30;151(3-4):169-81. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2014.11.001. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Expression of receptors for ovarian steroids and prostaglandin E2 in the
endometrium and myometrium of mares during estrus, diestrus and early pregnancy.

Silva ES(1), Scoggin KE(2), Canisso IF(2), Troedsson MH(2), Squires EL(2), Ball
BA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina Veterinária e Zootecnia, UNESP-Universidade Estadual
Paulista, Departamento de Reprodução Animal e Radiologia Veterinária, Botucatu,
São Paulo, CEP: 18618-970, Brazil. (2)Reproduction Laboratory, Maxwell H. Gluck
Equine Research, Department of Veterinary Science, University of Kentucky,
Lexington KY 40546-0099, USA. (3)Reproduction Laboratory, Maxwell H. Gluck Equine
Research, Department of Veterinary Science, University of Kentucky, Lexington KY 
40546-0099, USA. Electronic address: b.a.ball@uky.edu.

The objective of this study was to compare expression of estrogen receptor alpha 
(ER-a), ß (ER-ß), progesterone receptor (PR), as well as prostaglandin E2 type 2 
(EP2) and 4 (EP4) receptors in the equine myometrium and endometrium during
estrus, diestrus and early pregnancy. Tissues were collected during estrus,
diestrus, and early pregnancy. Transcripts for ER-a (ESR1), ER-ß (ESR2), PR
(PGR), EP2 (PTGER2) and EP4 (PTGER4) were quantified by qPCR.
Immunohistochemistry was used to localize ER-a, ER-ß, PR, EP2 and EP4.
Differences in transcript in endometrium and myometrium were compared by the <U+0394><U+0394>CT
method. Expression for ESR1 (P<0.05) tended to be higher during estrus than
diestrus in the endometrium (P=0.1) and myometrium (P=0.06). In addition, ESR1
expression was greater during estrus than pregnancy (P<0.05) in the endometrium
and tended to be higher in estrus compared to pregnancy in the myometrium
(P=0.1). Expression for PGR was greater (P<0.05) in the endometrium during estrus
and diestrus than during pregnancy. In the myometrium, PGR expression was greater
in estrus than pregnancy (P=0.05) and tended to be higher during diestrus in
relation to pregnancy (P=0.07). There were no differences among reproductive
stages in ESR2, PTGER2 and PTGER4 mRNA expression (P>0.05). Immunolabeling in the
endometrium appeared to be more intense for ER-a during estrus than diestrus and 
pregnancy. In addition, immunostaining for PR during pregnancy appeared to be
more intense in the stroma and less intense in glands and epithelium compared to 
estrus and diestrus. EP2 immunoreactivity appeared to be more intense during
early pregnancy in both endometrium and myometrium, whereas weak immunolabeling
for EP4 was noted across reproductive stages. This study demonstrates
differential regulation of estrogen receptor (ER) and PR in the myometrium and
endometrium during the reproductive cycle and pregnancy as well as abundant
protein expression of EP2 in the endometrium and myometrium during early
pregnancy in mares.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25465360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Urol. 2015 May;193(5):1625-31. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2014.11.087. Epub 2014 Nov
21.

Genetic polymorphisms in ESR1 and ESR2 genes, and risk of hypospadias in a
multiethnic study population.

Choudhry S(1), Baskin LS(2), Lammer EJ(3), Witte JS(4), Dasgupta S(2), Ma C(5),
Surampalli A(2), Shen J(2), Shaw GM(5), Carmichael SL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, California.
Electronic address: choudhrys@urology.ucsf.edu. (2)Department of Urology,
University of California, San Francisco, California. (3)Children's Hospital
Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, California. (4)Department of Epidemiology
and Biostatistics, and Institute of Human Genetics, University of California, San
Francisco, California. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.

PURPOSE: Estrogenic endocrine disruptors acting via estrogen receptors a (ESR1)
and ß (ESR2) have been implicated in the etiology of hypospadias, a common
congenital malformation of the male external genitalia. We determined the
association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in ESR1 and ESR2 genes with
hypospadias in a racially/ethnically diverse study population of California
births.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated the relationship between hypospadias and
108 ESR1 and 36 ESR2 single nucleotide polymorphisms in 647 cases and 877
population based nonmalformed controls among infants born in selected California 
counties from 1990 to 2003. Subgroup analyses were performed by race/ethnicity
(nonHispanic white and Hispanic subjects) and by hypospadias severity (mild to
moderate and severe).
RESULTS: Odds ratios for 33 of the 108 ESR1 single nucleotide polymorphisms had p
values less than 0.05 (p = 0.05 to 0.007) for risk of hypospadias. However, none 
of the 36 ESR2 single nucleotide polymorphisms was significantly associated. In
stratified analyses the association results were consistent by disease severity
but different sets of single nucleotide polymorphisms were significantly
associated with hypospadias in nonHispanic white and Hispanic subjects. Due to
high linkage disequilibrium across the single nucleotide polymorphisms, haplotype
analyses were conducted and identified 6 haplotype blocks in ESR1 gene that had
haplotypes significantly associated with an increased risk of hypospadias (OR 1.3
to 1.8, p = 0.04 to 0.00001). Similar to single nucleotide polymorphism analysis,
different ESR1 haplotypes were associated with risk of hypospadias in nonHispanic
white and Hispanic subjects. No significant haplotype association was observed
for ESR2.
CONCLUSIONS: The data provide evidence that ESR1 single nucleotide polymorphisms 
and haplotypes influence the risk of hypospadias in white and Hispanic subjects, 
and warrant further examination in other study populations.

Copyright © 2015 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2015 Apr;51:8-18. doi: 10.1016/j.domaniend.2014.10.002.
Epub 2014 Nov 7.

Ovariectomy in young prepubertal dairy heifers causes complete suppression of
mammary progesterone receptors.

Velayudhan BT(1), Huderson BP(1), Ellis SE(2), Parsons CL(1), Hovey RC(3), Rowson
AR(3), Akers RM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy Science, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA. (2)Department of Animal and Veterinary
Sciences, Clemson University, SC 29634, USA. (3)Department of Animal Science,
University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA. (4)Department of Dairy
Science, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA
24061, USA. Electronic address: rma@vt.edu.

Mammary growth and development depends on ovarian steroids and particularly
interaction of estrogen and progesterone with their intracellular receptors. The 
objectives of this study were to determine the effect of ovariectomy on the
expression of protein and messenger RNA for estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) and
progesterone receptor (PGR) and their relation to mammary ductal development and 
cell proliferation. Prepubertal Holstein heifers 2, 3, or 4 mo of age were
randomly assigned to one of 2 treatments, ovariectomized (OVX; n = 8) or sham
operated (INT; n = 12). Mammary parenchymal (PAR) tissue samples were harvested
30 d after surgery. Localization and quantitation of ESR1 and PGR in PAR were
determined by immunohistochemistry and quantitative multispectral imaging.
Relative messenger RNA expression of ESR1 and PGR in PAR was measured by
quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction. We observed the complete
absence of PGR-positive epithelial cell nuclei and reduced PGR transcript
abundance in mammary parenchyma of OVX heifers. The percent of epithelial cells
expressing ESR1 did not differ by treatment but was decreased with age. However, 
average intensity of ESR1 expression per cell was reduced in OVX heifers. The
abundance of Ki67 labeled epithelial cells and stromal cells was reduced after
ovariectomy. These data suggest that reduced mammary development after
ovariectomy may be mediated by loss of PGR expression and reduced ESR1 expression
in positive cells. A presumptive relationship with ovarian-derived circulating
estradiol remains unresolved, but data suggest other ovarian-derived agents may
play a role. Use of specific antagonists to manipulate expression or action of
PGR and ESR1 receptors should provide direct evidence for roles of these
receptors in prepubertal bovine mammary development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25460067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 Jan;145:121-30. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2014.11.006. Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Epigenetic modifications of gene promoter DNA in the liver of adult female mice
masculinized by testosterone.

Dkhil MA(1), Al-Quraishy S(2), Abdel-Baki AA(3), Ghanjati F(4), Arauzo-Bravo
MJ(5), Delic D(6), Wunderlich F(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, 11451 Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia; Department of Zoology and Entomology, Faculty of Science, Helwan
University, Cairo, Egypt. Electronic address: mohameddkhil@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, 11451 Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. (3)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University,
11451 Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Beni-Suef 
University, Beni-Suef, Egypt. (4)Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell
Therapeutics, Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany. (5)Computational
Biology and Systems Biomedicine, Biodonostia Health Research Institute, San
Sebastion, Spain; IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.
(6)Department of Biology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany;
Boehringer-Ingelheim, Biberach, Germany. (7)Department of Biology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Duesseldorf, Germany.

Testosterone (T) is known to masculinize the female phenotype of the liver,
evidenced as up- and down-regulated expressions of male- and female-predominant
genes, respectively, involved in hepatic metabolism. This study is aimed at
identifying epigenetic modifications of promoters of these differently expressed 
genes in the liver after masculinization by T of adult female C57BL/6 mice using 
methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and NimbleGen microarrays. Among the 17,354
promoters examined, 82 promoters in the liver have been identified to be
significantly changed by T (p<0.05), with 47 and 35 promoters exhibiting
increased and decreased DNA methylation, respectively. Most of these promoters
display the changes of DNA methylation in their Ups-regions, which are between
+500 and +2000 bp upstream from the transcription start site (TSS) of the genes. 
Less T-induced modifications have been detected in the Cor-regions of the
promoters, i.e., +500 to -500 bp around the TSS. Only 13 and 7 Cor-promoters are 
hyper- and hypo-methylated, respectively, among which are 10 hyper- and 5
hypo-methylated promoters of genes with annotated functions. Surprisingly, the
promoters are largely unmethylated in those genes whose expression has been
previously found to be permanently deregulated by T in the liver, as e.g. the
T-upregulated male-predominant genes Cyp7b1, Cyp2d9, Cyp4a10, Ugt2b1, Ugt2b38,
Hsd3b5, Slco1a1 as well as the T-downregulated female-predominant genes Cyp2b9,
Cyp2b13, Cyp3a41, Cyp3a44, Fmo3, Sult2a2, respectively. Though methylatable, the 
promoter DNA of Ar, Esr1, and Esr2 remained unaffected by T. However, T decreases
DNA-methylation of the Cor-promoter region of Ddc encoding the AR-coactivator
dopa decarboxylase. Among the identified 15 Cor-promoters of genes with annotated
functions are also those of Defb43, Cst11, and Sele involved in innate immunity. 
Our data support the view that T may exert long-lasting epigenetic effects on
functions of the liver-inherent immune system.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25448745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2014 Nov;182:226-37. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2014.09.036. Epub 2014 Oct 6.

Gene variation and premature ovarian failure: a meta-analysis.

Pu D(1), Xing Y(1), Gao Y(2), Gu L(3), Wu J(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 
Huai'an First People's Hospital, Huai'an, Jiangsu, China. (3)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital
Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (4)State Key Laboratory
of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China. Electronic address: jie.wuyale@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a complex, heterogeneous disorder
that is influenced by multiple genetic components. This meta-analysis aimed to
investigate the association between gene variants and susceptibility to POF.
STUDY DESIGN: MEDLINE and CNKI were searched for studies published from inception
(1950) to June 2014. Meta-analysis was performed when three or more studies
reported genetic data on the same polymorphism or mutation. Additive and dominant
models were analyzed using RevMan Version 5.1.
RESULTS: The literature search yielded 575 articles, of which 59 studies on the
association between POF and gene variants were identified for meta-analysis. Five
genes were selected for analysis, including 10 common gene polymorphisms [BMP15
(-9C>G, 788insTCT and 852C>T), ESR1 (-351A>G and -397C>T), FMR1 CGG repeat, FSHR 
(919A>G and 2039A>G), INHA (-16C>T and -124A>G)] and two mutations (BMP15 538G>A 
and INHA 769G>A). BMP15 538G>A was found to be significantly more common in
patients with POF compared with controls. No significant associations were found 
between the other variants of BMP15 and POF. With respect to ESR1, the
accumulative results were not significant, although the findings of the
individual studies were controversial. The incidence of FMR1 premutation was
significantly higher in patients with POF compared with controls [odds ratio (OR)
9.2, 95% confidence interval (CI) 5.42-15.61; p<0.001] in the overall population,
as well as in both Caucasian and Asian subgroups. Stratified analysis was applied
for INHA 769G>A by ethnicity; a significant association with POF was only found
in the Asian subgroup (allelic frequency: OR 8.89, 95% CI 2.1-5.52; p=0.004). No 
significant associations were found between the other variants of INHA and POF.
CONCLUSIONS: BMP15 538A, FMR1 premutation and INHA 769A (in Asians alone) may
indicate susceptibility to POF. Further well-designed studies and larger samples 
are required to confirm the association between gene variants and POF.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Chem Biol Interact. 2015 Jun 5;234:309-19. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2014.11.015. Epub
2014 Nov 28.

The endometrial cancer cell lines Ishikawa and HEC-1A, and the control cell line 
HIEEC, differ in expression of estrogen biosynthetic and metabolic genes, and in 
androstenedione and estrone-sulfate metabolism.

Hevir-Kene N(1), Riner TL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Slovenia. (2)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ljubljana, Slovenia. Electronic address: Tea.Lanisnik-Rizner@mf.uni-lj.si.

Estrogens have important roles in the pathogenesis of endometrial cancer. They
can have carcinogenic effects through stimulation of cell proliferation or
formation of DNA-damaging species. To characterize model cell lines of
endometrial cancer, we determined the expression profiles of the estrogen
receptors (ERs) ESR1, ESR2 and GPER, and 23 estrogen biosynthetic and metabolic
genes, and investigated estrogen biosynthesis in the control HIEEC cell line and 
the Ishikawa and HEC-1A EC cell lines. HIEEC and Ishikawa expressed all ERs to
different extents, while HEC-1A cells lacked expression of ESR1. Considering the 
estrogen biosynthetic and metabolic enzymes, these cells showed statistically
significant different gene expression profiles for SULT2B1, HSD3B2, CYP19A1,
AKR1C3, HSD17B1, HSD17B7, HSD17B12, CYP1B1, CYP3A5, COMT, SULT1A1, GSTP1 and
NQO2. In these cells, E2 was formed from E1S and E1, while androstenedione was
not converted to estrogens. HIEEC and Ishikawa had similar profiles of
androstenedione and E1 metabolism, but hydrolysis of E1S to E1 was weaker in
Ishikawa cells. HEC-1A cells were less efficient for activation of E1 into the
potent E2, but metabolized androstenedione to other androgenic metabolites better
than HIEEC and Ishikawa cells. This study reveals that HIEEC, Ishikawa, and
HEC-1A cells can all form estrogens only via the sulfatase pathway. HIEEC,
Ishikawa, and HEC-1A cells expressed all the major genes in the production of
hydroxyestrogens and estrogen quinones, and in their conjugation. Significantly
higher CYP1B1 mRNA levels in Ishikawa cells compared to HEC-1A cells, together
with lack of UGT2B7 expression, indicate that Ishikawa cells can accumulate more 
toxic estrogen-3,4-quinones than HEC-1A cells, as also for HIEEC cells. This
study provides further characterization of HIEEC, Ishikawa, and HEC-1A cells, and
shows that they differ greatly in expression of the genes investigated and in
their capacity for E2 formation, and thus they represent different in vitro
models.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25437045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Biol Reprod. 2015 Jan;92(1):24. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.124206. Epub 2014 Nov
26.

Diosgenin stimulates rat TM4 cell proliferation through activating plasma
membrane translocation and transcriptional activity of estrogen receptors.

Wu L(1), Dong H(1), Zhao J(1), Wang Y(1), Yang Q(1), Jia C(1), Ma J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chinese Medicine, Xijing Hospital affiliated to the Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. (2)Department of Chinese Medicine,
Xijing Hospital affiliated to the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,
China jingma@fmmu.edu.cn.

Sertoli cells (SCs) function as "nurse cells," which play crucial roles in
supporting spermatogenesis through establishing a unique and essential
environment in the male reproductive tract. Given the important roles of SCs in
male fertility, this study was designed to evaluate the effect of diosgenin, an
aglycone of the steroidal saponin, on TM4 cell proliferation and to elucidate the
possible mechanisms. We showed that diosgenin increased the proliferation of TM4 
cell and primary SCs in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Diosgenin
increased cyclins D1 and E as well as CDK4/6 and CDK2 expression but inhibited
P27 expression, with no significant alterations of cyclin B and cdc2 (cell
division cycle 2), resulting in cell-cycle G1/S transition. Diosgenin
significantly inhibited apoptosis, as reflected by decreased percentage of
TUNEL-positive cells; decreased expression of Bax (Bcl-2-associated X protein),
AIF (apoptosis-inducing factor), and cleaved caspases 3 and 9; and increased
expression of Bcl-2 (B-cell lymphoma 2). Diosgenin induced an immediate and
transient plasma membrane translocation of ESR1 and ESR2 from the nucleus, which 
was inhibited by the antiestrogen ICI 182<U+200A>780 and PP2, an inhibitor of SRC.
Moreover, ICI 182<U+200A>780 and PP2 significantly inhibited diosgenin-induced
cell-cycle transition and inhibition of apoptosis. Activation of extracellular
regulated protein kinase (ERK)/Akt signaling was also involved in
diosgenin-induced TM4 cell proliferation, which was SRC- and ESR-dependent.
Furthermore, diosgenin induced late activation of nuclear ESR transcriptional
activity, which in turn directly regulated cell cycle and apoptosis-related
factors, such as cyclin D and Bcl-2. Taken together, the results show that
diosgenin activated SRC-ESR translocation-ERK/Akt-ESR transcriptional activity,
leading to cell-cycle transition and inhibition of apoptosis and thus final cell 
proliferation. These findings may better our understanding of the pharmacological
actions of diosgenin and advance therapeutic approaches to male infertility.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25429088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2015 Feb;32(2):297-304. doi: 10.1007/s10815-014-0393-y.
Epub 2014 Nov 27.

Association between estrogen receptora gene (ESR1) PvuII (T/C) and XbaI (A/G)
polymorphisms and premature ovarian failure risk: evidence from a meta-analysis.

He M(1), Shu J, Huang X, Tang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi ZhuangAutonomousRegion, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Genetic factors are important in the pathogenesis of
Premature ovarian failure (POF). Notably, estrogen receptor-a (ESR1) has been
suggested as a possible candidate gene for POF; however, published studies of
ESR1 gene polymorphisms have been hampered by small sample sizes and inconclusive
or ambiguous results. The aim of this meta analysis is to investigate the
associations between two novel common ESR1 polymorphisms (intron 1 polymorphisms 
PvuII-rs2234693: T.C and XbaI-rs9340799: A.G) and POF.
METHODS: A comprehensive search was conducted to identify all studies on the
association of ESR1 gene polymorphisms with POF up to August 2014. Pooled odds
ratio (OR) and corresponding 95 % confidence interval (CI) were calculated using 
fixed-or random-effects model in the meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Three studies covering 1396 subjects were identified. Pooled data showed
significant association between ESR1 gene PvuII polymorphism and risk of POF:
[allele model: Cvs. T, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.735, 95%CI: 0.624<U+2009>~<U+2009>0.865, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001; co-dominant
models: CCvs.TT, OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.540, 95%CI: 0.382<U+2009>~<U+2009>0.764, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001, CTvs.TT,
OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.735, 95%CI: 0.555<U+2009>~<U+2009>0.972, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.031; dominant model: CT<U+2009>+<U+2009>CCvs.TT,
OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.618, 95%CI: 0.396<U+2009>~<U+2009>0.966, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.035; recessive model: CCvs.TT<U+2009>+<U+2009>CT,
OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.659, 95%CI: 0.502<U+2009>~<U+2009>0.864, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003]. Subgroup analyses showed a
significant association in all models in Asian population, but no significant
association in any model in European population. For the XbaI polymorphism,
overall, no significant association was observed under any genetic models.
However, under dominant model, ESR1 gene XbaI polymorphism is significantly
association with risk of POF in Asian population.
CONCLUSION: The present meta-analysis suggests that ESR1gene PvuII polymorphism
is significantly associated with an increased risk of POF. And ESR1gene XbaI
polymorphism is not association with risk of POF overall. However, under dominant
model, ESR1gene XbaI polymorphism is significantly association with risk of POF
in Asian population. Further large and well-designed studies are needed to
confirm the association.

PMCID: PMC4354193
PMID: 25428437  [PubMed - in process]


306. PeerJ. 2014 Nov 18;2:e654. doi: 10.7717/peerj.654. eCollection 2014.

Bioinformatic analysis of cis-regulatory interactions between progesterone and
estrogen receptors in breast cancer.

Khushi M(1), Clarke CL(1), Graham JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research, Westmead Millennium Institute, Sydney Medical
School-Westmead, University of Sydney , Australia.

Chromatin factors interact with each other in a cell and sequence-specific manner
in order to regulate transcription and a wealth of publically available datasets 
exists describing the genomic locations of these interactions. Our recently
published BiSA (Binding Sites Analyser) database contains transcription factor
binding locations and epigenetic modifications collected from published studies
and provides tools to analyse stored and imported data. Using BiSA we
investigated the overlapping cis-regulatory role of estrogen receptor alpha (ERa)
and progesterone receptor (PR) in the T-47D breast cancer cell line. We found
that ERa binding sites overlap with a subset of PR binding sites. To investigate 
further, we re-analysed raw data to remove any biases introduced by the use of
distinct tools in the original publications. We identified 22,152 PR and 18,560
ERa binding sites (<5% false discovery rate) with 4,358 overlapping regions among
the two datasets. BiSA statistical analysis revealed a non-significant overall
overlap correlation between the two factors, suggesting that ERa and PR are not
partner factors and do not require each other for binding to occur. However,
Monte Carlo simulation by Binary Interval Search (BITS), Relevant Distance,
Absolute Distance, Jaccard and Projection tests by Genometricorr revealed a
statistically significant spatial correlation of binding regions on chromosome
between the two factors. Motif analysis revealed that the shared binding regions 
were enriched with binding motifs for ERa, PR and a number of other transcription
and pioneer factors. Some of these factors are known to co-locate with ERa and PR
binding. Therefore spatially close proximity of ERa binding sites with PR binding
sites suggests that ERa and PR, in general function independently at the
molecular level, but that their activities converge on a specific subset of
transcriptional targets.

PMCID: PMC4243336
PMID: 25426335  [PubMed]


307. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Jan;36(1):122-32. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu237. Epub 2014 Nov 
23.

Comparison of tamoxifen and letrozole response in mammary preneoplasia of ER and 
aromatase overexpressing mice defines an immune-associated gene signature linked 
to tamoxifen resistance.

Dabydeen SA(1), Kang K(2), Díaz-Cruz ES(3), Alamri A(4), Axelrod ML(1), Bouker
KB(1), Al-Kharboosh R(1), Clarke R(1), Hennighausen L(5), Furth PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC 20057, USA. (2)Laboratory Genetics and Physiology,
NIDDK, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA Department of Microbiology, Dankook
University, Cheonan 330-714, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Oncology,
Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC
20057, USA, Department of Pharmaceutical, Social, & Administrative Sciences,
Belmont University College of Pharmacy, Nashville, TN 37212, USA. (4)Department
of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC 20057, USA, Clinical Laboratories Sciences, College of Applied
Medical Sciences, King Khalid University, Abha 62529, Saudi Arabia and.
(5)Laboratory Genetics and Physiology, NIDDK, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(6)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC 20057, USA, Department of Medicine, Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA
paf3@georgetown.edu.

Response to breast cancer chemoprevention can depend upon host genetic makeup and
initiating events leading up to preneoplasia. Increased expression of aromatase
and estrogen receptor (ER) is found in conjunction with breast cancer. To
investigate response or resistance to endocrine therapy, mice with targeted
overexpression of Esr1 or CYP19A1 to mammary epithelial cells were employed,
representing two direct pathophysiological interventions in estrogen pathway
signaling. Both Esr1 and CYP19A1 overexpressing mice responded to letrozole with 
reduced hyperplastic alveolar nodule prevalence and decreased mammary epithelial 
cell proliferation. CYP19A1 overexpressing mice were tamoxifen sensitive but Esr1
overexpressing mice were tamoxifen resistant. Increased ER expression occurred
with tamoxifen resistance but no consistent changes in progesterone receptor,
pSTAT3, pSTAT5, cyclin D1 or cyclin E levels in association with response or
resistance were found. RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) was employed to seek a
transcriptome predictive of tamoxifen resistance using these models and a second 
tamoxifen-resistant model, BRCA1 deficient/Trp53 haploinsufficient mice.
Sixty-eight genes associated with immune system processing were upregulated in
tamoxifen-resistant Esr1- and Brca1-deficient mice, whereas genes related to
aromatic compound metabolic process were upregulated in tamoxifen-sensitive
CYP19A1 mice. Interferon regulatory factor 7 was identified as a key
transcription factor regulating these 68 immune processing genes. Two loci
encoding novel transcripts with high homology to human immunoglobulin lambda-like
polypeptide 1 were uniquely upregulated in the tamoxifen-resistant models.
Letrozole proved to be a successful alternative to tamoxifen. Further study of
transcriptional changes associated with tamoxifen resistance including
immune-related genes could expand our mechanistic understanding and lead to
biomarkers predictive of escape or response to endocrine therapies.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4291054
PMID: 25421723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Cancer Causes Control. 2015 Jan;26(1):121-31. doi: 10.1007/s10552-014-0491-2.
Epub 2014 Nov 25.

Genetic variation in estrogen and progesterone pathway genes and breast cancer
risk: an exploration of tumor subtype-specific effects.

Nyante SJ(1), Gammon MD, Kaufman JS, Bensen JT, Lin DY, Barnholtz-Sloan JS, Hu Y,
He Q, Luo J, Millikan RC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD, USA, nyantesj@mail.nih.gov.

PURPOSE: To determine whether associations between estrogen pathway-related
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and breast cancer risk differ by molecular
subtype, we evaluated associations between SNPs in cytochrome P450 family 19
subfamily A polypeptide 1 (CYP19A1), estrogen receptor (ESR1), 3-beta
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I (HSD3B1), 17-beta hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type II (HSD17B2), progesterone receptor (PGR), and sex
hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) and breast cancer risk in a case-control study in
North Carolina.
METHODS: Cases (n = 1,972) were women 20-74 years old and diagnosed with breast
cancer between 1993 and 2001. Population-based controls (n = 1,776) were
frequency matched to cases by age and race. A total of 195 SNPs were genotyped,
and linkage disequilibrium was evaluated using the r (2) statistic. Odds ratios
(ORs) and 95 % confidence intervals (CIs) for associations with breast cancer
overall and by molecular subtype were estimated using logistic regression. Monte 
Carlo methods were used to control for multiple comparisons; two-sided p values
<3.3 × 10(-4) were statistically significant. Heterogeneity tests comparing the
two most common subtypes, luminal A (n = 679) and basal-like (n = 200), were
based on the Wald statistic.
RESULTS: ESR1 rs6914211 (AA vs. AT+TT, OR 2.24, 95 % CI 1.51-3.33), ESR1 rs985191
(CC vs. AA, OR 2.11, 95 % CI 1.43-3.13), and PGR rs1824128 (TT+GT vs. GG, OR
1.33, 95 % CI 1.14-1.55) were associated with risk after accounting for multiple 
comparisons. Rs6914211 and rs985191 were in strong linkage disequilibrium among
controls (African-Americans r (2) = 0.70; whites r (2) = 0.95). There was no
evidence of heterogeneity between luminal A and basal-like subtypes, and the
three SNPs were also associated with elevated risk of the less common luminal B, 
HER2+/ER-, and unclassified subtypes.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 and PGR SNPs were associated with risk, but lack of
heterogeneity between subtypes suggests variants in hormone-related genes may
play similar roles in the etiology of breast cancer molecular subtypes.

PMCID: PMC4291841
PMID: 25421376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Georgian Med News. 2014 Oct;(235):37-41.

Effect of estrogen receptor gene ESR1 polymorphism on development of premenstrual
syndrome.

Pakharenko L(1).

Author information: 
(1)SHEE "Ivano-Frankivsk National Medical University", Ivano-Frankivsk, Ukraine.

To identify risks of development of any disease is a priority of modern medicine.
The aim of this study was to investigate the frequency of polymorphic variants of
A-351G gene estrogen receptor ESR1 in patients with various forms of PMS.
Molecular genetic analysis of ESR1 gene polymorphism in 50 women with PMS (25
women of them had edematous form of disease, 25 - neuropsychical, 25 - mild, 25 -
severe form) was carried out. 25 women without diagnosis of PMS were examined as 
controls. The study A-351G polymorphism estrogen gene ESR1 showed no
statistically significant differences in the frequency of distribution of
genotypes and alleles between women with PMS and without this pathology. However,
the frequency of GG genotype in women with severe PMS was significantly higher in
8.0 times compared with healthy women (<U+03C7>2=4.87, p=0.03) and in women with
edematous form of PMS - in 7.0 times (<U+03C7>2=3.72, p=0.05). Thus, a polymorphic
variant of A-351G gene ESR1 estrogen can be considered as a marker of PMS.
Pathological variant GG genotype was significantly associated with the presence
of edematous and severe forms of the disease.

PMID: 25416214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2014 Nov 19;15:383. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-383.

Estrogen receptors genes polymorphisms and age at menarche in idiopathic
scoliosis.

Janusz P(1), Kotwicka M, Andrusiewicz M, Czaprowski D, Czubak J, Kotwicki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Orthopedics and Traumatology, Spine Disorders Unit,
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. mdpjanusz@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The age at menarche (AAM) is commonly in use in patients with IS as
one of the maturity indicator suggesting deceleration of the growth velocity. The
AAM was suggested to be related to predisposition and curve progression potential
of IS. The late age at menarche was reported to be associated with higher
prevalence of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis. The age at menarche is determined 
by both genetic and environmental factors as well as their interactions. Estrogen
receptors 1 and 2 polymorphism were reported to be associated with AAM: in ESR1
XbaI and PvuII site polymorphism and in ESR2 AluI site polymorphism.The purpose
of the study was to investigate associations of the ESR1 and ESR2 polymorphisms
with AAM in IS patients and to evaluate association of AAM with IS severity.
METHODS: 208 females with IS Caucasian females from Central Europe underwent
clinical, radiological and genetic examinations. Four SNPs were selected XbaI
(A/Grs9340799) and PvuII (C/T rs2234693) in ESR1and AluI (A/G rs4986938) and RasI
(A/G rs1256049) in ESR2. Samples were analyzed with polymerase chain reaction
followed by restriction fragments length polymorphism analysis (PCR-RFLP). The
age of a menarche was established during personal interview with the patients and
in case of children with their parents. The Cobb angle was measured.
RESULTS: All genotypes followed HWE. Mean AAM for patients was 154.8 ± 14.7
months (12.9 ± 1.2 years). The earliest AAM was 121 and latest 192 months. There 
was no statistically significant difference between AAM mean values in each
genotype, for the XbaI, PvuII, AluI and RsaI site polymorphisms the p values were
p=0.7141, p=0.9774, p=0.7973 and p=0.2282, respectively. Patients divided
according to Cobb into mild (<30°), moderate (30°-49°) or severe (= 50°) IS
revealed tendency to delay AAM: 151.9 ± 14.7; 155.2 ± 14.8 and 157.9 ± 14.0
months, respectively. There was statistical significant difference between
patients with mild <30° and severe = 50° IS, p=0.0267.
CONCLUSIONS: In IS patients estrogen receptors polymorphisms did not show
association with the AAM. Patients with severe IS form revealed delayed AAM than 
patients with mild IS form.

PMCID: PMC4247216
PMID: 25410117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2015 Feb;22(1):R51-67. doi: 10.1530/ERC-14-0096. Epub 2014
Nov 17.

Intratumoural inflammation and endocrine resistance in breast cancer.

Murray JI(1), West NR(1), Murphy LC(1), Watson PH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Deeley Research CentreBritish Columbia Cancer Agency, 2410 Lee Avenue,
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada V8R 6V5Translational Gastroenterology
UnitNuffield Department of Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UKDepartment of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics and the
Manitoba Institute of Cell BiologyUniversity of Manitoba and CancerCare Manitoba,
675 McDermot Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba, CanadaDepartment of Biochemistry and
MicrobiologyUniversity of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, CanadaDepartment 
of Pathology and Laboratory MedicineUniversity of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. (2)Deeley Research CentreBritish Columbia Cancer
Agency, 2410 Lee Avenue, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada V8R 6V5Translational 
Gastroenterology UnitNuffield Department of Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UKDepartment of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics
and the Manitoba Institute of Cell BiologyUniversity of Manitoba and CancerCare
Manitoba, 675 McDermot Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba, CanadaDepartment of
Biochemistry and MicrobiologyUniversity of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, 
CanadaDepartment of Pathology and Laboratory MedicineUniversity of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada Deeley Research CentreBritish
Columbia Cancer Agency, 2410 Lee Avenue, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada V8R
6V5Translational Gastroenterology UnitNuffield Department of Medicine, John
Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, UKDepartment of Biochemistry
and Medical Genetics and the Manitoba Institute of Cell BiologyUniversity of
Manitoba and CancerCare Manitoba, 675 McDermot Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
CanadaDepartment of Biochemistry and MicrobiologyUniversity of Victoria,
Victoria, British Columbia, CanadaDepartment of Pathology and Laboratory
MedicineUniversity of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Deeley Research CentreBritish Columbia Cancer Agency, 2410 Lee Avenue, Victoria, 
British Columbia, Canada V8R 6V5Translational Gastroenterology UnitNuffield
Department of Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford,
UKDepartment of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics and the Manitoba Institute of
Cell BiologyUniversity of Manitoba and CancerCare Manitoba, 675 McDermot Avenue, 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, CanadaDepartment of Biochemistry and MicrobiologyUniversity
of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, CanadaDepartment of Pathology and
Laboratory MedicineUniversity of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada pwatson@bccancer.bc.ca.

It is becoming clear that inflammation-associated mechanisms can affect
progression of breast cancer and modulate responses to treatment. Estrogen
receptor alpha (ERa (ESR1)) is the principal biomarker and therapeutic target for
endocrine therapies in breast cancer. Over 70% of patients are ESR1-positive at
diagnosis and are candidates for endocrine therapy. However, ESR1-positive
tumours can become resistant to endocrine therapy. Multiple mechanisms of
endocrine resistance have been proposed, including suppression of ESR1. This
review discusses the relationship between intratumoural inflammation and
endocrine resistance with a particular focus on inflammation-mediated suppression
of ESR1.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25404688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2014 Oct 30;5:187. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00187.
eCollection 2014.

Environmental and genetic contributors to salivary testosterone levels in
infants.

Xia K(1), Yu Y(2), Ahn M(3), Zhu H(3), Zou F(3), Gilmore JH(1), Knickmeyer RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel
Hill, NC , USA. (2)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel Hill, NC , USA. (3)Department of
Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel Hill, NC ,
USA.

Transient activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis in early infancy 
plays an important role in male genital development and sexual differentiation of
the brain, but factors contributing to individual variation in testosterone
levels during this period are poorly understood. We measured salivary
testosterone levels in 222 infants (119 males, 103 females, 108 singletons, 114
twins) between 2.70 and 4.80<U+2009>months of age. We tested 16 major demographic and
medical history variables for effects on inter-individual variation in salivary
testosterone. Using the subset of twins, we estimated genetic and environmental
contributions to salivary testosterone levels. Finally, we tested single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within ±5<U+2009>kb of genes involved in testosterone
synthesis, transport, signaling, and metabolism for associations with salivary
testosterone using univariate tests and random forest (RF) analysis. We report an
association between 5<U+2009>min APGAR scores and salivary testosterone levels in males.
Twin modeling indicated that individual variability in testosterone levels was
primarily explained by environmental factors. Regarding genetic variation,
univariate tests did not reveal any variants significantly associated with
salivary testosterone after adjusting for false discovery rate. The top hit in
males was rs10923844, an SNP of unknown function located downstream of HSD3B1 and
HSD3B2. The top hits in females were two SNPs located upstream of ESR1 (rs3407085
and rs2295190). RF analysis, which reflects joint and conditional effects of
multiple variants, indicated that genes involved in regulation of reproductive
function, particularly LHCGR, are related to salivary testosterone levels in male
infants, as are genes involved in cholesterol production, transport, and removal,
while genes involved in estrogen signaling are related to salivary testosterone
levels in female infants.

PMCID: PMC4214198
PMID: 25400620  [PubMed]


313. Biol Reprod. 2015 Feb;92(2):39. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.112854. Epub 2014 Nov
13.

Adrenomedullin2 (ADM2)/intermedin (IMD) in rat ovary: changes in estrous cycle
and pregnancy and its role in ovulation and steroidogenesis.

Chauhan M(1), Balakrishnan M(2), Blesson CS(2), Yallampalli C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas mschauha@bcm.edu. (2)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas.

Adrenomedullin2 (ADM2) is reported to facilitate embryo implantation and
placental development. Therefore, the current study was undertaken to identify if
ADM2 has a functional role in ovary to facilitate its reproductive actions. This 
study shows that the expression of ADM2 is differentially regulated in rat
estrous cycle and that ADM2 increases the synthesis and secretion of
17beta-estradiol accompanied with an increase in the expression of steroidogenic 
factor 1 (Sf1), estrogen receptor Esr1, and enzymes involved in steroidogenesis
in equine chorionic gonadotropin (eCG)-treated rat ovaries. In addition,
inhibition of endogenous ADM2 function in eCG-treated immature rats caused
impaired ovulation. Furthermore, the mRNA expression of Adm2 and receptor
activity modifying protein 3 is higher in the ovary on Day 18 compared to
nonpregnant and pregnant rats on Day 22. ADM2-like immunoreactivity is localized 
in granulosa cells, blood vessels, oocytes, cumulous oophorus, and corpus luteum 
of pregnant ovaries, suggesting a potential role for ADM2 in the ovary. This is
supported by the presence of ADM2-like immunoreactivity in the corpus luteum
during pregnancy and a decline in aromatase immunoreactivity in corpus luteum on 
Day 9 of gestation in rats infused with ADM2 antagonist during implantation and
decidualization phase. Taken together, this study suggests a potential
involvement of ADM2 in the rat ovary in regulating synthesis of estradiol to
support ovulation and facilitate efficient implantation and placental development
for a successful pregnancy.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4326727
PMID: 25395681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Dec;148(3):571-80. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3191-4. 
Epub 2014 Nov 14.

Pharmacogenomic diversity of tamoxifen metabolites and estrogen receptor genes in
Hispanics and non-Hispanic whites with breast cancer.

Rangel LB(1), Taraba JL, Frei CR, Smith L, Rodriguez G, Kuhn JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Biotechnology Program/RENORBIO, Health 
Sciences Center, Universidade Federal do Espirito Santo, Av. Marechal Campos,
1468, Maruipe, Vitoria, ES, 29040-090, Brazil.

Ethnic differences in patient genetics and breast cancer (BC) biology contribute 
to ethnic disparities in cancer presentation and patient outcome. We
prospectively evaluated SNPs within phase I and phase II tamoxifen (TAM)
metabolizing enzymes, and the estrogen receptor gene (ESR1), aiming to identify
potential pharmacogenomic ethnicity patterns in an ER-positive BC cohort
constituted of Hispanic and Non-Hispanic White (NHW) women in South Texas. Plasma
concentrations of TAM/metabolites were measured using HPLC. CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and
SULT1A1 genotypes were determined by DNA sequencing/Pyrosequencing technology.
ESR1 PvuII and XbaI SNPs were genotyped using Applied Biosystems Taqman Allelic
Discrimination Assay. Hispanics had higher levels of TAM, 4-hydroxytamoxifen, and
endoxifen than NHWs. There was a higher prevalence of CYP2D6 EM within Hispanics 
than NHWs, which corresponded to higher endoxifen levels, but no differences were
verified with regard to CYP2C9 and SULT1A1. We found a higher incidence of the
wild type forms of the ESR1 in Hispanics than NHWs. The performance status, the
disease stage at diagnosis, and the use of aromatase inhibitors might have
overcome the overall favorable pharmacogenomics profile of Hispanics when
compared to NHWs in relation to TAM therapy responsiveness. Our data strongly
point to ethnical peculiarities related to pharmacogenomics and demographic
features of TAM treated Hispanics and NHWs. In the era of pharmacogenomics and
its ultimate goal of individualized, efficacious and safe therapy, cancer studies
focused on the Hispanic population are warranted because this is the fastest
growing major demographic group, and an understudied segment in the U.S.

PMCID: PMC4413900
PMID: 25395315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. DNA Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;34(2):113-24. doi: 10.1089/dna.2014.2602. Epub 2014 Nov
12.

Cytotoxic mechanism of cytolethal distending toxin in nontyphoidal Salmonella
serovar (Salmonella Javiana) during macrophage infection.

Williams K(1), Gokulan K, Shelman D, Akiyama T, Khan A, Khare S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, National Center for Toxicological Research , U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, Arkansas.

Cytolethal distending toxin B (cdtB) is a conserved virulence factor in
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi. Here we report the presence and functionality 
of cdtB in some nontyphoidal Salmonella (NTS) serovars, including Salmonella
Javiana (cdtB+wt S. Javiana), isolated from imported food. To understand the role
of cdtB in NTS serovars, a deletion mutant (cdtB(-)<U+0394>S. Javiana) was constructed. 
Macrophages were infected with cdtB+wt S. Javiana (wild type), cdtB(-)<U+0394> S.
Javiana (mutant), and cdtB-negative NTS serovar (S. Typhimurium). Cytotoxic
activity and transcription level of genes involved in cell death (apoptosis,
autophagy, and necrosis) were assessed in infected macrophages. The cdtB+wt S.
Javiana caused cellular distension as well as high degree of vacuolization and
presence of the autophagosome marker LC3 in infected macrophages as compared with
cdtB(-)<U+0394>S. Javiana. The mRNA expression of genes involved in the induction of
autophagy in response to toxin (Esr1 and Pik3C3) and coregulators of autophagy
and apoptosis (Bax and Cyld) were significantly upregulated in cdtB(+)wt S.
Javiana-infected macrophages. As autophagy destroys internalized pathogens in
addition to the infected cell, it may reduce the spread of infection.

PMID: 25389664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Sex Med. 2015 Mar;12(3):676-84. doi: 10.1111/jsm.12753. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

A study of possible associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms in the
estrogen receptor 2 gene and female sexual desire.

Gunst A(1), Jern P, Westberg L, Johansson A, Salo B, Burri A, Spector T, Eriksson
E, Sandnabba NK, Santtila P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Logopedics, Åbo Akademi University, Turku,
Finland.

INTRODUCTION: Female sexual desire and arousal problems have been shown to have a
heritable component of moderate size. Previous molecular genetic studies on
sexual desire have mainly focused on genes associated with neurotransmitters such
as dopamine and serotonin. Nevertheless, there is reason to believe that hormones
with more specific functions concerning sexuality could have an impact on sexual 
desire and arousal.
AIM: The aim of the present study was to investigate the possible effects of 17
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in estrogen receptor genes on
female sexual desire and subjective and genital arousal (lubrication). Based on
previous research, we hypothesized that ESR1 and ESR2 are relevant genes that
contribute to female sexual desire and arousal.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The desire, arousal, and lubrication subdomains of the
Female Sexual Function Index self-report questionnaire were used.
METHODS: The present study involved 2,448 female twins and their sisters aged
18-49 who had submitted saliva samples for genotyping. The participants were a
subset from a large-scale, population-based sample.
RESULTS: We found nominally significant main effects on sexual desire for three
ESR2 -linked SNPs when controlled for anxiety, suggesting that individuals
homozygous for the G allele of the rs1271572 SNP, and the A allele of the
rs4986938 and rs928554 SNPs had lower levels of sexual desire. The rs4986938 SNP 
also had a nominally significant effect on lubrication. No effects for any of the
SNPs on subjective arousal could be detected.
CONCLUSIONS: The number of nominally significant results for SNPs in the ESR2
gene before correcting for multiple testing suggests that further studies on the 
possible influence of this gene on interindividual variation in female sexual
functioning are warranted. In contrast, no support for an involvement of ESR1 was
obtained. Our results should be interpreted with caution until replicated in
independent, large samples.

© 2014 International Society for Sexual Medicine.

PMID: 25385158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2014 Oct 22;5(3):164-76. eCollection 2014.

Sex hormone pathway gene polymorphisms are associated with risk of advanced
hepatitis C-related liver disease in males.

White DL(1), Liu Y(2), Garcia J(3), El-Serag HB(4), Jiao L(5), Tsavachidis S(2), 
Franco LM(6), Lee JS(7), Tavakoli-Tabasi S(8), Moore D(9), Goldman R(10),
Kuzniarek J(11), Ramsey DJ(11), Kanwal F(4), Marcelli M(12).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Epidemiology and Comparative Effectiveness Program, Section of Health
Services Research (IQuESt), Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor
College of Medicine Houston, TX, USA ; Texas Medical Center Digestive Disease
Center Houston, TX, USA ; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center at Baylor College of
Medicine Houston, TX, USA ; Center for Translational Research on Inflammatory
Diseases (CTRID), Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center Houston, TX,
USA. (2)Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center at Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX,
USA ; Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center at Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX, USA ;
Center for Translational Research on Inflammatory Diseases (CTRID), Michael E.
DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center Houston, TX, USA ; Section of
Endocrinology, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor College of
Medicine Houston, TX, USA. (4)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Michael
E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX, USA ;
Clinical Epidemiology and Comparative Effectiveness Program, Section of Health
Services Research (IQuESt), Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor
College of Medicine Houston, TX, USA ; Texas Medical Center Digestive Disease
Center Houston, TX, USA ; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center at Baylor College of
Medicine Houston, TX, USA. (5)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Michael
E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX, USA ;
Clinical Epidemiology and Comparative Effectiveness Program, Section of Health
Services Research (IQuESt), Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor
College of Medicine Houston, TX, USA ; Texas Medical Center Digestive Disease
Center Houston, TX, USA ; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center at Baylor College of
Medicine Houston, TX, USA ; Center for Translational Research on Inflammatory
Diseases (CTRID), Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center Houston, TX,
USA. (6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine
Houston, TX, USA. (7)Department of Systems Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, TX, USA. (8)Section of Infectious Diseases, Michael E. DeBakey Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center and Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX, USA.
(9)Department Molecular and Cell Biology and Department of Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine Houston, TX, USA. (10)Department of Oncology, Georgetown
University Medical Center Washington, DC, USA. (11)Clinical Epidemiology and
Comparative Effectiveness Program, Section of Health Services Research (IQuESt), 
Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor College of Medicine Houston, TX, 
USA. (12)Center for Translational Research on Inflammatory Diseases (CTRID),
Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center Houston, TX, USA ; Section of 
Endocrinology, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor College of
Medicine Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Males have excess advanced liver disease and cirrhosis risk including
from chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection though the reasons are unclear.
GOAL: To examine the role variants in genes involved in androgen and estrogen
biosynthesis and metabolism play in HCV-related liver disease risk in males.
METHODS: We performed a cross-sectional study evaluating single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 16 candidate genes involved in androgen and estrogen
ligand and receptor synthesis and risk of advanced hepatic fibrosis (F3/F4-F4)
and inflammation (A2/A3-A3). We calculated adjusted odds ratios (ORs) using
logistic regression and used multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) analysis 
to assess for gene-environment interaction.
RESULTS: Among 466 chronically HCV-infected males, 59% (n = 274) had advanced
fibrosis and 54% (n = 252) had advanced inflammation. Nine of 472 SNPs were
significantly associated with fibrosis risk; 4 in AKR1C3 (e.g., AKR1C3 rs2186174:
ORadj = 2.04, 95% CI 1.38-3.02), 1 each in AKR1C2 and ESR1, and 1 in HSD17B6.
Four SNPs were associated with inflammation risk, 2 in SRD5A1 (e.g., SRD5A1
rs248800: ORadj = 1.86, 95% CI 1.20-2.88) and 1 each in AKR1C2 and AKR1C3. MDR
analysis identified a single AKR1C3 locus (rs2186174) as the best model for
advanced fibrosis; while a 4-locus model with diabetes, AKR1C2 rs12414884, SRD5A1
rs6555406, and SRD5A1 rs248800 was best for inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: The consistency of our findings suggests AKR1C isoenzymes 2 and 3,
and potentially SRD5A1, may play a role in progression of HCV-related liver
disease in males. Future studies are needed to validate these findings and to
assess if similar associations exist in females.

PMCID: PMC4214264
PMID: 25379136  [PubMed]


318. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014 Nov 5;106(12). pii: dju334. doi: 10.1093/jnci/dju334.
Print 2014 Dec.

Volumetric mammographic density: heritability and association with breast cancer 
susceptibility loci.

Brand JS(1), Humphreys K(2), Thompson DJ(2), Li J(2), Eriksson M(2), Hall P(2),
Czene K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden (JSB, KH, ME, PH, KC); Department of Public Health and Primary 
Care, Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Cambridge, UK (DJT); Human
Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore (JL).
judith.brand@ki.se. (2)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden (JSB, KH, ME, PH, KC); Department of
Public Health and Primary Care, Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology,
Cambridge, UK (DJT); Human Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore (JL).

BACKGROUND: Mammographic density is a strong heritable trait, but data on its
genetic component are limited to area-based and qualitative measures. We studied 
the heritability of volumetric mammographic density ascertained by a
fully-automated method and the association with breast cancer susceptibility
loci.
METHODS: Heritability of volumetric mammographic density was estimated with a
variance component model in a sib-pair sample (N pairs = 955) of a Swedish
screening based cohort. Associations with 82 established breast cancer loci were 
assessed in an independent sample of the same cohort (N = 4025 unrelated women)
using linear models, adjusting for age, body mass index, and menopausal status.
All tests were two-sided, except for heritability analyses where one-sided tests 
were used.
RESULTS: After multivariable adjustment, heritability estimates (standard error) 
for percent dense volume, absolute dense volume, and absolute nondense volume
were 0.63 (0.06) and 0.43 (0.06) and 0.61 (0.06), respectively (all P < .001).
Percent and absolute dense volume were associated with rs10995190 (ZNF365; P =
9.0 × 10(-6) and 8.9 × 10(-7), respectively) and rs9485372 (TAB2; P = 1.8 ×
10(-5) and 1.8 × 10(-3), respectively). We also observed associations of
rs9383938 (ESR1) and rs2046210 (ESR1) with the absolute dense volume (P = 2.6 ×
10(-4) and 4.6 × 10(-4), respectively), and rs6001930 (MLK1) and rs17356907
(NTN4) with the absolute nondense volume (P = 6.7 × 10(-6) and 8.4 × 10(-5),
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the high heritability of mammographic density,
though estimates are weaker for absolute than percent dense volume. We also
demonstrate that the shared genetic component with breast cancer is not
restricted to dense tissues only.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25376863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Jul;23(7):949-56. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.219. Epub 2014 Nov
5.

C6ORF97-ESR1 breast cancer susceptibility locus: influence on progression and
survival in breast cancer patients.

Yamamoto-Ibusuki M(1), Yamamoto Y(2), Fujiwara S(1), Sueta A(2), Yamamoto S(1),
Hayashi M(1), Tomiguchi M(1), Takeshita T(1), Iwase H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. (2)1] Department of Breast and
Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto, Japan [2] Department of Molecular Targeting Therapy for Breast Cancer, 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto,
Japan.

Genome-wide association studies have identified a single-nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) to be associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. The biology of
one of the susceptibility locus C6ORF-ESR1 and whether it also contributes to
progression of established disease has not yet been ascertained. We examined the 
association of rs2046210 and its six linkage disequilibrium SNPs with
clinicopathological characteristics, prognosis, and gene expression levels of
ESR1 and the C6ORFs (C6ORF97:CCDC170, C6ORF211, C6ORF96:RMND1) in 344 breast
cancer tissue samples and 253 corresponding samples of adjacent normal tissue.
Tumor genotypes with homozygous risk alleles were more frequent than normal
tissues. The tumor genotypes of rs2046210 and rs6929137 with homozygous risk
alleles showed worse relapse-free survival (RFS, P=0.038 and P=0.031,
respectively), whereas no notable associations were observed with either
clinicopathological characteristics or expression of the peripheral genes. Higher
C6ORF97 expression correlated with ER negativity (P<0.0001), highly proliferative
characteristics (P=0.0005 for Ki67, P<0.0001 for nuclear grade) and worse RFS in 
the ER+/HER2- cohort (P=0.013), whereas the other two C6ORFs showed the inverse
associations. Furthermore, C6ORF97 showed significant worse prognostic values
especially in luminal B subtype in the publically available data sets. rs2046210 
and the upstream gene C6ORF97 might have substantial roles not only in
carcinogenesis but also in progression toward a more aggressive phenotype in
breast cancer patients, which suggests that functional studies of this locus are 
imperative.

PMCID: PMC4463506 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25370037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Virchows Arch. 2015 Jan;466(1):53-9. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1678-3. Epub 2014
Nov 5.

Heterogeneity of DNA methylation in multifocal prostate cancer.

Serenaite I(1), Daniunaite K, Jankevicius F, Laurinavicius A, Petroska D, Lazutka
JR, Jarmalaite S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Natural Sciences, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.

Comment in
    Virchows Arch. 2015 Jan;466(1):3-4.

Most prostate cancer (PCa) cases are multifocal, and separate foci display
histological and molecular heterogeneity. DNA hypermethylation is a frequent
alteration in PCa, but interfocal heterogeneity of these changes has not been
extensively investigated. Ten pairs of foci from multifocal PCa and 15 benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) samples were obtained from prostatectomy specimens,
resulting altogether in 35 samples. Methylation-specific PCR (MSP) was used to
evaluate methylation status of nine tumor suppressor genes (TSGs), and a set of
selected TSGs was quantitatively analyzed for methylation intensity by
pyrosequencing. Promoter sequences of the RASSF1 and ESR1 genes were methylated
in all paired PCa foci, and frequent (=75 %) DNA methylation was detected in
RARB, GSTP1, and ABCB1 genes. MSP revealed different methylation status of at
least one gene in separate foci in 8 out of 10 multifocal tumors. The mean
methylation level of ESR1, GSTP1, RASSF1, and RARB differed between the paired
foci of all PCa cases. The intensity of DNA methylation in these TSGs was
significantly higher in PCa cases than in BPH (p < 0.001). Hierarchical cluster
analysis revealed a divergent methylation profile of paired PCa foci, while the
foci from separate cases with biochemical recurrence showed similar methylation
profile and the highest mean levels of DNA methylation. Our findings suggest that
PCa tissue is heterogeneous, as between paired foci differences in DNA
methylation status were found. Common epigenetic profile of recurrent tumors can 
be inferred from our data.

PMID: 25369892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Endocrinol. 2015 Jan;224(1):85-95. doi: 10.1530/JOE-14-0549. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Estetrol is a weak estrogen antagonizing estradiol-dependent mammary gland
proliferation.

Gérard C(1), Blacher S(1), Communal L(1), Courtin A(1), Tskitishvili E(1),
Mestdagt M(1), Munaut C(1), Noel A(1), Gompel A(2), Péqueux C(3), Foidart JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor and Development BiologyGIGA-Cancer, Institute of
Pathology, University of Liège, CHU-B23, B-4000 Liège, BelgiumINSERM-UMRS
938Université Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC), F-75005 Paris, FranceGynaecological
Endocrinology UnitParis Descartes University, Hôpitaux Universitaires, F-75006
Paris, France. (2)Laboratory of Tumor and Development BiologyGIGA-Cancer,
Institute of Pathology, University of Liège, CHU-B23, B-4000 Liège,
BelgiumINSERM-UMRS 938Université Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC), F-75005 Paris,
FranceGynaecological Endocrinology UnitParis Descartes University, Hôpitaux
Universitaires, F-75006 Paris, France Laboratory of Tumor and Development
BiologyGIGA-Cancer, Institute of Pathology, University of Liège, CHU-B23, B-4000 
Liège, BelgiumINSERM-UMRS 938Université Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC), F-75005
Paris, FranceGynaecological Endocrinology UnitParis Descartes University,
Hôpitaux Universitaires, F-75006 Paris, France. (3)Laboratory of Tumor and
Development BiologyGIGA-Cancer, Institute of Pathology, University of Liège,
CHU-B23, B-4000 Liège, BelgiumINSERM-UMRS 938Université Pierre et Marie Curie
(UPMC), F-75005 Paris, FranceGynaecological Endocrinology UnitParis Descartes
University, Hôpitaux Universitaires, F-75006 Paris, France C.Pequeux@ulg.ac.be.

Estetrol (E4) is a natural estrogen produced exclusively by the human fetal liver
during pregnancy. Its physiological activity remains unknown. In contrast to
ethinyl estradiol and estradiol (E2), E4 has a minimal impact on liver cell
activity and could provide a better safety profile in contraception or hormone
therapy. The aim of this study was to delineate if E4 exhibits an activity
profile distinct from that of E2 on mammary gland. Compared with E2, E4 acted as 
a low-affinity estrogen in both human in vitro and murine in vivo models. E4 was 
100 times less potent than E2 to stimulate the proliferation of human breast
epithelial (HBE) cells and murine mammary gland in vitro and in vivo
respectively. This effect was prevented by fulvestrant and tamoxifen, supporting 
the notion that ERa (ESR1) is the main mediator of the estrogenic effect of E4 on
the breast. Interestingly, when E4 was administered along with E2, it
significantly antagonized the strong stimulatory effect of E2 on HBE cell
proliferation and on the growth of mammary ducts. This study characterizes for
the first time the impact of E4 on mammary gland. Our results highlight that E4
is less potent than E2 and exhibits antagonistic properties toward the
proliferative effect of E2 on breast epithelial cells. These data support E4 as a
potential new estrogen for clinical use with a reduced impact on breast
proliferation.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25359896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 24;5:5303. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6303.

Genome-wide association study identifies multiple loci associated with both
mammographic density and breast cancer risk.

Lindström S(1), Thompson DJ(2), Paterson AD(3), Li J(4), Gierach GL(5), Scott
C(6), Stone J(7), Douglas JA(8), dos-Santos-Silva I(9), Fernandez-Navarro P(10), 
Verghase J(11), Smith P(2), Brown J(2), Luben R(12), Wareham NJ(13), Loos RJ(14),
Heit JA(15), Pankratz VS(6), Norman A(6), Goode EL(6), Cunningham JM(16),
deAndrade M(6), Vierkant RA(6), Czene K(4), Fasching PA(17), Baglietto L(18),
Southey MC(19), Giles GG(18), Shah KP(8), Chan HP(20), Helvie MA(20), Beck
AH(21), Knoblauch NW(21), Hazra A(22), Hunter DJ(22), Kraft P(23), Pollan M(10), 
Figueroa JD(5), Couch FJ(24), Hopper JL(25), Hall P(4), Easton DF(26), Boyd
NF(27), Vachon CM(6), Tamimi RM(22).

Author information: 
(1)1] Program in Genetic Epidemiology and Statistical Genetics, Harvard School Of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [2] Department of Epidemiology,
Harvard School Of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (2)1] Centre
for Genetic Epidemiology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK [2]
Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge 
CB1 8RN, UK. (3)Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8. (4)Department of Medical Epidemiology
and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden. (5)Hormonal
and Reproductive Epidemiology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20850, USA. (6)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. (7)Centre for Genetic Origins of Health and
Disease, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia 6009,
Australia. (8)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (9)Faculty of Epidemiology and Population
Health, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London WC1E 7HT, UK.
(10)1] Cancer and Environmental Epidemiology Unit, National Center for
Epidemiology, Carlos III Institute of Health, Madrid 28029, Spain [2] Consortium 
for Biomedical Research in Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBER en Epidemiología
y Salud Pública-CIBERESP), Madrid 28029, Spain. (11)1] Centre for Genetic
Epidemiology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK [2] Department of
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK
[3] Plastic Surgery Unit, Royal Free Hospital, London NW3 2QG, UK. (12)Centre for
Genetic Epidemiology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK. (13)Medical
Research Council (MRC) Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic Science,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK. (14)1] Medical Research Council
(MRC) Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic Science, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK [2] The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, The
Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, The Mindich Child Health
and Development Institute, New York, New York 10029, USA. (15)Division of
Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
55905, USA. (16)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. (17)1] Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, 
Erlangen University Hospital, Friedrich Alexander University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center Erlangen-EMN, 910 54 Erlangen,
Germany [2] Division Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
California at Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles,
California 90024, USA. (18)1] Cancer Epidemiology Centre, Cancer Council
Victoria, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia [2] Centre for Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University
of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. (19)Department of Pathology,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. (20)Department of
Radiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.
(21)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (22)1] Program in Genetic
Epidemiology and Statistical Genetics, Harvard School Of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA [2] Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School Of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [3] Channing Division of Network
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (23)1] 
Program in Genetic Epidemiology and Statistical Genetics, Harvard School Of
Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [2] Department of Epidemiology,
Harvard School Of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA [3] Department 
of Biostatistics, Harvard School Of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA. (24)1] Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA [2] Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. (25)Centre for Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University
of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. (26)1] Centre for Genetic
Epidemiology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK [2] Department of
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK
[3] Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK.
(27)Campbell Family Institute for Breast Cancer Research, Ontario Cancer
Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 2M9.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2015;6:8358.

Mammographic density reflects the amount of stromal and epithelial tissues in
relation to adipose tissue in the breast and is a strong risk factor for breast
cancer. Here we report the results from meta-analysis of genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS) of three mammographic density phenotypes: dense area, non-dense
area and percent density in up to 7,916 women in stage 1 and an additional 10,379
women in stage 2. We identify genome-wide significant (P<5 × 10(-8)) loci for
dense area (AREG, ESR1, ZNF365, LSP1/TNNT3, IGF1, TMEM184B and SGSM3/MKL1),
non-dense area (8p11.23) and percent density (PRDM6, 8p11.23 and TMEM184B). Four 
of these regions are known breast cancer susceptibility loci, and four additional
regions were found to be associated with breast cancer (P<0.05) in a large
meta-analysis. These results provide further evidence of a shared genetic basis
between mammographic density and breast cancer and illustrate the power of
studying intermediate quantitative phenotypes to identify putative
disease-susceptibility loci.

PMCID: PMC4320806
PMID: 25342443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 1;193(11):5444-52. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303400. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

X-Chromosome complement and estrogen receptor signaling independently contribute 
to the enhanced TLR7-mediated IFN-a production of plasmacytoid dendritic cells
from women.

Laffont S(1), Rouquié N(1), Azar P(1), Seillet C(1), Plumas J(2), Aspord C(2),
Guéry JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Unité Mixte de Recherche 1043, Toulouse F-31300, France; Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, U5282, Toulouse F-31300, France; Centre de
Physiopathologie de Toulouse Purpan, Université Toulouse 3, Toulouse F-31300,
France; (2)Recherche et Développement Laboratoire, Etablissement Français du Sang
Rhône-Alpes, La Tronche F-38701, France; Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble
F-38041, France; and Immunobiology and Immunotherapy of Cancers, INSERM U823, La 
Tronche F-38701, France. (3)INSERM, Unité Mixte de Recherche 1043, Toulouse
F-31300, France; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, U5282, Toulouse
F-31300, France; Centre de Physiopathologie de Toulouse Purpan, Université
Toulouse 3, Toulouse F-31300, France; Jean-Charles.Guery@inserm.fr.

Human plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) play a major role in innate immunity
through the production of type I IFNs after TLR engagement by pathogens.
Sex-based differences in the innate function of human pDCs have been established,
with pDCs from women exhibiting enhanced TLR7-mediated IFN-a production as
compared with pDCs from males. In mice, we recently provided evidence for a role 
of estrogens as a positive regulator of pDC innate functions through
cell-intrinsic estrogen receptor a signaling, but did not exclude a role for
other X-linked factors, particularly in human pDCs. In this study, we
investigated the respective contribution of X chromosome dosage and sex hormones 
using a humanized mouse model in which male or female NOD-SCID-ß2m(-/-) were
transplanted with human progenitor cells purified from either male or female cord
blood cells. We showed that, in response to TLR7 ligands, the frequency of IFN-a-
and TNF-a-producing pDCs from either sex was greater in female than in male host 
mice, suggesting a positive role for estrogens. Indeed, blockade of estrogen
receptor signaling during pDC development in vitro inhibited TLR7-mediated IFN-a 
production by human pDCs, which expressed both ESR1 and ESR2 genes.
Interestingly, we also found that X chromosome dosage contributed to this sex
bias as female pDCs have an enhanced TLR7-mediated IFN-a response as compared
with male ones, irrespective of the sex of the recipient mice. Together, these
results indicate that female sex hormones, estrogens, and X chromosome complement
independently contribute to the enhanced TLR7-mediated IFN-a response of pDCs in 
women.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25339659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Ovarian Res. 2014 Oct 23;7:96. doi: 10.1186/s13048-014-0096-0.

Expression and molecular consequences of inhibition of estrogen receptors in
granulosa cells of bovine follicles.

Rovani MT, Gasperin BG, Ilha GF, Ferreira R, Bohrer RC, Duggavathi R, Bordignon
V, Gonçalves PB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biotechnology and Animal Reproduction - BioRep, Federal
University of Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. bayard@ufsm.br.

BACKGROUND: Estradiol (E2) receptors mediate E2 effects on cell proliferation and
apoptosis under normal and pathological conditions. However, the mechanisms
involved in E2 signaling are not completely understood. The objectives in this
study were to evaluate the expression of estrogen receptors (ESRs) during
follicular selection in cattle, and the effect of intrafollicular injection of
fulvestrant (an antagonist of ESRs) on follicular development and transcript
abundance in granulosa cells.
METHODS: Granulosa cells were obtained from the two largest follicles around
follicular deviation, after FSH treatment and after intrafollicular injection of 
fulvestrant. Ovarian follicular dynamics monitored by ultrasonography and
quantitative real time PCR were used to validate the in vivo model and
investigate the effects of FSH supplementation or ESR blockade on mRNA expression
of estradiol-related genes.
RESULTS: ESR1 and ESR2 were expressed in granulosa cells of both dominant (F1)
and subordinate (F2) follicles, but their transcripts levels were higher in F1
than F2 after follicular deviation. FSH treatment maintained mRNA levels of both 
ESR1 and ESR2 in F2 follicles at similar levels observed in F1 follicles.
Intrafollicular injection of 100 µM fulvestrant inhibited follicular growth and
decreased CYP19A1 mRNA levels. Transcript levels for both ESR1 and ESR2 were not 
affected by fulvestrant injection. Analyses of FSH-regulated genes revealed that 
ESRs inhibition in the dominant follicle decreased the transcript levels of the
GJA1 but not those of PRKAR2B, MRO or LRP11 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that: both ESR1 and ESR2 are regulated during 
follicular deviation and dominance in cattle and in response to FSH treatment,
and ESRs are required for normal gene expression and development of the dominant 
follicle. Furthermore, we have validated an in vivo model to study estrogen
signaling during follicular development that allows paracrine signaling between
different follicular cells in a physiological endocrine environment.

PMCID: PMC4210628
PMID: 25339519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Nov;148(2):315-25. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3163-8. 
Epub 2014 Oct 22.

Development of a robust RNA-based classifier to accurately determine ER, PR, and 
HER2 status in breast cancer clinical samples.

Wilson TR(1), Xiao Y, Spoerke JM, Fridlyand J, Koeppen H, Fuentes E, Huw LY,
Abbas I, Gower A, Schleifman EB, Desai R, Fu L, Sumiyoshi T, O'Shaughnessy JA,
Hampton GM, Lackner MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology Biomarker Development, Genentech Inc., 1 DNA Way, South
San Francisco, CA, USA.

Breast cancers are categorized into three subtypes based on protein expression of
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth
factor receptor-2 (HER2/ERBB2). Patients enroll onto experimental clinical trials
based on ER, PR, and HER2 status and, as receptor status is prognostic and
defines treatment regimens, central receptor confirmation is critical for
interpreting results from these trials. Patients enrolling onto experimental
clinical trials in the metastatic setting often have limited available archival
tissue that might better be used for comprehensive molecular profiling rather
than slide-intensive reconfirmation of receptor status. We developed a Random
Forests-based algorithm using a training set of 158 samples with centrally
confirmed IHC status, and subsequently validated this algorithm on multiple test 
sets with known, locally determined IHC status. We observed a strong correlation 
between target mRNA expression and IHC assays for HER2 and ER, achieving an
overall accuracy of 97 and 96%, respectively. For determining PR status, which
had the highest discordance between central and local IHC, incorporation of
expression of co-regulated genes in a multivariate approach added predictive
value, outperforming the single, target gene approach by a 10% margin in overall 
accuracy. Our results suggest that multiplexed qRT-PCR profiling of ESR1, PGR,
and ERBB2 mRNA, along with several other subtype associated genes, can
effectively confirm breast cancer subtype, thereby conserving tumor sections and 
enabling additional biomarker data to be obtained from patients enrolled onto
experimental clinical trials.

PMCID: PMC4223539
PMID: 25338319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 20;5:5260. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6260.

Genome-wide association study of breast cancer in Latinas identifies novel
protective variants on 6q25.

Fejerman L(1), Ahmadiyeh N(2), Hu D(1), Huntsman S(1), Beckman KB(3), Caswell
JL(1), Tsung K(2), John EM(4), Torres-Mejia G(5), Carvajal-Carmona L(6),
Echeverry MM(7), Tuazon AM(7), Ramirez C(8); COLUMBUS Consortium, Gignoux CR(9), 
Eng C(10), Gonzalez-Burchard E(10), Henderson B(11), Le Marchand L(12),
Kooperberg C(13), Hou L(14), Agalliu I(15), Kraft P(16), Lindström S(16),
Perez-Stable EJ(1), Haiman CA(11), Ziv E(1).

Collaborators: Carvajal-Carmona L, Echeverry MM, Bohórquez ME, Prieto R, Criollo 
Á, Ramírez C, Estrada AP, Suáres JJ, Mateus G, Castro JM, Sánchez Y, Murillo R,
Lucia Serrano M, Sanabria C, Olaya JG, Bolaños F, Vélez A, Carmona JA, Vélez A,
Rodríguez NG, Serón Sousa C, Mendez CE, Galviz AI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Institute of
Human Genetics, University of California San Fancisco, San Francisco, California 
94158, USA. (2)Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94122, USA. (3)University of Minnesota Genomics Center,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. (4)1] Cancer Prevention Institute of
California, Fremont, California 94538, USA [2] Division of Epidemiology,
Department of Health Research and Policy, Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California 94305, USA. (5)National
Institute of Public Health, Cuernavaca 62100, Mexico. (6)1] Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis,
California 95616, USA [2] Research Group, Citogenética Filogenia y Evolución de
Poblaciones, University of Tolima, Ibagué 7652000, Colombia. (7)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis,
California 95616, USA. (8)Research Group, Citogenética Filogenia y Evolución de
Poblaciones, University of Tolima, Ibagué 7652000, Colombia. (9)Department of
Genetics, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California 94305, USA. (10)Division of 
Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, Institute for Human
Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California
94158, USA. (11)Department of Preventive Medicine, Norris Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
California 90033, USA. (12)University of Hawaii Cancer Center, Honolulu, Hawaii
96813, USA. (13)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA. (14)Department of Preventive
Medicine, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. (15)Department
of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York 10461, USA. (16)Program in Genetic Epidemiology and Statistical
Genetics, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The genetic contributions to breast cancer development among Latinas are not well
understood. Here we carry out a genome-wide association study of breast cancer in
Latinas and identify a genome-wide significant risk variant, located 5' of the
Estrogen Receptor 1 gene (ESR1; 6q25 region). The minor allele for this variant
is strongly protective (rs140068132: odds ratio (OR) 0.60, 95% confidence
interval (CI) 0.53-0.67, P=9 × 10(-18)), originates from Indigenous Americans and
is uncorrelated with previously reported risk variants at 6q25. The association
is stronger for oestrogen receptor-negative disease (OR 0.34, 95% CI 0.21-0.54)
than oestrogen receptor-positive disease (OR 0.63, 95% CI 0.49-0.80; P
heterogeneity=0.01) and is also associated with mammographic breast density, a
strong risk factor for breast cancer (P=0.001). rs140068132 is located within
several transcription factor-binding sites and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays with MCF-7 nuclear protein demonstrate differential binding of the G/A
alleles at this locus. These results highlight the importance of conducting
research in diverse populations.

PMCID: PMC4204111
PMID: 25327703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2015 Apr;141(4):633-45. doi: 10.1007/s00432-014-1849-2. 
Epub 2014 Oct 17.

Genetic polymorphism of ESR1 rs2881766 increases breast cancer risk in Korean
women.

Son BH(1), Kim MK, Yun YM, Kim HJ, Yu JH, Ko BS, Kim H, Ahn SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of
Ulsan, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: We performed a case-control study to evaluate the association of genetic
polymorphisms of estrogen-metabolizing enzyme genes and estrogen receptor genes
with breast cancer risk according to age group and subtypes in Korean women.
METHODS: Breast cancer patients (n = 830) and the hospital healthy controls (n = 
390) with both clinical information and SNP data were included in the study. Age 
was divided into three groups: premenopausal under 35 years (n = 64),
premenopausal over 35 years (n = 456), and postmenopausal women (n = 310),
respectively. Tumor subtype was classified into four subtypes: luminal A, luminal
B, HER2-overexpressing, and triple-negative, respectively. Genotyping of the
selected SNPs in ESR1, ESR2, CYP1A1, CYP1B1, and COMT was conducted using the
VeraCode Golden Gate Genotyping Assay Technology. Multiple logistic regression
models (dominant, recessive, and additive) were applied to determine the odds
ratio, 95% confidence interval, and p value.
RESULTS: ESR1, rs2881766, rs2077647, rs926778, and rs2273206 polymorphisms
increased breast cancer risk, and rs3798377 decreased the risk in overall
patients. The association between SNP genotype and breast cancer risk was varied 
according to age groups and tumor subtypes. For age subgroups, rs2881766
increased breast cancer risk in the all three age groups, and rs926778 increased 
the risk in premenopausal over 35 years women and in postmenopausal women. For
the tumor subtypes, rs2881766 increased breast cancer risk manly in luminal A,
HER2-overexpressing, and triple-negative subtypes except for luminal B subtype,
and rs926778 increased the risk in luminal A and triple-negative subtypes.
Rs3798577 decreased the risk in luminal B and triple-negative subtypes.
CONCLUSION: The results showed that ESR1 rs2881766 polymorphism increased breast 
cancer risk and rs3798377 decreased the risk in Korean women. Because of wide
variation of the association between SNP genotype and breast cancer risk
according to age group and tumor subtypes, further studies such as a large-scale 
cohort study need for validation and test of biologic significance.

PMID: 25323936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2015 Jan;34(1):112-9. doi: 10.1002/etc.2766. Epub 2014 Nov 
25.

A time-course transcriptional kinetics of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal and 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axes in zebrafish eleutheroembryos after exposure 
to norgestrel.

Liang YQ(1), Huang GY, Ying GG, Liu SS, Jiang YX, Liu S, Peng FJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Guangzhou Institute of
Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

The objective of the present study was to investigate the effects of norgestrel
on the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axes in zebrafish eleutheroembryos. Zebrafish embryos were exposed to
different concentrations of norgestrel (0<U+2009>ng<U+2009>L(-1) , 5<U+2009>ng<U+2009>L(-1) , 50<U+2009>ng<U+2009>L(-1) ,
and 100<U+2009>ng<U+2009>L(-1) ) for 144<U+2009>h post fertilization (hpf), and the transcriptional
profiles of the HPG and HPA axes were examined every day. Norgestrel modulated
the expression of Pgr and Vtg1 messenger (m)RNAs mainly at 96 hpf for all
treatment groups. In addition, norgestrel strongly altered the expression of
Cyp11a1 mRNA above 5<U+2009>ng<U+2009>L(-1) (significant upregulation from 48 hpf to 120 hpf
and significant downregulation for 144 hpf). Norgestrel treatment could
significantly induce expression of Cyp19a1a, Cyp11b, Gnrh2, Gnrh3, and Lhb mRNAs 
but inhibit transcripts of Hsd11b2 and Crh genes above 5<U+2009>ng<U+2009>L(-1) at different
time points. The transcriptional expression levels of Esr1, Ar, Star, Hsd17b3,
Fshb, and Pomc were also mediated by 5<U+2009>ng<U+2009>L(-1) norgestrel or higher during
different exposure periods. Taken together, the overall results imply that the
transcriptional changes in zebrafish eleutheroembryos may pose a potential effect
on embryonic development, in particular in the brain and gonadogenesis.

© 2014 SETAC.

PMID: 25319565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Headache Pain. 2014 Oct 14;15:62. doi: 10.1186/1129-2377-15-62.

Genetic association and gene expression studies suggest that genetic variants in 
the SYNE1 and TNF genes are related to menstrual migraine.

Rodriguez-Acevedo AJ, Smith RA, Roy B, Sutherland H, Lea RA, Frith A, MacGregor
EA, Griffiths LR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Centre, Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation,
Queensland University of Technology, Musk Ave, Kelvin Grove, Brisbane, QLD 4059, 
Australia. lyn.griffiths@qut.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Menstrual migraine (MM) encompasses pure menstrual migraine (PMM) and
menstrually-related migraine (MRM). This study was aimed at investigating genetic
variants that are potentially related to MM, specifically undertaking genotyping 
and mRNA expression analysis of the ESR1, PGR, SYNE1 and TNF genes in MM cases
and non-migraine controls.
METHODS: A total of 37 variants distributed across 14 genes were genotyped in 437
DNA samples (282 cases and 155 controls). In addition levels of gene expression
were determined in 74 cDNA samples (41 cases and 33 controls). Association and
correlation analysis were performed using Plink and RStudio.
RESULTS: SNPs rs3093664 and rs9371601 in TNF and SYNE1 genes respectively, were
significantly associated with migraine in the MM population (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009
respectively). Analysis of qPCR results found no significant difference in levels
of gene expression between cases and controls. However, we found a significant
correlation between the expression of ESR1 and SYNE1, ESR1 and PGR and TNF and
SYNE1 in samples taken during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that SNPs rs9371601 and rs3093664 in the SYNE1 and 
TNF genes respectively, are associated with MM. The present study also provides
strong evidence to support the correlation of ESR1, PGR, SYNE1 and TNF gene
expression in MM.

PMCID: PMC4196204
PMID: 25315199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 13;9(10):e109659. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109659.
eCollection 2014.

Estrogen receptor 1 gene expression and its combination with estrogen receptor 2 
or aromatase expression predicts survival in non-small cell lung cancer.

Aresti U(1), Carrera S(2), Iruarrizaga E(2), Fuente N(2), Marrodan I(2), de
Lobera AR(2), Muñoz A(2), Buque A(1), Condori E(2), Ugalde I(2), Calvo B(1),
Vivanco GL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Laboratory, Cruces University Hospital/BioCruces Health
Research Institute, Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain. (2)Medical Oncology Department,
Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain.

The biological roles of estrogen receptor 1 (ERS1), estrogen receptor 2 (ERS2),
and aromatase (CYP19A1) genes in the development of non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is unclear, as is the use of their expression as a prognostic factor. The
aim of this study was to investigate the prognostic value of estrogen receptors
and aromatase mRNA expression, along with aromatase protein concentration, in
resected NSCLC patients. Tumor and non-tumor lung tissue samples were analyzed
for the mRNA expression of ERS1, ERS2 and CYP19A1 by RT-PCR. Aromatase
concentration was measured with an ELISA. A total of 96 patients were included.
ERS1 expression was significantly higher in non-tumor tissue than in tumor
samples. Two gene expression categories were created for each gene (and protein):
high and low. ERS1 high category showed increased overall survival (OS) when
compared to the low expression category. Aromatase protein concentration was
significantly higher in tumor samples. Higher ERS1 expression in tumor tissues
was related to longer overall survival. The analysis of gene expression
combinations provides evidence for longer OS when both ERS1 and ERS2 are highly
expressed. ESR1, alone or in combination with ERS2 or CYP19A1, is the most
determining prognostic factor within the analyzed 3 genes. It seems that ERS1 can
play a role in NSCLC prognosis, alone or in combination with other genes such as 
ERS2 or Cyp19a1. ERS2 in combination with aromatase concentration could have a
similar function.

PMCID: PMC4195686
PMID: 25310221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Arkh Patol. 2014 Jul-Aug;76(4):15-7.

[Numerical impairments in genes in breast cancer: a multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification study].

[Article in Russian]

Matsionis AE, Petrov AV, Gorelik MZ, Zavalishina LE.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze breast cancer samples using the new technique multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay. MATERIAL AND METHODS;
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast carcinoma samples from 65 patients were
examined. After manual microdissection, DNA was isolated using a commercial kit
("QIAGEN") and analyzed with SALSA MLPA KIT P078-B1 Breast Tumour
("MRC-Holland"). Capillary electrophoresis provided results.
RESULTS: MLPA assay was successful in all examined samples. The amplification and
deletion frequencies of the analyzed genes were in line with the literature data.
The technique requires conventional work-related skills in a molecular genetic
laboratory and, as a whole, presents no problems with its usage. The
interpretation of results is devoid of subjective meaning due to exclusively
their mathematical analysis. MLPA assay provides an insight into numerical
impairments in the following genes: ERBB2, MYC, TRAF4, C11orf30 (EMSY), ADAM9,
IKBKB, CCNE1, TOP2A, CDH1, CDC6, ESR1, CPD, EGFR, MTDH, CCND1, BIRC5, MED1,
FGFR1, MAPT, PRDM14, and AURKA.
CONCLUSION: MLPA is an easy-to-use and promising method for multiplex genetic
analysis of tumor cells in breast cancer.

PMID: 25306619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 1;74(23):7137-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1212. Epub
2014 Oct 10.

Densely ionizing radiation acts via the microenvironment to promote aggressive
Trp53-null mammary carcinomas.

Illa-Bochaca I(1), Ouyang H(1), Tang J(2), Sebastiano C(3), Mao JH(2), Costes
SV(2), Demaria S(4), Barcellos-Hoff MH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, New York University School of Medicine, New 
York, New York. (2)Department of Pathology, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, New York. (3)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, Berkeley, California. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology,
New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York. Life Sciences
Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, New York University School of Medicine, New 
York, New York. mhbarcellos-hoff@nyumc.org.

Densely ionizing radiation, which is present in the space radiation environment
and used in radiation oncology, has potentially greater carcinogenic effect
compared with sparsely ionizing radiation that is prevalent on earth. Here, we
used a radiation chimera in which mice were exposed to densely ionizing 350
MeV/amu Si-particles, <U+03B3>-radiation, or sham-irradiated and transplanted 3 days
later with syngeneic Trp53-null mammary fragments. Trp53-null tumors arising in
mice irradiated with Si-particles had a shorter median time to appearance and
grew faster once detected compared with those in sham-irradiated or <U+03B3>-irradiated 
mice. Tumors were further classified by markers keratin 8/18 (K18, KRT18),
keratin 14 (K14, KRT14) and estrogen receptor (ER, ESR1), and expression
profiling. Most tumors arising in sham-irradiated hosts were comprised of both
K18- and K14-positive cells (K14/18) while those tumors arising in irradiated
hosts were mostly K18. Keratin staining was significantly associated with ER
status: K14/18 tumors were predominantly ER-positive, whereas K18 tumors were
predominantly ER-negative. Genes differentially expressed in K18 tumors compared 
with K14/18 tumor were associated with ERBB2 and KRAS, metastasis, and loss of
E-cadherin. Consistent with this, K18 tumors tended to grow faster and be more
metastatic than K14/18 tumors, however, K18 tumors in particle-irradiated mice
grew significantly larger and were more metastatic compared with sham-irradiated 
mice. An expression profile that distinguished K18 tumors arising in
particle-irradiated mice compared with sham-irradiated mice was enriched in
mammary stem cell, stroma, and Notch signaling genes. These data suggest that
carcinogenic effects of densely ionizing radiation are mediated by the
microenvironment, which elicits more aggressive tumors compared with similar
tumors arising in sham-irradiated hosts.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25304265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Oncotarget. 2014 Oct 30;5(20):9864-76.

Comprehensive analysis of long non-coding RNAs in human breast cancer clinical
subtypes.

Su X(1), Malouf GG(2), Chen Y(3), Zhang J(1), Yao H(1), Valero V(3), Weinstein
JN(1), Spano JP(2), Meric-Bernstam F(4), Khayat D(2), Esteva FJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Groupe Hospitalier
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Department of Medical Oncology, University Pierre and Marie
Curie (Paris VI), Institut Universitaire de Cancérologie, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(3)Breast Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. (4)Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (5)Breast Medical Oncology Program, 
New York University Cancer Institute, New York, NY, USA.

Accumulating evidence highlights the potential role of long non-coding RNAs
(lncRNAs) as biomarkers and therapeutic targets in solid tumors. However, the
role of lncRNA expression in human breast cancer biology, prognosis and molecular
classification remains unknown. Herein, we established the lncRNA profile of 658 
infiltrating ductal carcinomas of the breast from The Cancer Genome Atlas
project. We found lncRNA expression to correlate with the gene expression and
chromatin landscape of human mammary epithelial cells (non-transformed) and the
breast cancer cell line MCF-7. Unsupervised consensus clustering of lncRNA
revealed four subgroups that displayed different prognoses. Gene set enrichment
analysis for cis- and trans-acting lncRNAs showed enrichment for breast cancer
signatures driven by master regulators of breast carcinogenesis. Interestingly,
the lncRNA HOTAIR was significantly overexpressed in the HER2-enriched subgroup, 
while the lncRNA HOTAIRM1 was significantly overexpressed in the basal-like
subgroup. Estrogen receptor (ESR1) expression was associated with distinct lncRNA
networks in lncRNA clusters III and IV. Importantly, almost two thirds of the
lncRNAs were marked by enhancer chromatin modifications (i.e., H3K27ac),
suggesting that expressed lncRNA in breast cancer drives carcinogenesis through
increased activity of neighboring genes. In summary, our study depicts the first 
lncRNA subtype classification in breast cancer and provides the framework for
future studies to assess the interplay between lncRNAs and the breast cancer
epigenome.

PMCID: PMC4259443
PMID: 25296969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 6;9(10):e109712. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109712.
eCollection 2014.

Meta-analysis of associations of IL1 receptor antagonist and estrogen receptor
gene polymorphisms with systemic lupus erythematosus susceptibility.

Cai L(1), Zhang JW(2), Xue XX(1), Wang ZG(3), Wang JJ(1), Tang SD(1), Tang SW(1),
Wang J(4), Zhang Y(5), Xia X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanjing
Medical University, Jiangning District, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (2)Department of
Anesthesiology, Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Medical College of Nanjing
University, Gulou District, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (3)Department of Nosocomial 
Infection Control, General Hospital of Beijing Military Region, Dongcheng
District, Beijing, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine,
Nanjing Medical University, Jiangning District, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China;
Department of General Practice, Kangda College, Nanjing Medical University,
Jiangning District, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (5)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Jiangning
District, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; Institute of Epidemiology and Microbiology,
Huadong Research Institute for Medicine and Biotechnics, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease that affects a number
of different organs and tissues. Interleukin-1 (IL1) and estrogen are considered 
potential elements in the pathology of SLE. Recently, the variable number of
tandem repeats (VNTR) polymorphism in the IL1 receptor antagonist gene (IL1-RN)
and PvuII (rs2234693) and XbaI (rs9340799) polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor
1 gene (ESR1) have been associated with a predisposition to SLE. However, the
evidence for these associations is inconclusive. We therefore conducted a
meta-analysis to validate the roles of these polymorphisms in SLE susceptibility.
We searched four databases and identified a total of 17 eligible articles
comprising 24 studies. The Newcastle-Ottawa quality assessment scale was used to 
assess the qualities of the selected studies. We assessed the strengths of the
associations using odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs).
Regarding the IL-1RN VNTR, the 2 allele significantly increased SLE
susceptibility (2 vs. L: OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.34, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.03-1.73, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03). The ESR1 PvuII
CC/CT genotype was also associated with SLE susceptibility (CC/CT vs. TT:
OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.25, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.06-1.47, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01), and the difference was especially
pronounced among Asians (CC/CT vs. TT: OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.33, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.04-1.69, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02). 
No significant association between the ESR1 XbaI polymorphism and SLE
susceptibility was observed in the overall analysis. However, a marginally
significant association between the GG/GA genotype was found in individuals of
Asian descent (GG/GA vs. AA: OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.30, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.01-1.67, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.04). These
results indicate that the IL1-RN VNTR 2 allele, ESR1 PvuII CC/CT genotype and
ESR1 XbaI GG/GA genotype may increase SLE susceptibility, especially in Asian
individuals.

PMCID: PMC4186846
PMID: 25286391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Environ Sci Technol. 2014 Nov 4;48(21):12952-61. doi: 10.1021/es5032294. Epub
2014 Oct 27.

PCB related effects thresholds as derived through gene transcript profiles in
locally contaminated ringed seals (Pusa hispida).

Brown TM(1), Ross PS, Reimer KJ, Veldhoen N, Dangerfield NJ, Fisk AT, Helbing CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria ,
Victoria, British Columbia V8W 2Y2, Canada.

Causal evidence linking toxic injury to polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) exposure
is typically confounded by the complexity of real-world contaminant mixtures to
which aquatic wildlife are exposed. A local PCB "hotspot" on the Labrador coast
provided a rare opportunity to evaluate the effects of PCBs on the health of a
marine mammal as this chemical dominated their persistent organic pollutant (POP)
burdens. The release of approximately 260 kg of PCBs by a military radar facility
over a 30 year period (1970-2000) contaminated some local marine biota, including
the ringed seal (Pusa hispida). The abundance profiles of eight health-related
gene transcripts were evaluated in liver samples collected from 43 ringed seals
in the affected area. The mRNA transcript levels of five gene targets, including 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr), interleukin-1 ß (Il1b), estrogen receptor a
(Esr1), insulin like growth factor receptor 1 (Igf1), and glucocorticoid receptor
a (Nr3c1) correlated with increasing levels of blubber PCBs. PCB threshold values
calculated using best-fit hockey-stick regression models for these five genes
averaged 1,680±206 ng/g lw, with the lowest, most conservative, being 1,370 ng/g 
lw for Il1b. Approximately 14% of the seals in the region exceeded this
threshold. The dominance of PCBs in the seals studied enabled an assessment of
the effects of this chemical on gene transcripts involved in regulating the
health of a highly mobile predator, something that is rarely possible in the
world of complex mixtures.

PMID: 25286162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Dec;53(3):355-66. doi: 10.1530/JME-14-0092. Epub 2014 Sep 
25.

In vivo oestrogenic modulation of Egr1 and Pitx1 gene expression in female rat
pituitary gland.

Gajewska A(1), Herman AP(2), Wolinska-Witort E(2), Kochman K(2), Zwierzchowski
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of NeuroendocrinologyThe Kielanowski Institute of Animal Physiology
and Nutrition, Polish Academy of Sciences, Instytucka Street 3, 05-110 Jablonna
n. Warsaw, PolandNeuroendocrinology DepartmentMedical Centre for Postgraduate
Education, Marymoncka 99/103 Street, 01-813 Warsaw, PolandDepartment of Molecular
BiologyInstitute of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Jastrzebiec, 05-552 Magdalenka, Poland a.gajewska@ifzz.pan.pl. (2)Department of
NeuroendocrinologyThe Kielanowski Institute of Animal Physiology and Nutrition,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Instytucka Street 3, 05-110 Jablonna n. Warsaw,
PolandNeuroendocrinology DepartmentMedical Centre for Postgraduate Education,
Marymoncka 99/103 Street, 01-813 Warsaw, PolandDepartment of Molecular
BiologyInstitute of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Jastrzebiec, 05-552 Magdalenka, Poland.

EGR1 and PITX1 are transcription factors required for gonadotroph cell Lhb
promoter activation. To determine changes in Egr1 and Pitx1 mRNA levels in
central and peripheral pituitary stimulations, an in vivo model based on i.c.v.
pulsatile (1 pulse/0.5<U+200A>h over 2<U+200A>h) GnRH agonist (1.5<U+200A>nM buserelin) or antagonist 
(2<U+200A>nM antide) microinjections was used. The microinjections were given to
ovariectomised and 17ß-oestradiol (E2) (3×20<U+200A>µg), ERA (ESR1) agonist propyl
pyrazole triol (PPT) (3×0.5<U+200A>mg), ERB (ESR2) agonist diarylpropionitrile (DPN)
(3×0.5<U+200A>mg) s.c. pre-treated rats 30<U+200A>min after last pulse anterior pituitaries
were excised. Relative mRNA expression was determined by quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR). Results revealed a gene-specific response for GnRH and/or oestrogenic 
stimulations in vivo. Buserelin pulses enhanced Egr1 expression by 66% in
ovariectomised rats, whereas the oestradiol-supplemented+i.c.v.
NaCl-microinjected group showed a 50% increase in Egr1 mRNA expression. The
oestrogenic signal was transmitted via ERA (ESR1) and ERB (ESR2) activation as
administration of PPT and DPN resulted in 97 and 62%, respectively, elevation in 
Egr1 mRNA expression. A synergistic action of GnRH agonist and 17ß-oestradiol
(E2) stimulation of the Egr1 gene transcription in vivo were found. GnRHR
activity did not affect Pitx1 mRNA expression; regardless of NaCl, buserelin or
antide i.c.v. pulses, s.c. oestrogenic supplementation (with E2, PPT or DPN)
consistently decreased (by -46, -48 and -41% respectively) the Pitx1 mRNA in the 
anterior pituitary gland. Orchestrated Egr1 and Pitx1 activities depending on
specific central and peripheral regulatory inputs could be responsible for
physiologically variable Lhb gene promoter activation in vivo.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25258388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 23;9(9):e108287. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108287.
eCollection 2014.

Associations between Individual and Combined Polymorphisms of the TNF and VEGF
Genes and the Embryo Implantation Rate in Patients Undergoing In Vitro
Fertilization (IVF) Programs.

Boudjenah R(1), Molina-Gomes D(1), Torre A(1), Boitrelle F(1), Taieb S(2), Dos
Santos E(2), Wainer R(1), de Mazancourt P(2), Selva J(1), Vialard F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Genetics, Gynaecology and Obstetrics,
Poissy Saint Germain Medical Centre, Poissy, France; EA 2493, Versailles Saint
Quentin University, Versailles, France. (2)EA 2493, Versailles Saint Quentin
University, Versailles, France.

BACKGROUND: A multiple pregnancy is now considered to be the most common adverse 
outcome associated with in vitro fertilization (IVF). As a consequence, the
identification of women with the best chances of embryo implantation is a
challenge in IVF program, in which the objective is to offer elective
single-embryo transfer (eSET) without decreasing the pregnancy rate. To date, a
range of hormonal and clinical parameters have been used to optimize eSET but
none have significant predictive value. This variability could be due to genetic 
predispositions related to single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Here, we
assessed the individual and combined impacts of thirteen SNPs that reportedly
influence the outcome of in vitro fertilisation (IVF) on the embryo implantation 
rate for patients undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection program (ICSI).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A 13 gene polymorphisms: FSHR(Asn680Ser), p53(Arg72Pro),
AMH(Ile49Ser), ESR2(+1730G>A), ESR1(-397T>C), BMP15(-9C>G), MTHFR1(677C>T),
MTHFR2(1298A>C), HLA-G(-725C>G), VEGF(+405G>C), TNFa(-308A>G), AMHR(-482A>G),
PAI-1(4G/5G), multiplex PCR assay was designed to genotype women undergoing ICSI 
program. We analyzed the total patients population (n = 428) and a subgroup with 
homogeneous characteristics (n = 112).
RESULTS: Only the VEGF(+405G>C) and TNFa(-308A>G) polymorphisms impacted
fertilization, embryo implantation and pregnancy rates. Moreover, the combined
VEGF+405.GG and TNFa-308.AG or AA genotype occurred significantly more frequently
in women with high implantation potential. In contrast, the VEGF+405.CC and
TNFa-308.GG combination was associated with a low implantation rate.
CONCLUSION: We identified associations between VEGF(+405G>C) and TNFa(-308A>G)
polymorphisms (when considered singly or as combinations) and the embryo
implantation rate. These associations may be predictive of embryo implantation
and could help to define populations in which elective single-embryo transfer
should be recommended (or, conversely, ruled out). However, the mechanism
underlying the function of these polymorphisms in embryo implantation remains to 
be determined and the associations observed here must be confirmed in a larger,
more heterogeneous cohort.

PMCID: PMC4172632
PMID: 25247819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014;21(6):853-64. doi: 10.1530/ERC-14-0250. Epub 2014 Sep
16.

Variants of estrogen-related genes and breast cancer risk in European and African
American women.

Quan L(1), Hong CC(2), Zirpoli G(2), Roberts MR(2), Khoury T(2),
Sucheston-Campbell LE(2), Bovbjerg DH(2), Jandorf L(2), Pawlish K(2), Ciupak
G(2), Davis W(2), Bandera EV(2), Ambrosone CB(2), Yao S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Roswell Park Cancer InstituteElm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, New York 14263,
USAUniversity of Pittsburgh Cancer InstitutePittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USAIcahn
School of Medicine at Mount SinaiNew York, New York, USANew Jersey Department of 
HealthTrenton, New Jersey, USARutgers Cancer Institute of New JerseyNew
Brunswick, New Jersey, USA Roswell Park Cancer InstituteElm and Carlton Streets, 
Buffalo, New York 14263, USAUniversity of Pittsburgh Cancer InstitutePittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USAIcahn School of Medicine at Mount SinaiNew York, New York,
USANew Jersey Department of HealthTrenton, New Jersey, USARutgers Cancer
Institute of New JerseyNew Brunswick, New Jersey, USA. (2)Roswell Park Cancer
InstituteElm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, New York 14263, USAUniversity of
Pittsburgh Cancer InstitutePittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USAIcahn School of Medicine 
at Mount SinaiNew York, New York, USANew Jersey Department of HealthTrenton, New 
Jersey, USARutgers Cancer Institute of New JerseyNew Brunswick, New Jersey, USA. 
(3)Roswell Park Cancer InstituteElm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, New York 14263,
USAUniversity of Pittsburgh Cancer InstitutePittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USAIcahn
School of Medicine at Mount SinaiNew York, New York, USANew Jersey Department of 
HealthTrenton, New Jersey, USARutgers Cancer Institute of New JerseyNew
Brunswick, New Jersey, USA song.yao@roswellpark.org.

It has been observed previously that compared with women of European ancestry
(EA), those of African ancestry (AA) are more likely to develop estrogen receptor
(ER)-negative breast cancer, although the mechanisms have not been elucidated. We
tested the associations between breast cancer risk and a targeted set of 20 genes
known to be involved in estrogen synthesis, metabolism, and response and
potential gene-environment interactions using data and samples from 1307 EA (658 
cases) and 1365 AA (621 cases) participants from the Women's Circle of Health
Study (WCHS). Multivariable logistic regression found evidence of associations
with single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ESR1 gene in EA women
(rs1801132, odds ratio (OR)=1.47, 95% CI=1.20-1.80, P=0.0002; rs2046210, OR=1.24,
95% CI=1.04-1.47, P=0.02; and rs3020314, OR=1.43, 95% CI=1.19-1.70, P=0.00009),
but not in AA women. The only other gene associated with breast cancer risk was
CYP1A2 in AA women (rs2470893, OR=1.42, 95% CI=1.00-2.02, P=0.05), but not in EA 
women. When stratified by ER status, ESR1 rs1801132, rs2046210, and rs3020314
showed stronger associations in ER-positive than in ER-negative breast cancer in 
only EA women. Associations with the ESR1 SNPs in EA women also appeared to be
stronger with longer endogenous estrogen exposure or hormonal replacement therapy
use. Our results indicate that there may be differential genetic influences on
breast cancer risk in EA compared with AA women and that these differences may be
modified by tumor subtype and estrogen exposures. Future studies with a larger
sample size may determine the full contribution of estrogen-related genes to
racial/ethnic differences in breast cancer.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4214251
PMID: 25228414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Pain. 2014 Nov;155(11):2390-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2014.09.009. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Epistasis between polymorphisms in COMT, ESR1, and GCH1 influences COMT enzyme
activity and pain.

Smith SB(1), Reenilä I(2), Männistö PT(2), Slade GD(1), Maixner W(1), Diatchenko 
L(3), Nackley AG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pain Research and Innovation, School of Dentistry, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (2)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (3)Center for Pain Research and
Innovation, School of Dentistry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC,
USA; Alan Edwards Pain Centre For Research on Pain, McGill University, Montreal, 
Canada. (4)Center for Pain Research and Innovation, School of Dentistry,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Electronic address:
andrea_nackley@dentistry.unc.edu.

Abnormalities in the enzymatic activity of catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT)
contribute to chronic pain conditions, such as temporomandibular disorders (TMD).
Thus, we sought to determine the effects of polymorphisms in COMT and
functionally related pain genes in the COMT pathway (estrogen receptor 1 [ESR1], 
guanosine-5-triphosphate cyclohydrolase 1 [GCH1], methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase [MTHFR]) on COMT enzymatic activity, musculoskeletal pain, and
pain-related intermediate phenotypes among TMD cases and healthy control
subjects. Results show that the COMT rs4680 (val(158)met) polymorphism is most
strongly associated with outcome measures, such that individuals with the minor A
allele (met) exhibit reduced COMT activity, increased TMD risk, and increased
musculoskeletal pain. Epistatic interactions were observed between the COMT
rs4680 polymorphism and polymorphisms in GCH1 and ESR1. Among individuals with
the COMT met allele, those with 2 copies of the GCH1 rs10483639 minor G allele
exhibit normalized COMT activity and increased mechanical pain thresholds. Among 
individuals with the COMT val allele, those with 2 copies of the ESR1 rs3020377
minor A allele exhibit reduced COMT activity, increased bodily pain, and poorer
self-reported health. These data reveal that the GCH1 minor G allele confers a
protective advantage among met carriers, whereas the ESR1 minor A allele is
disadvantageous among val carriers. Furthermore, these data suggest that the
ability to predict the downstream effects of genetic variation on COMT activity
is critically important to understanding the molecular basis of chronic pain
conditions.

Copyright © 2014 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4253645
PMID: 25218601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Biol Reprod. 2014 Nov;91(5):110. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.120170. Epub 2014
Sep 10.

Uterine epithelial cell estrogen receptor alpha-dependent and -independent
genomic profiles that underlie estrogen responses in mice.

Winuthayanon W(1), Hewitt SC(1), Korach KS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Biology, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina. (2)Receptor Biology, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle 
Park, North Carolina korach@niehs.nih.gov.

Estrogens exert their activity through estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) to
stimulate hypertrophy and hyperplasia in the uterus. A uterine epithelial ERalpha
conditional knockout mouse model (Wnt7a(Cre+);Esr1(f/f) or cKO) demonstrated that
ERalpha in the epithelial cells was dispensable for an initial uterine
proliferative response to 17beta-estradiol (E2) but required for subsequent
uterine biological responses. This study aimed to characterize the differential
gene expression patterns induced by E2 in the presence or absence of epithelial
ERalpha. RNA microarray analysis revealed that approximately 20% of the genes
differentially expressed at 2 h were epithelial ERalpha independent, as they were
preserved in the cKO uteri. This indicates that early uterine transcripts
mediated by stromal ERalpha are sufficient to promote initial proliferative
responses. However, more than 90% of the differentially expressed transcripts at 
24 h were not regulated in the cKO, indicating that the majority of later
transcriptional regulation required epithelial ERalpha, especially those involved
in mitosis. This shows that loss of regulation of these later transcripts results
in blunted subsequent uterine growth after 3 days of E2 treatment. Additionally, 
progesterone's ability to inhibit E2-induced epithelial cell proliferation was
impaired, consistent with a uterine receptivity defect that contributes to cKO
infertility. These transcriptional profiles correlate with our previously
observed biological responses, in which the initial proliferative response is
independent of epithelial ERalpha and thus dependent on stromal ERalpha, yet
epithelial ERalpha is essential for subsequent tissue responsiveness.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4434925
PMID: 25210133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2015 Feb;39(1):127-35. doi:
10.1016/j.clinre.2014.07.016. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) genetic variations in cancer risk: a systematic review
and meta-analysis.

Sun H(1), Hou J(2), Shi W(3), Zhang L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210046,
Jiangsu, China. (2)Clinical Laboratory, Mother and Child Health Care Hospital of 
Qixia District, Nanjing, Nanjing 210028, Jiangsu, China; Clinical Laboratory, The
North Branch of Nanjing Mother and Child Health Care Hospital, Nanjing 210004,
Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: jinjun_hou@163.com. (3)Clinical Laboratory,
Nanjing Traditional Chinese Medical Hospital, Nanjing 210001, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, Lanxi People's Hospital, Jinhua, 321100 Zhejiang, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Emerging published data on the association between single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene and cancer
susceptibility are inconsistent. This review and meta-analysis is performed to
derive a more precise evaluation of this relationship.
METHODS: The literature search of PubMed, Embase, Web of Science and CNKI
databases was conducted from their inception through June 2014. Crude odds ratios
(ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated to assess the
association.
RESULTS: Twenty-two literatures were enrolled in this meta-analysis. The results 
indicated that ESR1 rs1801132 (C>G) was associated with cancer risk in Caucasian 
populations. However, the results of stratified analysis by cancer type and
source of controls indicated that no significant association was found.
Furthermore, rs2077647 (A>G) was only associated with an increased risk of
hepatocellular carcinoma, but was an adverse effect on cancer risk in Caucasian
populations.
CONCLUSIONS: This present meta-analysis indicated that rs1801132 (C>G) and
rs2077647 (A>G) may be protective factors in Caucasian populations. Meanwhile,
rs2077647 (A>G) may be closely related with hepatocellular carcinoma.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25200861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Oct;147(3):513-25. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3121-5. 
Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Transcriptional CCND1 expression as a predictor of poor response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy with trastuzumab in HER2-positive/ER-positive breast cancer.

Tanioka M(1), Sakai K, Sudo T, Sakuma T, Kajimoto K, Hirokaga K, Takao S, Negoro 
S, Minami H, Nakagawa K, Nishio K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hyogo Cancer Center, 13-70 Kitaoji-cho,
Akashi, Hyogo, 673-8558, Japan, makitanioka123456@yahoo.co.jp.

Several trials have confirmed that the pathological complete response (pCR) rates
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) are significantly lower in
HER2-positive/ER-positive patients than in HER2-positive/ER-negative patients. To
understand this phenomenon, we investigated the association between NAC
resistance and CCND1, which is frequently overexpressed in ER-positive tumors.
Pretreatment formalin-fixed tumor tissues were collected from 75 HER2-positive
patients receiving NAC comprised anthracyclines, taxanes, and trastuzumab.
Seventeen gene transcripts along with PIK3CA mutations were detected using
MassARRAY (Sequenom, San Diego, CA). The gene expression levels were dichotomized
according to the median values. The immunohistochemical expression of ER, PTEN,
BCL-2, and cyclin D1 was scored. The relationship between the variables was
assessed using the Spearman correlation. A logistic regression analysis was
performed to detect predictors of pCR, which was defined as no invasive tumor in 
the breast or axilla. Forty-seven percent of the cases were ER-positive and 52 % 
(40/63 % in ER-positive/ER-negative) achieved a pCR. Among the ER-positive
patients, the CCND1 gene expression level was 2.1 times higher than that in
ER-negative patients and was significantly correlated with the expression of
cyclin D1 protein. In a univariate analysis, a pCR was associated with high mRNA 
levels of ESR1, PGR, LMTK3, HER2, IGF1R, INPP4B, PDL-1, BCL-2, and CCND1 (P =
0.05). In contrast, none of these genes were significantly correlated with a pCR 
among the ER-negative tumors and only EGFR was significantly correlated with a
pCR. PIK3CA mutations or PTEN loss were not associated with a pCR in either
group. After excluding ESR1 (r = 0.58), PGR (r = 0.64), and IGF1R (r = 0.59), the
expressions of which were correlated with CCND1, a multivariate analysis revealed
that CCND1 [P = 0.043; OR, 0.16] and HER2 [P = 0.012; OR, 11.2] retained its
predictive value for pCR among ER-positive patients, but not among ER-negative
patients. A High Level of CCND1 gene expression is a poor predictor of a pCR and 
provides a rationale for evaluating CDK4/6 inhibitors in
HER2-positive/ER-positive breast cancer patients.

PMID: 25200445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Gene. 2014 Nov 15;552(1):8-17. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.09.006. Epub 2014 Sep 4.

Gene expression profiling of key genes in hypothalamus-pituitary-gonad axis of
rare minnow Gobiocypris rarus in response to EE2.

Qin F(1), Wang X(1), Liu S(1), Zheng Y(1), Li M(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
China. (2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University,
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi
712100, China. Electronic address: zzwang@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

The 17a-ethinylestradiol (EE2), which could induce estrogenic effects, is found
in different aquatic systems. The current study aimed to assess in vivo effects
of short-term EE2 exposure on the transcriptional activity of genes in the brain 
and gonad tissues in order to characterize the mode of action of EE2 on the
hypothalamus-pituitary-gonad axis in rare minnow (Gobiocypris rarus). The full
length cDNAs of fshß, lhß, fshr and lhr were first characterized in G. rarus. The
homology and phylogenetic analyses of the amino acid sequences revealed that
these four genes share high identity in cyprinid fish. The tissue distribution
analysis by qRT-PCR showed that fshß and lhß were mainly expressed in the brain
and fshr and lhr were mainly expressed in gonads. Adult G. rarus was exposed to
EE2 at 1, 5, 25 and 125 ng/L for 3 and 6 days and the expression of brain
cyp19a1b, fshß and lhß, estrogen receptors (esr1, esr2a, and esr2b) and gonadal
fshr, lhr and cyp19a1a were assessed. Cyp19a1b was significantly up-regulated in 
the brains of female exposed to EE2 at 1-125 ng/L for 6 days. The brain lhß, but 
not fshß was strongly suppressed in most EE2 exposure groups of both sexes. The
brain esr2b was inhibited in both sexes exposed to EE2 at all of the four
concentrations for 6 days. Esr2a was up-regulated in the females by 6-day EE2
treatment at 1 and 25 ng/L. The high responsiveness of brain lhß and esr2s to EE2
and their significant correlation in both sexes suggested that the
transcriptional activity of Esr2s could play key roles in modulation of lhß
expression via direct action on gonadotropic cells in response to EE2. In gonads,
fshr was strongly inhibited by EE2 in males, while lhr was significantly
stimulated by EE2 in females. Cyp19a1a was inhibited by EE2 in both sexes. The
positive correlations of gene expressions of both fshr and lhr with cyp19a1a in
testes suggest that the suppression of 17a-estradiol (E2) synthesis in testis by 
exogenous estrogen could mediate via both Fsh/Fshr and Lh/Lhr signaling in male
G. rarus.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25194895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2014 Nov-Dec;46:18-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ntt.2014.08.002. Epub
2014 Aug 27.

Developmental toxicity of endocrine disruptors in early life stages of zebrafish,
a genetic and embryogenesis study.

Santos D(1), Matos M(2), Coimbra AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences and Environment School, University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto
Douro (UTAD), Quinta de Prados 5000-801 Vila Real, Portugal. Electronic address: 
derciacsantos@gmail.com. (2)Life Sciences and Environment School, University of
Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro (UTAD), Quinta de Prados 5000-801 Vila Real,
Portugal; Institute of Biotechnology and Bioengineering/Centre of Genomics and
Biotechnology (IBB/CGB), University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro (UTAD),
Quinta de Prados 5000-801 Vila Real, Portugal. Electronic address:
mmatos@utad.pt. (3)Life Sciences and Environment School, University of
Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro (UTAD), Quinta de Prados 5000-801 Vila Real,
Portugal; Centre for the Research and Technology of Agro-Environmental and
Biological Sciences (CITAB), University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro (UTAD), 
Quinta de Prados 5000-801 Vila Real, Portugal. Electronic address:
acoimbra@utad.pt.

Endocrine disrupting compounds (EDCs) are capable of interfering with the
endocrine system and are increasingly widespread in the aquatic environments. In 
the present study, zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos and larvae were used to assess
how EDCs may interfere with embryogenesis. Therefore, zebrafish embryos were
exposed to 17a-ethinylestradiol (EE2: 0.4, 2, 4 and 20 ng/L), genistein (Gen: 2, 
20, 200 and 2000 ng/L) and fadrozole (Fad: 2, 10, 50 and 250 µg/L), between 2 and
144 h post-fertilization (hpf). Somite development, heartbeat, malformations,
mortality and hatching rates were evaluated. In parallel, the expression patterns
of hormone receptors (esr1, esr2a, esr2b and ar) and apoptotic pathways related
genes (p53 and c-jun) were determined using quantitative real-time PCR. Results
showed that EE2, Gen and Fad caused a higher mortality and also malformations in 
larvae compared with control. A significant toxic effect was observed in the
heartbeat rate, at 144 hpf, in larvae exposed to EE2 and Fad. QPCR revealed
alterations in the expression levels of all the evaluated genes, at different
time points. esr1 and c-jun genes were upregulated by EE2 and Gen exposure while 
the expression of esr2a, esr2b and ar genes was downregulated. Fad exposure
decreased esr1, p53 and c-jun expression levels. This study shows a toxic effect 
of EE2, Gen and Fad to vertebrate embryogenesis and a relation between hormones
action and apoptosis pathways.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25172296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Biol Reprod. 2014 Oct;91(4):100. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.120899. Epub 2014
Aug 27.

Soy promotes juvenile granulosa cell tumor development in mice and in the human
granulosa cell tumor-derived COV434 cell line.

Mansouri-Attia N(1), James R(1), Ligon A(1), Li X(1), Pangas SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas. (2)Department of Pathology & Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas Department of Molecular & Cellular Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas spangas@bcm.edu.

Soy attracts attention for its health benefits, such as lowering cholesterol or
preventing breast and colon cancer. Soybeans contain isoflavones, which act as
phytoestrogens. Even though isoflavones have beneficial health effects, a role
for isoflavones in the initiation and progression of diseases including cancer is
becoming increasingly recognized. While data from rodent studies suggest that
neonatal exposure to genistein (the predominant isoflavone in soy) disrupts
normal reproductive function, its role in ovarian cancers, particularly granulosa
cell tumors (GCT), is largely unknown. Our study aimed to define the contribution
of a soy diet in GCT development using a genetically modified mouse model for
juvenile GCTs (JGCT; Smad1 Smad5 conditional double knockout mice) as well as a
human JGCT cell line (COV434). While dietary soy cannot initiate JGCT development
in mice, we show that it has dramatic effects on GCT growth and tumor progression
compared to a soy-free diet. Loss of Smad1 and Smad5 alters estrogen receptor
alpha (Esr1) expression in granulosa cells, perhaps sensitizing the cells to the 
effects of genistein. In addition, we found that genistein modulates estrogen
receptor expression in the human JGCT cell line and positively promotes cell
growth in part by suppressing caspase-dependent apoptosis. Combined, our work
suggests that dietary soy consumption has deleterious effects on GCT development.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4435027
PMID: 25165122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 30;5(16):6770-87.

The BCL9-2 proto-oncogene governs estrogen receptor alpha expression in breast
tumorigenesis.

Zatula N(1), Wiese M(1), Bunzendahl J(1), Birchmeier W(2), Perske C(3), Bleckmann
A(4), Brembeck FH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Biology and Signal Transduction, Georg-August-University Göttingen,
Germany. Dept. of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Georg-August-University
Göttingen, Germany. (2)Max-Delbrueck-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin,
Germany. (3)Dept. of Pathology, Georg-August-University Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Dept. of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Georg-August-University Göttingen,
Germany.

The majority of human breast cancers express estrogen receptor alpha (ER), which 
is important for therapy with anti-estrogens. Here we describe the role of
BCL9-2, a proto-oncogene previously characterized as co-activator of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, for mammary tumorigenesis in mice and human. ER positive
human breast cancers showed overexpression of BCL9-2 and tamoxifen treated
patients with high BCL9-2 demonstrated a better survival. BCL9-2 was upregulated 
during puberty and pregnancy in normal mammary epithelia, but downregulated in
the involuted gland. BCL9-2 overexpression in vivo delayed the mammary involution
and induced alveolar hyperplasia. Moreover, aged BCL9-2 transgenic mice developed
ductal-like mammary tumors with high nuclear ER expression. We found, that
primary cell cultures of BCL9-2 breast tumors responded to tamoxifen treatment.
Moreover, BCL9-2 regulated the expression of ER and the proliferation of human
breast cancer cells independently of ß-catenin. Finally, we describe a novel
mechanism, how BCL9-2 regulates ER transcription by interaction with Sp1 through 
the proximal ESR1 gene promoter. In summary, BCL9-2 induces ER positive breast
cancers in vivo, regulates ER expression by a novel ß-catenin independent
mechanism in breast cancer cells, and might predict the therapy response to
tamoxifen treatment.

PMCID: PMC4196162
PMID: 25149534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Dec;53(3):345-53. doi: 10.1530/JME-14-0052. Epub 2014 Aug 
20.

Bisphenol A enhances adipogenic differentiation of human adipose stromal/stem
cells.

Ohlstein JF(1), Strong AL(1), McLachlan JA(1), Gimble JM(1), Burow ME(1), Bunnell
BA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative MedicineTulane University
School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane Avenue, SL-99, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112,
USASection of Hematology and Medical OncologyDepartment of Medicine, Tulane
University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USADepartment of
PharmacologyTulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112,
USA. (2)Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative MedicineTulane University 
School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane Avenue, SL-99, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112,
USASection of Hematology and Medical OncologyDepartment of Medicine, Tulane
University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USADepartment of
PharmacologyTulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112,
USA Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative MedicineTulane University
School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane Avenue, SL-99, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112,
USASection of Hematology and Medical OncologyDepartment of Medicine, Tulane
University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USADepartment of
PharmacologyTulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112,
USA bbunnell@tulane.edu.

Exposure of humans to the endocrine disrupter bisphenol A (BPA) has been
associated with increased weight and obesity. However, the mechanism(s) by which 
BPA increases adipose tissue in humans remains to be determined. The goal of this
study was to determine the effects of BPA on adipogenesis of cultured human
adipose stromal/stem cells (ASCs), precursors to mature adipocytes. ASCs from
three donors were cultured for either 14 or 21 days in adipogenic differentiation
media containing increasing concentrations of BPA (100<U+200A>pM-10<U+200A>µM). The extent of
adipogenic differentiation in the ASCs was assessed by staining with Oil Red O to
visualize adipogenic differentiation and then quantified by extraction and
optical density measurement of the retained dye. BPA significantly enhanced
adipogenesis at a concentration of 1<U+200A>µM after 21 days of culture. Additionally,
we found that BPA increased transcription of the estrogen receptor (ER (ESR1))
and that treatment with the ER antagonist ICI 182<U+200A>780, blocked the effects of
BPA, indicating that BPA may act via an ER-mediated pathway. The results of
molecular analyses indicated that the expression of the adipogenesis-associated
genes dual leucine zipper-bearing kinase (DLK (MAP3K12)), IGF1,
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPa (CEBPA)), peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3> (PPARG)), and lipoprotein lipase
(LPL) was temporally accelerated and increased by BPA. In summary, these results 
indicate that BPA significantly enhances adipogenesis in ASCs through an
ER-mediated pathway at physiologically relevant concentrations.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4757902
PMID: 25143472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 2;111(35):12859-64. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1405362111. Epub 2014 Aug 19.

Nedd9 restrains renal cystogenesis in Pkd1-/- mice.

Nikonova AS(1), Plotnikova OV(1), Serzhanova V(1), Efimov A(2), Bogush I(1), Cai 
KQ(2), Hensley HH(1), Egleston BL(1), Klein-Szanto A(2), Seeger-Nukpezah T(1),
Golemis EA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Developmental Therapeutics and. (2)Cancer Biology, Fox Chase
Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111. (3)Programs in Developmental Therapeutics 
and erica.golemis@fccc.edu.

Mutations inactivating the cilia-localized Pkd1 protein result in autosomal
dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), a serious inherited syndrome
affecting ~ 1 in 500 people, in which accumulation of renal cysts eventually
destroys kidney function. Severity of ADPKD varies throughout the population, for
reasons thought to involve differences both in intragenic Pkd1 mutations and in
modifier alleles. The scaffolding protein NEDD9, commonly dysregulated during
cancer progression, interacts with Aurora-A (AURKA) kinase to control ciliary
resorption, and with Src and other partners to influence proliferative signaling 
pathways often activated in ADPKD. We here demonstrate Nedd9 expression is
deregulated in human ADPKD and a mouse ADPKD model. Although genetic ablation of 
Nedd9 does not independently influence cystogenesis, constitutive absence of
Nedd9 strongly promotes cyst formation in the tamoxifen-inducible
Pkd1fl/fl;Cre/Esr1(+) mouse model of ADPKD. This cystogenic effect is associated 
with striking morphological defects in the cilia of Pkd1(-/-);Nedd9(-/-) mice,
associated with specific loss of ciliary localization of adenylase cyclase III in
the doubly mutant genotype. Ciliary phenotypes imply a failure of Aurora-A
activation: Compatible with this idea, Pkd1(-/-);Nedd9(-/-) mice had ciliary
resorption defects, and treatment of Pkd1(-/-) mice with a clinical Aurora-A
kinase inhibitor exacerbated cystogenesis. In addition, activation of the
ADPKD-associated signaling effectors Src, Erk, and the mTOR effector S6 was
enhanced, and Ca(2+) response to external stimuli was reduced, in
Pkd1(-/-);Nedd9(-/-) versus Pkd1(-/-) mice. Together, these results indicated an 
important modifier action of Nedd9 on ADPKD pathogenesis involving failure to
activate Aurora-A.

PMCID: PMC4156736
PMID: 25139996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Ecol Resour. 2015 Mar;15(2):414-24. doi: 10.1111/1755-0998.12311. Epub 2014
Aug 22.

Genome-wide analysis reveals artificial selection on coat colour and reproductive
traits in Chinese domestic pigs.

Wang C(1), Wang H, Zhang Y, Tang Z, Li K, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of
Ministry of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, China.

Pigs from Asia and Europe were independently domesticated from c. 9000 years ago.
During this period, strong artificial selection has led to dramatic phenotypic
changes in domestic pigs. However, the genetic basis underlying these
morphological and behavioural adaptations is relatively unknown, particularly for
indigenous Chinese pigs. Here, we performed a genome-wide analysis to screen 196 
regions with selective sweep signals in Tongcheng pigs, which are a typical
indigenous Chinese breed. Genes located in these regions have been found to be
involved in lipid metabolism, melanocyte differentiation, neural development and 
other biological processes, which coincide with the evolutionary phenotypic
changes in this breed. A synonymous substitution, c.669T>C, in ESR1, which
colocalizes with a major quantitative trait locus for litter size, shows extreme 
differences in allele frequency between Tongcheng pigs and wild boars. Notably,
the variant C allele in this locus exhibits high allele frequency in most Chinese
populations, suggesting a consequence of positive selection. Five genes (PRM1,
PRM2, TNP2, GPR149 and JMJD1C) related to reproductive traits were found to have 
high haplotype similarity in Chinese breeds. Two selected genes, MITF and EDNRB, 
are implied to shape the two-end black colour trait in Tongcheng pig. Subsequent 
SNP microarray studies of five Chinese white-spotted breeds displayed a
concordant signature at both loci, suggesting that these two genes are
responsible for colour variations in Chinese breeds. Utilizing massively parallel
sequencing, we characterized the candidate sites that adapt to artificial and
environmental selections during the Chinese pig domestication. This study
provides fundamental proof for further research on the evolutionary adaptation of
Chinese pigs.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25132237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Endocr J. 2014;61(11):1069-78. Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Association of osteoporosis susceptibility genes with bone mineral density and
bone metabolism related markers in Koreans: the Chungju Metabolic Disease Cohort 
(CMC) study.

Park SE(1), Oh KW, Lee WY, Baek KH, Yoon KH, Son HY, Lee WC, Kang MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

In this study, we evaluated the association between bone mineral density (BMD)
and 10 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within eight osteoporosis
susceptibility genes that were previously identified in genome-wide association
studies (GWASs). A total of 494 men and 493 postmenopausal women participating in
the Chungju Metabolic Disease cohort study in Korea were included. The following 
10 SNPs were genotyped: ZBTB40 rs6426749, MEF2C rs1366594, ESR1 rs2941740,
TNFRSF11B rs3134070, TNFRSF11B rs2073617, SOX6 rs711785, LRP5 rs599083, TNFSF11
rs227438, TNFSF11 rs9594782, and FOXL1 rs10048146; and the association between
these SNPs and bone metabolism-related markers was assessed. Two SNPs, TNFSF11
rs2277438 and FOXL1 rs1004816, were associated with lumbar spine BMD. TNFSF11
rs2277438 in men and SOX6 rs7117858 and FOXL1 rs10048146 in postmenopausal women 
were found to be associated with lumbar BMD. ZBTB40 rs6426749, MEF2C rs1366594,
and LRP5 rs599083 showed significant associations with femur neck BMD. These
three SNPs in men and MEF2C rs1366594 and ESR1 rs2941740 in postmenopausal women 
were associated with femur neck BMD. A significant association between MEF2C
rs1366594 and serum calcium levels was observed in men. Serum phosphorus levels
were related to SOX6 rs7117858. Serum PTH levels were significantly associated
with TNFRSF11B rs3134070 in men, and SOX6 rs711858 in postmenopausal women. In
conclusion, our study independently confirmed associations between several SNPs: 
ZBTB40, MEF2C, ESR1, SOX6, LRP5, TNFSF11, and FOXL1 and bone marrow density in
the Korean population.

PMID: 25132170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Nov 4;230(3):375-81. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.08.012. Epub
2014 Aug 13.

Actions of methyl-, propyl- and butylparaben on estrogen receptor-a and -ß and
the progesterone receptor in MCF-7 cancer cells and non-cancerous MCF-10A cells.

Wróbel AM(1), Gregoraszczuk EL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Toxicology of Reproduction, Institute of Zoology,
Jagiellonian University in Kraków, Gronostajowa 9, 30-387 Krakow, Poland.
Electronic address: ania.wrobel@uj.edu.pl. (2)Department of Physiology and
Toxicology of Reproduction, Institute of Zoology, Jagiellonian University in
Kraków, Gronostajowa 9, 30-387 Krakow, Poland. Electronic address:
ewa.gregoraszczuk@uj.edu.pl.

Numerous studies have shown that widely used parabens possess estrogenic
properties. In the present study, we examined the effects of methyl-, propyl- and
butylparaben on the mRNA and protein expression of estrogen receptor (ER)-a
(ESR1) and -ß (ESR2) and the progesterone receptor (PGR). Human MCF-7 breast
cancer cells and MCF-10A non-transformed breast epithelial cells were exposed to 
parabens at a concentration of 20nM; 17ß-estradiol at a concentration of 10nM,
was used as a positive control. Both propyl- and butylparaben stimulated PGR mRNA
expression in MCF-7 cells, whereas methyl- and propylparaben PGR protein
expression. In MCF-10A cells, butyl- and propylparaben increased only PGR mRNA
expression. All parabens increased ESR1 gene and protein expression in MCF-7 and 
with the exception of butylparaben in MCF-10A cells. All parabens significantly
increased ESR2 mRNA and protein expression in MCF-7 cells, but in MCF-10A cells
only ESR2 protein expression. In summary, by virtue of their stimulatory action
on the expression of ESR1, ESR2 and PGR in cancer cells, parabens can be viewed
as potential contributors to breast cancer progression. Extension, the actions of
these parabens on the expression of ERs and PGR in non-cancerous cells point to
possible actions on breast cancer initiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25128701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Aug 14;16(4):422. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0422-x.

Evaluation of functional genetic variants at 6q25.1 and risk of breast cancer in 
a Chinese population.

Wang Y, He Y, Qin Z, Jiang Y, Jin G, Ma H, Dai J, Chen J, Hu Z, Guan X, Shen H.

INTRODUCTION: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at 6q25.1 that are
associated with breast cancer susceptibility have been identified in several
genome-wide association studies (GWASs). However, the exact causal variants in
this region have not been clarified.
METHODS: In the present study, we genotyped six potentially functional
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the CCDC170 and ESR1 gene regions
at 6q25.1 and accessed their associations with risk of breast cancer in a study
of 1,064 cases and 1,073 cancer-free controls in Chinese women. The biological
function of the risk variant was further evaluated by performing laboratory
experiments.
RESULTS: Breast cancer risk was significantly associated with three SNPs located 
at 6q25.1-rs9383935 in CCDC170 and rs2228480 and rs3798758 in ESR1-with variant
allele attributed odds ratios (ORs) of 1.38 (95% confidence interval (CI): 1.20
to 1.57, P=2.21×10(-6)), 0.84 (95% CI: 0.72 to 0.98, P=0.025) and 1.19 (95% CI:
1.04 to 1.37, P=0.013), respectively. The functional variant rs9383935 is in high
linkage disequilibrium (LD) with GWAS-reported top-hit SNP (rs2046210), but only 
rs9383935 showed a strong independent effect in conditional regression analysis. 
The rs9383935 risk allele A showed decreased activity of reporter gene in both
the MCF-7 and BT-474 breast cancer cell lines, which might be due to an altered
binding capacity of miR-27a to the 3' untranslated region (3' UTR) sequence of
CCDC170. Real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR confirmed the
correlation between rs9383935 genotypes and CCDC170 expression levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study suggest that the functional variant
rs9383935, located at the 3' UTR of CCDC170, may be one candidate of the causal
variants at 6q25.1 that modulate the risk of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4303231
PMID: 25116933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Endocrinology. 2014 Nov;155(11):4531-41. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1069. Epub 2014 Aug
8.

Aromatase (Cyp19a1b) in the pituitary is dynamically involved in the upregulation
of lhb but not fshb in the vitellogenic female ricefield eel Monopterus albus.

Zhang S(1), Zhang Y, Chen W, Wu Y, Ge W, Zhang L, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences (S.Z., Y.Z., W.C., Y.W., L.Z., W.Z.), Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510275, People's Republic of China; and Faculty of Heath
Sciences (W.G.), University of Macau, Taipa, Macau Special Administrative Region 
(SAR), China, and School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Aromatase, encoded by Cyp19a1, is expressed in the pituitary of vertebrates;
however, its physiological relevance remains poorly defined. In teleosts, the
duplicated cyp19a1b is preferentially expressed in the pituitary where LH and FSH
are synthesized in distinct gonadotropes. Our present study demonstrated that
Cyp19a1b is colocalized with Lhb, but not Fshb, during vitellogenesis in female
ricefield eels. The immunoreactive levels of Cyp19a1b and Lhb, as well as their
colocalization frequency, increased during vitellogenesis toward maturation. The 
expression of lhb but not fshb in the pituitary fragments of female ricefield
eels was induced by both estradiol (E2) and testosterone (T). In agreement, the
promoter of lhb but not fshb was activated by both E2 and T. T is more potent
than E2 in inducing lhb expression, whereas E2 is much more effective in
activating the lhb promoter. T-induced lhb expression in the pituitary fragments 
was abolished by the estrogen receptor (Esr) antagonist fulvestrant and
suppressed by the aromatase inhibitor letrozole, suggesting that the effect of T 
on lhb expression at the pituitary is largely mediated by E2. Furthermore, Lhb
was shown to colocalize with Esr1 but not Esr2a. Taken together, results of the
present study suggest that Cyp19a1b in LH cells may greatly upregulate lhb
expression during vitellogenesis, possibly via E2 and Esr1 in an intracrine
manner. The absence of Cyp19a1b in FSH cells and the insensitivity of fshb to sex
steroids may contribute to the differential expression of lhb and fshb in
ricefield eels and possibly other vertebrates as well.

PMID: 25105781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Reprod Sci. 2015 Mar;22(3):347-57. doi: 10.1177/1933719114542015. Epub 2014 Aug
6.

Genetic polymorphisms in Pakistani women with polycystic ovary syndrome.

Liaqat I(1), Jahan N(2), Krikun G(3), Taylor HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology GC University, Lahore, Pakistan Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA ifiliaqat@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Zoology GC
University, Lahore, Pakistan. (3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the major cause of anovulatory infertility.
Although the genetic basis of PCOS is not well understood, it is a common
metabolic and endocrine disorder. This study investigates the possible genomic
variants associated with PCOS in Pakistani women from the Punjab region. DNA
samples from 96 patients with genetically unrelated PCOS and 96 controls were
analyzed by direct sequencing to determine the polymorphisms of different loci on
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (fshr), follicle-stimulating hormone ß
(fshrß), luteinizing hormone chorionic gonadotropin (lhcgr), luteinizing hormone 
ß (lhß), estrogen receptor a (esr1), and estrogen receptor ß (esr2) genes.
Significant associations were observed within the genotype frequencies, allele
frequencies, and multi-single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) haplotype analysis of
most polymorphisms studied. This study identified new SNPs at positions 605+52
Del/T in lhcgr genes occurring in this particular subpopulation. The strong r (2)
value suggests that polymorphisms in the fshr and esr1 genes were in linkage
disequilibrium. Our study provides evidence of statistically significant
associations between susceptibility to PCOS in Pakistani women and the gene
polymorphisms mentioned earlier. This suggests that the susceptible loci for PCOS
lie within or very close to the chromosomal regions spanning these genes.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 25100445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Nat Commun. 2014 Aug 7;5:4577. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5577.

Recurrent ESR1-CCDC170 rearrangements in an aggressive subset of oestrogen
receptor-positive breast cancers.

Veeraraghavan J(1), Tan Y(1), Cao XX(1), Kim JA(2), Wang X(2), Chamness GC(2),
Maiti SN(3), Cooper LJ(3), Edwards DP(4), Contreras A(5), Hilsenbeck SG(2), Chang
EC(6), Schiff R(7), Wang XS(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Lester &Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA [2] Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA [3] Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA [4]. (2)1] Lester &Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [3] Department of Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (3)Division of Pediatrics, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (4)1]
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Department of Pathology &Immunology, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (5)Department of Pathology &Immunology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (6)1] Lester &Sue Smith
Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Dan L.
Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [3]
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (7)1] Lester &Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [3] Department of Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [4] Department of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Characterizing the genetic alterations leading to the more aggressive forms of
oestrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancers is of critical significance in
breast cancer management. Here we identify recurrent rearrangements between the
oestrogen receptor gene ESR1 and its neighbour CCDC170, which are enriched in the
more aggressive and endocrine-resistant luminal B tumours, through large-scale
analyses of breast cancer transcriptome and copy number alterations. Further
screening of 200 ER+ breast cancers identifies eight ESR1-CCDC170-positive
tumours. These fusions encode amino-terminally truncated CCDC170 proteins
(<U+0394>CCDC170). When introduced into ER+ breast cancer cells, <U+0394>CCDC170 leads to
markedly increased cell motility and anchorage-independent growth, reduced
endocrine sensitivity and enhanced xenograft tumour formation. Mechanistic
studies suggest that <U+0394>CCDC170 engages Gab1 signalosome to potentiate growth
factor signalling and enhance cell motility. Together, this study identifies
neoplastic ESR1-CCDC170 fusions in a more aggressive subset of ER+ breast cancer,
which suggests a new concept of ER pathobiology in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4130357
PMID: 25099679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Oncol. 2014 Dec;8(8):1679-89. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.07.003. Epub 2014
Jul 10.

Evaluation of the ability of adjuvant tamoxifen-benefit gene signatures to
predict outcome of hormone-naive estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer
patients treated with tamoxifen in the advanced setting.

Sieuwerts AM(1), Lyng MB(2), Meijer-van Gelder ME(3), de Weerd V(3), Sweep FC(4),
Foekens JA(3), Span PN(5), Martens JW(3), Ditzel HJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Erasmus
University Medical Center and Cancer Genomics Netherlands, P.O. Box 2040, 3000 CA
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: a.sieuwerts@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Erasmus 
University Medical Center and Cancer Genomics Netherlands, P.O. Box 2040, 3000 CA
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Radiation 
Oncology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark; Department of Oncology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.

To identify molecular markers indicative of response to tamoxifen and easily
implemented in the routine setting, we recently reported three gene signatures
that could stratify post-menopausal tamoxifen-treated, estrogen receptor-positive
(ER+) patients according to outcome in the adjuvant setting. Here, we evaluated
the predictive potential of the total of 14 genes included in the 3 gene
signatures using 2 hormone-naïve Dutch ER+ cohorts of a total of 285 recurrent
breast cancer patients treated with first-line tamoxifen. mRNA levels were
measured by reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) and the length of
progression-free survival (PFS) was used as the primary endpoint. A Mann-Whitney 
U test was used to select for differentially expressed genes between tumors of
patients who showed or did not show progressive disease within 6 months after
start of tamoxifen treatment. Cox univariate and multivariate regression analysis
for PFS were used to further assess their (independent) predictive potential.
Five (BCAR3, BCL2, ESR1, IGF1R, and NCOA1) of the 14 genes analyzed showed
significantly higher mRNA levels in tumors of patients who showed no disease
progression within 6 months. Only BCAR3, BCL2 and NAT1 were significantly
associated with a favorable PFS in multivariate analysis that included the
traditional predictive factors: age, dominant relapse site, disease-free
interval, ER and progesterone receptor (PGR), and adjuvant chemotherapy. This
study shows that BCAR3, BCL2 and NAT1 in particular exhibit predictive promise
regarding the efficacy of tamoxifen treatment in recurrent disease, in addition
to the previously shown favorable outcome in the adjuvant setting.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25081647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. BMC Med Genomics. 2014;7 Suppl 1:S3. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-7-S1-S3. Epub 2014
May 8.

Integrative analysis reveals disease-associated genes and biomarkers for prostate
cancer progression.

Li Y, Vongsangnak W, Chen L, Shen B.

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is one of the most common complex diseases with high 
leading cause of death in men. Identifications of prostate cancer associated
genes and biomarkers are thus essential as they can gain insights into the
mechanisms underlying disease progression and advancing for early diagnosis and
developing effective therapies.
METHODS: In this study, we presented an integrative analysis of gene expression
profiling and protein interaction network at a systematic level to reveal
candidate disease-associated genes and biomarkers for prostate cancer
progression. At first, we reconstructed the human prostate cancer protein-protein
interaction network (HPC-PPIN) and the network was then integrated with the
prostate cancer gene expression data to identify modules related to different
phases in prostate cancer. At last, the candidate module biomarkers were
validated by its predictive ability of prostate cancer progression.
RESULTS: Different phases-specific modules were identified for prostate cancer.
Among these modules, transcription Androgen Receptor (AR) nuclear signaling and
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) signalling pathway were shown to be the
pathway targets for prostate cancer progression. The identified candidate
disease-associated genes showed better predictive ability of prostate cancer
progression than those of published biomarkers. In context of functional
enrichment analysis, interestingly candidate disease-associated genes were
enriched in the nucleus and different functions were encoded for potential
transcription factors, for examples key players as AR, Myc, ESR1 and hidden
player as Sp1 which was considered as a potential novel biomarker for prostate
cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The successful results on prostate cancer samples demonstrated that 
the integrative analysis is powerful and useful approach to detect candidate
disease-associate genes and modules which can be used as the potential biomarkers
for prostate cancer progression. The data, tools and supplementary files for this
integrative analysis are deposited at http://www.ibio-cn.org/HPC-PPIN/.

PMCID: PMC4110715
PMID: 25080090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 31;9(7):e103444. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103444.
eCollection 2014.

Endothelial function and insulin resistance in early postmenopausal women with
cardiovascular risk factors: importance of ESR1 and NOS3 polymorphisms.

Clapauch R(1), Mourão AF(2), Mecenas AS(3), Maranhão PA(3), Rossini A(2),
Bouskela E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Clinical and Experimental Research on Vascular Biology
(BioVasc), Biomedical Center, State University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil; Hospital da Lagoa, Endocrinology Sector, Health Ministry, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil. (2)Departamento de Bioquímica, IBRAG, State University of Rio de Janeiro,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. (3)Laboratory for Clinical and Experimental Research on
Vascular Biology (BioVasc), Biomedical Center, State University of Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Cardiovascular benefits from estradiol activation of nitric oxide endothelial
production may depend on vascular wall and on estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and 
nitric oxide synthase (NOS3) polymorphisms. We have evaluated the
microcirculation in vivo through nailfold videocapillaroscopy, before and after
acute nasal estradiol administration at baseline and after increased sheer stress
(postocclusive reactive hyperemia response) in 100 postmenopausal women, being 70
controls (healthy) and 30 simultaneously hypertensive and diabetic (HD),
correlating their responses to PvuII and XbaI ESR1 polymorphisms and to VNTR,
T-786C and G894T NOS3 variants. In HD women, C variant allele of ESR1 Pvull was
associated to higher vasodilatation after estradiol (1.72 vs 1.64 mm/s, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01 
compared to TT homozygotes) while G894T and T-786C NOS3 polymorphisms were
connected to lower increment after shear stress (15% among wild type and 10%
among variant alleles, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02 and 0.04). The G variant allele of ESR1 XbaI
polymorphism was associated to higher HOMA-IR (3.54 vs. 1.64, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01) in HD and
higher glucose levels in healthy women (91.8 vs. 87.1 mg/dl, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01), in which 
increased waist and HOMA-IR were also related to the G allele in NOS3 G894T
(waist 93.5 vs 88.2 cm, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02; HOMA-IR 2.89 vs 1.48, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.05). ESR1 Pvull,
NOS3 G894T and T-786C polymorphism analysis may be considered in HD
postmenopausal women for endothelial response prediction following estrogen
therapy but were not discriminatory for endothelial response in healthy women.
ESR1 XbaI and G894T NOS3 polymorphisms may be useful in accessing insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes risks in all women, even before menopause and
occurrence of metabolic disease.

PMCID: PMC4117493
PMID: 25077953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Eur Spine J. 2014 Dec;23(12):2586-93. doi: 10.1007/s00586-014-3481-x. Epub 2014
Jul 31.

Association between the ESR1 -351A>G single nucleotide polymorphism (rs9340799)
and adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Chen S(1), Zhao L, Roffey DM, Phan P, Wai EK.

Author information: 
(1)The Ottawa Hospital, University of Ottawa Spine Program, 1053 Carling Avenue, 
Ottawa, ON, K1Y 4E9, Canada, suzan.chen@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: A single nucleotide polymorphism in the promoter region of the estrogen 
receptor alpha gene (ESR1), rs9340799, has been linked with adolescent idiopathic
scoliosis (AIS) in several association studies with limited sample size and
inconsistent findings. A systematic review can provide a comprehensive appraisal 
of literature evidence and a meta-analysis can obtain a more precise estimate of 
any association. The purpose of the present study was to assess and synthesize
the currently available evidence on the association between rs9340799 and AIS by 
conducting a systematic review and meta-analysis.
METHODS: This review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review
and Meta-Analyses guidelines. PubMed (MEDLINE), EMBASE, Scopus and HuGE
Literature Finder databases were systematically searched to identify relevant
studies following a sensitive strategy. Summary odds ratios and corresponding 95%
confidence intervals (95 % CI) were estimated using the fixed-effect inverse
variance model for allelic (G vs. A) and genotypic comparisons.
RESULTS: Meta-analysis of four studies (n = 1,827 AIS cases and n = 1,253
controls) found a non-significant association between rs9340799 and AIS (allelic 
odds ratio 1.09, 95 % CI 0.96-1.23, p = 0.17).
CONCLUSIONS: When examined in isolation, the rs9340799 polymorphism does not
appear to be a likely susceptibility variant for AIS predisposition. However,
rs9340799 may be associated with AIS severity, progression and treatment; further
investigation is necessary to confirm these potential associations.

PMID: 25077943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Iran J Reprod Med. 2014 Jun;12(6):395-400.

Investigation on estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms in Iranian women with
recurrent pregnancy loss.

Mahdavipour M(1), Idali F(2), Zarei S(3), Talebi S(4), Fatemi R(2), Jeddi-Tehrani
M(4), Pahlavan S(5), Rajaei F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Research Centre, Qazvin University of Medical Sciences,
Qazvin, Iran. ; Reproductive Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research
Institute, ACECR, Tehran, Iran. (2)Reproductive Immunology Research Center,
Avicenna Research Institute, ACECR, Tehran, Iran. (3)Department of Immunology,
School of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(4)Monoclonal Antibody Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, ACECR,
Tehran, Iran. (5)Reproductive Biotechnology Research Center, Avicenna Research
Institute, ACECR, Tehran, Iran. (6)Cell and Molecular Research Centre, Qazvin
University of Medical Sciences, Qazvin, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is a multifactorial disorder.
Environmental factors and genetics can affect pregnancy outcomes.
OBJECTIVE: Conflicting data suggest an association between estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) gene polymorphisms and RPL. In this study, such association was
investigated in Iranian women with RPL.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this case control study, blood samples were collected
from 244 women with a history of three or more consecutive pregnancy losses and
104 healthy women with at least two live births. Using polymerase chain reaction-
restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP), we studied -397C/T and
-351A/G polymorphisms on ESR1 gene in case and control subjects.
RESULTS: The genotypic frequencies of -397C/T and -351A/G polymorphisms on
ESR1were not significantly different between RPL and control groups (p=0.20 and
p=0.09, respectively). A significantly negative correlation was observed between 
-397C/T and -351A/G (r=-0.852, p<0.001) in RPL women and complete linkage
disequilibrium between the investigated polymorphisms was found (D': 0.959;
r-square= 0.758, p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: This investigation suggests that the analyzed polymorphisms on
ESR1gene are not associated with an increased risk of RPL in the studied
population.

PMCID: PMC4111887
PMID: 25071847  [PubMed]


361. Eur J Endocrinol. 2014 Oct;171(4):527-33. doi: 10.1530/EJE-14-0278. Epub 2014 Jul
28.

Androgen receptor expression in male breast cancer predicts inferior outcome and 
poor response to tamoxifen treatment.

Wenhui Z(1), Shuo L(2), Dabei T(2), Ying P(2), Zhipeng W(2), Lei Z(2), Xiaohui
H(2), Jingshu G(2), Hongtao S(2), Qingyuan Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical OncologyThe Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Heilongjiang Harbin 150000, China zhaowenhui1977@163.com
zhma19650210@163.com. (2)Department of Medical OncologyThe Third Affiliated
Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Heilongjiang Harbin 150000, China.

OBJECTIVE: Androgen receptor (AR) plays an important role in male breast cancer
(MBC). Additionally, endocrine therapy is the most important treatment in
oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive advanced breast cancer. This study was aimed to 
investigate the role of AR in MBC treatment and prognosis and to analyse the
relationship between AR and the effect of tamoxifen treatment in MBC patients.
METHODS: AR protein levels and other tumour characteristics (e.g. expression of
ER (ESR1), PR (PGR), AR, HER2 (ERBB2) and Ki-67 (MKI67)) in breast cancer tissue 
from 102 MBC patients were determined using immunohistochemical analysis.
Additionally, the relationship between AR status and clinicopathological features
was analysed using the <U+03C7>(2)-test. Association with survival was initially
analysed using the Kaplan-Meier method and the log-rank test, and Cox regression 
analysis was used to adjust for other prognostic indicators.
RESULTS: High expression of AR was not correlated with T-stage, histological
grade, HER2 status and the status of other sex hormone receptors, but was
associated with lymph node metastases (P=0.032). AR-positive patients showed
significantly shorter 5-year overall survival (OS) rates (P=0.045) and 5-year
disease-free survival (DFS) rates (P=0.026) than AR-negative patients. By
contrast, for patients who received tamoxifen therapy, AR-negative patients
showed a higher clinical benefit rate than AR-positive patients (P=0.025).
Additionally, the median TTP and OS were significantly different (P=0.02 for TTP;
P=0.029 for OS).
CONCLUSIONS: AR expression correlates strongly with both OS and DFS in patients
with MBC. AR-positive patients can predict a poorer clinical outcome than
AR-negative patients after adjuvant tamoxifen therapy.

© 2014 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 25069458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Future Oncol. 2015;11(2):233-49. doi: 10.2217/fon.14.165. Epub 2014 Jul 28.

Global and gene-specific DNA methylation pattern discriminates cholecystitis from
gallbladder cancer patients in Chile.

Kagohara LT(1), Schussel JL, Subbannayya T, Sahasrabuddhe N, Lebron C, Brait M,
Maldonado L, Valle BL, Pirini F, Jahuira M, Lopez J, Letelier P, Brebi-Mieville
P, Ili C, Pandey A, Chatterjee A, Sidransky D, Guerrero-Preston R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

AIM: The aim of the study was to evaluate the use of global and gene-specific DNA
methylation changes as potential biomarkers for gallbladder cancer (GBC) in a
cohort from Chile.
MATERIAL & METHODS: DNA methylation was analyzed through an ELISA-based technique
and quantitative methylation-specific PCR.
RESULTS: Global DNA Methylation Index (p = 0.02) and promoter methylation of
SSBP2 (p = 0.01) and ESR1 (p = 0.05) were significantly different in GBC when
compared with cholecystitis. Receiver curve operator analysis revealed promoter
methylation of APC, CDKN2A, ESR1, PGP9.5 and SSBP2, together with the Global DNA 
Methylation Index, had 71% sensitivity, 95% specificity, a 0.97 area under the
curve and a positive predictive value of 90%.
CONCLUSION: Global and gene-specific DNA methylation may be useful biomarkers for
GBC clinical assessment.

PMCID: PMC4332836
PMID: 25066711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Clin Interv Aging. 2014 Jun 30;9:1031-8. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S65921. eCollection
2014.

Estrogen receptor a gene polymorphisms and risk of Alzheimer's disease: evidence 
from a meta-analysis.

Cheng D(1), Liang B(2), Hao Y(1), Zhou W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transfusion, First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, High 
Vocational Technological College, China Medical University, Shenyang, People's
Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: Human estrogen receptor a (ESR1), a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily of ligand-activated transcription factors, is one of the key
mediators of hormonal response in estrogen-sensitive tissues. Accumulating
evidence has demonstrated that two of the most widely studied single-nucleotide
polymorphisms in ESR1 - PvuII (T/C, rs223493) and Xbal (A/G, rs9340799) - are
possibly associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, individual study
results are still controversial.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We searched PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Science
Direct, SpringerLink, and the Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure databases
for eligible studies assessing the association of ESR1 polymorphisms and AD risk 
(last search performed in November 2013). Thereafter, a meta-analysis of 13,192
subjects from 18 individual studies was conducted to evaluate the association
between ESR1 polymorphisms and susceptibility to AD.
RESULTS: The results indicated that a significant association was found between
the ESR1 PvuII polymorphism and AD risk in Caucasian populations (CC + CT versus 
TT, odds ratio [OR] 1.14, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.02-1.28, P=0.03; CT
versus TT, OR 1.16, 95% CI 1.02-1.31, P=0.02), whereas no evidence of association
was found in Asian populations. Nevertheless, we did not find any significant
association between the ESR1 XbaI polymorphism and AD risk for any model in
Caucasian and Asian populations (all P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Based on this meta-analysis, we conclude that the ESR1 PvuII
polymorphism might be a risk factor in AD development in Caucasian populations,
not in Asian populations. Further confirmation is needed from better-designed and
larger studies.

PMCID: PMC4085310
PMID: 25061285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Oct;141(2):423-31. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu145. Epub 2014 Jul
24.

Control of transcriptional repression of the vitellogenin receptor gene in
largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides) by select estrogen receptors isotypes.

Dominguez GA(1), Bisesi JH Jr(2), Kroll KJ(3), Denslow ND(3), Sabo-Attwood T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, University of South Carolina,
Columbia, South Carolina 29208 Department of Environmental and Global Health,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610. (2)Department of Environmental
Health Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina 29208
Department of Environmental and Global Health, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida 32610 Department of Physiological Sciences, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611. (3)Department of Physiological Sciences,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611.

The vitellogenin receptor (Vtgr) plays an important role in fish reproduction.
This receptor functions to incorporate vitellogenin (Vtg), a macromolecule
synthesized and released from the liver in the bloodstream, into oocytes where it
is processed into yolk. Although studies have focused on the functional role of
Vtgr in fish, the mechanistic control of this gene is still unexplored. Here we
report the identification and analysis of the first piscine 5' regulatory region 
of the vtgr gene which was cloned from largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides).
Using this putative promoter sequence, we investigated a role for hormones,
including insulin and 17ß-estradiol (E2), in transcriptional regulation through
cell-based reporter assays. No effect of insulin was observed, however, E2 was
able to repress transcriptional activity of the vtgr promoter through select
estrogen receptor subtypes, Esr1 and Esr2a but not Esr2b. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay demonstrated that Esr1 likely interacts with the vtgr
promoter region through half ERE and/or SP1 sites, in part. Finally we also show 
that ethinylestradiol (EE2), but not bisphenol-A (BPA), represses promoter
activity similarly to E2. These results reveal for the first time that the Esr1
isoform may play an inhibitory role in the expression of LMB vtgr mRNA under the 
influence of E2, and potent estrogens such as EE2. In addition, this new evidence
suggests that vtgr may be a target of select endocrine disrupting compounds
through environmental exposures.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4271047
PMID: 25061109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:321486. doi: 10.1155/2014/321486. Epub 2014 Jun 26.

Investigation of estrogen receptor (ESR1) for breast cancer from traditional
Chinese medicine.

Hung TC(1), Lee WY(2), Chen KB(3), Chan YC(4), Chen CY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Asia University, Taichung 41354, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Asia University, Taichung 41354, Taiwan 
; School of Medicine, College of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung
40402, Taiwan ; Department of Neurosurgery, China Medical University Hospital,
No. 2 Yude Road, North District, Taichung 40447, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Biomedical Informatics, Asia University, Taichung 41354, Taiwan ; School of
Medicine, College of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan ;
Department of Anesthesiology, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung 40447, 
Taiwan. (4)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, China Medical University,
Taichung 40402, Taiwan. (5)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Asia University,
Taichung 41354, Taiwan ; School of Medicine, College of Medicine, China Medical
University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan ; Research Center for Chinese Medicine &
Acupuncture, China Medical University, Taichung 40402, Taiwan ; Human Genetic
Center, Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital,
Taichung 40447, Taiwan.

Recently, an important topic of breast cancer had been published in 2013. In this
report, estrogen receptor (ESR1) had defined the relation of hormone-cause breast
cancer. The screening of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) database has found
the molecular compounds by simulating molecular docking and molecular dynamics to
regulate ESR1. S-Allylmercaptocysteine and 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan are selected
according to the highest docking score than that of other TCM compounds and
Raloxifene (control). The simulation from molecular dynamics is helpful in
analyzing and detecting the protein-ligand interactions. After a comparing the
control and the Apo form, then based on the docking poses, hydrophobic
interactions, hydrogen bond and structure variations, this research postulates
that S-allylmercaptocysteine may be more appropriate than other compounds for
protein-ligand interaction.

PMCID: PMC4098895
PMID: 25054138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Andrology. 2014 Sep;2(5):695-701. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2014.00243.x. Epub
2014 Jul 23.

Expression of the oestrogen receptor GPER by testicular peritubular cells is
linked to sexual maturation and male fertility.

Sandner F(1), Welter H, Schwarzer JU, Köhn FM, Urbanski HF, Mayerhofer A.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomy III, Cell Biology, LMU München, München, Germany.

Besides the two nuclear oestrogen receptors (ESR1/ESR2), the G protein-coupled
oestrogen receptor (GPER) was described in the human testis but little is known
about testicular GPER during development or male infertility. We performed an
immunohistochemical analysis using human and rhesus monkey testicular samples.
The results obtained in adult primate testes showed GPER in interstitial and
vascular cells as well as in smooth muscle-like peritubular cells, which build
the wall of seminiferous tubules. Expression of GPER was also found in cultured
human testicular peritubular cells (HPTCs) by Western blotting and
RT-PCR/sequencing. Furthermore, as seen in time-lapse videos of cultured cells,
addition of a specific GPER agonist (G1) significantly reduced the numbers of
HTPCs within 24 h. A GPER antagonist (G15) prevented this action, implying a role
for GPER related to the control of cell proliferation or cell death of
peritubular cells. Peritubular cell functions and their phenotype change, for
example, during post-natal development and in the cases of male infertility. The 
study of non-human primate samples revealed that GPER in peritubular cells was
detectable only from the time of puberty onwards, while in samples from infantile
and prepubertal monkeys only interstitial cells showed immunopositive staining.
In testicular biopsies of men with mixed atrophy, a reduction or loss of
immunoreactive GPER was found in peritubular cells surrounding those tubules, in 
which spermatogenesis was impaired. In other cases of impaired spermatogenesis,
namely when the tubular wall was fibrotically remodelled, a complete loss of GPER
was seen. Thus, the observed inverse relation between the state of fertility and 
GPER expression by peritubular cells implies that the regulation of primate
testicular peritubular cells by oestrogens is mediated by GPER in both, health
and disease.

© 2014 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMCID: PMC4134690
PMID: 25052196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Transl Oncol. 2014 Oct;7(5):613-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2014.06.001. Epub 2014
Jul 19.

Tumor heterogeneity at protein level as an independent prognostic factor in
endometrial cancer.

Supernat A(1), Lapinska-Szumczyk S(2), Majewska H(3), Gulczynski J(4), Biernat
W(3), Wydra D(2), Zaczek AJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology,
University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk, 80-211 Gdansk, Poland.
(2)Department of Gynaecology, Gynaecological Oncology and Gynaecological
Endocrinology, Medical University of Gdansk, 80-402 Gdansk, Poland. (3)Department
of Pathomorphology, Medical University of Gdansk, 80-214 Gdansk, Poland.
(4)Department of Pathology and Neuropathology, Medical University of Gdansk,
80-211 Gdansk, Poland. (5)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Intercollegiate
Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk, 
80-211 Gdansk, Poland. Electronic address: azaczek@gumed.edu.pl.

Intratumor heterogeneity implies heterogeneous protein function, facilitating
tumor adaptation which results in therapeutic failure. We hypothesized that tumor
heterogeneity at protein level may influence the course of the disease. As a
single biopsy might not represent the full biologic complexity of the tumor, we
have analyzed immunohistochemically four different cores obtained from each
primary tumor within the cohort of 364 patients with endometrial cancer (EC). The
following proteins were examined: estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), progesterone
receptor, epidermal growth factor receptor, v-erb-b2 erythroblastic leukemia
viral oncogene homolog 2, receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-3, v-erb-b2 avian
erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 4,
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase, phosphorylated v-akt murine
thymoma viral oncogene homolog 1, v-myc avian myelocytomatosis viral oncogene
homolog, DNA topoisomerase II alpha 170 kDa (TOP2A), cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A), tumor protein p53, RAD21 homolog, S. pombe, and
runt-related transcription factor 1. Particularly strong correlation was found
between TOP2A and CDKN2A heterogeneity and higher stage of the disease (P = .0002
and P = .0003, respectively). Most correlations with clinicopathologic data were 
observed for ESR1 heterogeneity that correlated with non-endometrioid carcinomas 
(P=.02), higher stage (P=.005), grade (P=.01), and the presence of metastases (P 
= .01). Thirty-nine (11.0%) patients were classified as "globally heterogeneous".
Cumulative tumor heterogeneity strongly correlated with the presence of
metastases, higher stage, and higher grade of the disease (all P b .05). It also 
carried negative prognostic value (P=.0008). We show that the degree of
heterogeneity in EC might serve as a clinically valid molecular marker.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4225657
PMID: 25048628  [PubMed]


368. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Oct;75(10):1114-24. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22206. Epub 2014 Jul 8.

Neonatal overexpression of estrogen receptor-a alters midbrain dopamine neuron
development and reverses the effects of low maternal care in female offspring.

Peña CJ(1,)(2), Champagne FA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York, 10029. (2)Department of Psychology, Columbia
University, New York, New York, 10027.

Maternal behavior is dependent on estrogen receptor-alpha (ERa; Esr1) and
oxytocin receptor (OTR) signaling in the medial preoptic area (MPOA) of the
hypothalamus, as well as dopamine signaling from the ventral tegmental area (VTA)
to forebrain regions. Previous studies in rats indicate that low levels of
maternal care, particularly licking/grooming (LG), lead to reduced levels of MPOA
ERa and VTA dopamine neurons in female offspring and predict lower levels of
postpartum maternal behavior by these offspring. The aim of this study was to
determine the functional impact on maternal behavior of neonatal manipulation of 
ERa in females that had experienced low versus high levels of postnatal maternal 
LG. Adenovirus expressing ESR1 was targeted to the MPOA in female pups from low
and high LG litters on postnatal day 2-3. Overexpression of ESR1 in low LG
offspring elevated the level of ERa-immunoreactive cells in the MPOA and of
tyrosine hydroxylase cells in the VTA to that observed in high LG females.
Amongst juvenile female low LG offspring, ESR1 overexpression also decreased the 
latency to engage in maternal behavior toward donor pups. These results show that
virally mediated expression of ESR1 in the neonatal rat hypothalamus results in
lasting changes in ESR1 expression through the juvenile period, and can "rescue" 
hormone receptor levels and behavior of offspring reared by low LG dams,
potentially mediated by downstream alterations within reward circuitry. Thus, the
transmission of maternal behavior from one generation to the next can be
augmented by neonatal ERa in the MPOA.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4284154 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25044746  [PubMed - in process]


369. Reproduction. 2014 Sep;148(3):285-94. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0128.

Estradiol increases cAMP in the oviductal secretory cells through a nongenomic
mechanism.

Oróstica ML(1), Lopez J(1), Rojas I(1), Rocco J(1), Díaz P(1), Reuquén P(1),
Cardenas H(1), Parada-Bustamante A(2), Orihuela PA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología,
Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33, Santiago, 
ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y Nanotecnología-CEDENNASantiago,
ChileInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de Chile, Santiago,
ChileLaboratorio de Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología,
Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33, Santiago, 
ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y Nanotecnología-CEDENNASantiago,
ChileInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de Chile, Santiago,
Chile. (2)Laboratorio de Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y
Biología, Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33, 
Santiago, ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y
Nanotecnología-CEDENNASantiago, ChileInstituto de Investigaciones
Materno-InfantilUniversidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile. (3)Laboratorio de
Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología, Universidad de
Santiago de Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33, Santiago, ChileCentro
para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y Nanotecnología-CEDENNASantiago,
ChileInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de Chile, Santiago,
ChileLaboratorio de Inmunología de la ReproducciónFacultad de Química y Biología,
Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Alameda 3363, Casilla 40, Correo 33, Santiago, 
ChileCentro para el Desarrollo en Nanociencia y Nanotecnología-CEDENNASantiago,
ChileInstituto de Investigaciones Materno-InfantilUniversidad de Chile, Santiago,
Chile pedro.orihuela@usach.cl.

In the rat oviduct, estradiol (E2) accelerates egg transport by a nongenomic
action that requires previous conversion of E2 to methoxyestrogens via
catechol-O-methyltranferase (COMT) and activation of estrogen receptor (ER) with 
subsequent production of cAMP and inositol triphosphate (IP3). However, the role 
of the different oviductal cellular phenotypes on this E2 nongenomic pathway
remains undetermined. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of E2
on the levels of cAMP and IP3 in primary cultures of secretory and smooth muscle 
cells from rat oviducts and determine the mechanism by which E2 increases cAMP in
the secretory cells. In the secretory cells, E2 increased cAMP but not IP3, while
in the smooth muscle cells E2 decreased cAMP and increased IP3. Suppression of
protein synthesis by actinomycin D did not prevent the E2-induced cAMP increase, 
but this was blocked by the ER antagonist ICI 182<U+200A>780 and the inhibitors of COMT 
OR 486, G protein-a inhibitory (Gai) protein pertussis toxin and adenylyl cyclase
(AC) SQ 22536. Expression of the mRNA for the enzymes that metabolizes estrogens,
Comt, Cyp1a1, and Cyp1b1 was found in the secretory cells, but this was not
affected by E2. Finally, confocal immunofluorescence analysis showed that E2
induced colocalization between ESR1 (ERa) and Gai in extranuclear regions of the 
secretory cells. We conclude that E2 differentially regulates cAMP and IP3 in the
secretory and smooth muscle cells of the rat oviduct. In the secretory cells, E2 
increases cAMP via a nongenomic action that requires activation of COMT and ER,
coupling between ESR1 and Gai, and stimulation of AC.

© 2014 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25038866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Development. 2014 Aug;141(16):3159-64. doi: 10.1242/dev.108498. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Dual roles for Id4 in the regulation of estrogen signaling in the mammary gland
and ovary.

Best SA(1), Hutt KJ(2), Fu NY(1), Vaillant F(1), Liew SH(3), Hartley L(4), Scott 
CL(5), Lindeman GJ(5), Visvader JE(6).

Author information: 
(1)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Medical
Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(2)Ovarian Biology Laboratory, Prince Henry's Institute, Monash Medical Center,
Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia Department of Anatomy and Developmental
Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia. (3)Ovarian Biology
Laboratory, Prince Henry's Institute, Monash Medical Center, Clayton, Victoria
3168, Australia. (4)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (5)ACRF Stem 
Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Medicine, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia Department of Medical Oncology,
The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia. (6)ACRF Stem
Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Medical Biology, The University
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia visvader@wehi.edu.au.

The HLH transcriptional regulator Id4 exerts important roles in different organs,
including the neural compartment, where Id4 loss usually results in early
lethality. To explore the role of this basally restricted transcription factor in
the mammary gland, we generated a cre-inducible mouse model. MMTV- or
K14-cre-mediated deletion of Id4 led to a delay in ductal morphogenesis,
consistent with previous findings using a germ-line knockout mouse model. A
striking increase in the expression of ERa (Esr1), PR and FoxA1 was observed in
both the basal and luminal cellular subsets of Id4-deficient mammary glands.
Together with chromatin immunoprecipitation of Id4 on the Esr1 and Foxa1 promoter
regions, these data imply that Id4 is a negative regulator of the ERa signaling
axis. Unexpectedly, examination of the ovaries of targeted mice revealed
significantly increased numbers of secondary and antral follicles, and reduced
Id4 expression in the granulosa cells. Moreover, expression of the cascade of
enzymes that are crucial for estrogen biosynthesis in the ovary was decreased in 
Id4-deficient females and uterine weights were considerably lower, indicating
impaired estrogen production. Thus, compromised ovarian function and decreased
circulating estrogen likely contribute to the mammary ductal defects evident in
Id4-deficient mice. Collectively, these data identify Id4 as a novel regulator of
estrogen signaling, where Id4 restrains ERa expression in the basal and luminal
cellular compartments of the mammary gland and regulates estrogen biosynthesis in
the ovary.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25038044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2014 Dec;21(24):13964-73. doi:
10.1007/s11356-014-3260-6. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Risk for estrogen-dependent diseases in relation to phthalate exposure and
polymorphisms of CYP17A1 and estrogen receptor genes.

Huang PC(1), Li WF, Liao PC, Sun CW, Tsai EM, Wang SL.

Author information: 
(1)National Environmental Health Research Center (NEHRC), National Health
Research Institutes (NHRI), Miaoli, Taiwan.

Evidence has shown that polymorphisms of various genes known to be involved in
estrogen biosynthesis and function are associated with estrogen-dependent
diseases (EDDs). These genes include CYP17A1, estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), and 2
(ESR2). Phthalates are considered estrogenic endocrine disruptors, and recent
research has suggested that they may act as a risk factor for EDDs. However,
extremely few studies have assessed the effects of gene-environment interaction
on these diseases. We recruited 44 patients with endometriosis or adenomyosis, 36
patients with leiomyoma, and 69 healthy controls from a medical center in Taiwan 
between 2005 and 2007. Urine samples were collected and analyzed for seven
phthalate metabolites using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.
Peripheral lymphocytes were used for DNA extraction to determine the genotype of 
CYP17A1, ESR1, and ESR2. Compared to controls, patients with leiomyoma had
significantly higher levels of total urinary mono-ethylhexyl phthalate (SMEHP)
(52.1 vs. 29.6 µg/g creatinine, p = 0.040), mono-n-butyl phthalate (MnBP) (75.4
vs. 51.3 µg/g creatinine, p = 0.019), and monoethyl phthalate (MEP) (103.7 vs.
59.3 µg/g creatinine, p = 0.031). In contrast, patients with endometriosis or
adenomyosis showed a marginally increased level of urinary MEHP only. Subjects
who were homozygous for both the ESR1 C allele (rs2234693) and CYP17A1 C allele
(rs743572) showed a significantly increased risk for leiomyoma (OR = 19.8; 95 %
CI, 1.70; 231.5; p = 0.017) relative to subjects with other genotypes of ESR1 and
CYP17A1. These results were obtained after adjusting for age, cigarette smoking, 
MEHP level, GSTM1 genotype and other covariates. Our results suggested that both 
CYP17A1 and ESR1 polymorphisms may modulate the effects of phthalate exposure on 
the development of leiomyoma.

PMID: 25030786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Mol Biosyst. 2014 Oct;10(10):2558-66. doi: 10.1039/c4mb00240g.

Vitreous proteomic analysis of idiopathic epiretinal membranes.

Yu J(1), Feng L, Wu Y, Wang H, Ba J, Zhu W, Xie C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200072, P. R. China. dryujing@aliyun.com.

To understand the molecular mechanisms of idiopathic epiretinal membranes
(iERMs), the vitreous proteomes of patients with iERMs were investigated. The
vitreous proteome in patients with iERMs (n = 8) and donor samples (n = 8) was
analysed using reversed phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC)
coupled with electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) and
GeneGo Metacore. This research followed the tenets of the Declaration of
Helsinki for the use of human subjects. In this current study, 226 significant
changes in protein abundance (abundance ratio >2, p < 0.01) were identified in
the vitreous proteome of iERM patients compared to normal control vitreous,
including 122 proteins that were present at lower levels and 104 proteins that
were present at higher levels. In the iERM vitreous samples, complement
components, inflammation-related proteins and matrix metalloproteinase were
present at higher levels, while normal cytoskeleton proteins were present at
lower levels. The top GeneGo pathway was "immune response", the top process
network was "inflammation", and the top KEGG pathway was "coagulation cascades". 
The essential 2-node proteins of the network were estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and 
p300. Among those found at higher levels, ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2O
(UBE2O) and complement C4A (C4A) were the most abundant proteins, and could be
detected in each of the iERM vitreous samples. It can be concluded that iERMs are
a complicated pathological process involving inflammation, immune response, and
cytoskeleton remolding. UBE2O and C4A may be candidate biomarkers for iERMs.

PMID: 25014768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Infect Genet Evol. 2014 Oct;27:69-76. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.07.002. Epub
2014 Jul 9.

Association of PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms in estrogen receptor alpha gene with 
the risk of hepatitis B virus infection in the Guangxi Zhuang population.

Liu Y(1), Liu Y(1), Huang X(1), Sui J(1), Mo C(1), Wang J(1), Peng Q(1), Deng
Y(1), Huang L(1), Li S(2), Qin X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China. (2)Department of Clinical
Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning,
Guangxi, China. Electronic address: lis8858@126.com. (3)Department of Clinical
Laboratory, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning,
Guangxi, China. Electronic address: qinxue919@126.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Available evidence has suggested that estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) is implicated in the pathogenic process of hepatitis B infection.
Therefore, we evaluated the association of PvuII (rs2234693) and XbaI (rs9340799)
in ESR1 and HBV infection in Guangxi Zhuang populations.
METHODS: A total of 389 subjects were divided into four groups: 112 patients with
chronic hepatitis B (CHB), 65 patients with hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related liver
cirrhosis (LC), 107 patients with HBV-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and
105 healthy controls. The polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism strategy was used to detect ESR1 gene PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms.
RESULTS: Compared with healthy controls, binary logistic regression analyses show
that the CC genotype of PvuII was associated with a significantly increased
susceptibility to CHB compared with the TT genotype (OR=1.760, 95% CI
1.316-2.831; p=0.044). The PvuII CC genotype was also associated with
significantly increased risk of HBV-related LC (OR=1.921, 95% CI 1.342-2.478;
p=0.043). Similarly, the subjects bearing the homozygous CC genotype of PvuII
polymorphism also had more than a 1.7-fold increased risk for development of HCC 
(OR=1.748, 95% CI 1.313-2.787; p=0.010) compared with those bearing the TT
genotype. Furthermore, the AC haplotype was associated with a significantly
increased risk of HCC with an OR of 1.456 (p=0.003). In contrast, there were no
significant differences in the genotype and allele of XbaI polymorphisms in the
ESR1 gene between the groups of patients and healthy controls. In addition, ESR1 
polymorphisms were not significantly associated with susceptibility to
HBV-related HCC when using CHB and LC patients as references.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the CC genotype of PvuII in ESR1 is associated with 
an increased risk of CHB, HBV-related LC and HCC in Guangxi Zhuang populations.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25014269  [PubMed - in process]


374. Science. 2014 Jul 11;345(6193):216-20. doi: 10.1126/science.1253533.

Cancer therapy. Ex vivo culture of circulating breast tumor cells for
individualized testing of drug susceptibility.

Yu M(1), Bardia A(2), Aceto N(3), Bersani F(3), Madden MW(3), Donaldson MC(3),
Desai R(3), Zhu H(3), Comaills V(3), Zheng Z(4), Wittner BS(3), Stojanov P(5),
Brachtel E(6), Sgroi D(7), Kapur R(8), Shioda T(2), Ting DT(2), Ramaswamy S(2),
Getz G(9), Iafrate AJ(7), Benes C(2), Toner M(10), Maheswaran S(11), Haber
DA(12).

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD
20815, USA. (2)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical
School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. (3)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. (4)Massachusetts
General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129,
USA. Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.
Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Insitutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142,
USA. (6)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129,
USA. (7)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. (8)Center for Bioengineering in Medicine, Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. (9)Massachusetts General Hospital
Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. Department of 
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. Broad Institute of
Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (10)Center for Bioengineering in
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. Department of
Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. (11)Massachusetts
General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129,
USA. Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.
maheswaran@helix.mgh.harvard.edu haber@helix.mgh.harvard.edu. (12)Massachusetts
General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129,
USA. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.
maheswaran@helix.mgh.harvard.edu haber@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014 Sep;11(9):501.
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2014 Sep;13(9):654.
    Bull Cancer. 2014 Nov;101(11):997.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2014 Sep;14(9):576.

Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are present at low concentrations in the
peripheral blood of patients with solid tumors. It has been proposed that the
isolation, ex vivo culture, and characterization of CTCs may provide an
opportunity to noninvasively monitor the changing patterns of drug susceptibility
in individual patients as their tumors acquire new mutations. In a
proof-of-concept study, we established CTC cultures from six patients with
estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. Three of five CTC lines tested were
tumorigenic in mice. Genome sequencing of the CTC lines revealed preexisting
mutations in the PIK3CA gene and newly acquired mutations in the estrogen
receptor gene (ESR1), PIK3CA gene, and fibroblast growth factor receptor gene
(FGFR2), among others. Drug sensitivity testing of CTC lines with multiple
mutations revealed potential new therapeutic targets. With optimization of CTC
culture conditions, this strategy may help identify the best therapies for
individual cancer patients over the course of their disease.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4358808
PMID: 25013076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Clin Cases Miner Bone Metab. 2014 Jan;11(1):36-43.

CYP19 and ESR1 gene polymorphisms: response of the bone mineral density in
post-menopausal women to hormonal replacement therapy.

Masi L(1), Ottanelli S(1), Berni R(2), Cacudi E(2), Giusti F(1), Marcucci G(1),
Cavalli L(1), Fossi C(1), Marini F(1), Ciuffi S(1), Tanini A(1), Brandi ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Bone Diseases Unit, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Statistics, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Sex steroids are important regulators of bone physiology and play an 
essential role in the maintenance of bone health throughout the life. Hormonal
replacement therapy (HRT) is a treatment commonly used to relieve symptoms and
some undesirable consequences of menopause such as osteoporosis. Osteoporosis,
characterized by the loss of bone mass and deterioration of microarchitecture
with a consequent higher risk of fragility fractures, is under genetic influence.
A tetranucleotide (TTTA)n microsatellite repeat polymorphism, at intron 4 of the 
CYP19 (aromatase) gene, has been previously associated with higher lumbar spine
bone mineral density (LS-BMD) and lower risk of spine fracture in postmenopausal 
women. Moreover, the ERa encoded by the ESR1 gene is another important candidate 
for the regulation of bone mass of menopause. Moreover prospective analysis from 
>18.000 subjects at the GENOMOS study indicated that XX homozygotes genotype had 
a reduced risk of fracture independently from BMD. In the present study, we
investigated in postmenopausal Italian women, at baseline and after 1 year of
HRT, whether ESR1 and CYP19 gene polymorphisms could affect BMD through different
statistical models.
METHODS: This study has been performed on 100 post-menopausal Italian women, from
a larger group of 250. The study group was administred HRT and LS-BMD was
measured at baseline and after 1 year of therapy. Genetic analysis evaluating
ESR1 and CYP19 gene polymorphisms was performed.
RESULTS: Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) test showed that women with normal
LS-BMD at the baseline had a major statistically significant BMD increase of
0.1426 gr/cm(2) (p= 0.0001) with respect to the osteoporotic patients. In
addition, subjects with genotype 1 and 2 of CYP19 gene had a lower modification
in LS-BMD after 1 year of HRT (0.0837 gr/cm(2) and 0,076 g/cm(2); p=0.0470 and
0,0547 respectively) when compared to genotype 3. No influences of the aromatase 
genotypes were observed in the variable difference using both Anova and GLMs
test. Regarding the ESR1 gene polymorphism, the LS-BMD after 1 year of HRT was
influenced by the diagnosis at the baseline and height and ERa genotypes were
able to influence difference with statistical significant results with both test.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, we have demonstrated that CYP19 gene
polymorphism is able to influence the effect of 1 year HRT on LS-BMD with no
influence on pre-/ and post-/HRT LS-BMD differences. Although ESR1 gene
polymorphism is not able to influence the LS-BMD after 1 year HRT, it influences 
the observed modifications during the year of therapy. These data underlie the
complexity of the genetics of the bone mass and its importance in influencing the
response to HRT.

PMCID: PMC4064439
PMID: 25002878  [PubMed]


376. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Aug;21(4):T183-202. doi: 10.1530/ERC-14-0248. Epub 2014
Jul 7.

Bringing androgens up a NOTCH in breast cancer.

Tarulli GA(1), Butler LM(2), Tilley WD(2), Hickey TE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dame Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories (DRMCRL)Faculty of Health
Sciences, School of Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia 5005, Australia gerard.tarulli@adelaide.edu.au. (2)Dame Roma Mitchell
Cancer Research Laboratories (DRMCRL)Faculty of Health Sciences, School of
Medicine, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.

While it has been known for decades that androgen hormones influence normal
breast development and breast carcinogenesis, the underlying mechanisms have only
been recently elucidated. To date, most studies have focused on androgen action
in breast cancer cell lines, yet these studies represent artificial systems that 
often do not faithfully replicate/recapitulate the cellular, molecular and
hormonal environments of breast tumours in vivo. It is critical to have a better 
understanding of how androgens act in the normal mammary gland as well as in in
vivo systems that maintain a relevant tumour microenvironment to gain insights
into the role of androgens in the modulation of breast cancer development. This
in turn will facilitate application of androgen-modulation therapy in breast
cancer. This is particularly relevant as current clinical trials focus on
inhibiting androgen action as breast cancer therapy but, depending on the steroid
receptor profile of the tumour, certain individuals may be better served by
selectively stimulating androgen action. Androgen receptor (AR) protein is
primarily expressed by the hormone-sensing compartment of normal breast
epithelium, commonly referred to as oestrogen receptor alpha (ERa
(ESR1))-positive breast epithelial cells, which also express progesterone
receptors (PRs) and prolactin receptors and exert powerful developmental
influences on adjacent breast epithelial cells. Recent lineage-tracing studies,
particularly those focussed on NOTCH signalling, and genetic analysis of cancer
risk in the normal breast highlight how signalling via the hormone-sensing
compartment can influence normal breast development and breast cancer
susceptibility. This provides an impetus to focus on the relationship between
androgens, AR and NOTCH signalling and the crosstalk between ERa and PR
signalling in the hormone-sensing component of breast epithelium in order to
unravel the mechanisms behind the ability of androgens to modulate breast cancer 
initiation and growth.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25001242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:435853. doi: 10.1155/2014/435853. Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Network based integrated analysis of phenotype-genotype data for prioritization
of candidate symptom genes.

Li X(1), Zhou X(1), Peng Y(2), Liu B(3), Zhang R(4), Hu J(5), Yu J(1), Jia C(1), 
Sun C(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer and Information Technology and Beijing Key Lab of Traffic
Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China.
(2)School of Engineering and Informatics, University of Bradford, West Yorkshire 
BD7 1DP, UK. (3)China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, China.
(4)Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing
100053, China. (5)Institute of Basic Theory of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, China. (6)Liaoning
Provincial Key Laboratory of Cerebral Diseases, Institute for Brain Disorders,
Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, China.

BACKGROUND: Symptoms and signs (symptoms in brief) are the essential clinical
manifestations for individualized diagnosis and treatment in traditional Chinese 
medicine (TCM). To gain insights into the molecular mechanism of symptoms, we
develop a computational approach to identify the candidate genes of symptoms.
METHODS: This paper presents a network-based approach for the integrated analysis
of multiple phenotype-genotype data sources and the prediction of the
prioritizing genes for the associated symptoms. The method first calculates the
similarities between symptoms and diseases based on the symptom-disease
relationships retrieved from the PubMed bibliographic database. Then the
disease-gene associations and protein-protein interactions are utilized to
construct a phenotype-genotype network. The PRINCE algorithm is finally used to
rank the potential genes for the associated symptoms.
RESULTS: The proposed method gets reliable gene rank list with AUC (area under
curve) 0.616 in classification. Some novel genes like CALCA, ESR1, and MTHFR were
predicted to be associated with headache symptoms, which are not recorded in the 
benchmark data set, but have been reported in recent published literatures.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that by integrating phenotype-genotype
relationships into a complex network framework it provides an effective approach 
to identify candidate genes of symptoms.

PMCID: PMC4060751
PMID: 24991551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Leukemia. 2015 Feb;29(2):297-303. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.205. Epub 2014 Jul 3.

Genomic profiling of thousands of candidate polymorphisms predicts risk of
relapse in 778 Danish and German childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients.

Wesolowska-Andersen A(1), Borst L(2), Dalgaard MD(1), Yadav R(1), Rasmussen
KK(2), Wehner PS(3), Rasmussen M(4), Ørntoft TF(5), Nordentoft I(5), Koehler
R(6), Bartram CR(6), Schrappe M(7), Sicheritz-Ponten T(1), Gautier L(1), Marquart
H(8), Madsen HO(8), Brunak S(1), Stanulla M(9), Gupta R(1), Schmiegelow K(10).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs.
Lyngby, Denmark. (2)Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, The Juliane Marie Centre,
The University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Department of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, HC Andersen Children's Hospital, Odense
University Hospital, Odense, Denmark. (4)Centre for GeoGenetics, Natural History 
Museum of Denmark, The University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Århus University Hospital, Århus, Denmark.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(7)Department of General Pediatrics, University Medical Center
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany. (8)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (9)Department of Clinical Immunology,
Diagnostic Centre, The University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)1] Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, The Juliane Marie Centre, The
University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark [2] Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, The University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia survival approaches 90%. New strategies
are needed to identify the 10-15% who evade cure. We applied targeted,
sequencing-based genotyping of 25<U+2009>000 to 34<U+2009>000 preselected potentially
clinically relevant single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to identify host
genome profiles associated with relapse risk in 352 patients from the Nordic
ALL92/2000 protocols and 426 patients from the German Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster
(BFM) ALL2000 protocol. Patients were enrolled between 1992 and 2008 (median
follow-up: 7.6 years). Eleven cross-validated SNPs were significantly associated 
with risk of relapse across protocols. SNP and biologic pathway level analyses
associated relapse risk with leukemia aggressiveness, glucocorticosteroid
pharmacology/response and drug transport/metabolism pathways. Classification and 
regression tree analysis identified three distinct risk groups defined by end of 
induction residual leukemia, white blood cell count and variants in
myeloperoxidase (MPO), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), lamin B1 (LMNB1) and matrix
metalloproteinase-7 (MMP7) genes, ATP-binding cassette transporters and
glucocorticosteroid transcription regulation pathways. Relapse rates ranged from 
4% (95% confidence interval (CI): 1.6-6.3%) for the best group (72% of patients) 
to 76% (95% CI: 41-90%) for the worst group (5% of patients, P<0.001). Validation
of these findings and similar approaches to identify SNPs associated with
toxicities may allow future individualized relapse and toxicity risk-based
treatments adaptation.

PMCID: PMC4320289
PMID: 24990611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:965486. doi: 10.1155/2014/965486.
Epub 2014 May 27.

Screening to Identify Commonly Used Chinese Herbs That Affect ERBB2 and ESR1 Gene
Expression Using the Human Breast Cancer MCF-7 Cell Line.

Chiu JH(1), Chang CJ(2), Wu JC(3), Liu HJ(4), Wen CS(5), Hsu CH(4), Chen JL(6),
Tseng LM(7), Chen WS(8), Shyr YM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Traditional Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 112, Taiwan ; Division of General Surgery, Department of
Surgery, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei 112, Taiwan ; Division of
General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Cheng Hsin General Hospital, Taipei 112, 
Taiwan. (2)Department of Food Science, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung 
202, Taiwan. (3)Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine, Kaohsiung Veterans
General Hospital, Kaohsiung 81362, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Traditional Medicine, 
School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Orthopedics, Cheng Hsin General Hospital, Taipei 112, Taiwan.
(6)School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 333,
Taiwan ; Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,
Taoyuan 333, Taiwan. (7)Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei 112, Taiwan ; School of Medicine,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112, Taiwan. (8)Division of Colorectal
Surgery, Department of Surgery, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei 112,
Taiwan ; Experimental Surgery of the Department of Surgery, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, Taipei 112, Taiwan. (9)Division of General Surgery, Department 
of Surgery, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei 112, Taiwan.

Aim. Our aim the was to screen the commonly used Chinese herbs in order to detect
changes in ERBB2 and ESR1 gene expression using MCF-7 cells. Methods. Using the
MCF-7 human breast cancer cell line, cell cytotoxicity and proliferation were
evaluated by MTT and trypan blue exclusion assays, respectively. A luciferase
reporter assay was established by transient transfecting MCF-7 cells with
plasmids containing either the ERBB2 or the ESR1 promoter region linked to the
luciferase gene. Chinese herbal extracts were used to treat the cells at 24<U+2009>h
after transfection, followed by measurement of their luciferase activity. The
screening results were verified by Western blotting to measure HER2 and ER a
protein expression. Results. At concentrations that induced little cytotoxicity, 
thirteen single herbal extracts and five compound recipes were found to increase 
either ERBB2 or ESR1 luciferase activity. By Western blotting, Si-Wu-Tang,
Kuan-Shin-Yin, and Suan-Tsao-Ren-Tang were found to increase either HER2 or ER a 
protein expression. In addition, Ligusticum chuanxiong was shown to have a great 
effect on ERBB2 gene expression and synergistically with estrogen to stimulate
MCF-7 cell growth. Conclusion. Our results provide important information that
should affect clinical treatment strategies among breast cancer patients who are 
receiving hormonal or targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC4058453
PMID: 24987437  [PubMed]


380. Neuro Oncol. 2014 Nov;16(11):1499-509. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/nou107. Epub 2014 Jun 
26.

DNA methylation and gene deletion analysis of brain metastases in melanoma
patients identifies mutually exclusive molecular alterations.

Marzese DM(1), Scolyer RA(1), Roqué M(1), Vargas-Roig LM(1), Huynh JL(1), Wilmott
JS(1), Murali R(1), Buckland ME(1), Barkhoudarian G(1), Thompson JF(1), Morton
DL(1), Kelly DF(1), Hoon DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, John Wayne Cancer Institute, Santa Monica,
California (D.M.M., J.L.H., D.S.B.H.); Department of Tissue Oncology and
Diagnostic Pathology (R.A.S., M.E.B., J.F.T.) and Department of Melanoma and
Surgical Oncology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia (J.F.T.);
Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia (R.A.S.,
J.S.W., M.E.B., J.F.T.); Melanoma Institute Australia, Sydney, Australia (R.A.S.,
J.S.W.); Cellular and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Institute of Histology and
Embryology, Mendoza, Argentina (M.R.); Tumor Biology Laboratory, Institute of
Medicine and Experimental Biology of Cuyo, Mendoza, Argentina (L.M.V.-R.);
Department of Pathology (R.M.), Center for Molecular Oncology (R.M.), and Human
Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York (R.M.); Division of Surgical Oncology, John Wayne Cancer
Institute, Santa Monica, California (D.L.M.); Brain Tumor Center, Saint John's
Health Center, Santa Monica, California (G.B., D.F.K.).

BACKGROUND: The brain is a common target of metastases for melanoma patients.
Little is known about the genetic and epigenetic alterations in melanoma brain
metastases (MBMs). Unraveling these molecular alterations is a key step in
understanding their aggressive nature and identifying novel therapeutic targets.
METHODS: Genome-wide DNA methylation analyses of MBMs (n = 15) and normal brain
tissues (n = 91) and simultaneous multigene DNA methylation and gene deletion
analyses of metastatic melanoma tissues (99 MBMs and 43 extracranial metastases) 
were performed. BRAF and NRAS mutations were evaluated in MBMs by targeted
sequencing.
RESULTS: MBMs showed significant epigenetic heterogeneity. RARB, RASSF1, ESR1,
APC, PTEN, and CDH13 genes were frequently hypermethylated. Deletions were
frequently detected in the CDKN2A/B locus. Of MBMs, 46.1% and 28.8% had BRAF and 
NRAS missense mutations, respectively. Compared with lung and liver metastases,
MBMs exhibited higher frequency of CDH13 hypermethylation and CDKN2A/B locus
deletion. Mutual exclusivity between hypermethylated genes and CDKN2A/B locus
deletion identified 2 clinically relevant molecular subtypes of MBMs. CDKN2A/B
deletions were associated with multiple MBMs and frequently hypermethylated genes
with shorter time to brain metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Melanoma cells that colonize the brain harbor numerous genetically
and epigenetically altered genes. This study presents an integrated genomic and
epigenomic analysis that reveals MBM-specific molecular alterations and mutually 
exclusive molecular subtypes.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4201072
PMID: 24968695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Life Sci. 2014 Aug 6;110(1):8-14. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2014.06.014. Epub 2014 Jun
22.

Induction of hepatic apolipoprotein A-I gene expression by the isoflavones
quercetin and isoquercetrin.

Haas MJ(1), Onstead-Haas LM(2), Szafran-Swietlik A(1), Kojanian H(1), Davis T(2),
Armstrong P(2), Wong NC(3), Mooradian AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Florida
Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, USA. (2)Biotechnology Laboratory Technology,
Florida State College of Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, USA. (3)Departments of
Medicine and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.

AIMS: Phytochemicals such as flavonoids, vitamins, and polyphenols have been
shown to have beneficial effects in metabolic disease. To determine if select
flavonoids regulate hepatic apolipoprotein A-I (apo A-I) and high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) synthesis, we examined the effects of quercetin, isoquercetin, 
and myrescetin on apo A-I gene expression in HepG2 (hepatocytes) and Caco-2
(intestinal) cells.
MAIN METHODS: Apo A-I gene expression was measured by Western blotting,
quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction, and transient
transfection. Estrogen receptor a (ESR1) and estrogen receptor ß expression were 
measured by Western blotting, and ESR1 expression was inhibited using
ESR1-specific short inhibitory RNA (siRNA).
KEY FINDINGS: Quercetin and isoquercetin, but not myrecetin, induced apo A-I
protein and mRNA synthesis, and induced apo A-I promoter activity. Induction by
quercetin required an estrogen-responsive region of the apo A-I promoter.
Addition of estrogen receptor blocker ICI-182780 to quercetin-treated cells
inhibited the effects of quercetin on apo A-I gene expression. Down-regulation of
ESR1 with ESR1 siRNA had no effect on basal apo A-I gene expression; however it
prevented quercetin-mediated induction of apo A-I gene expression.
SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that quercetin induces apo A-I gene expression at least
in part through induction of ESR1 and may be useful in treating
hypoalphalipoproteinemia.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24963805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2014 May 29;5(2):71-86. eCollection 2014.

Influence of sex and disease severity on gene expression profiles in individuals 
with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

McGee SP(1), Zhang H(2), Karmaus W(2), Sabo-Attwood T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, University of South Carolina 921 
Assembly Street, Columbia, SC, 29208, USA. (2)Division of Epidemiology,
Biostatistics and Environmental Health, University of Memphis 3825 DeSoto Avenue,
Memphis, TN 38152, USA. (3)Department of Environmental and Global Health and
Center for Environmental and Human Toxicology, University of Florida 2187 Mowry
Rd, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA.

Epidemiological studies suggest sex-specific trends in the prevalence and
mortality of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) that are distinct for each disease. While the expression
of numerous immune and extracellular matrix (ECM) genes in the lung have been
well characterized in these diseases, associations elucidating their sex-specific
expression patterns by disease type and severity, and the evaluation of
hormone-related genes, have not been well studied. Here we performed targeted
transcriptional profiling of 48 genes was performed on lung tissue samples from
males and females with mild or medium severity IPF or COPD. The genes assessed
included those involved in inflammation, ECM remodeling and hormonal processes.
Data for 36 lung tissue samples were obtained that were stratified by disease and
sex. Expression levels revealed a subset of genes which show differential
expression among sexes, disease type, and disease severity. The most significant 
observations were the increased expression primarily of ECM genes in medium
severity IPF (CATHK, COL1A1, COL3, MMP1, MMP7, IL-1RN) compared to mild IPF and
COPD. Two genes, CH3L1 and MMP7 showed a tendency of interaction between sex and 
disease in IPF severity. Surprisingly, there were no significant differences in
any of the sex genes measured between the IPF groups; however, ESR1 and AR
expression levels were higher and lower, respectively, compared to COPD samples. 
Overall, this work highlights two genes, CH3L1 and MMP7, that may contribute to
gender trends observed for IPF and COPD and are potential targets for future
research.

PMCID: PMC4065396
PMID: 24959312  [PubMed]


383. Exp Ther Med. 2014 May;7(5):1151-1154. Epub 2014 Mar 7.

Integration of partial least squares and Monte Carlo gene expression analysis in 
coronary artery disease.

Zhang H(1), Li T(1), Wu G(1), Ma F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Xi'an Central Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi 
710003, P.R. China.

Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the most common type of cardiovascular disease
and leading cause of mortality worldwide. Microarray technology for gene
expression analysis has facilitated the identification of the molecular mechanism
that underlies the pathogenesis of CAD. Previous studies have primarily used
variance or regression analysis, without considering array specific factors.
Thus, the aim of the present study was to investigate the mechanism of CAD using 
partial least squares (PLS)-based analysis, which was integrated with the Monte
Carlo technique. Microarray analysis was performed with a data set of 110 CAD
patients and 111 controls obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. A
total of 390 dysregulated genes were acquired. Significantly increased
representations of dysregulated genes in Gene Ontology items, including
transforming growth factor ß-activated receptor activity and acyl-CoA oxidase
activity, were identified. Network analysis revealed three hub genes with a
degree of >10, including ESR1, ITGA4 and ARRB2. The results of the present study 
provide novel information on the gene expression signatures of CAD patients and
offer further theoretical support for future therapeutic study.

PMCID: PMC3991499
PMID: 24940402  [PubMed]


384. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2014 Jun 17;239(7):883-890. [Epub ahead of print]

Methylation patterns of estrogen receptor a promoter correlate with estrogen
receptor a expression and clinicopathological factors in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Dai B(1), Geng L(1), Yu Y(2), Sui C(1), Xie F(1), Shen W(1), Zheng T(1), Yang
J(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Special Treatment, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200438, China. (2)The Department of 
Biliary Tract Surgery, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai 200438, China. (3)The Department of Special
Treatment, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200438, China jmyang@smmu.edu.cn.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the seventh most common type of cancer;
notably, the incidence of HCC is four to eight times higher in men than women.
Previous studies reported that the estrogen receptor (ER) signaling pathway is
involved in the pathogenesis of HCC, although the extent of its involvement is
unclear due to several conflicting reports. In the present study, tumor and
paired adjacent non-cancerous tissues from 157 HCC patients were collected.
Transcriptome sequencing and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
were used to quantify the ER a (ESR1) expression levels, and the Sequenom
EpiTYPER assay was used to delineate the methylation patterns in the ESR1
promoter. We found that ESR1 expression was significantly reduced in tumor
tissues (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) compared to adjacent non-cancerous tissues. The CpG sites
around the transcription start site were significantly hypermethylated in the
tumor (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). This methylation pattern also correlated with the gene
expression (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). Additionally, we found that the hypermethylation of ESR1
was associated with the presence of fibrous capsules (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.2<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4)), the
absence of microvascular invasions (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>8.0<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4)), thin trabecular pattern
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025), and lower histologic gradings (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>5.2<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-3)). Thus, ESR1
expression is a candidate tumor suppressor gene in HCC. Further, promoter
hypermethylation may be a mechanism by which expression of ESR1 is repressed, and
the extent of hypermethylation of ESR1 may be a marker for HCC status and
progression.

© 2014 by the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine.

PMID: 24939822  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


385. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Aug;21(4):677-90. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0480. Epub 2014
Jun 17.

Deficiency of ERß and prostate tumorigenesis in FGF8b transgenic mice.

Elo T(1), Yu L(2), Valve E(2), Mäkelä S(3), Härkönen P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and AnatomyPharmacologyDrug Development and
TherapeuticsTurku Center for Disease ModelingInstitute of Biomedicine, University
of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, FinlandFunctional Foods
ForumUniversity of Turku, Turku, FinlandDepartment of Laboratory MedicineMAS
University Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden teresa.elo@utu.fi.
(2)Departments of Cell Biology and AnatomyPharmacologyDrug Development and
TherapeuticsTurku Center for Disease ModelingInstitute of Biomedicine, University
of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, FinlandFunctional Foods
ForumUniversity of Turku, Turku, FinlandDepartment of Laboratory MedicineMAS
University Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. (3)Departments of Cell
Biology and AnatomyPharmacologyDrug Development and TherapeuticsTurku Center for 
Disease ModelingInstitute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu
10, 20520 Turku, FinlandFunctional Foods ForumUniversity of Turku, Turku,
FinlandDepartment of Laboratory MedicineMAS University Hospital, Lund University,
Malmö, SwedenDepartments of Cell Biology and AnatomyPharmacologyDrug Development 
and TherapeuticsTurku Center for Disease ModelingInstitute of Biomedicine,
University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, FinlandFunctional Foods
ForumUniversity of Turku, Turku, FinlandDepartment of Laboratory MedicineMAS
University Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

Estrogens contribute to the development and growth of the prostate and are
implicated in prostate tumorigenesis. In their target tissues, estrogens mediate 
their effects via estrogen receptor a (ERa (ESR1)) and ß (ERß (ESR2)).
Hyperplasia and decreased differentiation of epithelial cells in the prostate
have been reported in ERß knockout (BERKO) mice. Herein, we studied the effect of
ERß deficiency on prostate tumorigenesis by crossing BERKOFVB mice with
prostate-targeted human fibroblast growth factor 8b transgenic (FGF8b-Tg) mice.
Consistent with results described in our previous report, the prostates of
1-year-old FGF8b-Tg mice displayed stromal aberrations, prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (mPIN) lesions, inflammation, and occasionally cancer. The prostates of
BERKOFVB mice exhibited mild epithelial hypercellularity and inflammation. The
prostate phenotypes of FGF8b-Tg-BERKOFVB mice closely resembled those of FGF8b-Tg
mice. However, mucinous metaplasia, indicated by Goblet-like cells in the
epithelium, was significantly more frequent in the prostates of FGF8b-Tg-BERKOFVB
mice when compared with FGF8b-Tg mice. Furthermore, compared with FGF8b-Tg mice, 
there was a tendency for increased frequency of inflammation but milder
hyperplasias in the prostate stroma of FGF8b-Tg-BERKOFVB mice. The expression
levels of mRNAs for FGF8b-regulated genes including osteopontin (Spp1),
connective tissue growth factor (Ctgf), fibroblast growth factor receptors
(Fgfrs), and steroid hormone receptors and cytokines were similar in the
prostates of FGF8b-Tg and FGF8b-Tg-BERKOFVB mice. Our results indicate that ERß
plays a role in the differentiation of the prostatic epithelium and, potentially,
in the defensive mechanism required for protection against inflammation but do
not support a direct tumor-suppressive function of ERß in the prostate of
FGF8b-Tg mice.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 24938408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Dairy Sci. 2014;97(8):4985-96. doi: 10.3168/jds.2014-8070. Epub 2014 Jun 13.

Cellular proliferation rate and insulin-like growth factor binding protein
(IGFBP)-2 and IGFBP-3 and estradiol receptor alpha expression in the mammary
gland of dairy heifers naturally infected with gastrointestinal nematodes during 
development.

Perri AF(1), Dallard BE(2), Baravalle C(2), Licoff N(3), Formía N(4), Ortega
HH(2), Becú-Villalobos D(3), Mejia ME(3), Lacau-Mengido IM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Regulación Hipofisaria, Instituto de Biología y Medicina
Experimental, Vuelta de Obligado 2490, 1428, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina; Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias, Universidad Nacional del Litoral,
3080, Esperanza, Santa Fe, Argentina. (2)Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias,
Universidad Nacional del Litoral, 3080, Esperanza, Santa Fe, Argentina.
(3)Laboratorio de Regulación Hipofisaria, Instituto de Biología y Medicina
Experimental, Vuelta de Obligado 2490, 1428, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina. (4)Esc. Inchausti, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, 6667, 25 de mayo,
Pcia. de Buenos Aires, Argentina. (5)Laboratorio de Regulación Hipofisaria,
Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental, Vuelta de Obligado 2490, 1428,
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. Electronic address:
ilacau@ibyme.conicet.gov.ar.

Mammary ductal morphogenesis during prepuberty occurs mainly in response to
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and estradiol stimulation. Dairy heifers
infected with gastrointestinal nematodes have reduced IGF-1 levels, accompanied
by reduced growth rate, delayed puberty onset, and lower parenchyma-stroma
relationship in their mammary glands. Immunohistochemical studies were undertaken
to determine variations in cell division rate, IGF-1 system components, and
estradiol receptors (ESR) during peripubertal development in the mammary glands
of antiparasitic-treated and untreated Holstein heifers naturally infected with
gastrointestinal nematodes. Mammary biopsies were taken at 20, 30, 40, and 70 wk 
of age. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen immunolabeling, evident in nuclei,
tended to be higher in the parenchyma of the glands from treated heifers than in 
those from untreated. Insulin-like growth factor binding proteins (IGFBP) type 2 
and type 3 immunolabeling was cytoplasmic and was evident in stroma and
parenchyma. The IGFBP2-labeled area was lower in treated than in untreated
heifers. In the treated group, a maximal expression of this protein was seen at
40 wk of age, whereas in the untreated group the labeling remained constant. No
differences were observed for IGFBP3 between treatment groups or during
development. Immunolabeling for a ESR (ESR1) was evident in parenchymal nuclei
and was higher in treated than in untreated heifers. In the treated group, ESR1
peaked at 30 wk of age and then decreased. These results demonstrate that the
parasite burden in young heifers negatively influence mammary gland development, 
affecting cell division rate and parameters related to estradiol and IGF-1
signaling in the gland.

Copyright © 2014 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24931533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Aug;41(8):5459-66. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3419-8. Epub 2014
Jun 14.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERS1) SNPs c454-397T>C (PvuII) and c454-351A>G (XbaI)
are risk biomarkers for breast cancer development.

Madeira KP(1), Daltoé RD, Sirtoli GM, Carvalho AA, Rangel LB, Silva IV.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Program/RENORBIO, Health Sciences Center, Federal University of 
Espirito Santo, Vitoria, Brazil.

There are several risk factors related to Breast Cancer (BC) risks and response
to chemotherapy with SERMs. Recently some single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
on ESR1 gene have been associated to this disease. However, data are still
inconclusive. The present study aimed to investigate the association of SNPs
c454-397T>C (also called PvuII) and c454-351A>G (so called XbaI) to incidence of 
sporadic BC; ERa expression in BC; tamoxifen hormonetherapy (HT-TMX)
responsiveness. To do so, a cohort of BC patients was analyzed through
retrospective data collection, immunohistochemistry to ERa protein, and
genotyping for PvuII and XbaI SNPs by PCR-RFLP, confirmed by sequencing.
Significant difference in PvuII alleles frequencies were found BC patients when
compared to control samples. Patients with P allele have a 5.14-fold increased BC
risk. We found higher P and X alleles frequencies in ERa positive BC and the pp
and xx genotypes were observed exclusively in patients with HT-TMX-responsive BC.
Taken together, data indicates that P allele as a novel sporadic BC biomarker
whereas p and x alleles enhanced chemotherapy responsiveness.

PMID: 24928087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Endocrinology. 2014 Sep;155(9):3597-609. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1017. Epub 2014 Jun
10.

Hypothalamic molecular changes underlying natural reproductive senescence in the 
female rat.

Kermath BA(1), Riha PD, Woller MJ, Wolfe A, Gore AC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience (B.A.K., A.C.G.), Division of Pharmacology and
Toxicology (P.D.R., A.C.G.), and Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology
(A.C.G.), The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712; Department of
Biology (M.J.W.), University of Wisconsin-Whitewater, Whitewater, Wisconsin
53190; and Department of Pediatrics (A.W.), Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore Maryland 21287.

The role of the hypothalamus in female reproductive senescence is unclear. Here
we identified novel molecular neuroendocrine changes during the natural
progression from regular reproductive cycles to acyclicity in middle-aged female 
rats, comparable with the perimenopausal progression in women. Expression of 48
neuroendocrine genes was quantified within three hypothalamic regions: the
anteroventral periventricular nucleus, the site of steroid positive feedback onto
GnRH neurons; the arcuate nucleus (ARC), the site of negative feedback and
pulsatile GnRH release; and the median eminence (ME), the site of GnRH secretion.
Surprisingly, the majority of changes occurred in the ARC and ME, with few
effects in anteroventral periventricular nucleus. The overall pattern was
increased mRNA levels with chronological age and decreases with reproductive
cycle status in middle-aged rats. Affected genes included transcription factors
(Stat5b, Arnt, Ahr), sex steroid hormone receptors (Esr1, Esr2, Pgr, Ar),
steroidogenic enzymes (Sts, Hsd17b8), growth factors (Igf1, Tgfa), and
neuropeptides (Kiss1, Tac2, Gnrh1). Bionetwork analysis revealed region-specific 
correlations between genes and hormones. Immunohistochemical analyses of
kisspeptin and estrogen receptor-a in the ARC demonstrated age-related decreases 
in kisspeptin cell numbers as well as kisspeptin-estrogen receptor-a dual-labeled
cells. Taken together, these results identify unexpectedly strong roles for the
ME and ARC during reproductive decline and highlight fundamental differences
between middle-aged rats with regular cycles and all other groups. Our data
provide evidence of decreased excitatory stimulation and altered hormone feedback
with aging and suggest novel neuroendocrine pathways that warrant future study.
Furthermore, these changes may impact other neuroendocrine systems that undergo
functional declines with age.

PMCID: PMC4138577
PMID: 24914937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2014 Oct;140(10):1681-7. doi: 10.1007/s00432-014-1729-9.
Epub 2014 Jun 8.

Estrogen receptor promoter methylation predicts survival in low-grade ovarian
carcinoma patients.

Kirn V(1), Shi R, Heublein S, Knabl J, Guenthner-Biller M, Andergassen U,
Fridrich C, Malter W, Harder J, Friese K, Mayr D, Jeschke U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Cologne, Kerpener Str. 
34, 50931, Cologne, Germany, verena.kirn@uk-koeln.de.

PURPOSE: Ovarian carcinoma is the third most common gynecological cancer and only
short recurrence-free survival and overall survival times are achieved. The role 
of the estrogen receptor expression is well studied in breast cancer and breast
cancer cell lines. Patients with positive estrogen receptor expression have a
lower risk for recurrence and a better overall survival. Previous studies have
shown that ESR1 methylation influences ovarian cancer development and might thus 
play a role regarding prognosis of ovarian carcinoma.
METHODS: A total of 75 patients were identified that were treated for ovarian
carcinoma by debulking surgery and adjuvant standard chemotherapy. Isolation and 
bisulfite treatment of genomic DNA from serial sections of surgically resected
ovarian carcinoma tissue was performed using commercially available kits. For the
detection of methylated ESR1 promoter sequences, real-time methylation-specific
PCR was used.
RESULTS: Promoter methylation did not show a correlation between
clinical-pathological data for all patients. However, within the subgroup of
low-grade ovarian carcinoma patients and patients with an ovarian tumor of low
malignant potential methylation of the ESR1 promoter inversely correlated with
survival (p = 0.031).
CONCLUSIONS: Although small numbers of ovarian carcinoma patients were analyzed, 
methylation status might be useful as a prognostic marker within the subgroup of 
low-grade ovarian carcinoma patients. Further studies should investigate a larger
cohort and also address the use of demethylation agents with respect to improve
patient's prognosis in this subgroup of ovarian carcinoma patients.

PMID: 24908329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2014 Jul;48:84-92. doi: 10.1016/j.domaniend.2014.02.006. 
Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Nursing supports neonatal porcine testicular development.

Rahman KM(1), Lovich JE(1), Lam C(1), Camp ME(1), Wiley AA(2), Bartol FF(2),
Bagnell CA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Endocrinology and Animal Biosciences Program,
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA. (2)Department of Anatomy, Physiology 
and Pharmacology, Cellular and Molecular Biosciences Program, Auburn University, 
Auburn, AL, USA. (3)Department of Animal Sciences, Endocrinology and Animal
Biosciences Program, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA. Electronic
address: bagnell@aesop.rutgers.edu.

The lactocrine hypothesis suggests a mechanism whereby milk-borne bioactive
factors delivered to nursing offspring affect development of neonatal tissues.
The objective of this study was to assess whether nursing affects testicular
development in neonatal boars as reflected by: (1) Sertoli cell number and
proliferation measured by GATA-4 expression and proliferating cell nuclear
antigen immunostaining patterns; (2) Leydig cell development and steroidogenic
activity as reflected by insulin-like factor 3 (INSL3), and P450 side chain
cleavage (scc) enzyme expression; and (3) expression of estrogen receptor-alpha
(ESR1), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) A, and relaxin family peptide
receptor (RXFP) 1. At birth, boars were randomly assigned (n = 6-7/group) to
nurse ad libitum or to be pan fed porcine milk replacer for 48 h. Testes were
collected from boars at birth, before nursing and from nursed and replacer-fed
boars at 50 h on postnatal day (PND) 2. Sertoli cell proliferating cell nuclear
antigen labeling index increased (P < 0.01) from birth to PND 2 in nursed, but
not in replacer-fed boars. Sertoli cell number and testicular GATA-4 protein
levels increased (P < 0.01) from PND 0 to PND 2 only in nursed boars. Neither age
nor nursing affected testicular INSL3, P450scc, ESR1, or VEGFA levels. However,
testicular relaxin family peptide receptor 1 (RXFP1) levels increased (P < 0.01) 
with age and were greater in replacer-fed boars on PND 2. Results suggest that
nursing supports neonatal porcine testicular development and provide additional
evidence for the importance of lactocrine signaling in pigs.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24906933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Ann Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jun;18(2):71-5. doi:
10.6065/apem.2013.18.2.71. Epub 2013 Jun 30.

Estrogen receptor a polymorphism in boys with constitutional delay of growth and 
puberty.

Kang BH(1), Kim SY(1), Park MS(1), Yoon KL(1), Shim KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyung Hee University School of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

PURPOSE: There were a lot of reports regarding associations of polymorphisms in
the estrogen receptor a (ESR1). with many disorders. But, those with
constitutional delay of growth and puberty (CDGP) are not known. Our aim is to
find out any association between CDGP and ESR1.
METHODS: In a total of 27 subjects, we compared 7 CDGP patients with 20 healthy
controls with their heights and sexual maturity rates were within normal range.
We selected three single nucleotide polymorphisms from intron 1 of ESR1
(rs3778609, rs12665044, and rs827421) as candidates, respectively.
RESULTS: In genotype analyses, the frequency of G/G genotype at rs827421 in
intron 1 of ESR1 was increased in CDGP boys (P=0.03).
CONCLUSION: The genetic variation of ESR1 can be a contributing factor of tempo
of growth and puberty.

PMCID: PMC4027098
PMID: 24904855  [PubMed]


392. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Aug;21(4):587-99. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0485. Epub 2014
Jun 2.

VGLL1 expression is associated with a triple-negative basal-like phenotype in
breast cancer.

Castilla MÁ(1), López-García MÁ(2), Atienza MR(3), Rosa-Rosa JM(3), Díaz-Martín
J(2), Pecero ML(3), Vieites B(2), Romero-Pérez L(2), Benítez J(3), Calcabrini
A(3), Palacios J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital
Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N,
41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer
(RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario
Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS),
Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of
Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, ItalyInstituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen
del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville,
SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid,
SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal and
Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman
Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of Technology and
HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy jose.palacios@salud.madrid.org
macastillamoro@gmail.com. (2)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad
de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda.
Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa 
en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital
Universitario Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación
Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del
Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid,
SpainDepartment of Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
ItalyInstituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital
Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N,
41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer
(RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario
Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS),
Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of
Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. (3)Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen
del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville,
SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid,
SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal and
Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman
Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of Technology and
HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Vestigial-like 1 (VGLL1) is a poorly characterized gene encoding a
transcriptional co-activator structurally homologous to TAZ and YAP that
modulates the Hippo pathway in Drosophila. In this study, we examined the
expression of VGLL1 and its intronic miRNA, miR-934, in breast cancer. VGLL1 and 
miR-934 expression miRNA profiling was carried out on frozen samples of grade 3
invasive ductal carcinomas. VGLL1 protein was also examined in 433 sporadic and
BRCA1-associated breast carcinomas on tissue microarrays. RNA-seq data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was used to confirm differences in VGLL1 and miR-934
expression in different breast cancer subtypes, and to correlate their expression
with that of other genes and miRNAs. Of 28 miRNAs differentially expressed in
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and ER-negative grade 3 breast carcinomas,
miR-934 was most strongly upregulated in ER-negative carcinomas, and its
expression was correlated with that of VGLL1. Nuclear VGLL1 expression was
observed in 13% of sporadic breast carcinomas, and while VGLL1 was only
occasionally found in luminal A (0.70%) and B (5.60%) carcinomas, it was often
expressed in HER2-positive (17%), triple-negative (TN) breast carcinomas (>40%)
and BRCA1-associated TN carcinomas (>50%). These findings were confirmed in the
TCGA dataset, which revealed positive associations with luminal progenitor genes 
(GABRP, SLC6A14, FOXC1, PROM1, and BBOX1) and strong negative correlations with
ER-associated genes (ESR1, C6ORF211, GATA3, and FOXA1). Moreover, VGLL1
expression was associated with reduced overall survival. In conclusion, VGLL1 and
miR-934 are mainly expressed in sporadic and BRCA1-associated TN basal-like
breast carcinomas, and their coordinated expression, at least partially mediated 
by the direct modulation of ESR1, might be involved in the maintenance of a
luminal progenitor phenotype.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 24891455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2014 May 15;12:40. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-12-40.

Use of antagonists and morpholinos in loss-of-function analyses: estrogen
receptor ESR2a mediates the effects of 17alpha-ethinylestradiol on primordial
germ cell distribution in zebrafish.

Hu J, Sun S, Guo M, Song H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanghai Medical School and 
Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, PR China. hysong@shmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Various chemicals released into the aquatic environment adversely
affect the reproductive system of fish, particularly by changing gonad structure 
and function. 17alpha-ethinylestradiol (EE2) is a potent environmental estrogen
that disrupts sexual differentiation and normal reproduction in fish. Previous
studies have shown that exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs)
disrupts the migration of primordial germ cells (PGCs) in zebrafish.
METHODS: To investigate the effects of EE2 exposure on PGC migration, zebrafish
embryos were injected with gfp-nanos mRNA to label PGCs and subsequently exposed 
to different concentrations of EE2. Typical estrogen receptor antagonist
treatment and morpholino knockdown experiments were used to identify functional
estrogen receptors that mediate the effects of EE2.
RESULTS: The migration of PGCs was disrupted after exposure to high
concentrations of EE2 (1 mirog/L). Loss-of-function analyses were performed for
estrogen receptor ESR1, ESR2a, and ESR2b, and only loss of ESR2a resulted in a
decreased number of ectopic PGCs following exposure to 1 mirog/L EE2.
CONCLUSIONS: EE2 exposure disrupts PGC migration and distribution, and this
effect is mediated through the estrogen receptor ESR2a.

PMCID: PMC4038371
PMID: 24886565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Nat Med. 2014 Jul;20(7):715-24. doi: 10.1038/nm.3580. Epub 2014 Jun 1.

Increased gene copy number of VAMP7 disrupts human male urogenital development
through altered estrogen action.

Tannour-Louet M(1), Han S(2), Louet JF(3), Zhang B(4), Romero K(5), Addai J(5),
Sahin A(5), Cheung SW(6), Lamb DJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Scott Department of Urology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA. [2] Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS, Sophia
Antipolis, France. (2)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. [2]. (3)1] Department of Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. [2] Centre
Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire, INSERM U1065, Nice, France. [3].
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA. (5)Scott Department of Urology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA. (6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. (7)1] Scott Department of Urology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. [2] Department of Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. [3] Center for
Reproductive Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

Despite the fact that genitourinary defects are among the most common birth
defects in newborns, little is known about their etiology. Here we analyzed
children born with congenital genitourinary tract masculinization disorders by
array-comparative genomic hybridization, which revealed in 1.35% of cases the
presence of de novo copy number gains at Xq28 encompassing the VAMP7 gene, which 
encodes a vesicle-trafficking protein that is part of the SNARE complex.
Transgenic mice carrying a bacterial artificial chromosome encoding human VAMP7
mimicked the defective urogenital traits observed in boys with masculinization
disorders such as cryptorchidism, urethral defects and hypospadias. Transgenic
mice also exhibited reduced penile length, focal spermatogenic anomalies,
diminished sperm motility and subfertility. VAMP7 colocalized with estrogen
receptor a (ESR1) in the presence of its cognate ligand, 17ß-estradiol. Elevated 
levels of VAMP7 markedly intensified ESR1-potentiated transcriptional activity by
increasing ESR1 protein cellular content upon ligand stimulation and upregulated 
the expression of estrogen-responsive genes including ATF3, CYR61 and CTGF, all
of which have been implicated in human hypospadias. Hence, increased gene dosage 
of VAMP7, and thus higher expression levels of its protein product, enhances
estrogen receptor action in male genitourinary tissues, affects the virilization 
of the reproductive tract and results in genitourinary birth defects in humans.

PMCID: PMC4283218
PMID: 24880616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Oct 15;23(20):5558-69. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu268. Epub 2014 May
30.

Genetic factors affecting gene transcription and catalytic activity of
UDP-glucuronosyltransferases in human liver.

Liu W(1), Ramírez J(2), Gamazon ER(2), Mirkov S(2), Chen P(2), Wu K(2), Sun C(3),
Cox NJ(4), Cook E Jr(5), Das S(3), Ratain MJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907,
USA and. (2)Department of Medicine and. (3)Human Genetics, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (4)Department of Medicine and Human Genetics,
The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (5)Department of Psychiatry,
The University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. (6)Department of
Medicine and mratain@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu.

The aim of this study was to discover cis- and trans-acting factors significantly
affecting mRNA expression and catalytic activity of human hepatic
UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs). Transcription levels of five major hepatic
UGT1A (UGT1A1, UGT1A3, UGT1A4, UGT1A6 and UGT1A9) and five UGT2B (UGT2B4, UGT2B7,
UGT2B10, UGT2B15 and UGT2B17) genes were quantified in human liver tissue samples
(n = 125) using real-time PCR. Glucuronidation activities of 14 substrates were
measured in 47 livers. We genotyped 167 tagSNPs (single-nucleotide polymorphisms)
in UGT1A (n = 43) and UGT2B (n = 124), as well as the known functional UGT1A1*28 
and UGT2B17 CNV (copy number variation) polymorphisms. Transcription levels of 15
transcription factors (TFs) known to regulate these UGTs were quantified. We
found that UGT expression and activity were highly variable among the livers
(median and range of coefficient of variations: 135%, 74-217% and 52%, 39-105%,
respectively). CAR, PXR and ESR1 were found to be the most important
trans-regulators of UGT transcription (median and range of correlation
coefficients: 46%, 6-58%; 47%, 9-58%; and 52%, 24-75%, respectively). Hepatic UGT
activities were mainly determined by UGT gene transcription levels. Twenty-one
polymorphisms were significantly (FDR-adjusted P < 0.05) associated with mRNA
expression and/or activities of UGT1A1, UGT1A3 and UGT2B17. We found novel SNPs
in the UGT2B17 CNV region accounting for variability in UGT2B17 gene
transcription and testosterone glucuronidation rate, in addition to that
attributable to the UGT2B17 CNV. Our study discovered novel pharmacogenetic
markers and provided detailed insight into the genetic network regulating hepatic
UGTs.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4168829
PMID: 24879639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Tumour Biol. 2014 Aug;35(8):8319-28. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2086-7. Epub 2014
May 24.

The influence of ESR1 rs9340799 and ESR2 rs1256049 polymorphisms on prostate
cancer risk.

Fu C(1), Dong WQ, Wang A, Qiu G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong,
510515, China.

Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2) may play a role in the 
development of prostate cancer. Many studies focused on ESR1 rs9340799 and ESR2
rs1256049 polymorphisms to explore associations with prostate cancer risk. These 
studies showed inconsistent and conflicting results. The aim of this
meta-analysis was to investigate the pooled association of ESR1 rs9340799 and
ESR2 rs1256049 polymorphisms with prostate cancer risk. A systematic literature
search was conducted to identify related studies (up to February 2014) in several
online databases including PubMed, Google Scholar, CNKI and Wanfang online
libraries. A total of 16 eligible articles were enrolled in this updated
meta-analysis. The result suggested that ESR1 rs9340799 polymorphism was
significantly associated with prostate cancer in overall populations (GG+GA vs.
AA: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002; G vs. A: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004), Caucasians (GG+GA vs. AA: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008; G vs. A:
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.016) and Africans (GG+GA vs. AA: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005; G vs. A: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006), but not in
Asians (GG+GA vs. AA: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.462; G vs. A: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.665). The result also showed that
there was a significant association between ESR2 rs1256049 polymorphism and
prostate cancer in Caucasians (AA+AG vs. GG: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.016; A vs. G: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005), but 
no association in overall populations (AA+AG vs. GG: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.826; A vs. G:
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.478), Asians (AA+AG vs. GG: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.177; A vs. G: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.703) and Africans
(AA+AG vs. GG: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.847; A vs. G: P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.707). The cumulative meta-analysis and
sensitivity analysis showed the results were robust. In conclusion, this
meta-analysis indicated that ESR1 rs9340799 polymorphism was associated with
prostate cancer risk in overall populations, Caucasians and Africans, while ESR2 
rs1256049 polymorphism was associated with prostate cancer risk in Caucasians.
However, the biological mechanisms need to be further investigated.

PMID: 24859835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Jun 27;574:41-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.05.017. Epub 2014
May 22.

Meta-analysis of PvuII, XbaI variants in ESR1 gene and the risk of Alzheimer's
disease: the regional European difference.

Wang T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN, USA. Electronic address: twang18@uthsc.edu.

The PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms of ESR1 gene have been reported in the
Alzheimer's disease (AD) studies. However, whether these ESR1 genetic variants
can contribute to the risk of AD remains controversial. Herein, we conducted a
meta-analysis to clarify the association between ESR1 polymorphisms and the
occurrence of AD. Articles were identified by systematic searches in PubMed,
Google scholar and Wan Fang Med Online database. The combined odds ratios (OR)
and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated within different inherited
models. Publication bias tests, subgroup analyses and sensitive analyses were
also performed. Overall, the PvuII variant was negatively associated with AD in
the Caucasian population (pp vs PP+Pp, OR 0.86, 95%CI (0.76, 0.96)). However,
there was a poor association between XbaI polymorphism and AD in European
populations. In particular, PvuII variant was found significantly associated with
a decreased AD risk in South European samples (pp vs PP+Pp, OR 0.86, 95%CI (0.75,
0.98)). This meta-analysis indicated that regional European differences of ESR1
PvuII polymorphism in the association with the occurrence of AD, which need to be
further identified, especially in South European countries.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24857745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Mol Oncol. 2014 Oct;8(7):1278-89. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.04.010. Epub 2014
May 4.

Subtype-dependent prognostic relevance of an interferon-induced pathway metagene 
in node-negative breast cancer.

Callari M(1), Musella V(1), Di Buduo E(1), Sensi M(1), Miodini P(1), Dugo M(1),
Orlandi R(1), Agresti R(2), Paolini B(3), Carcangiu ML(3), Cappelletti V(4),
Daidone MG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Via Amadeo, 42, 20133 Milan, Italy. (2)Department 
of Surgery, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Via Venezian, 1,
20133 Milan, Italy. (3)Department of Pathology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale dei Tumori, Via Venezian, 1, 20133 Milan, Italy. (4)Department of
Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale
dei Tumori, Via Amadeo, 42, 20133 Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
vera.cappelletti@istitutotumori.mi.it. (5)Department of Experimental Oncology and
Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Via Amadeo,
42, 20133 Milan, Italy. Electronic address:
mariagrazia.daidone@istitutotumori.mi.it.

The majority of gene expression signatures developed to predict the likelihood to
relapse in breast cancer (BC) patients assigns a high risk score to patients with
Estrogen Receptor (ER) negative or highly proliferating tumors. We aimed to
identify a signature of differentially expressed (DE) metagenes, rather than
single DE genes, associated with distant metastases beyond classical risk
factors. We used 105 gene expression profiles from consecutive BCs to identify
metagenes whose prognostic role was defined on an independent series of 92
ESR1+/ERBB2- node-negative BCs (42 cases developing metastases within 5 years
from diagnosis and 50 cases metastasis-free for more than 5 years, comparable for
age, tumor size, ER status and surgery). Findings were validated on publicly
available datasets of 684 node-negative BCs including all the subtypes. Only a
metagene containing interferon-induced genes (IFN metagene) proved to be
predictive of distant metastasis in our series of patients with ESR1+/ERBB2-
tumors (P = 0.029), and such a finding was validated on 457 ESR1+/ERBB2- BCs from
public datasets (P = 0.0424). Conversely, the IFN metagene was associated with a 
low risk of metastasis in 104 ERBB2+ tumors (P = 0.0099) whereas it did not prove
to significantly affect prognosis in 123 ESR1-/ERBB2- tumors (P = 0.2235). A
complex prognostic interaction was revealed in ESR1+/ERBB2- and ERBB2+ tumors
when the association between the IFN metagene and a T-cell metagene was
considered. The study confirms the importance of analyzing prognostic variables
separately within BC subtypes, highlights the advantages of using metagenes
rather than genes, and finally identifies in node-negative ESR1+/ERBB2- BCs, the 
unfavorable role of high IFN metagene expression.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24853384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Apr 25;13(2):3228-36. doi: 10.4238/2014.April.25.8.

Screening and functional microarray analysis of differentially expressed genes
related to osteoporosis.

Chen Y(1), Xia RG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Sixth People's Hospital of Shanghai, Shanghai,
China. (2)Department of Orthopedics, Sixth People's Hospital of Shanghai,
Shanghai, China xiaronggangxrg@hotmail.com.

We searched for key genes that could accurately predict bone mineral density. The
gene expression profile GSE7429 was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus
database, which includes 20 samples, 10 with high and 10 with low bone mineral
density. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified with packages 
in R language. Further, BLASTX was used to obtain COG function classifications of
all the DEGs. The GOTM software was used to find DEGs enriched modules. The
functions of genes in the modules was also predicted with the software GENECODIS.
Three hundred and three genes were identified as DEGs by comparing high and low
bone mineral density samples; the selected genes were mapped to 14 modules
collected in PPID. Genes VDR, ESR1, and NRIP1, located in the same module, were
significantly enriched in intracellular receptor-mediated signaling biological
processes. We conclude that the genes VDR, ESR1, NRIP1 in B cells have a close
relationship with bone mineral density. The expression patterns of these genes
could be used to determine osteoprotegerin function and for early diagnosis and
prevention of low bone mineral density.

PMID: 24841655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2014 Aug;31(8):935-46. doi: 10.1007/s10815-014-0257-5.
Epub 2014 May 20.

Genetic associations with diminished ovarian reserve: a systematic review of the 
literature.

Greene AD(1), Patounakis G, Segars JH.

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics & Gynecology Department, St Luke's Roosevelt Hospital Center, 1000 
Tenth Ave, Suite 10 C, New York, NY, 10019, USA.

PURPOSE: Diminished ovarian reserve (DOR) affects 10 % of women seeking fertility
treatment. Although it is much more prevalent than premature ovarian failure,
less is known about its etiology. The purpose of this article is to review the
possible genetic causes of, and associations with, pathologic DOR.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted using PubMed from 1966 through
November 2013.
RESULTS: Twenty-one articles identified genes associated with DOR: one gene
mutation (FMR1), three polymorphisms (GDF9, FSHR, and ESR1), and seven genes
differentially expressed between women with DOR and controls (AMH, LHCGR, IGF1,
IGF2, IGF1R, IGF2R and GREM1). Six candidate genes were discovered in mice,
including Foxl2, Gdf9, Bmp15, Aire, Wnt4, and Gpr3. Two case reports of
chromosomal translocations were also identified.
CONCLUSIONS: While the etiology of pathologic DOR is likely multifactorial, it is
possible that many cases attributed to an idiopathic cause may have a genetic
component. Larger studies are needed to expose the impact gene mutations,
polymorphisms, and epigenetics have on pathologic DOR.

PMCID: PMC4130940
PMID: 24840722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. PLoS One. 2014 May 14;9(5):e97200. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097200. eCollection
2014.

The HER2-encoded miR-4728-3p regulates ESR1 through a non-canonical internal seed
interaction.

Newie I(1), Søkilde R(1), Persson H(2), Grabau D(3), Rego N(2), Kvist A(2), von
Stedingk K(4), Axelson H(4), Borg Å(5), Vallon-Christersson J(6), Rovira C(5).

Author information: 
(1)BioCare, Strategic Cancer Research Program, Lund, Sweden; Department of
Oncology and Pathology, Lund University Cancer Center, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Oncology and Pathology, Lund University Cancer Center, Lund,
Sweden. (3)Department of Pathology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(4)BioCare, Strategic Cancer Research Program, Lund, Sweden; Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Lund University Cancer Center, Lund, Sweden. (5)BioCare,
Strategic Cancer Research Program, Lund, Sweden; CREATE Health, Strategic Centre 
for Translational Cancer Research, Lund, Sweden; Department of Oncology and
Pathology, Lund University Cancer Center, Lund, Sweden. (6)CREATE Health,
Strategic Centre for Translational Cancer Research, Lund, Sweden; Department of
Oncology and Pathology, Lund University Cancer Center, Lund, Sweden.

Since the early 1980s remarkable progress has been made in understanding the role
of the HER2 locus in carcinogenesis, but many details of its regulatory network
are still elusive. We recently reported the finding of 367 new human microRNA
(miRNA) genes of which one, mir-4728, is encoded in an intron of the HER2 gene.
Here, we confirm that the HER2 oncogene is a bi-functional locus encoding the
membrane receptor and a functional miRNA gene. We further show that miR-4728-3p
has alternative functionalities depending on the region used for interaction with
its target; the canonical seed between nucleotides 2-8 or a novel, more internal 
seed shifted to nucleotides 6-12. Analysis of public data shows that this
internal seed region, although rare compared to the far more abundant canonical
2-8 seed interaction, can also direct targeted down-regulation by other miRNAs.
Through the internal seed, miR-4728-3p regulates expression of estrogen receptor 
alpha, an interaction that would have remained undetected if classic rules for
miRNA-target interaction had been applied. In summary, we present here an
alternative mode of miRNA regulation and demonstrate this dual function of the
HER2 locus, linking the two major biomarkers in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4020767
PMID: 24828673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. PLoS One. 2014 May 13;9(5):e97417. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097417. eCollection
2014.

Genetic influences on hand osteoarthritis in Finnish women--a replication study
of candidate genes.

Hämäläinen S(1), Solovieva S(1), Vehmas T(1), Luoma K(2), Leino-Arjas P(1),
Hirvonen A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Centre of Expertise for Health and
Work Ability, Helsinki, Finland. (2)University of Helsinki, Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Radiology department, Helsinki, Finland.

OBJECTIVES: Our aims were to replicate some previously reported associations of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in five genes (A2BP1, COG5, GDF5, HFE,
ESR1) with hand osteoarthritis (OA), and to examine whether genes (BCAP29, DIO2, 
DUS4L, DVWA, HLA, PTGS2, PARD3B, TGFB1 and TRIB1) associated with OA at other
joint sites were associated with hand OA among Finnish women.
DESIGN: We examined the bilateral hand radiographs of 542 occupationally active
Finnish female dentists and teachers aged 45 to 63 and classified them according 
to the presence of OA by using reference images. Data regarding finger joint pain
and other risk factors were collected using a questionnaire. We defined two hand 
OA phenotypes: radiographic OA in at least three joints (ROA) and symptomatic DIP
OA. The genotypes were determined by PCR-based methods. In statistical analysis, 
we used SNPStats software, the chi-square test and logistic regression.
RESULTS: Of the SNPs, rs716508 in A2BP1 was associated with ROA (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.7, 95% CI
0.5-0.9) and rs1800470 in TGFB1 with symptomatic DIP OA (1.8, 1.2-2.9). We found 
an interaction between ESR1 (rs9340799) and occupation: teachers with the minor
allele were at an increased risk of symptomatic DIP OA (2.8, 1.3-6.5). We saw no 
association among the dentists. We also found that the carriage of the COG5
rs3757713 C allele increased the risk of ROA only among women with the BCAP29
rs10953541 CC genotype (2.6; 1.1-6.1). There was also a suggestive interaction
between the HFE rs179945 and the ESR1 rs9340799, and the carriage of the minor
allele of either of these SNPs was associated with an increased risk of
symptomatic DIP OA (2.1, 1.3-2.5).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the earlier findings of A2BP1 and TBGF1 being OA
susceptibility genes and provide evidence of a possible gene-gene interaction in 
the genetic influence on hand OA predisposition.

PMCID: PMC4019597
PMID: 24825461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2014 Apr;156(6):841-4. doi: 10.1007/s10517-014-2465-5. Epub
2014 May 3.

Association of ESR1 gene polymorphism with preterm rupture of fetal membranes.

Kan NE(1), Tyutyunnik VL, Donnikov AE, Sannikova MV, Sukhikh GT.

Author information: 
(1)V. I. Kulakov Research Center of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Perinatology, The
Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia, kan-med@mail.ru.

We examined 179 patients with and without preterm rupture of fetal membranes. The
mothers and their newborns have been genotyped by two polymorphic loci of
estrogen receptor a (ESR1) gene: -397T > C[PvuII] (rs2234693) and -351A > G[XbaI]
(rs9340799). The CG haplotype of the fetus should be regarded as a risk factor of
preterm rupture of fetal membranes, while haplotype TA as a protective factor.
Genotype -351A/A is a marker of the protective haplotype in the fetus, while
genotype -397C/C is a marker of the risk haplotype, which can be used in combined
analysis of both markers. These data attest to an important role of fetal
genotype in the formation of genetic predisposition to preterm rupture of fetal
membranes.

PMID: 24824712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Aug;99(8):E1539-46. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4472. Epub
2014 May 13.

Plasma estrogen levels, estrogen receptor gene variation, and ischemic arterial
disease in postmenopausal women: the three-city prospective cohort study.

Scarabin-Carré V(1), Brailly-Tabard S, Ancelin ML, Maubaret C, Guiochon-Mantel A,
Canonico M, Scarabin PY.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research in Epidemiology and Population Health (V.S.-C., M.C.,
P.-Y.S.), Unité 1018, Department of Hormones and Cardiovascular Disease, 94807
Villejuif, France; Unité Mixte de Recherche en Santé 1018 (V.S.-C., M.C.,
P.-Y.S.), Université Paris-Sud, 94276 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France; Service de
Génétique Moléculaire, Pharmacogénétique, et Hormonologie (S.B.-T., A.G.-M.),
Hôpital de Bicêtre, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 94275 Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France; INSERM Unité Mixte de Recherche en Santé 693 (S.B.-T.,
A.G.-M.), Université Paris-Sud, 94276 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France; INSERM Unité
1061 (M.-L.A.), University Montpellier, 34493 Montpellier, France; INSERM (C.M.),
Institut de Santé Publique, d'Épidémiologie et de Développement, Center Unité
897, Department of Epidemiology-Biostatistic, 33076 Bordeaux, France; and
Université Bordeaux (C.M.), 33076 Bordeaux, France.

BACKGROUND: In older postmenopausal women, high levels of endogenous estrogen
have been related to adverse health outcomes including ischemic arterial disease 
(IAD). Whether estrogen receptor-a (ESR1) and -ß (ESR2) polymorphisms modulate
the effects of estrogens on IAD has not been investigated.
METHODS: In the Three-City prospective cohort study among subjects older than 65 
years, we used a case-cohort design in which plasma levels of total and
bioavailable 17ß-estradiol were measured. After exclusion of postmenopausal women
using hormone therapy, a random subcohort of 533 women and 105 incident cases of 
first IAD events over 4 years of follow-up were analyzed. Five common
polymorphisms of ESR1 and ESR2 were genotyped. Hazard ratios (HRs) of IAD for a
1-SD increase in hormones levels by the genotypes were estimated from Cox models 
after adjustment for cardiovascular risk factors and a correction for multiple
testing. We also investigated the role of hemostasis and inflammation as
potential mediators.
RESULTS: Neither estrogens nor IAD risk was significantly associated with
estrogen receptor polymorphisms. Overall, IAD risk increased with total estradiol
[HR1.40, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.11-1.77]. Stratified analysis by
genotypes showed that total estradiol was positively related to IAD risk in women
with ESR1 rs9340799-AA genotype but not in women with the AG/GG genotype (HR
1.62, 95% CI 1.22-2.17 and HR 1.03, 95% CI 0.81-1.30, respectively; P for
interaction <.05). An additional adjustment for hemostatic variables reduced the 
HR by about one third in women carrying the rs9340799-AA genotype (HR 1.41, 95%
CI 1.06-1.90).
CONCLUSION: The ESR1 rs9340799 genotype may modify the IAD risk related to high
endogenous estrogens levels in older postmenopausal women. Hypercoagulability may
act as a mediator.

PMID: 24823458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(7):3041-4.

ESR1 and PGR gene promoter methylation and correlations with estrogen and
progesterone receptors in ductal and lobular breast cancer.

Medina-Jaime AD(1), Reyes-Vargas F, Martinez-Gaytan V, Zambrano-Galvan G,
Portillo-Delcampo E, Burciaga-Nava JA, Reyes-Romero M, Sifuentes-Alvarez A.

Author information: 
(1)Health Services of Durango SSD, Durango, Mexico E-mail : sifual55@hotmail.com.

The aim of this work was to analyze methylation of the promoter sites of the ESR1
and PGR genes and to determine correlations with immunohistochemical expression
of estrogen and progesterone receptors in ductal and lobular breast cancers. An
observational, descriptive, molecular study was conducted on 20 ductal and 20
lobular breast cancer samples with immunohistochemical determination of estrogen 
and progesterone receptor expression. The methylation analysis of ESR1 and PGR
promoter sites was carried-out by methylation-specific PCR. For correlation
analysis, Kendall's tau coefficient was determined. Positive correlations were
found between estrogen and progesterone receptors, estrogen receptor and
unmethylated progesterone receptor, progesterone receptor, and unmethylated
progesterone receptor. Negative correlations were found between estrogen receptor
and methylated progesterone receptor, progesterone receptor and methylated
progesterone receptor, methylated and unmethylated estrogen receptor, and
methylated and unmethylated progesterone receptor. The results suggest that
methylation of promoter sites of ESR1 and PGR is a relatively uncommon event in
ductal and lobular breast cancer, and also suggest that the determination of
epigenetic states of ESR1 and PGR could represent an alternative or complement to
the histopathological expression analysis.

PMID: 24815444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Aug 4;228(3):235-40. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.04.019. Epub
2014 May 5.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a mediates di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate
transgenerational repression of ovarian Esr1 expression in female mice.

Kawano M(1), Qin XY(2), Yoshida M(3), Fukuda T(4), Nansai H(2), Hayashi Y(5),
Nakajima T(6), Sone H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environmental Risk, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan; Department of Nursing, School of Health
Sciences, Ibaraki Prefectural University of Health Science, Inashiki-gun,
Ibaraki, Japan. (2)Research Center for Environmental Risk, National Institute for
Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. (3)Division of Pathology,
Biological Safety Research Center, National Institute of Health Sciences,
Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Animal Production Science, Graduate
School of Agricultural Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(5)Pathophysiological Laboratory Sciences, Department of Radiological and Medical
Laboratory Sciences, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya,
Aichi, Japan. (6)College of Life and Health Sciences, Chubu University, Kasugai, 
Aichi, Japan. (7)Research Center for Environmental Risk, National Institute for
Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. Electronic address:
hsone@nies.go.jp.

Di-(2-ethylhexyl)-phthalate (DEHP) is a phthalate ester that binds peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor a (PPARa) to induce proliferation of peroxisomes 
and regulate the expression of specific target genes. The question of whether the
effect of DEHP on female reproductive processes is mediated via PPARa-dependent
signaling is controversial. In this study, we investigated the effect of exposure
to DEHP on ovarian expression of estrogen receptor a (Esr1) and aromatase
(Cyp19a1) in three generations of Sv/129 wild-type (WT, +/+) and PPARa (-/-)
knockout mice. Compared with untreated controls, ovarian expression of Esr1
decreased in response to DEHP treatment in the F0 (0.56-fold, P=0.19), F1
(0.45-fold, P=0.023), and F2 (0.35-fold, P=0.014) generations of WT mice, but not
PPARa-null mice. Our data indicate that transgenerational repression by DEHP of
ovarian Esr1 gene expression is mediated by PPARa-dependent pathways. Further
studies are required to elucidate the mechanisms underlying crosstalk between
PPARa and Esr1 signaling in reproductive processes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24811840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Andrology. 2014 Jul;2(4):559-71. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2014.00219.x. Epub 2014
Apr 30.

Effects of the oestrogen receptor antagonist Fulvestrant on expression of genes
that affect organization of the epididymal epithelium.

Pereira MF(1), Fernandes SA, Nascimento AR, Siu ER, Hess RA, Oliveira CA, Porto
CS, Lazari MF.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

The role of oestrogens in epididymal function is still unclear. Knockout of the
oestrogen receptor ESR1 (Esr1(-/-) ) or treatment with the anti-oestrogen
Fulvestrant affect epididymal milieu and sperm motility. We investigated the
effect of in vivo treatment of rats with Fulvestrant on: (i) expression of genes 
that may be important for the architecture and function of the epididymal
epithelium: prominins 1 and 2, metalloproteinase 7, claudin 7, beta-catenin and
cadherin 13, and (ii) levels of oestradiol and testosterone, and expression of
oestrogen and androgen receptors, in the initial segment (IS), caput, corpus and 
cauda epididymis. Fulvestrant (i) reduced gene expression of prominin 1 (variant 
1) in the caput, reduced prominin 1 protein content in the caput epididymis and
in the efferent ductules, and increased the localization of prominin 1 in
microvilli of the caput and corpus; (ii) reduced gene expression of prominin 2 in
the corpus and cauda epididymis; (iii) increased the metalloproteinase 7 content 
in the apical region of principal cells from IS/caput; (iv) reduced in the corpus
epididymis, but increased in the efferent ductules, the cadherin 13 mRNA level;
(v) reduced testosterone but increased oestradiol levels in the corpus and cauda;
(vi) increased the androgen receptor protein content in all regions of the
epididymis, and the oestrogen receptor GPER in the corpus and cauda epididymis.
In conclusion, treatment with Fulvestrant induced regional-specific changes in
hormonal and steroid receptor content, and affected expression of proteins
important for epithelial organization and absorption/secretion. The mechanisms of
oestrogen action may differ among epididymal regions, which may contribute to
determine region-specific sperm functions.

© 2014 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMID: 24782439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Spermatogenesis. 2014 Dec 31;4(2):e979103.

Disruption of estrogen receptor signaling and similar pathways in the efferent
ductules and initial segment of the epididymis.

Hess RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Biology & Toxicology; Department of Comparative Biosciences;
College of Veterinary Medicine; University of Illinois ; Urbana, IL USA.

Seminiferous tubular atrophy may involve indirectly the disruption of estrogen
receptor-a (ESR1) function in efferent ductules of the testis. ESR1 helps to
maintain fluid resorption by the ductal epithelium and the inhibition or
stimulation of this activity in rodent species will lead to fluid accumulation in
the lumen. If not resolved, the abnormal buildup of fluid in the head of the
epididymis and efferent ductules becomes a serious problem for the testis, as it 
leads to an increase in testis weight, tubular dilation and seminiferous
epithelial degeneration, as well as testicular atrophy. The same sequence of
pathogenesis occurs if the efferent ductule lumen becomes occluded. This review
provides an introduction to the role of estrogen in the male reproductive tract
but focuses on the various overlapping mechanisms that could induce efferent
ductule dysfunction and fluid backpressure histopathology. Although efferent
ductules are difficult to find, their inclusion in routine histological
evaluations is recommended, as morphological images of these delicate tubules may
be essential for understanding the mechanism of testicular injury, especially if 
dilations are observed in the rete testis and/or seminiferous tubules. Signature 
Lesion: The rete testis and efferent ductules can appear dilated, as if the
lumens were greatly expanded with excess fluid or the accumulation of sperm.
Because the efferent ductules resorb most of the fluid arriving from the rete
testis lumen, one of two mechanisms is likely to be involved: a) reduced fluid
uptake, which has been caused by the disruption in estrogen receptor signaling or
associated pathways; or b) an increased rate of fluid resorption, which results
in luminal occlusion. Both mechanisms can lead to a temporary increase in
testicular weight, tubular dilation and atrophy of the seminiferous tubules.

PMCID: PMC4581051
PMID: 26413389  [PubMed]


409. DNA Cell Biol. 2014 Sep;33(9):605-15. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2270. Epub 2014 Apr
28.

Genetic polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene and cerebral infarction risk: a
meta-analysis.

Gao HH(1), Gao LB, Wen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University , Shenyang, People's Republic of China .

A number of studies have documented that estrogen receptor a (ESR1) may play an
important role in the development and progression of cerebral infarction, but
many existing studies have yielded inconclusive results. This meta-analysis was
performed to evaluate the relationships between ESR1 genetic polymorphisms and
cerebral infarction risk. The PubMed, CISCOM, CINAHL, Web of Science, Google
Scholar, EBSCO, Cochrane Library, and CBM databases were searched for relevant
articles published before October 1, 2013, without any language restrictions.
Meta-analysis was conducted using the STATA 12.0 software. Seven case-control
studies were included with a total of 1471 patients with cerebral infarction and 
4688 healthy control subjects. Two common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
in the ESR1 gene (rs2234693 T>C and rs9340799<U+2009>A>G) were assessed. Our
meta-analysis results revealed that ESR1 genetic polymorphisms might increase the
risk of cerebral infarction. Subgroup analysis by SNP type indicated that both
rs2234693 and rs9340799 polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene were strongly associated
with an increased risk of cerebral infarction. Further subgroup analysis by
ethnicity showed significant associations between ESR1 genetic polymorphisms and 
increased risk of cerebral infarction among both Asians and Caucasians. In the
stratified subgroup analysis by gender, the results suggested that ESR1 genetic
polymorphisms were associated with an increased risk of cerebral infarction in
the female population. However, there were no statistically significant
associations between ESR1 genetic polymorphisms and cerebral infarction risk in
the male population. Meta-regression analyses also confirmed that gender might be
a main source of heterogeneity. Our findings indicate that ESR1 genetic
polymorphisms may contribute to the development of cerebral infarction,
especially in the female population.

PMID: 24772998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:151457. doi: 10.1155/2014/151457. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in estrogen receptor alpha gene
with susceptibility to knee osteoarthritis: a case-control study in a Chinese Han
population.

Dai X(1), Wang C(1), Dai J(1), Shi D(1), Xu Z(1), Chen D(1), Teng H(2), Jiang
Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Center of Diagnosis and Treatment for Joint Disease, Drum Tower Hospital
Affiliated to Medical School of Nanjing University, Zhongshan Road 321, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu 210008, China ; Joint Research Center for Bone and Joint Disease, Model
Animal Research Center (MARC), Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210093,
China. (2)Joint Research Center for Bone and Joint Disease, Model Animal Research
Center (MARC), Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210093, China.

Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most prevalent form of arthritis and its
multifactorial nature has been increasingly recognized. Genetic factors play an
important role in OA etiology and estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene
polymorphisms may be involved. This study tried to explore whether the ESR1 gene 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were associated with primary knee OA in
the Chinese Han population. Two SNPs, rs2234693 and rs9340799, were genotyped in 
469 cases and 522 controls. Rs2234693 was associated with knee OA in the dominant
genetic model (TT + TC versus CC) (P = 0.025) and a higher T allele frequency
existed (P = 0.047) among females. The combined genotype (TT + TC) (P = 0.025)
and T allele (P = 0.016) were related with mild knee OA only. For rs9340799, A
allele was associated with knee OA in all subjects (P = 0.031) and females (P =
0.046). Statistical differences were detected in the dominant genetic model (AA +
AG versus GG) among females (P = 0.030). The combined genotype (AA + AG) (P =
0.036) and A allele (P = 0.039) were merely correlated with mild knee OA. ESR1
gene is considerably associated with knee OA etiology in the Chinese Han
population.

PMCID: PMC3977114
PMID: 24772413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jun;124(6):2709-21. doi: 10.1172/JCI59901. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Estrogen promotes Leydig cell engulfment by macrophages in male infertility.

Yu W, Zheng H, Lin W, Tajima A, Zhang Y, Zhang X, Zhang H, Wu J, Han D, Rahman
NA, Korach KS, Gao GF, Inoue I, Li X.

Male infertility accounts for almost half of infertility cases worldwide. A
subset of infertile men exhibit reduced testosterone and enhanced levels of
estradiol (E2), though it is unclear how increased E2 promotes deterioration of
male fertility. Here, we utilized a transgenic mouse strain that overexpresses
human CYP19, which encodes aromatase (AROM+ mice), and mice with knockout of
Esr1, encoding estrogen receptor a (ERaKO mice), to analyze interactions between 
viable Leydig cells (LCs) and testicular macrophages that may lead to male
infertility. In AROM+ males, enhanced E2 promoted LC hyperplasia and macrophage
activation via ERa signaling. E2 stimulated LCs to produce growth arrest-specific
6 (GAS6), which mediates phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by bridging cells with
surface exposed phosphatidylserine (PS) to macrophage receptors, including the
tyrosine kinases TYRO3, AXL, and MER. Overproduction of E2 increased
apoptosis-independent extrusion of PS on LCs, which in turn promoted engulfment
by E2/ERa-activated macrophages that was mediated by AXL-GAS6-PS interaction. We 
further confirmed E2-dependant engulfment of LCs by real-time 3D imaging.
Furthermore, evaluation of molecular markers in the testes of patients with
nonobstructive azoospermia (NOA) revealed enhanced expression of CYP19, GAS6, and
AXL, which suggests that the AROM+ mouse model reflects human infertility.
Together, these results suggest that GAS6 has a potential as a clinical biomarker
and therapeutic target for male infertility.

PMCID: PMC4038558
PMID: 24762434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Virchows Arch. 2014 Jun;464(6):689-99. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1576-8. Epub 2014 
Apr 23.

Absence of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene amplification in a series of
breast cancers in Taiwan.

Chen JR(1), Hsieh TY, Chen HY, Yeh KY, Chen KS, ChangChien YC, Pintye M, Chang
LC, Hwang CC, Chien HP, Hsu YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keelung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 222 Maijin
Road, Keelung, 204, Taiwan, jimrchen@cgmh.org.tw.

Immunohistochemical expression of ERa, encoded by the ESR1 (estrogen receptor 1) 
gene located at 6q25.1, is the most important determinant of responsiveness to
endocrine therapy in breast cancer. The prevalence and significance of ESR1
amplification in breast cancer remain controversial. We set out to assess ESR1
status and its relevance in breast cancer in Taiwan. We tested tissue samples
from 311 invasive carcinomas in a tissue microarray for ESR1 status by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and chromogenic in situ hybridization
(CISH). In order to examine its association with ERa and ESR1 status, HER2 status
was determined by FISH. Of the carcinomas, 58.8 % (183/311) was ERa positive.
None of the carcinomas showed amplification of ESR1 by either method, whereas
24.1 % (75/311) of the carcinomas harbored HER2 amplification. Of the carcinomas,
9.6 % (26/301) showed ESR1 gain (1.3<U+2009>=<U+2009>ratio ESR1/chromosome 6<U+2009><<U+2009>2) by FISH and
10 % (24/299) by CISH. FISH and CISH results showed a good correlation
(<U+03BA>-coefficient<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.786). ESR1 gain by FISH and CISH was significantly associated 
with high-grade (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0294 and 0.0417, respectively) but not with ERa
expression, HER2 status, or overall survival. ERa positivity was significantly
associated with better overall survival (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.039). HER2 amplification was
significantly related with poor overall survival (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002). Our data confirm
that in breast cancer, HER2 amplification is a frequent genetic aberration and a 
negative prognostic factor, and show that ESR1 amplification is not a key genetic
abnormality in the tumorigenesis of breast cancer in Taiwan.

PMID: 24756215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Jul;140(1):190-203. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu074. Epub 2014 Apr
20.

Investigation of the effects of subchronic low dose oral exposure to bisphenol A 
(BPA) and ethinyl estradiol (EE) on estrogen receptor expression in the juvenile 
and adult female rat hypothalamus.

Rebuli ME(1), Cao J(1), Sluzas E(2), Delclos KB(3), Camacho L(3), Lewis SM(3),
Vanlandingham MM(3), Patisaul HB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27695 Keck Center for Behavioral Biology, North Carolina State
University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695. (2)Department of Biology, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695. (3)National Center for 
Toxicological Research, Jefferson, Arkansas 72079. (4)Department of Biology,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695 Keck Center for
Behavioral Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina
27695 Heather_Patisaul@ncsu.edu.

Concerns have been raised regarding the long-term impacts of early life exposure 
to the ubiquitous environmental contaminant bisphenol A (BPA) on brain
organization. Because BPA has been reported to affect estrogen signaling, and
steroid hormones play a critical role in brain sexual differentiation, there is
also concern that BPA exposure could alter neural sex differences. Here, we
examine the impact of subchronic exposure from gestation to adulthood to oral
doses of BPA below the current no-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) of 5
mg/kg body weight (bw)/day on estrogen receptor (ESR) expression in sexually
dimorphic brain regions of prepubertal and adult female rats. The dams were
gavaged daily with vehicle (0.3% carboxymethylcellulose), 2.5, 25, 260, or 2700
µg BPA/kg bw/day, or 0.5 or 5.0 µg ethinyl estradiol (EE)/kg bw/day from
gestational day 6 until labor began. Offspring were then gavaged directly from
the day after birth until the day before scheduled sacrifice on postnatal days 21
or 90. Using in situ hybridization, one or more BPA doses produced significant
decreases in Esr1 expression in the juvenile female rat anteroventral
periventricular nucleus (AVPV) of the hypothalamus and significant decreases in
Esr2 expression in the adult female rat AVPV and medial preoptic area (MPOA),
relative to vehicle controls. BPA did not simply reproduce EE effects, indicating
that BPA is not acting solely as an estrogen mimic. The possible consequences of 
long-term changes in hypothalamic ESR expression resulting from subchronic low
dose BPA exposure on neuroendocrine effects are discussed and being addressed in 
ongoing, related work.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Toxicological Sciences 2014.
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain
in the US.

PMCID: PMC4133590
PMID: 24752507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Jun;52(3):R257-65. doi: 10.1530/JME-14-0030. Epub 2014 Apr
16.

Revising the role of the androgen receptor in breast cancer.

Fioretti FM(1), Sita-Lumsden A(1), Bevan CL(1), Brooke GN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Androgen Signalling LaboratoryDepartment of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial
College London, London W12 0NN, UKMolecular OncologySchool of Biological
Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, Essex CO4 3SQ, UK. (2)Androgen
Signalling LaboratoryDepartment of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London,
London W12 0NN, UKMolecular OncologySchool of Biological Sciences, University of 
Essex, Colchester, Essex CO4 3SQ, UKAndrogen Signalling LaboratoryDepartment of
Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UKMolecular
OncologySchool of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, Essex CO4
3SQ, UK gbrooke@essex.ac.uk.

Breast cancer (BC) is traditionally viewed as an oestrogen-dependent disease in
which the androgen receptor (AR) is inhibitory, counteracting the oncogenic
activity of oestrogen receptor a (ERa (ESR1)). Most probably as a result of this 
crosstalk, the AR has prognostic value in ER-positive disease, with AR positivity
reported to correlate with a better prognosis. Activation of the AR pathway has
been previously used as a therapeutic strategy to treat BC, but its usage
declined following the introduction of the anti-oestrogen tamoxifen. More
recently, it has been demonstrated that a subset of triple-negative BCs
(molecular apocrine) are dependent upon androgen signalling for growth and
therapies that inhibit androgen signalling, currently used for the treatment of
prostate cancer, e.g. the antiandrogen bicalutamide and the CYP17 inhibitor
abiraterone acetate are undergoing clinical trials to investigate their efficacy 
in this BC subtype. This review summarises the current knowledge of AR activity
in BC.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 24740738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Biol Reprod. 2014 Jun;90(6):121. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.114165. Epub 2014
Apr 16.

Treatment with bazedoxifene and conjugated estrogens results in regression of
endometriosis in a murine model.

Naqvi H(1), Sakr S(1), Presti T(1), Krikun G(1), Komm B(2), Taylor HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. (2)Pfizer, Collegeville, Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut Department of Molecular, Cellular, and
Developmental Biology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut
hugh.taylor@yale.edu.

Bazedoxifene (BZA), a selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), inhibits the 
action of estrogens on endometrial proliferation. Here, we evaluate the effect of
a tissue-selective estrogen complex (TSEC) containing BZA and conjugated
estrogens (CE) on ectopic endometrial lesions in a mouse model of endometriosis. 
Experimental endometriosis was created in 60 female CD-1 mice. The mice were
randomly divided into 10 groups that received varying doses of either BZA (1, 2, 
3, or 5 mg/kg/day), BZA (1, 2, 3, or 5 mg/kg/day) in combination with CE (3
mg/kg/day), CE treatment alone (3 mg/kg/day), or vehicle control for 8 wk.
Treatment with BZA alone or the TSEC containing BZA/CE led to a decrease in
endometriotic lesion size compared to controls. The mean surface area of the
untreated lesions was 19.6 mm(2). Treatment with BZA or BZA/CE resulted in
reduced lesion size (to 8.8 and 7.8 mm(2), respectively). No significant
difference was found in lesion size between the BZA and BZA/CE treatment groups
or between different doses of either treatment. Ovarian cyst formation was not
evident in the treated groups. Treatment with the TSEC containing higher BZA
dosages (3 and 5 mg/kg/day) led to significantly lower levels of estrogen
receptor (Esr1) mRNA expression compared to the control treatment. No differences
were observed in expression of progesterone receptor (Pgr). Immunohistochemical
analysis also demonstrated a decrease in ESR protein. The combination of CE and
BZA may prove to be a novel treatment option for endometriosis.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4093999
PMID: 24740602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Nature. 2014 May 29;509(7502):627-32. doi: 10.1038/nature13169. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Scalable control of mounting and attack by Esr1+ neurons in the ventromedial
hypothalamus.

Lee H(1), Kim DW(2), Remedios R(3), Anthony TE(3), Chang A(3), Madisen L(4), Zeng
H(4), Anderson DJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Biology and Biological Engineering 156-29, California Institute
of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Pasadena, California 91125, USA. (2)Computation and Neural Systems,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA. (3)Division 
of Biology and Biological Engineering 156-29, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, California 91125, USA. (4)Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle,
Washington 98103, USA. (5)1] Division of Biology and Biological Engineering
156-29, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA [2]
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Pasadena, California 91125, USA [3] Computation 
and Neural Systems, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California
91125, USA.

Social behaviours, such as aggression or mating, proceed through a series of
appetitive and consummatory phases that are associated with increasing levels of 
arousal. How such escalation is encoded in the brain, and linked to behavioural
action selection, remains an unsolved problem in neuroscience. The ventrolateral 
subdivision of the murine ventromedial hypothalamus (VMHvl) contains neurons
whose activity increases during male-male and male-female social encounters.
Non-cell-type-specific optogenetic activation of this region elicited attack
behaviour, but not mounting. We have identified a subset of VMHvl neurons marked 
by the oestrogen receptor 1 (Esr1), and investigated their role in male social
behaviour. Optogenetic manipulations indicated that Esr1(+) (but not Esr1(-))
neurons are sufficient to initiate attack, and that their activity is
continuously required during ongoing agonistic behaviour. Surprisingly, weaker
optogenetic activation of these neurons promoted mounting behaviour, rather than 
attack, towards both males and females, as well as sniffing and close
investigation. Increasing photostimulation intensity could promote a transition
from close investigation and mounting to attack, within a single social
encounter. Importantly, time-resolved optogenetic inhibition experiments revealed
requirements for Esr1(+) neurons in both the appetitive (investigative) and the
consummatory phases of social interactions. Combined optogenetic activation and
calcium imaging experiments in vitro, as well as c-Fos analysis in vivo,
indicated that increasing photostimulation intensity increases both the number of
active neurons and the average level of activity per neuron. These data suggest
that Esr1(+) neurons in VMHvl control the progression of a social encounter from 
its appetitive through its consummatory phases, in a scalable manner that
reflects the number or type of active neurons in the population.

PMCID: PMC4098836
PMID: 24739975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2014 Aug;68(8):780-5. doi:
10.1136/jech-2013-203451. Epub 2014 Apr 15.

Genetically predicted 17ß-estradiol and systemic inflammation in women: a
separate-sample Mendelian randomisation analysis in the Guangzhou Biobank Cohort 
Study.

Zhao J(1), Jiang CQ(2), Lam TH(1), Liu B(2), Cheng KK(3), Kavikondala S(1), Zhang
WS(2), Leung GM(1), Schooling CM(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR. (2)Guangzhou Number 12 Hospital, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, University of Birmingham, UK.
(4)School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR CUNY School of Public Health and Hunter College, New
York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Many chronic diseases are characterised by low-grade systemic
inflammation. Oestrogens may promote immune response consistent with sex-specific
patterns of diseases. In vitro culture and animal experiments suggest oestrogens 
are anti-inflammatory and might thereby protect against low-grade systemic
inflammation. Evidence from epidemiological studies is limited. Using a Mendelian
randomisation analysis with a separate-sample instrumental variable (SSIV)
estimator, we examined the association of genetically predicted 17ß-estradiol
with well-established systemic inflammatory markers (total white cell count,
granulocyte and lymphocyte count).
METHODS: A genetic score predicting 17ß-estradiol was developed in 237 young
Chinese women (university students) from Hong Kong based on a parsimonious set of
genetic polymorphisms (ESR1 (rs2175898) and CYP19A1 (rs1008805)). Multivariable
linear regression was used to examine the association of genetically predicted
17ß-estradiol with systemic inflammatory markers among 3096 older (50+ years)
Chinese women from the Guangzhou Biobank Cohort Study.
RESULTS: Predicted 17ß-estradiol was negatively associated with white blood cell 
count (-6.3 10(3)/mL, 95% CI -11.4 to -1.3) and granulocyte count (-4.5 10(3)/mL,
95% CI -8.5 to -0.4) but not lymphocyte count (-1.5 10(3)/mL, 95% CI -3.4 to 0.4)
adjusted for age only. Results were similar further adjusted for education,
smoking, use of alcohol, physical activity, Body Mass Index, waist-hip ratio, age
of menarche, age at menopause, use of hormonal contraceptives and hormone
replacement therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Endogenous genetically predicted 17ß-estradiol reduced low-grade
systemic inflammatory markers (white blood cell count and granulocyte count),
consistent with experimental and ecological evidence of 17ß-estradiol promoting
immune response. Replication in a larger sample is required.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24737458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Endocrinology. 2014 Jul;155(7):2613-23. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1101. Epub 2014 Apr 
15.

ESR1 and ESR2 differentially regulate daily and circadian activity rhythms in
female mice.

Royston SE(1), Yasui N, Kondilis AG, Lord SV, Katzenellenbogen JA, Mahoney MM.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program (S.E.R., M.M.M.), Medical Scholars Program (S.E.R.), and 
Departments of Chemistry (N.Y., J.A.K.) and Comparative Biosciences (A.G.K.,
S.V.L., M.M.M.), University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61802.

Estrogenic signaling shapes and modifies daily and circadian rhythms, the
disruption of which has been implicated in psychiatric, neurologic,
cardiovascular, and metabolic disease, among others. However, the activational
mechanisms contributing to these effects remain poorly characterized. To
determine the activational impact of estrogen on daily behavior patterns and
differentiate between the contributions of the estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2, 
ovariectomized adult female mice were administered estradiol, the ESR1 agonist
propylpyrazole triol, the ESR2 agonist diarylpropionitrile, or cholesterol
(control). Animals were singly housed with running wheels in a 12-hour light,
12-hour dark cycle or total darkness. Estradiol increased total activity and
amplitude, consolidated activity to the dark phase, delayed the time of peak
activity (acrophase of wheel running), advanced the time of activity onset, and
shortened the free running period (t), but did not alter the duration of activity
(a). Importantly, activation of ESR1 or ESR2 differentially impacted daily and
circadian rhythms. ESR1 stimulation increased total wheel running and amplitude
and reduced the proportion of activity in the light vs the dark. Conversely, ESR2
activation modified the distribution of activity across the day, delayed
acrophase of wheel running, and advanced the time of activity onset.
Interestingly, t was shortened by estradiol or either estrogen receptor agonist. 
Finally, estradiol-treated animals administered a light pulse in the early
subjective night, but no other time, had an attenuated response compared with
controls. This decreased phase response was mirrored by animals treated with
diarylpropionitrile, but not propylpyrazole triol. To conclude, estradiol has
strong activational effects on the temporal patterning and expression of daily
and circadian behavior, and these effects are due to distinct mechanisms elicited
by ESR1 and ESR2 activation.

PMID: 24735329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Patholog Res Int. 2014;2014:372653. doi: 10.1155/2014/372653. Epub 2014 Mar 6.

Study assessing the quality of quantification of estrogen receptor protein
expression by immunohistochemistry and gene expression in breast cancer.

Leen S(1), Steven VL(2), Marie DA(3), Valérie D(3), Annemie de P(4), Gert VD(5), 
Peter VD(6), Luc D(5), Peter V(5), Filip L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Cancer Research Unit, GZA Hospitals Sint-Augustinus,
Oosterveldlaan 24, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium ; Department of Medical Oncology,
University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Translational Cancer Research Unit, GZA Hospitals Sint-Augustinus,
Oosterveldlaan 24, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium ; Department of Oncology, KU Leuven,
Herestraat 49, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (3)Department of Pathology, AZ Klina
Hospital, Augustijnslei 100, 2930 Brasschaat, Belgium. (4)Department of
Pathology, AZ Nikolaas Hospital, Moerlandstraat 1, 9100 Sint-Niklaas, Belgium.
(5)Translational Cancer Research Unit, GZA Hospitals Sint-Augustinus,
Oosterveldlaan 24, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium. (6)Department of Medical Oncology,
University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium.

Although immunohistochemistry (IHC) is a widely used technique to classify tumors
in ER-positive versus ER-negative ones, interlab variabilities can occur. This
study aims to investigate the influences of preanalytical and analytical factors 
on IHC results. For this purpose, the different steps of the preparation of IHC
sections and scoring procedures were compared between two participating
laboratories and a central lab. There was a significant positive correlation
between the IHC results of the participating laboratories and those of the
central lab (correlation coefficient > 0.600; P<0.05). Nevertheless, some
discordant cases for immunostaining (5.3% for ER and 5.6% for PR) and for scoring
(10.5% for PR) occur at site 1. Comparing IHC results with ESR1 gene expression
results revealed a significant positive correlation (correlation coefficients >
0.769; P<0.05). PCR results of ER target genes showed some heterogeneity in the
ER-signalling pathway. These results suggest that differences in the IHC
procedure between these laboratories did not have a big influence on the end
result. Nevertheless, discordant cases caused by preanalytical and analytical
lab-specific procedures have been identified.

PMCID: PMC3964839
PMID: 24734208  [PubMed]


420. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2014;38(3-4):200-13. doi: 10.1159/000355559. Epub
2014 Apr 8.

Estrogen receptor a variants affect age at onset of Alzheimer's disease in a
multiethnic female cohort.

Janicki SC(1), Park N, Cheng R, Clark LN, Lee JH, Schupf N.

Author information: 
(1)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, N.Y., USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Few studies of gene variants that affect estrogen activity
investigate their association with age at onset of Alzheimer's disease (AD) in
women of different ethnicities. We examined the influence of ESR1 polymorphisms
on age at onset of AD in a multiethnic cohort of women.
METHODS: Among 1,436 women participating in the Washington Heights Inwood
Columbia Aging Project, association with age at AD onset was assessed for 41
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the ESR1 gene using Cox proportional
hazard models, adjusting for presence of an APOE e4 allele, years of education,
and body mass index.
RESULTS: Six SNPs in self-identified White women were protectively associated
with delayed age of AD onset in this self-identified group, including the two
restriction fragment length polymorphisms PvuII (rs2234693) and XbaI (rs9340799) 
(HR range = 0.420-0.483). Two separate SNPs were found to affect age of AD onset 
in self-identified Black women.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 polymorphisms affect age of onset of AD in women, and risk
alleles vary by ethnicity. These effects are possibly due to different linkage
disequilibrium patterns or differences in comorbid environmental or cultural risk
factors mediating the SNP effect on risk for AD.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC4141004
PMID: 24732579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2014 Jun 15;306(12):R918-24. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00499.2013. Epub 2014 Apr 9.

Marinobufagenin regulates permeability and gene expression of brain endothelial
cells.

Ing NH(1), Berghman L(2), Abi-Ghanem D(2), Abbas K(3), Kaushik A(3), Riggs PK(1),
Puschett JB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biosciences, 
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas; (2)Department of Poultry Science,
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
Texas; and. (3)the Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine and Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas. (4)the
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas jbpuschett@aol.com.

Marinobufagenin (MBG) is a cardiotonic steroid that increases in the circulation 
in preeclampsia. Preeclampsia and eclampsia are associated with cerebral edema.
Therefore, we examined the effects of MBG on human brain microvascular
endothelial cells (HBMEC) in vitro. MBG enhanced the permeability of HBMEC
monolayers at 1-, 10-, and 100-nM doses, but had no effect at 0.1 nM. Agilent
Human Gene Expression microarrays were utilized in these studies. MBG treatment
(10 nM for 12 h) downregulated concentrations of the soluble VEGFR transcript
sFLT by 59% but did not alter those of FLTv3 mRNA (determined by quantitative
PCR). When treated and control HBMEC transcriptomes were interrogated on
microarrays, 1,069 genes appeared to be regulated by MBG. Quantitative RT-PCR
confirmed that MBG treatment upregulated ENKUR mRNA concentrations by 57%. Its
protein product interacts with calmodulin and calcium channel proteins. MBG
treatment downregulated several genes whose protein products are involved in cell
adhesion (ITGA2B, FERMT1, CLDN16, and TMEM207) and cell signaling (GRIN2C,
SLC8A1, and ESR1). The level of downregulation ranged from 22 to 66%. Altogether,
MBG actively enhanced the permeability of HBMEC monolayers while downregulating
genes involved in adhesion. MBG treatment had variable effects on ENKUR, GRIN2C, 
and SLC8A1 genes, all associated with calcium transport. These studies provide
the basis for future investigations of MBG actions in normal physiology and
disease.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 24717675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Eur J Neurol. 2014 Jul;21(7):1011-20. doi: 10.1111/ene.12427. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Multilocus analysis of hormonal, neurotransmitter, inflammatory pathways and
genome-wide associated variants in migraine susceptibility.

Ghosh J(1), Pradhan S, Mittal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, UP, India.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Migraine pathophysiology involves a complex interplay of 
processes wherein the hormonal, neurotransmitter and inflammatory pathways
interact to influence the migraine phenotype. However, all studies pertaining to 
the role of genetic variants in migraine have been restricted to a specific
pathway and none of the studies has looked into inter-pathway genetic analysis.
Our aim was to combine all the genetic variants from our previously reported
studies to conduct higher order gene-gene interaction analysis using different
multi-analytical approaches.
METHODS: The study group included 324 migraine patients and 134 healthy controls.
The study included 20 polymorphisms from hormonal, neurotransmitter, inflammatory
and genome-wide associated variants from our published reports. Univariate and
multivariate analyses were carried out by logistic regression. Classification and
regression tree (CART) analysis was performed to build a decision tree via
recursive partitioning. The high order genetic interactions associated with
migraine risk were analyzed using multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR).
RESULTS: Univariate analysis revealed significant associations of polymorphisms
in CYP19A1, ESR1, TNFA and PRDM16 genes with migraine susceptibility. Multiple
regression analysis found significant results for four markers in CYP19A1, TNFA, 
ESR1 and LRP1 genes. In CART, the most prominent splitting variable was CYP19A1
polymorphism followed by TNFA, ESR1 and PRDM16 markers. The MDR analysis
identified markers of CYP19A1, CYP19A1- TNFA, CYP19A1- ESR1- TNFA and CYP19A1-
ESR1- TRPM8- PRDM16 as best models for one, two, three and four factors,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests interactions amongst hormonal,
inflammatory and genome-wide associated variants but not with neurotransmitter
pathway variants in migraine susceptibility.

© 2014 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2014 EAN.

PMID: 24698360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2014 Apr;37(2):147-54. doi: 10.1007/s13402-014-0170-z. Epub
2014 Apr 2.

Analysis of gene copy number alterations by multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification in columnar cell lesions of the breast.

Verschuur-Maes AH(1), Moelans CB, de Bruin PC, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht Cancer Center, PO
Box 85500, 3508 GA, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Columnar cell lesions (CCLs) are possible precursors of breast
cancer, but little is known about the role of breast cancer-related genes in the 
progression of CCL to invasive breast cancer.
METHODS: Gene copy numbers of 17 breast cancer-related genes were analyzed using 
Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) in CCL (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>28), ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS) grade I likely originating from CCL (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>5), and paired 
CCL (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>14/28) with DCIS (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>7) and/or invasive carcinoma (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>13). The genes
included were BIRC5, C11orf30, CCND1, CCNE1, CDH1, CPD, EGFR, ERBB2, ESR1, FGFR1,
IKBKB, MAPT, MED1, MTDH, MYC, TOP2A and TRAF4.
RESULTS: No high level gene amplifications were observed in CCL, but copy number 
gains were encountered for the C11orf30 (3/28), MYC, CPD, MTDH (2/28), and CCND1,
CCNE1, ESR1 and TOP2A genes (1/28). In addition, CDH1 showed loss in 2/28 and
TOP2A in 1/28 cases. CCLs with or without atypia exhibited comparable numbers of 
copy number changes (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.312). Overall, the frequency of gene copy number
changes increased from CCL towards DCIS and invasive carcinoma (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004). Also 
in the cases with synchronous lesions, the CCLs exhibited fewer copy number
changes than the DCIS/invasive carcinomas.
CONCLUSIONS: CCLs carry copy number changes of several known breast
cancer-related genes, thereby substantiating their role in breast carcinogenesis.
Among them, CCND1 and ESR1 copy number gains and CDH1 copy number losses are of
particular interest. Since the copy number changes observed were more prevalent
in DCIS and invasive carcinoma than in CCL, the corresponding gene alterations
may represent rather late occurring events in low nuclear grade breast
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 24692099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Histochem Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;142(4):421-32. doi: 10.1007/s00418-014-1216-z. Epub
2014 Apr 2.

Expression pattern of estrogen receptors a and ß and G-protein-coupled estrogen
receptor 1 in the human testis.

Fietz D(1), Ratzenböck C, Hartmann K, Raabe O, Kliesch S, Weidner W, Klug J,
Bergmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, University of
Giessen, Giessen, Germany.

Estrogen signaling is considered to play an important role in spermatogenesis,
spermiogenesis and male fertility. Estrogens can act via the two nuclear estrogen
receptors ESR1 (ERa) and ESR2 (ERß) or via the intracellular G-protein-coupled
estrogen receptor 1 (GPER, formerly GPR30). Several reports on the localization
and expression of all three receptors in the human testis have been published but
are controversial particularly in case of ERa. Contrary to previous studies, we
decided therefore to evaluate expression of all three receptors in the testis by 
a number of different methods and in comparison with MCF-7 cells. Using qPCR, we 
could show that mRNA expression of ERa is considerably lower and expression of
ERß and GPER much higher in the testis than in MCF-7 cells. RT-PCR after
laser-assisted microdissection of tubular and interstitial compartments from
normal and Sertoli cell only syndrome testes plus in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemical analyses of the same samples demonstrated that there is very 
low expression of ERa in germ cells and in single interstitial cells, very high
expression of ERß in germ cells and Sertoli cells and high expression of GPER in 
interstitial cells and less in Sertoli cells.

PMID: 24692005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Age (Dordr). 2014 Jun;36(3):9647. doi: 10.1007/s11357-014-9647-y. Epub 2014 Apr
1.

Estrogen deficiency does not decrease the in vitro osteogenic potential of rat
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Veronesi F(1), Pagani S, Della Bella E, Giavaresi G, Fini M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Preclinical and Surgical Studies, Rizzoli Orthopedic Institute, 
Via Di Barbiano 1/10, 40136, Bologna, Italy, francesca.veronesi@ior.it.

Osteoporosis due to estrogen deficiency is an increasing bone health issue
worldwide: new strategies are being studied for regenerative medicine of bone
pathologies in these patients. The most commonly used cells for tissue
engineering therapy are the bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs), but they 
might be negatively affected by aging and estrogen deficiency. Besides the
general advantages of adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (ADSCs) over BMSCs, 
ADSCs also seem to be less affected by aging than BMSCs, but in the literature,
little is known about ADSCs in estrogen deficiency. The present study
investigated the in vitro behavior of ADSCs, isolated from healthy (SHAM) and
estrogen-deficient (OVX) rats. Phenotype, clonogenicity, viability, and
osteogenic differentiation, at both cellular and molecular levels, were evaluated
with or without osteogenic stimuli. Pro-inflammatory cytokines, growth factors,
and adipogenic differentiation markers were also analyzed. There were no
significant differences between OVX and SHAM ADSCs in some analyzed parameters.
In addition, clonogenicity, osteopontin (Spp1) gene expression, alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) activity at 2 weeks of culture, total collagen (COLL),
osteocalcin (Bglap) gene expression and production, and matrix mineralization
were significantly higher in OVX than in SHAM ADSCs. Besides the increase in some
osteogenic markers, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (Pparg) gene
was also more expressed in OVX in osteogenic medium, with a concomitant estrogen 
receptor 1 (Esr1) gene expression decrease. These results underlined that ADSCs
were not affected by estrogen deficiency in an osteogenic microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC4082606
PMID: 24687841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. JSLS. 2014 Jan-Mar;18(1):102-9. doi: 10.4293/10860813X13693422519154.

Gene expression profiling of human kidneys undergoing laparoscopic donor
nephrectomy.

Xu YH(1); Jian-Li, Ma XP(2), Lu Y(2), Chen P(2), Luo SW(2), Jia ZG(2), Liu Y(2), 
Guo Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, 452nd Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army, No.
317 Shunjiang Road, Chengdu 610021, China. YahongXuxu@hotmail.com. (2)Department 
of Urology, 452nd Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army, Chengdu, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The objective was to compare gene expression profiles 
of 6 kidneys from open donor nephrectomy with 6 kidneys removed after
laparoscopic donor nephrectomy and several hours of carbon dioxide
pneumoperitoneum with DNA microarrays and identify small-molecule drugs.
METHODS: The gene expression profile GSE3297 was downloaded from the Gene
Expression Omnibus database, and the differentially expressed genes were
identified by a bioinformatics approach. First, Osprey software was used to
construct a differentially expressed gene associated network. Then, DAVID
(Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery) and
FuncAssociate were used to perform functional analyses. Finally, the Connectivity
Map was used to screen for small-molecule drugs.
RESULTS: A total of 285 differentially expressed genes were identified, including
148 down-regulated genes and 137 up-regulated genes. In addition, the
differentially expressed genes in the most significant Gene Ontology term were
CASP6, KRAS, SOCS1, ESR1, TSHB, COL1A1, and MMP14. Furthermore, several
differentially expressed genes, including STAT1, STAT6, SOS2, and SOCS1,
participated in the most remarkable Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator 
of transcription signaling pathway. Finally, luteolin--with the highest score
(0.887)--was identified as the small-molecule drug.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show an altered renal transcriptome induced by several
hours of carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum and laparoscopic surgery characterized
by up-regulation of genes associated with acute inflammation, apoptosis, and
immune injury, which could potentially result in renal injury and an enhanced
immune response in the recipient after transplant.

PMCID: PMC3939323
PMID: 24680151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Andrology. 2014 Jul;2(4):510-20. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2014.00194.x. Epub 2014
Mar 28.

Ductuli efferentes of the male Golden Syrian hamster reproductive tract.

Ford J Jr(1), Carnes K, Hess RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL,
USA.

Efferent ductules are responsible for the transportation of spermatozoa from the 
testis to the epididymis and their epithelium is responsible for the reabsorption
of over 90% of the luminal fluid. The purpose of this research was to
characterize the gross morphology and histology of efferent ductules in the male 
Golden Syrian hamster. The efferent ductules emerge from rete testis with a
unique polarity at the apex or cephalic pole of the testis. The number of
efferent ductules varied from 3 to 10 with an average of 6.0 and blind ending
ducts were observed in approximately 56% of the males. The ductules merged into a
single common duct prior to entering the caput epididymidis. The proximal
efferent ductule lumen was wider than the distal (conus and common ducts),
consistent with reabsorption of most of the luminal fluid, as was morphology of
the ductal epithelium. Non-ciliated cells in the proximal region had prominent
endocytic apparatuses, showing both coated pits and apical tubules in the apical 
cytoplasm. Large basolateral, intercellular spaces were also present in the
epithelium of the proximal region. Distal non-ciliated cells had an abundance of 
large endosomes and lysosomal granules. Localisation of sodium/hydrogen
exchanger-3 (NHE3; SLC9A3) and aquaporins 1 and 9 (AQP1, AQP9) along the
microvillus border was also consistent with ion transport and fluid reabsorption 
by this epithelium. In comparison, the caput epididymidis epithelium expressed
only AQP9 immunostaining. Another unusual feature of the hamster efferent
ductules was the presence of glycogen aggregates in the basal cytoplasm of small 
groups of epithelial cells, but only in the proximal ducts near the rete testis. 
Androgen (AR), estrogen (ESR1 and ESR2) and vitamin D receptors (VDR) were also
abundant in epithelial nuclei of proximal and distal efferent ductules. In
comparison, caput epididymidis showed very little immunostaining for ESR1.

© 2014 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMCID: PMC4069219
PMID: 24677666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Breast. 2014 Jun;23(3):226-33. doi: 10.1016/j.breast.2014.02.007. Epub 2014 Mar
21.

Gender-associated expression of tumor markers and a small gene set in breast
carcinoma.

Andres SA(1), Smolenkova IA(1), Wittliff JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, J. Graham Brown Cancer Center 
and Institute for Molecular Diversity & Drug Design, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY 40202, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, J. 
Graham Brown Cancer Center and Institute for Molecular Diversity & Drug Design,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. Electronic address:
jim.wittliff@louisville.edu.

Breast carcinomas in both genders share pathological features, although
differences in incidence, prognosis and survival are reported. Expression of 33
genes was investigated in male and female breast carcinomas in association with
ER, PR, HER-2/neu and EGF-receptor. Among 98 male breast cancers, 82 were ER+ and
78 were PR+. ER and PR protein levels were greater in males compared to females, 
although no differences were observed in ESR1 and PGR expression. A difference
was observed in binding affinities of PR but not ER between genders. No
differences were observed in HER-2/neu, EGFR protein, or patient age. Expression 
of NAT1, TBC1D9, IL6ST, RABEP1, PLK1 and LRBA was elevated in carcinomas of males
compared to those of females, in which ER status appeared to be related to
expression. Over-expression of protein products of these genes represents novel
molecular targets for development of gender-specific therapeutics and companion
diagnostics.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24656773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Biomed Rep. 2014 Jan;2(1):101-104. Epub 2013 Nov 15.

CTCF and CTCFL mRNA expression in 17ß-estradiol-treated MCF7 cells.

Del Campo EP(1), Márquez JJ(2), Reyes-Vargas F(3), Intriago-Ortega MD(4),
Quintanar-Escorza MA(4), Burciaga-Nava JA(4), Sifuentes-Alvarez A(4),
Reyes-Romero M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Nutrition, Juárez
University of the State of Durango, Durango 34000, Mexico. (2)Department of
Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Nutrition, Juárez University of the
State of Durango, Durango 34000, Mexico ; Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of 
Medicine and Nutrition, Juárez University of the State of Durango, Durango 34000,
Mexico. (3)Cancer State Center of the Ministry of Health, Durango, Durango 34000,
Mexico. (4)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and Nutrition, Juárez 
University of the State of Durango, Durango 34000, Mexico.

Estrogens play a key role in breast cancer, with 60-70% of the cases expressing
estrogen receptors (ERs), which are encoded by the ESR1 gene. CTCFL, a paralogue 
of the chromatin organizer CTCF, is a potential biomarker of breast cancer, but
its expression in this disease is currently controversial. A positive correlation
has been reported between CTCFL and ERs in breast tumors and there also exists a 
coordinated interaction between CTCF and ERs in breast cancer cells. Therefore,
there appears to be an association between CTCF, CTCFL and estrogens in breast
cancer; however, there has been no report on the effects of estrogens on CTCF and
CTCFL expression. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of
17ß-estradiol (E2) on the CTCF and CTCFL mRNA expression in the MCF7 breast
cancer cell line. The promoter methylation status of CTCFL and data mining for
estrogen response elements in promoters of the CTCF and CTCFL genes were also
determined. The transcription of CTCF and CTCFL was performed by quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and the promoter methylation status of CTCFL was
determined by methylation-specific PCR. The MCF7 cells exhibited basal
transcription of CTCF, which was significantly downregulated to 0.68 by 1 µM E2; 
basal or E2-regulated transcription of CTCFL was not detected. Under basal
conditions, the CTCFL promoter was methylated. Through data mining, an estrogen
response element was identified in the CTCF promoter, but no such element was
found in CTCFL. These results suggested that estrogens may modulate CTCF
expression, although there was no apparent association between ERs and CTCFL.

PMCID: PMC3917730
PMID: 24649078  [PubMed]


430. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2014 May;31(5):601-11. doi: 10.1007/s10815-014-0212-5.
Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Association of polymorphisms in estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2) with male
infertility: a meta-analysis and systematic review.

Ge YZ(1), Xu LW, Jia RP, Xu Z, Li WC, Wu R, Liao S, Gao F, Tan SJ, Song Q, Xin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 68 
Changle Road, Nanjing, 210006, China.

PURPOSE: Estrogens play an important role in male reproduction via interacting
with estrogen receptors (ERs), whose expression can be regulated by the
polymorphisms in different regions of ESR1 and ESR2 genes. However, results from 
published studies on the association between four well-characterized
polymorphisms (PvuII, XbaI, RsaI, and AluI) in the gene of ERs (ESR1 and ESR2)
and male infertility risk are inconclusive.
METHODS: To investigate the strength of relationship of PvuII and XbaI in ESR1
and RsaI and AluI in ESR2 with male infertility, we conducted a meta-analysis of 
12 eligible studies with odds ratio (OR) and its corresponding 95 % confidence
intervals (95 % CI).
RESULTS: Overall, ESR1 PvuII and ESR2 RsaI polymorphisms were significantly
associated with male infertility risk. The subgroup analyses by ethnicities
demonstrated that in Asians, ESR1 PvuII, XbaI and ESR2 RsaI polymorphisms were
significantly associated with a decreased infertility risk, while in Caucasians
both ESR1 PvuII and ESR2 RsaI polymorphisms increased the susceptibility to male 
infertility. As for ESR2 AluI polymorphism, no significant association was
detected in either overall analysis or subgroup analyses by
ethnicities/genotyping methods.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis suggested that polymorphisms in the genes of ERs 
(ESR1 and ESR2) may have differential roles in the predisposition to male
infertility according to the different ethnic backgrounds. Further well-designed 
and unbiased studies with larger sample size and diverse ethnic backgrounds
should be conducted to verify our findings.

PMCID: PMC4016379
PMID: 24647635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Jun;52(3):357-71. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0187. Epub 2014 Mar 
19.

Sexually dimorphic transcription of estrogen receptors in cod gonads throughout a
reproductive cycle.

Nagasawa K(1), Presslauer C(1), Kirtiklis L(2), Babiak I(1), Fernandes JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biosciences and AquacultureUniversity of Nordland, 8049 Bodø,
NorwayDepartment of ZoologyFaculty of Biology and Biotechnology, University of
Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, 10-718 Olsztyn, Poland. (2)Faculty of Biosciences
and AquacultureUniversity of Nordland, 8049 Bodø, NorwayDepartment of
ZoologyFaculty of Biology and Biotechnology, University of Warmia and Mazury in
Olsztyn, 10-718 Olsztyn, PolandFaculty of Biosciences and AquacultureUniversity
of Nordland, 8049 Bodø, NorwayDepartment of ZoologyFaculty of Biology and
Biotechnology, University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, 10-718 Olsztyn,
Poland. (3)Faculty of Biosciences and AquacultureUniversity of Nordland, 8049
Bodø, NorwayDepartment of ZoologyFaculty of Biology and Biotechnology, University
of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, 10-718 Olsztyn, Poland jfe@uin.no.

The role of sex steroid regulation in gonadal maturation is a very complex
process that is far from being fully understood. Hence, we have investigated
seasonal changes in gonadal expression of estrogen receptors (ERs) in Atlantic
cod (Gadus morhua L.), a batch spawner, throughout the annual reproductive cycle.
Three nuclear ER partial cDNA sequences (esr1, esr2a, and esr2b) were cloned and 
all esr transcripts were detected mainly in liver and gonads of fish of both
sexes. In situ hybridization of esrs along with germ cell (vasa) and gonadal
somatic cell markers (gonadal soma-derived factor (gsdf), 3ß-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase (3ßhsd), and anti-Müllerian hormone (amh) for testicular, or gsdf
for ovarian somatic cells) showed that all three esrs were preferentially
localized within interstitial fibroblasts composed of immature and mature Leydig 
cells in testis, whereas they were differentially expressed in both follicular
cells and oocytes in ovary. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis revealed a
sexually dimorphic expression pattern of the three esr paralogs in testis and
ovary. A significant increase in esr2a expression was identified in testis and of
esr2b in ovary, whereas esr1 transcripts were elevated in both testis and ovary
in February and March before the spawning period. The localization and sexually
dimorphic expression of esr genes in gonads indicate a direct function of
estrogen via ERs in gonadal somatic cell growth and differentiation for Leydig
cell in testis and follicular cells in ovary throughout the annual reproductive
cycle in Atlantic cod.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 24647045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2014 Mar 6;5:30. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00030.
eCollection 2014.

GPER Signaling in Spermatogenesis and Testicular Tumors.

Chimento A(1), Sirianni R(1), Casaburi I(1), Pezzi V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Applied Biology, Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutrition
Sciences, University of Calabria , Cosenza , Italy.

Estrogens play important roles in the regulation of testis development and
spermatogenesis. Moreover, several evidences suggest that estrogen signaling can 
be involved in testicular tumorigenesis. The physiological effects of estrogen
are mediated by the classical nuclear estrogen receptors ESR1 and 2, which
regulate both genomic and rapid signaling events. In the recent years, a member
of the seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor family, GPR30 (GPER), has
been identified to promote estrogen action in target cells including testicular
cells. Ours and other studies reported that GPER is expressed in normal germ
cells (spermatogonia, spermatocytes, spermatids), somatic cells (Sertoli and
Leydig cells), and it is also involved in mediating estrogen action during
spermatogenesis and testis development. In addition, GPER seems to be involved in
modulating estrogen-dependent testicular cancer cell growth. However, in this
context, the effects of GPER stimulation on cell survival and proliferation
appear to be cell type specific. This review summarizes the current knowledge on 
the functions regulated by estrogens and mediated by GPER in normal and tumor
testicular cells.

PMCID: PMC3944538
PMID: 24639669  [PubMed]


433. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 May 1;20(9):2485-94. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2602.
Epub 2014 Mar 14.

Effect of aromatase inhibition on functional gene modules in estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer and their relationship with antiproliferative
response.

Gao Q(1), Patani N, Dunbier AK, Ghazoui Z, Zvelebil M, Martin LA, Dowsett M.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute
of Cancer Research; Academic Department of Biochemistry, Royal Marsden Foundation
Trust, London, United Kingdom; and Department of Biochemistry, University of
Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.

PURPOSE: To investigate potential associations between gene modules representing 
key biologic processes and response to aromatase inhibitors (AI) in estrogen
receptor-positive (ER(+)) breast cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Paired gene expression and Ki67 protein expression were
available from 69 postmenopausal women with ER(+) early breast cancer, at
baseline and 2 weeks post-anastrozole treatment, in the presurgical setting.
Functional gene modules (n = 26) were retrieved from published studies and their 
module scores were computed before and after elimination of
proliferation-associated genes (PAG). Ki67 and module scores were assessed at
baseline and 2 weeks post-anastrozole. Unsupervised clustering was used to assess
associations between modules and Ki67.
RESULTS: Proliferation-based modules were highly correlated with Ki67 expression 
both pretreatment and on-treatment. At baseline with and without PAGs, Ki67
expression was significantly inversely correlated with ERG, ESR1.2, SET, and
PIK3CA modules. Modules measuring estrogen signaling strongly predicted
antiproliferative response to therapy with and without PAGs. Baseline expression 
of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-I) module predicted a poor change in
Ki67-implicating genes within the module as involved in de novo resistance to
AIs. High expression of Immune.2.STAT1 module pretreatment predicted poor
antiproliferative response to therapy. A significant association between
estrogen-regulated genes modules (ESR1, ESR1-2, SET, and ERG) was evident post
AI.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple processes and pathways are affected by AI treatment in
ER(+) breast cancer. Modules closely associated with ESR1 expression were
predictive of good antiproliferative response to AIs, but modules representing
immune activity and IGF-I/MAPK were predictive of poor Ki67 response, supporting 
their therapeutic targeting in combination with AIs.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24634384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Reprod Sci. 2014 Nov;21(11):1411-22. doi: 10.1177/1933719114527355. Epub 2014 Mar
10.

Expression of genomic functional estrogen receptor 1 in mouse sertoli cells.

Lin J(1), Zhu J(1), Li X(1), Li S(1), Lan Z(2), Ko J(3), Lei Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of OB/GYN & Women's Health, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, Louisville, KY, USA. (2)Division of Life Sciences, Alltech,
Nicholasville, KY, USA. (3)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA. (4)Department of OB/GYN & Women's 
Health, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, USA
zhenmin.lei@louisville.edu.

There is no consensus whether Sertoli cells express estrogen receptor 1 (Esr1).
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, Western blot, and
immunofluorescence demonstrated that mouse Sertoli cell lines, TM4, MSC-1, and
15P-1, and purified primary mouse Sertoli cells (PSCs) contained Esr1 messenger
RNA and proteins. Incubation of Sertoli cells with 17ß-estradiol (E2) or ESR1
agonist stimulated the expression of an estrogen responsive gene Greb1, which was
prevented by ESR inhibitor or ESR1 antagonist. Overexpression of Esr1 in MSC-1
enhanced E2-induced Greb1 expression, while knockdown of Esr1 by small
interfering RNA in TM4 attenuated the response. Furthermore, E2-induced Greb1
expression was abolished in the PSCs isolated from Amh-Cre/Esr1-floxed mice in
which Esr1 in Sertoli cells were selectively deleted. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays indicated that E2-induced Greb1 expression in Sertoli 
cells was mediated by binding of ESR1 to estrogen responsive elements. In
summary, ligand-dependent nuclear ESR1 was present in mouse Sertoli cells and
mediates a classical genomic action of estrogens.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMCID: PMC4212333
PMID: 24615934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Cell J. 2014 Fall;16(3):299-308. Epub 2014 Oct 4.

The Comparison of The Effects of Silybin and Silybin-Phosphatidylcholine on
Viability and ESR Expression in Human Breast Cancer T47D Cell Line.

Mahmoodi N(1), Motamed N(1), Paylakhi SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Kish International Campus,
University of Tehran, Kish, Iran ; School of Biology, University College of
Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran. (2)School of Biology, Damghan
University, Damghan, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Silybin is a polyphenol with anti-oxidant and anti-cancer properties. 
The poor bioavailability of some polyphenols can be improved by binding to
phosphatidylcholine. In recent years, studies have been conducted to evaluate the
anti-cancer effect of silybin. We studied the effect of silybin and
silybin-phosphatidylcholine on ESR1 and ESR2 gene expression and viability in the
T47D breast cancer cell line.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, a
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-Yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide test (MTT test) was 
used to determine doses for cell treatment, and the gene expression was analyzed 
by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (real-time RT- PCR).
RESULTS: Significant dose- and time-dependent cell growth inhibitory effects of
silybin and silybin-phosphatidylcholine along with ESR1 down-regulation were
observed in T47D cells. In contrast to ESR1, the T47D cell line showed negligible
ESR2 expression.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that silybin and silybin-phosphatidylcholine
down-regulate ESR1 in ER(+)breast cancers. Results also show that in the T47D
cell line, silybindown-regulation of ESR1 compared with silybin.

PMCID: PMC4204191
PMID: 24611152  [PubMed]


436. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 7;9(3):e87616. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087616. eCollection 
2014.

Methylation of migraine-related genes in different tissues of the rat.

Labruijere S(1), Stolk L(2), Verbiest M(2), de Vries R(1), Garrelds IM(1), Eilers
PH(3), Danser AH(1), Uitterlinden AG(2), MaassenVanDenBrink A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Internal Medicine, Div. of Pharmacology, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Dept. of Internal Medicine, Genetics Laboratory,
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Dept. of Biostatistics,
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

17ß-Estradiol, an epigenetic modulator, is involved in the increased prevalence
of migraine in women. Together with the prophylactic efficacy of valproate, which
influences DNA methylation and histone modification, this points to the
involvement of epigenetic mechanisms. Epigenetic studies are often performed on
leukocytes, but it is unclear to what extent methylation is similar in other
tissues. Therefore, we investigated methylation of migraine-related genes that
might be epigenetically regulated (CGRP-ergic pathway, estrogen receptors,
endothelial NOS, as well as MTHFR) in different migraine-related tissues and
compared this to methylation in rat as well as human leukocytes. Further, we
studied whether 17ß-estradiol has a prominent role in methylation of these genes.
Female rats (n = 35) were ovariectomized or sham-operated and treated with
17ß-estradiol or placebo. DNA was isolated and methylation was assessed through
bisulphite treatment and mass spectrometry. Human methylation data were obtained 
using the Illumina 450k genome-wide methylation array in 395 female subjects from
a population-based cohort study. We showed that methylation of the Crcp, Calcrl, 
Esr1 and Nos3 genes is tissue-specific and that methylation in leukocytes was not
correlated to that in other tissues. Interestingly, the interindividual variation
in methylation differed considerably between genes and tissues. Furthermore we
showed that methylation in human leukocytes was similar to that in rat leukocytes
in our genes of interest, suggesting that rat may be a good model to study human 
DNA methylation in tissues that are difficult to obtain. In none of the genes a
significant effect of estradiol treatment was observed.

PMCID: PMC3946422
PMID: 24609082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2014 May 1;200:35-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.02.016. Epub
2014 Mar 4.

Stallion spermatozoa: putative target of estrogens; presence of the estrogen
receptors ESR1, ESR2 and identification of the estrogen-membrane receptor GPER.

Arkoun B(1), Gautier C(1), Delalande C(1), Barrier-Battut I(2), Guénon I(1), Goux
D(3), Bouraïma-Lelong H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Normandie Univ, F-14032 Caen, France; UNICAEN, EA2608, OeReCa, F-14032 Caen,
France; USC-INRA 2006, F-14032 Caen, France. (2)Jumenterie du Pin, Institut
Français du Cheval et de l'Equitation, 61310 Exmes, France. (3)Normandie Univ,
F-14032 Caen, France; UNICAEN, CMABIO, F-14032 Caen, France. (4)Normandie Univ,
F-14032 Caen, France; UNICAEN, EA2608, OeReCa, F-14032 Caen, France; USC-INRA
2006, F-14032 Caen, France. Electronic address: helene.bouraima@unicaen.fr.

Among mammals, the stallion produces the largest amount of testicular estrogens. 
These steroid hormones are produced mainly by Leydig and Sertoli cells in the
testis and also in the epididymis. Their role in horse testicular physiology and 
their ability to act on spermatozoa are still unknown. In order to determine if
spermatozoa are targets for estrogens, the presence of estrogen receptors in
mature ejaculated spermatozoa has been investigated. The presence of a single
isoform of ESR1 (66kDa) and ESR2 (61kDa) was found by Western-blot analysis in
samples from seven stallions. Confocal analysis mainly showed a flagellar
localization for both receptors. Immuno-TEM experiments revealed that they are
mostly located near the membranes, which are classically associated with rapid,
non-genomic, effects. Moreover, we evidenced the expression of the seven
transmembrane estradiol binding receptor GPER in colt testis. The protein was
also localized at the connecting piece in mature spermatozoa. In conclusion, our 
results suggest that horse spermatozoa are a target for estrogens, which could
act on several receptors either during the epididymal transit and/or in the
female genital tract.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24607572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Reprod Sci. 2014 Nov;21(11):1362-9. doi: 10.1177/1933719114525271. Epub 2014 Mar 
6.

Resveratrol and endometrium: a closer look at an active ingredient of red wine
using in vivo and in vitro models.

Amaya SC(1), Savaris RF(2), Filipovic CJ(1), Wise JD(3), Hestermann E(3), Young
SL(4), Lessey BA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Greenville Health System, Greenville,
SC, USA. (2)Departmento de Ginecologia e Obstetrícia, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul, Brazil Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Greenville Health System, Greenville, SC, USA Department of Biology, 
Furman University, Greenville, SC, USA. (4)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (5)Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Greenville Health System, Greenville, SC, USA
blessey@ghs.org.

Resveratrol is a natural phytoestrogen with antiproliferative properties present 
in red wine, grapes, and berries. Published reports on the effects of resveratrol
in human endometrial function are limited. The objective of this study was to
investigate the expression of estrogen receptor a (ESR1), Ki-67 (a proliferative 
marker), aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), and members of the cytochrome P450
superfamily of enzymes (CYP1A1 and CYP1B1) in an in vitro and vivo assay.
Alkaline phosphatase assay of estrogenicity was used to compare estrogen activity
of different concentrations of resveratrol to estradiol (E2) and
diethylstilbestrol (DES), using Ishikawa cell culture. Immunohistochemical
expression of ESR1 and Ki67, and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction 
of AhR, CYP1A1, and CYP1B1 were analyzed from xenograft implants of human
endometrial tissue in ovariectomized immunodeficient RAG-2-<U+03B3>(c) mice, after 30
days of treatment with subcutaneous pellets of E2, E2 plus progesterone (P4), or 
E2 plus resveratrol (6, 30, or 60 mg) for 30 days. Compared to E2, resveratrol
acted as an agonist and antagonist of estrogen in low and high concentrations,
respectively, when combined with E2. Xenografts of human endometrial tissues in
RAG-2 mice exhibited reduced expression of ESR1 and proliferative activity (Ki67)
with 60 mg of resveratrol. This study suggests that resveratrol, at high doses,
has the potential benefit to reduce proliferation of human endometrium through
ESR1.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMCID: PMC4212329
PMID: 24604232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Apr 30;566:151-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.02.051. Epub
2014 Mar 3.

Fighting in the home cage: Agonistic encounters and effects on neurobiological
markers within the social decision-making network of house mice (Mus musculus).

Greenberg GD(1), Howerton CL(2), Trainor BC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA;
Center for Neuroscience, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA;
Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
Electronic address: ggreenberg@ucdavis.edu. (2)Department of Animal Science,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA. (3)Neuroscience Graduate Group,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA; Center for Neuroscience,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA; Department of Psychology,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Inbred strains of mice, such as C57Bl/6, have become preferred animal models for 
neurobehavioral studies. A main goal in creating inbred lines is to reduce the
effects of individual genetic variation on observed phenotypes. Most studies use 
only males, and there is increasing evidence that agonistic interactions within
the home cage may produce systematic variability in behavior and brain function. 
Previous studies have demonstrated that the outcomes of aggressive interactions
have powerful effects on the brain and behavior, but less is known about whether 
aggressive interactions within the home cage have similar effects. We assessed
group-housed laboratory mice C57Bl/6 for competitive ability and then tested the 
extent high competitive ability (CA) or low CA was related to gene and protein
expression within related pathways. We focused on a broad social behavior
network, including the nucleus accumbens (NAc) and bed nucleus of the stria
terminalis (BNST). High CA mice had significantly more corticotropin releasing
hormone receptor 2 (CRHR2) and estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) mRNA in the BNST.
Our data suggest a simple test of CA could yield valuable information that could 
be used to reduce error variance and increase power in neurobiological studies
using mice.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4019314
PMID: 24602985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2014 Mar;15(3):243-55. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1300220.

Estrogen receptor a gene PvuII polymorphism and coronary artery disease: a
meta-analysis of 21 studies.

Ding J(1), Xu H, Yin X, Zhang FR, Pan XP, Gu YA, Chen JZ, Guo XG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China; Xiuzhou District, Gaozhao Street
Community Health Service Center, Jiaxing 314031, China; State Key Laboratory for 
Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, the First Affiliated Hospital,
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, China; Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The association between the estrogen receptor a gene (ESR1) PvuII polymorphism
(c.454-397T>C) and coronary artery disease (CAD) is controversial. Thus, we
conducted a meta-analysis to evaluate the relationship. Data were collected from 
21 studies encompassing 9926 CAD patients and 16710 controls. Odds ratios (ORs)
with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to assess the relationship between 
PvuII polymorphism and CAD. The polymorphism in control populations in all
studies followed Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. We found a significant association
between ESR1 PvuII polymorphism and CAD risk in all subjects. When the data were 
stratified by region, a significant association between ESR1 PvuII polymorphism
and CAD risk was observed in Asian populations but not in Western populations.
The current study suggests that ESR1 PvuII polymorphism has an important role in 
CAD susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3955911
PMID: 24599688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Anticancer Res. 2014 Mar;34(3):1307-19.

Cell identity disruption in breast cancer precursors.

Coradini D(1), Boracchi P, Oriana S, Biganzoli E, Ambrogi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Community Health Sciences, Medical Statistics,
Biometry and Bioinformatics, University of Milan, Via Vanzetti 5, 20133, Milan,
Italy. danila.coradini@yahoo.it.

BACKGROUND: Mammary epithelial cell identity depends on a set of genes
epigenetically-regulated by maintenance proteins, the best-characterized of which
belong to the Trithorax and Polycomb groups. Perturbations in expression of these
proteins may disrupt cell identity and trigger tumor initiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The pattern of expression of a panel of genes involved in 
control of cell identity and mammary gland remodeling was investigated in two
precancerous lesions, atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) and ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS) and compared to the corresponding histologically normal tissue.
RESULTS: ADH and DCIS showed a close association in overexpression of Polycomb
complex components, silencing of Homeobox A (HOXA) cluster gene, and
overexpression of the genes involved in estrogen signaling, specifically,
forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) and GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) pioneer factors, and
estrogen receptor-1 (ESR1).
CONCLUSION: Our findings support the hypothesis that disruption of epigenetic
control is associated with loss of cell identity and acquisition of a
constitutive estrogen-dependent terminally-differentiated luminal phenotype.

PMID: 24596378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jul;41(7):4463-74. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3317-0. Epub 2014
Mar 5.

Genetic polymorphisms in VDR, ESR1 and ESR2 genes may contribute to
susceptibility to Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis.

Gao Z(1), Fu HJ, Xue JJ, Wu ZX, Zhao LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Elderly Neurology, Heilongjiang Hospital, Zhongshan Road No. 82,
Xiangfang District, Harbin, 150000, People's Republic of China.

Retraction in
    Gao Z, Fu HJ, Xue JJ, Wu ZX, Zhao LB. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Oct;42(10):1457.

We conducted this meta-analysis of relevant case-control studies to investigate
the relationships between genetic polymorphisms in VDR, ESR1 and ESR2 genes to
the susceptibility of Parkinson's disease (PD). A search on electronic databases 
without any language restrictions was conducted: MEDLINE (1966-2013), the
Cochrane Library Database (Issue 12, 2013), EMBASE (1980-2013), CINAHL
(1982-2013), Web of Science (1945-2013) and the Chinese Biomedical Database
(1982-2013). Meta-analysis was performed using the STATA statistical software.
Crude odds ratio (OR) with their 95% confidence interval (95% CI) was calculated.
Fourteen case-control studies with a total of 3,689 PD patients and 4,627 healthy
subjects were included in our meta-analysis. The results of our meta-analysis
demonstrated that the VDR genetic polymorphisms might be closely related to
increased risks of PD (allele model: OR = 1.18, 95% CI 1.09-1.29, P < 0.001;
dominant model: OR = 1.37, 95% CI 1.16-1.63, P < 0.001; respectively), especially
for the polymorphisms rs7976091 and rs10735810. Our findings also illustrated
that ESR1 genetic polymorphisms might increase the risk of PD (allele model: OR =
1.56, 95% CI 1.17-2.07, P = 0.002; recessive model: OR = 1.93, 95 % CI 1.33-2.80,
P < 0.001; homozygous model: OR = 1.35, 95% CI 1.02-1.79, P = 0.038; heterozygous
model: OR = 2.04, 95% CI 1.36-3.07, P = 0.001; respectively), especially for the 
polymorphisms rs2234693 and rs9340799. Furthermore, we found significant
correlations of ESR2 genetic polymorphisms with the risk of PD (allele model: OR 
= 1.78, 95% CI 1.19-2.67, P = 0.005; recessive model: OR = 1.93, 95% CI
1.15-3.27, P = 0.014; homozygous model: OR = 1.77, 95% CI 1.09-2.89, P = 0.022;
heterozygous model: OR = 1.88, 95% CI 1.08-3.27, P = 0.025; respectively),
especially for the rs1256049 polymorphism. Our meta-analysis suggests that
genetic polymorphisms in VDR, ESR1 and ESR2 genes may contribute to increased
risks for PD.

PMID: 24595449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Apr 1;20(7):1724-6. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0067.
Epub 2014 Feb 28.

Estrogen receptor mutations in breast cancer--new focus on an old target.

Segal CV(1), Dowsett M.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre at The
Institute of Cancer Research and Academic Department of Biochemistry, The Royal
Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

Comment on
    Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Apr 1;20(7):1757-67.

Recent studies have provided strong evidence for the emergence of substantial
numbers of constitutively active ESR1 mutations in estrogen receptor-positive
metastatic breast cancer that are undetected in primary disease. Some of these
mutants remain partially sensitive to current anti-estrogen therapies but
effective therapeutics targeted at them may require new approaches.

©2014 AACR.

PMID: 24583794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Gene. 2014 Apr 25;540(1):26-31. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.02.039. Epub 2014 Feb
26.

Identification of an estrogen receptor gene in the natural freshwater snail
Bithynia tentaculata.

Hultin CL(1), Hallgren P(2), Persson A(2), Hansson MC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Environmental and Climate Research (CEC), Lund University,
Sölvegatan 37, SE-223 62 Lund, Sweden. Electronic address:
cecilia.hultin@cec.lu.se. (2)Aquatic Ecology, Department of Biology, Lund
University, Sölvegatan 37, SE-223 62 Lund, Sweden. (3)Centre for Environmental
and Climate Research (CEC), Lund University, Sölvegatan 37, SE-223 62 Lund,
Sweden.

Mollusks have received increasing interest in ecotoxicological studies but so far
the available scientific analyses of how their genes are affected by
anthropogenic pollutants are scarce. The focus of this study is to identify an
estrogen receptor (er) gene in the common prosobranch snail Bithynia tentaculata 
and to test a hypothesis that 17a-Ethinylestradiol (EE2) will modulate er gene
expression after short-term exposure. We set up exposure experiments with a total
of 144 snails, which were collected from a natural population in southern Sweden.
Snails were exposed to either 10ng/L or 100ng/L EE2 during 24h and/or 72h. From
the isolated B. tentaculata RNA we successfully identified and characterized a
novel er gene and phylogenetic analyses strongly indicate that the Bithynia er
gene is an ortholog to the human ERa (ESR1, NR3A1). We found a significant
interaction between EE2-dose and exposure duration on the er's gene expression
(Two-way ANOVA; p=0.04). We also found a significant difference in the gene
expression of the er when comparing the control and 100ng/L treatment groups
after 72h in female snails (One-way ANOVA; p=0.047). The results from this study 
should be useful for future field-related studies of estrogen receptors in
natural populations of mollusks.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24583164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Croat Med J. 2014 Feb;55(1):38-44.

Estrogen receptor 1 gene (TA)n polymorphism is associated with lone atrial
fibrillation in men.

Golubic K(1), malcelj A, Sertic J, Juricic L.

Author information: 
(1)Karlo Golubic, Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, University Hospital
Center, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Kispaticeva 12, 10000 Zagreb,
Croatia, karlo.golubic@gmail.com.

AIM: To determine the association between the number of thymine-adenine (TA)n
dinucleotide repeats in the promoter region of the gene coding for the estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1) and the prevalence of lone atrial fibrillation (AF) in men.
METHODS: We conducted a case-control study involving 89 men with lone AF and 166 
healthy male controls. The ESR1 genotype was established by polymerase chain
reaction and capillary electrophoresis. To assess the association of ESR1
genotype with AF, logistic regression models were built with AF as outcome.
RESULTS: Men with lone AF had significantly greater number of (TA)n repeats of
single alleles than controls (mean ± standard deviation, 19.2 ± 4.2 vs 18 ± 4.3, 
P = 0.010). After adjustment for other factors, a unit-increase in (TA)n repeat
number was associated with a significantly greater likelihood of AF (odds ratio
1.069; 95% confidence interval 1.024-1.116, P=0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that a greater number of (TA)n repeats in the
promoter region of ESR1 is associated with a significantly increased likelihood
of lone atrial fibrillation in men.

PMCID: PMC3944416
PMID: 24577825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Syst Biol Reprod Med. 2014 Jun;60(3):161-4. doi: 10.3109/19396368.2013.877540.
Epub 2014 Feb 25.

The ESR1 gene in unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion.

Pan H(1), Suo P, Liu C, Wang J, Zhou S, Ma X, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Institute for Family Planning , Beijing , China .

Recurrent spontaneous abortion (RSA) is a health problem that affects nearly 1%
of fertile couples. However, the underlying etiology and mechanism(s) remain
elusive. The aim of this study was to investigate estrogen receptor (ESR) 1 gene 
polymorphisms for risk association of unexplained recurrent spontaneous abortion 
(URSA) in the Chinese Han population. The entire coding region of the ESR1 gene
was sequenced from 129 URSA patients and 183 healthy controls. There was a
significant difference between the G allele and GG genotype distributions, of the
ESR1 gene (XbaI) polymorphism, between the URSA and the control groups (<U+03C7>(2) =
14.93, df = 1, p < 0.001, OR = 2.01 95% CI: 1.41-2.88 by allele; <U+03C7>(2) = 12.24, df
= 2, p = 0.002 by genotype). The PvuII polymorphism, C allele frequency was
higher in RSA than in controls (41.9% vs. 34.7%, respectively). Women carrying
C-G haplotype were associated with an increased risk of URSA in this population
(permutation test p value = 0.016, OR = 1.76 95% CI: 1.19-2.59). Estrogen
receptor 1 gene PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms were associated with URSA in a
Chinese Han population. However, independent replication of these associations
are necessary to assure veracity.

PMID: 24568551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cell J. 2014 Summer;16(2):225-30. Epub 2014 May 25.

Lack of Association between ESR1 and CYP1A1 Gene Polymorphisms and Susceptibility
to Uterine Leiomyoma in Female Patients of Iranian Descent.

Taghizade Mortezaee F(1), Tabatabaiefar MA(2), Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori M(1),
Miraj S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical
Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran. (2)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology,
School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(3)Deparmment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hajar Hospital, Shahrekord University
of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran.

Uterine leiomyoma (UL) is the most common benign smooth muscle cell tumor with as
yet unknown etiology and pathogenesis. This study was carried out to investigate 
the association of ESR1-351 A>G, ESR1 -397 T>C and CYP1A1 (Ile462Val)
polymorphisms with UL in female patients of Iranian origin. In this case-control 
study, 276 patients with UL and 156 healthy women were recruited. The genetic
polymorphisms ESR1-351 A>G, ESR1-397 T>C and CYP1A1 (Ile462Val) were genotyped by
polymerase chain reaction- restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).
No significant difference were found in frequencies of both genotypes and alleles
of ESR1-351 A>G, ESR1-397 T>C and CYP1A1 (Ile462Val) polymorphisms between the
two groups (p>0.05). Our findings indicated that these ESR1 and CYP1A1
polymorphisms were not associated with the development of UL in the cases
reported here.

PMCID: PMC4072073
PMID: 24567938  [PubMed]


448. Med Oncol. 2014 Apr;31(4):896. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0896-5. Epub 2014 Feb 22.

Expression profiling of breast cancer patients treated with tamoxifen: prognostic
or predictive significance.

Tabarestani S(1), Ghaderian SM, Rezvani H, Mirfakhraie R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Approximately 70% of breast cancers are estrogen receptor (ER) positive, and
interfering with estrogen action with tamoxifen has been the treatment of choice 
for ER-positive breast cancer patients. However, about a third of patients
treated with tamoxifen will experience a recurrence of cancer. The expression
analysis of selected genes involved in tamoxifen/estrogen and receptor tyrosine
kinase signaling pathways can help to further decipher mechanisms of recurrence
in ER+ tumors and contribute to the development of prognostic and possibly
predictive biomarkers. We selected seven genes (ESR1, CCND1, MYC, HER2, AKT1,
AIB1 and NCOR1), which are components of these pathways. A case-control study was
designed. All patients in the control group had received standard adjuvant
tamoxifen treatment for 5 years without any evidence of recurrence. Patients in
the case group had experienced an early recurrence of cancer while receiving
tamoxifen treatment. Expression levels of selected genes in both groups were
compared. Expression levels of CCND1 (p < 0.001), HER2 (p < 0.001), AKT1 (p =
0.038) and AIB1 (p = 0.004) were significantly higher in recurrent tumors
compared to non-recurrent tumors, while expression levels of NCOR1 (p < 0.001)
were significantly lower in recurrent tumors. In multivariable analysis, CCND1 (p
< 0.001), HER2 (p = 0.003), AIB1 (p = 0.036) and NCOR1 (p = 0.002) remained
significant predictors of recurrence. Expression levels of CCND1, HER2, AIB1 and 
NCOR1 were detected as independent predictors of recurrence in this cohort of
tamoxifen-treated patients. Further work should be done to validate the
predictive value of this gene profile for tamoxifen response.

PMID: 24563328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Oct 16;7 Suppl 3:S6. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-S3-S6.

Identification of novel microRNA regulatory pathways associated with
heterogeneous prostate cancer.

Tang Y, Yan W, Chen J, Luo C, Kaipia A, Shen B.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are potential regulators that contribute to the
pathogenesis of cancer. Microarray technologies have been widely used to
characterize aberrant miRNA expression patterns in cancer. Nevertheless, the
miRNAs expression signatures identified for a same cancer differs among
laboratories due to the cancer heterogeneity. In addition, how the deregulated
miRNAs coordinately contribute to the tumourigenic process of prostate cancer
remains elusive.
RESULTS: We evaluated five outlier detection algorithms that take into account
the heterogeneity of cancer samples. ORT was selected as the best method and
applied to four prostate cancer associated microRNA expression datasets. After
microRNA target prediction and pathway enrichment mapping, 38 Gene Ontology
terms, 16 KEGG pathways and 99 GeneGO pathways are found putative prostate cancer
associated. Comparison with our previous studies, we identified two putative
novel pathways important in prostate cancer. The two novel pathways are 1)
ligand-independent activation of ESR1 and ESR2 and 2) membrane-bound ESR1:
interaction with growth factors signalling.
CONCLUSIONS: We proved that expression signatures of at the pathway level well
address the cancer heterogeneity and are more consistent than at the miRNA/gene
levels. Based on this observation, we identified putative novel microRNA
regulatory pathways which will help us to elucidate the cooperative function of
different microRNAs in prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3852103
PMID: 24555436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Endocrinol. 2014 Apr 22;221(2):201-13. doi: 10.1530/JOE-13-0475. Print 2014
May.

Bisphenol A enhances kisspeptin neurons in anteroventral periventricular nucleus 
of female mice.

Wang X(1), Chang F, Bai Y, Chen F, Zhang J, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine Department of Physiology,
Nanjing Medical University, Hanzhong Road 140, Nanjing 210029, China MOE-Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Children's Environmental Health, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China.

Bisphenol-A (BPA), an environmental estrogen, adversely affects female
reproductive health. However, the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown.
We found that oral administration (p.o.) of BPA (20 <U+200A>µg/kg) to adult female mice 
at proestrus, but not at estrus or diestrus, significantly increased the levels
of plasma E2, LH and FSH, and Gnrh mRNA within 6 <U+200A>h. The administration of BPA at
proestrus, but not at diestrus, could elevate the levels of Kiss1 mRNA and
kisspeptin protein in anteroventral periventricular nucleus (AVPV) within 6 <U+200A>h.
In contrast, the level of Kiss1 mRNA in arcuate nucleus (ARC) was hardly altered 
by BPA administration. In addition, at proestrus, a single injection (i.c.v.) of 
BPA dose-dependently enhanced the AVPV-kisspeptin expression within 6 <U+200A>h, this
was sensitive to E2 depletion by ovariectomy and an estrogen receptor a (ERa)
antagonist. Similarly, the injection of BPA (i.c.v.) at proestrus could elevate
the levels of plasma E2, LH, and Gnrh mRNA within 6 <U+200A>h in a dose-dependent
manner, which was blocked by antagonists of GPR54 or ERa. Injection of BPA
(i.c.v.) at proestrus failed to alter the timing and peak concentration of
LH-surge generation. In ovariectomized mice, the application of E2 induced a
dose-dependent increase in the AVPV-Kiss1 mRNA level, indicating 'E2-induced
positive feedback', which was enhanced by BPA injection (i.c.v.). The levels of
Era (Esr1) and Erß (Esr2) mRNAs in AVPV and ARC did not differ significantly
between vehicle-and BPA-treated groups. This study provides in vivo evidence that
exposure of adult female mice to a low dose of BPA disrupts the
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal reproductive endocrine system through enhancing
AVPV-kisspeptin expression and release.

PMID: 24532816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Chronobiol Int. 2014 Jun;31(5):637-44. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2014.885528. Epub
2014 Feb 14.

Estrogen receptor 1 modulates circadian rhythms in adult female mice.

Blattner MS(1), Mahoney MM.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine .

Estradiol influences the level and distribution of daily activity, the duration
of the free-running period, and the behavioral phase response to light pulses.
However, the mechanisms by which estradiol regulates daily and circadian rhythms 
are not fully understood. We tested the hypothesis that estrogens modulate daily 
activity patterns via both classical and "non-classical" actions at the estrogen 
receptor subtype 1 (ESR1). We used female transgenic mice with mutations in their
estrogen response pathways; ESR1 knock-out (ERKO) mice and "non-classical"
estrogen receptor knock-in (NERKI) mice. NERKI mice have an ESR1 receptor with a 
mutation in the estrogen-response-element binding domain, allowing only actions
via "non-classical" genomic and second messenger pathways. Ovariectomized female 
NERKI, ERKO, and wildtype (WT) mice were given a subcutaneous capsule with low-
or high-dose estradiol and compared with counterparts with no hormone
replacement. We measured wheel-running activity in a light:dark cycle and
constant darkness, and the behavioral phase response to light pulses given at
different points during the subjective day and night. Estradiol increased average
daily wheel-running, consolidated activity to the dark phase, and shortened the
endogenous period in WT, but not NERKI and ERKO mice. The timing of activity
onset during entrainment was advanced in all estradiol-treated animals regardless
of genotype suggesting an ESR1-independent mechanism. We propose that estradiol
modifies period, activity level, and distribution of activity via classical
actions of ESR1 whereas an ESR1 independent mechanism regulates the phase of
rhythms.

PMID: 24527952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Reprod Sci. 2014 Feb 10;21(8):1006-1014. [Epub ahead of print]

Apolipoprotein E Induction in Syrian Hamster Testis Following Tributyltin
Exposure: A Potential Mechanism of Male Infertility.

Kanimozhi V(1), Palanivel K(1), Kadalmani B(2), Krikun G(3), Taylor HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, School of life Sciences, Bharathidasan
University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India. (2)Department of Animal Science, 
School of life Sciences, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu,
India kadalmanibdu@rediffmail.com. (3)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology &
Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT,
USA.

Tributyltin (TBT) is a common environmental contaminant used as the active
ingredient in many products such as a biocides, wood preservatives, disinfecting 
agents, and antifouling paints. The TBT is a known endocrine disruptor. The aim
of the current investigation was to determine the toxicity of TBT in the
reproductive tract of adult male Syrian hamsters and to ascertain whether this
compound results in untoward effects on apolipoprotein E (ApoE), a lipoprotein
central to sex hormone synthesis. The TBT was administered orally to male Syrian 
hamsters at doses of 50, 100, and 150 ppm/kg for 65 days of treatment. We
determined body weight, testis weight, sperm count, sperm morphology, testis
histology, ApoE expression, serum lipid profile, testosterone level,
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR), and steroid hormone receptor
expression compared to vehicle-treated controls. High doses of TBT significantly 
affected each of these parameters in Syrian hamsters. Weight and morphology of
the testis were altered as well as sperm production. Real-time
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed that expression
of ApoE messenger RNA was upregulated in testes from TBT-treated groups compared 
with controls while the expression of androgen receptor, FSHR, estrogen receptor 
a (ESR1), and estrogen receptor ß (ESR2) was decreased. We posit that exposure to
TBT hinders intracellular cholesterol transport resulting in abnormal sex steroid
biosynthesis and subsequent spermatogenic defects. Importantly, these effects may
account for the decreased level of normal sperm observed in hamsters exposed to
TBT.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 24516040  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


453. Aquat Toxicol. 2014 Mar;148:211-20. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2014.01.010. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

Molecular signatures in rainbow darter (Etheostoma caeruleum) inhabiting an
urbanized river reach receiving wastewater effluents.

Bahamonde PA(1), Tetreault GR(2), McMaster ME(3), Servos MR(4), Martyniuk CJ(5), 
Munkittrick KR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Rivers Institute and Department of Biology, University of New
Brunswick, Saint John, NB, Canada E2L 4L5. Electronic address:
paulina.bahamonde@unb.ca. (2)Emerging Methods Branch, Aquatic Contaminant
Research Division, Water Science and Technology Directorate, Environment Canada, 
Burlington, ON, Canada L7R 4A6; University of Waterloo, Department of Biology,
Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1. (3)Emerging Methods Branch, Aquatic Contaminant
Research Division, Water Science and Technology Directorate, Environment Canada, 
Burlington, ON, Canada L7R 4A6. (4)University of Waterloo, Department of Biology,
Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1. (5)Canadian Rivers Institute and Department of
Biology, University of New Brunswick, Saint John, NB, Canada E2L 4L5.

Rainbow darter (Etheostoma caeruleum) is a small benthic fish species found in
North America that are abundant and distributed throughout the Grand River
watershed, ON, Canada. Rainbow darter exhibit intersex in males at sites adjacent
to municipal wastewater effluents (MWWE). In October 2010, female and male
rainbow darter were collected at 3 sites (1 upstream reference and 2 downstream
exposed sites) in the Grand River near the cities of Kitchener and Waterloo. The 
primary objectives of this research were (1) to characterize the responses of
whole organism endpoints (i.e. condition factor (K), liversomatic (LSI) and
gonadosomatic index (GSI), histopathology) to MWWEs and (2) to identify
transcripts showing altered steady state abundance with exposure to MWWE in fish 
inhabiting municipal wastewater effluent-exposed areas. Genes measured in this
study included vitellogenin, Sry-box containing protein 9 (sox9), forkhead box L2
(foxl2), doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1 (dmrt1), cytochrome
P450, family 11, subfamily A, polypeptide 1 (cyp11a) as well as estrogen (esr1,
esrb) and androgen (ar) receptors. There were no changes in condition factor;
however, there was a significant increase in LSI and a decrease in GSI in fish
inhabiting downstream environments when compared with fish collected from the
reference site. Males had a high incidence (~ 70%) of intersex in downstream
sites; characterized by the presence of oocytes within the testis. In the gonad, 
there were sex specific differences for genes related to sexual differentiation; 
dmrt1 was only expressed in males whereas foxl2 and sox9 were highly expressed in
females compared to males. Expression levels of ar and esr1 were higher in
females than males. Conversely, esrb was not differentially expressed between
sexes or among sites. There were no differences detected for the genes
investigated within sex among sites. This study is the first to report on gene
expression changes in the rainbow darter, with emphasis on the differences in
transcript abundance between sexes and how these changes relate to exposures to
MWWEs. Molecular approaches are being investigated for their potential
application to field ecotoxicology, and molecular bioassays for relevant,
sentinel species in environmental monitoring programs are required to better
understand the impact of anthropogenic impacts on species at risk in river
systems.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24513783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Gene. 2014 Apr 10;539(1):68-74. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.01.061. Epub 2014 Feb 8.

Constructing regulatory networks to identify biomarkers for insulin resistance.

Yang Y(1), Wang Y(2), Zhou K(3), Hong A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Jinan University, College of Life Science and Technology, 601 Huangpu Blvd,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, China. (2)United States Department of
Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, Western Regional Research Center,
Albany, CA 94710, USA. (3)The Affiliated Hospital of Luzhou Medical College, 25
Taiping Ave., Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, China. (4)Jinan University, College of Life
Science and Technology, 601 Huangpu Blvd, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, China.
Electronic address: tha@jnu.edu.cn.

Insulin resistance (IR) is a physiological condition in which cells fail to
respond to the insulin hormone. Despite advances in the diagnosis and treatment
of IR, novel molecular targets are still needed to improve the accuracy of
diagnosis and the outcomes of therapy. Here, we present a systems approach to
identify molecular biomarkers for IR. We downloaded the gene expression profile
of IR from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), generated a regulatory network by
mapping co-expressed genes to transcription factors (TFs) and calculated the
regulatory impact factor of each transcription factor. Finally, we selected a
list of potential molecular targets that could be used as therapeutic targets or 
diagnostic biomarkers, including ETS1, AR, ESR1 and Myc. Our studies identified
multiple TFs that could play an important role in the pathogenesis of IR and
provided a systems understanding of the potential relationships among these
genes. Our study has the potential to aid in the understanding of IR and provides
a basis for IR biomarker discovery.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24512691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Anticancer Res. 2014 Feb;34(2):723-7.

ESR1 promoter methylation in squamous cell cervical cancer.

Kirn V(1), Zaharieva I, Heublein S, Thangarajah F, Friese K, Mayr D, Jeschke U.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cologne, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kerpener Str. 
34, 50931 Cologne, Germany. verena.kirn@uk-koeln.de.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Estrogen receptor-alpha is usually expressed in normal cervical
tissue, but its presence is decreased or absent in invasive cervical cancer
indicating that its expression is lost during development of invasive cervical
cancer. The aim of the present study was to investigate ESR1 promoter methylation
in cervical cancer and correlate methylation status with clinico-pathological
parameters.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty patients treated for cervical cancer were included
in the study. Isolation and bisulfite treatment of genomic DNA from cervical
cancer tissue was performed by commercially-available kits. Methylated ESR1
promoter sequences were detected by quantitative real-time methylation-specific
PCR.
RESULTS: Methylation status did not present differences regarding age
at-diagnosis, FIGO stage, grade, BMI and overall survival for all patients, but
within the subgroup of non-keratinizing squamous cell cancer methylation status
correlated with grading (p=0.047).
CONCLUSION: Methylation of the ESR1 promoter does not seem to be of any
prognostic relevance, but is associated with higher tumor grading of cervical
cancer patients.

PMID: 24511005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Breast Cancer. 2015 Sep;22(5):544-51. doi: 10.1007/s12282-014-0518-2. Epub 2014
Feb 9.

Evaluating 17 breast cancer susceptibility loci in the Nashville breast health
study.

Han MR(1), Deming-Halverson S, Cai Q, Wen W, Shrubsole MJ, Shu XO, Zheng W, Long 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology
Center Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
2525 West End Avenue, 8th Floor, Nashville, TN, 37203-1738, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies have discovered multiple genetic loci
associated with breast cancer risk. Investigating these loci would be helpful to 
evaluate previous findings and identify causal variants for breast cancer. We
evaluated index SNPs in 17 of these loci in a study of 1,511 cases and 1,454
controls of European descent.
METHODS: We investigated the overall association with breast cancer and among
subtypes defined as ER+ (estrogen receptor positive), ER- (estrogen receptor
negative) and triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Combined effects of SNPs on
breast cancer risk were assessed via a genetic risk score. We evaluated the
contribution of both genetic variants and traditional risk factors to a breast
cancer risk assessment model.
RESULTS: Five of the 17 SNPs were significantly associated (P = 0.05) with
overall breast cancer in the same direction as previously reported: rs13387042
(2q35/TNP1), rs4973768 (3p24/SLC4A7), rs2046210 (6q25/ESR1), rs1219648
(10q26/FGFR2), and rs4784227 (16q12/TOX3). When stratified by breast cancer
subtype, all five SNPs were associated (P < 0.05) with ER+ cancer, three with ER-
cancer (rs13387042, rs1219648, and rs4784227), and one with TNBC (rs1219648). A
GRS, based on those five significant SNPs, showed strong association with overall
breast cancer with ORs (95 % CI) of 1.48 (1.22-1.79), 1.85 (1.52-2.25) and 2.26
(1.82-2.80), respectively, for each quartile, (P = 2.0 × 10(-15)). Traditional
risk factors, including previous benign breast disease, breast cancer family
history and parity, were significantly associated with breast cancer risk in the 
present study. These factors, together with the GRS, were used to build a breast 
cancer risk assessment model with a c statistic of 0.6321 from receiver operating
characteristic analysis. The contribution of the GRS to the model was greater
than prior benign breast disease, family history and parity with the c statistic 
change of 0.0374, 0.0324, 0.0103, 0.0012, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that five SNPs were associated with overall
breast cancer, with stronger association for ER+ than ER- cancer as previously
reported, and suggests that a risk assessment model incorporating the GRS from
five loci is useful in identifying women at high risk of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4127164 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 24510657  [PubMed - in process]


457. Gynecol Oncol. 2014 Mar;132(3):709-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2014.02.001. Epub
2014 Feb 6.

Credentialing of DNA methylation assays for human genes as diagnostic biomarkers 
of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia in high-risk HPV positive women.

Vasiljevic N(1), Scibior-Bentkowska D(1), Brentnall AR(1), Cuzick J(1), Lorincz
AT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Queen Mary University of London, Centre for Cancer Prevention, Wolfson
Institute of Preventive Medicine, Barts and The London School of Medicine,
London, EC1M 6BQ, United Kingdom. (2)Queen Mary University of London, Centre for 
Cancer Prevention, Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Barts and The London
School of Medicine, London, EC1M 6BQ, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
a.lorincz@qmul.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: Testing for high risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) is increasing;
however due to limitations in specificity there remains a need for better triage 
tests. Research efforts have focused recently on methylation of human genes which
show promise as diagnostic classifiers.
METHODS: Methylation of 26 genes: APC, CADM1, CCND2, CDH13, CDKN2A, CTNNB1,
DAPK1, DPYS, EDNRB, EPB41L3, ESR1, GSTP1, HIN1, JAM3, LMX1, MAL, MDR1, PAX1,
PTGS2, RARB, RASSF1, SLIT2, SOX1, SPARC, TERT and TWIST1 was measured by
pyrosequencing in cytology specimens from a pilot set of women with normal or
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3 (CIN3) histology. Six genes were
selected for testing in Predictors 1, a colposcopy referral study comprising 799 
women. The three genes EPB41L3, DPYS and MAL were further tested in a second
colposcopy referral study, Predictors 2, comprising 884 women.
RESULTS: The six genes selected from the pilot: EPB41L3, EDNRB, LMX1, DPYS, MAL
and CADM1 showed significantly elevated methylation in CIN2 and CIN3 (CIN2/3)
versus =CIN1 in Predictors 1 (p<0.01). Highest methylation was observed in cancer
tissues. EPB41L3 methylation was the best single classifier of CIN2/3 in both
HR-HPV positive (p<0.0001) and negative samples (p=0.02). Logistic regression
modeling showed that other genes did not add significantly to EPB41L3 and in
Predictors 2, its classifier value was validated with AUC 0.69 (95% CI
0.65-0.73).
CONCLUSION: Several methylated genes show promise for detecting CIN2/3 of which
EPB41L3 seems the best. Methylated human gene biomarkers used in combination may 
be clinically useful for triage of women with HR-HPV infections.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3989115
PMID: 24508839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Endocrinology. 2014 May;155(5):1991-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-2150. Epub 2014 Feb
7.

Generation of Esr1-knockout rats using zinc finger nuclease-mediated genome
editing.

Rumi MA(1), Dhakal P, Kubota K, Chakraborty D, Lei T, Larson MA, Wolfe MW, Roby
KF, Vivian JL, Soares MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Reproductive Health and Regenerative Medicine; Departments of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (M.A.K.R., P.D., K.K., D.C., T.L., J.L.V.,
M.J.S.), Molecular and Integrative Physiology (M.A.L., M.W.W.), and Anatomy and
Cell Biology (K.F.R.), University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas
66160.

Estrogens play pivotal roles in development and function of many organ systems,
including the reproductive system. We have generated estrogen receptor 1
(Esr1)-knockout rats using zinc finger nuclease (ZFN) genome targeting. mRNAs
encoding ZFNs targeted to exon 3 of Esr1 were microinjected into single-cell rat 
embryos and transferred to pseudopregnant recipients. Of 17 live births, 5 had
biallelic and 1 had monoallelic Esr1 mutations. A founder with monoallelic
mutations was backcrossed to a wild-type rat. Offspring possessed only wild-type 
Esr1 alleles or wild-type alleles and Esr1 alleles containing either 482 bp
(<U+0394>482) or 223 bp (<U+0394>223) deletions, indicating mosaicism in the founder. These
heterozygous mutants were bred for colony expansion, generation of homozygous
mutants, and phenotypic characterization. The <U+0394>482 Esr1 allele yielded altered
transcript processing, including the absence of exon 3, aberrant splicing of exon
2 and 4, and a frameshift that generated premature stop codons located
immediately after the codon for Thr157. ESR1 protein was not detected in
homozygous <U+0394>482 mutant uteri. ESR1 disruption affected sexually dimorphic
postnatal growth patterns and serum levels of gonadotropins and sex steroid
hormones. Both male and female Esr1-null rats were infertile. Esr1-null males had
small testes with distended and dysplastic seminiferous tubules, whereas
Esr1-null females possessed large polycystic ovaries, thread-like uteri, and
poorly developed mammary glands. In addition, uteri of Esr1-null rats did not
effectively respond to 17ß-estradiol treatment, further demonstrating that the
<U+0394>482 Esr1 mutation created a null allele. This rat model provides a new
experimental tool for investigating the pathophysiology of estrogen action.

PMCID: PMC3990838
PMID: 24506075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 5;9(2):e87867. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087867. eCollection 
2014.

Expression patterns of microRNAs in porcine endometrium and their potential roles
in embryo implantation and placentation.

Su L(1), Liu R(1), Cheng W(1), Zhu M(1), Li X(1), Zhao S(1), Yu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry
of Education, Huazhong (Central China) Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, PR 
China.

Implantation and placentation are critical steps for successful pregnancy. The
pig has a non-invasive placenta and the uterine luminal epithelium is intact
throughout pregnancy. To better understand the regulation mechanisms in functions
of endometrium at three certain gestational stages that are critical for
embryo/fetal loss in pigs, we characterized microRNA (miRNA) expression profiles 
in the endometrium on days 15 (implantation period), 26 (placentation period) and
50 (mid-gestation period) of gestation. The differentially expressed miRNAs
across gestational days were detected and of which, 65 miRNAs were grouped into 4
distinct categories according to the similarities in their temporal expression
patterns: (1) categories A and B contain majority of miRNAs (51 miRNAs, such as
the miR-181 family) that were down- or up-regulated between gestational days 15
and 26, respectively; (2) categories C and D (14 miRNAs) consist miRNAs that were
down- or up-regulated between gestational days 26 and 50, respectively. The
expression patterns represented by eleven miRNAs were validated by qPCR. The
majority of miRNAs were in categories A and B, suggesting that these miRNAs were 
involved in regulation of embryo implantation and placentation. The pathway
analysis revealed that the predicted targets were involved in several pathways,
such as focal adhesion, cell proliferation and tissue remolding. Furthermore, we 
identified that genes well-known to affect embryo implantation in pigs, namely
SPP1, ITGB3 and ESR1, contain the miR-181a or miR-181c binding sites using the
luciferase reporter system. The present study revealed distinctive miRNA
expression patterns in the porcine endometrium during the implantation,
placentation or mid-gestation periods. Additionally, our results suggested that
miR-181a and miR-181c likely play important roles in the regulation of genes and 
pathways that are known to be involved in embryo implantation and placentation in
pigs.

PMCID: PMC3914855
PMID: 24505325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Syst Biol Reprod Med. 2014 Apr;60(2):89-97. doi: 10.3109/19396368.2014.885995.
Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Alterations in the estrogen environment of the testis contribute to declining
sperm production in aging rats.

Clarke M(1), Pearl CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Western Michigan University , Kalamazoo, MI
, USA.

Testicular function, specifically, production of testosterone by Leydig cells,
diminishes during aging. Estradiol is also produced by the testis and potentially
acts in an autocrine or paracrine manner to help regulate spermatogenesis.
However, changes in estradiol concentration or receptor expression within the
testis during aging remain unclear. This study was designed to test the
hypothesis that the estrogen environment of the testis is altered during aging
and that these changes are associated with declining sperm production. Sprague
Dawley rats were examined at three, 15, 18, and 21 months of age to detail
changes in sperm production and testicular concentration of testosterone and
estradiol; five rats were used at three and 21 months and three rats were used at
15 and 18 months. Daily sperm production declined 49% from 15 to 21 months of
age. Testicular concentrations of estradiol declined 53% from 15 to 21 months of 
age; testosterone concentrations were not significantly different. These results 
suggest that declines in intra-testicular estradiol may contribute to declining
sperm production. We further tested our hypothesis by treating rats once every
third day with a subcutaneous injection of estradiol valerate (1<U+2009>µg/kg) from 15
to 18 months of age. Estradiol was increased 54% in treated animals while
testosterone was unaffected. Estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) expression was
significantly reduced from 15 to 18 months and expression in estrogen-treated
animals was significantly higher than age-matched controls. Additionally, ESR1
expression in 18 month treated animals was not different from 15 months of age.
Importantly, daily sperm production in 18 month treated animals was 22% higher
than age-matched controls; thus, treatment prevented approximately half of the
decline observed in control animals. Collectively, our results suggest that
estrogen is involved in maintaining optimum spermatogenesis in adult rats and
that estrogen treatment may attenuate the age-associated loss in sperm
production.

PMID: 24499511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e87697. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087697. eCollection
2014.

Promoter DNA methylation of farnesoid X receptor and pregnane X receptor
modulates the intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy phenotype.

Cabrerizo R(1), Castaño GO(2), Burgueño AL(3), Fernández Gianotti T(3), Gonzalez 
Lopez Ledesma MM(4), Flichman D(4), Pirola CJ(3), Sookoian S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Hepatology, Institute of Medical Research
A Lanari-IDIM, University of Buenos Aires-National Council of Scientific and
Technological Research (CONICET), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Liver Unit, Medicine and Surgery Department, Hospital Abel Zubizarreta, Ciudad
Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina ; Research Council in Health, Ciudad Autónoma
de Buenos Aires, Argentina. (3)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biology of
the Complex Diseases, Institute of Medical Research A Lanari-IDIM, University of 
Buenos Aires-National Council of Scientific and Technological Research (CONICET),
Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. (4)Department of Virology, School of 
Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos 
Aires, Argentina. (5)Department of Clinical and Molecular Hepatology, Institute
of Medical Research A Lanari-IDIM, University of Buenos Aires-National Council of
Scientific and Technological Research (CONICET), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires,
Argentina ; Liver Unit, Medicine and Surgery Department, Hospital Abel
Zubizarreta, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina ; Research Council in
Health, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is a multifactorial liver
disorder which pathogenesis involves the interplay among abnormal bile acid (BA) 
levels, sex hormones, environmental factors, and genetic susceptibility. The
dynamic nature of ICP that usually resolves soon after delivery suggests the
possibility that its pathobiology is under epigenetic modulation. We explored the
status of white blood peripheral cells-DNA methylation of CpG-enriched sites at
the promoter of targeted genes (FXR/NR1H4, PXR/NR1I2, NR1I3, ESR1, and ABCC2) in 
a sample of 88 ICP patients and 173 healthy pregnant women in the third trimester
of their pregnancies. CpG dinucleotides at the gene promoter of nuclear receptors
subfamily 1 members and ABCC2 transporter were highly methylated during healthy
pregnancy. We observed significant differences at the distal (-1890) and proximal
promoter (-358) CpG sites of the FXR/NR1H4 and at the distal PXR/NR1I2 (-1224)
promoter, which were consistently less methylated in ICP cases when compared with
controls. In addition, we observed that methylation at FXR/NR1H4-1890 and
PXR/NR1I2-1224 promoter sites was highly and positively correlated with BA
profiling, particularly, conjugated BAs. Conversely, methylation level at the
proximal FXR/NR1H4-358 CpG site was significantly and negatively correlated with 
the primary cholic and secondary deoxycholic acid. In vitro exploration showed
that epiallopregnanolone sulfate, a reported FXR inhibitor, regulates the
transcriptional activity of FXR/NR1H4 but seems to be not involved in the
methylation changes. In conclusion, the identification of epigenetic marks in
target genes provides a basis for the understanding of adverse liver-related
pregnancy outcomes, including ICP.

PMCID: PMC3909199
PMID: 24498169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Indian J Hum Genet. 2013 Oct;19(4):408-11. doi: 10.4103/0971-6866.124366.

Genetic polymorphisms of estrogen receptor alpha and catechol-O-methyltransferase
genes in Turkish patients with familial prostate carcinoma.

Pazarbasi A(1), Yilmaz MB(1), Alptekin D(1), Luleyap U(1), Tansug Z(2), Ozpak
L(1), Izmirli M(3), Onatoglu-Arikan D(1), Kocaturk-Sel S(1), Erkoc MA(1), Turgut 
O(1), Bereketoglu C(1), Tunc E(1), Akbal E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Cukurova
University, Adana, Turkey. (2)Department of Urology, Faculty of Medicine,
Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey. (3)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Bezmi Alem University, Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: Estrogen is one of the most crucial hormones participating in the
proliferation and carcinogenesis of the prostate glands. Genetic polymorphisms in
the estrogen metabolism pathway might be involved in the risk of prostate
carcinoma development. We evaluated the association between genetic polymorphisms
in estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) genes
and the risk of developing familial prostate carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, 34 cases with prostate carcinoma whose
first-degree relatives had prostate carcinoma and 30 healthy age-matched male
controls were enrolled. The genotypes of ESR1 and COMT genes were analyzed
employing polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism
method. 34 cases with prostate carcinoma, whose first degree relatives had
prostate carcinoma and 14 age-matched male controls were enrolled to analyze the 
genotype of these two genes.
RESULTS: Among control patients, the ESR1 PvuII genotypes of C/C, C/T and T/T
were observed in 37%, 26% and 37%, respectively, whereas the C/C, C/T and T/T
genotypes were observed in 18%, 41% and 41% of case patients, respectively. Among
controls, the ESR1 PvuII allele frequencies of C and T were equally observed,
whereas the C and T allele frequencies were observed in 38% and 62% of patients, 
respectively. Among ESR1 PvuII genotypes there were not any significant
difference in terms of genotype (P = 0.199) and allele (P = 0.181) frequencies.
Among controls, the ESR1 XbaI genotypes of G/G, G/A and A/A were observed in 33%,
37% and 33%, respectively, whereas the G/G, G/A and A/A genotypes were observed
in 12%, 47% and 41% of patients, respectively. Among controls, the ESR1 XbaI
allele frequencies of A and G were observed equally, respectively, whereas the A 
and G frequencies were observed in 65% and 35% of patients, respectively. Among
ESR1 <U+03A7> baI, there was not any significant difference in terms of genotype (P =
0.111) and allele (P = 0.093) frequencies. But the C/C genotype of the PvuII site
and G/G genotype of the XbaI site in the ESR1 gene were associated significantly 
with the risk of developing prostate carcinoma. The G/G, G/A and A/A genotypes of
the COMT gene were observed in 50%, 29% and 21% of control patients and in 53%,
21% and 26% of case patients, respectively. The A and G allele frequencies of the
COMT gene were observed in 36.7%, 63.3% of control patients and in 36.8%, 63.2%
of case patients, respectively. In COMT gene, there was not any significant
difference in terms of genotype (P = 0.843) and allele (P = 0.991) frequencies.
But the G/A genotype of the COMT gene had a weak tendency toward increased risk.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms of ESR1 gene in the estrogen metabolism pathway were
associated significantly with familial prostate carcinoma risk. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms of low-penetrance genes are targets for understanding the genetic
susceptibility of familial prostate carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3897134
PMID: 24497704  [PubMed]


463. BMC Cancer. 2014 Feb 4;14:59. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-59.

ESR1 gene promoter region methylation in free circulating DNA and its correlation
with estrogen receptor protein expression in tumor tissue in breast cancer
patients.

Martínez-Galán J(1), Torres-Torres B, Núñez MI, López-Peñalver J, Del Moral R,
Ruiz De Almodóvar JM, Menjón S, Concha A, Chamorro C, Ríos S, Delgado JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves,
University of Granada, Avenida de las Fuerzas Armadas s/n, 18011 Granada, Spain. 
jmgalan22@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Tumor expression of estrogen receptor (ER) is an important marker of 
prognosis, and is predictive of response to endocrine therapy in breast cancer.
Several studies have observed that epigenetic events, such methylation of
cytosines and deacetylation of histones, are involved in the complex mechanisms
that regulate promoter transcription. However, the exact interplay of these
factors in transcription activity is not well understood. In this study, we
explored the relationship between ER expression status in tumor tissue samples
and the methylation of the 5' CpG promoter region of the estrogen receptor gene
(ESR1) isolated from free circulating DNA (fcDNA) in plasma samples from breast
cancer patients.
METHODS: Patients (n = 110) with non-metastatic breast cancer had analyses
performed of ER expression (luminal phenotype in tumor tissue, by
immunohistochemistry method), and the ESR1-DNA methylation status (fcDNA in
plasma, by quantitative methylation specific PCR technique).
RESULTS: Our results showed a significant association between presence of
methylated ESR1 in patients with breast cancer and ER negative status in the
tumor tissue (p = 0.0179). There was a trend towards a higher probability of
ESR1-methylation in those phenotypes with poor prognosis i.e. 80% of triple
negative patients, 60% of HER2 patients, compared to 28% and 5.9% of patients
with better prognosis such as luminal A and luminal B, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Silencing, by methylation, of the promoter region of the ESR1 affects
the expression of the estrogen receptor protein in tumors of breast cancer
patients; high methylation of ESR1-DNA is associated with estrogen receptor
negative status which, in turn, may be implicated in the patient's resistance to 
hormonal treatment in breast cancer. As such, epigenetic markers in plasma may be
of interest as new targets for anticancer therapy, especially with respect to
endocrine treatment.

PMCID: PMC3922625
PMID: 24495356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Mol Hum Reprod. 2014 Jun;20(6):550-66. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gau010. Epub 2014 Jan 
30.

The transcriptomic and proteomic effects of ectopic overexpression of miR-30d in 
human endometrial epithelial cells.

Moreno-Moya JM(1), Vilella F(2), Martínez S(1), Pellicer A(1), Simón C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad (FIVI) and Instituto
Universitario IVI/INCLIVA, Valencia University, Paterna, Spain. (2)Fundación
Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad (FIVI) and Instituto Universitario
IVI/INCLIVA, Valencia University, Paterna, Spain felipe.vilella@ivi.es.
(3)Fundación Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad (FIVI) and Instituto
Universitario IVI/INCLIVA, Valencia University, Paterna, Spain Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA.

miR-30d is known to be up-regulated during the acquisition of receptivity in the 
endometrium. In order to determine the transcriptomic and proteomic changes which
occur after transient overexpression of miR-30d in primary endometrial epithelial
cells, in vitro cultured human endometrial epithelial cells (hEECs) were studied 
experimentally. Two different miRNAs (scramble versus mimic; n = 15) were
transiently transfected into primary hEECs from four different patients and were 
evaluated for mRNA and protein expression using Agilent's gene expression
microarray and iTRAQ analysis techniques, respectively. A set of differentially
expressed mRNAs were validated by qPCR and several differentially expressed
proteins were validated by western blot. Finally, methylation differential
immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) was used to validate the epigenetic changes in the
H19 gene. The results showed that transient transfection with miR-30d miRNA
induced the differential mRNA-expression of 176 genes (75 up-regulated and 101
down-regulated). Several of them have been associated with reproductive and
endocrine system disorders, tissue development, and are implicated in epithelial 
cell proliferation. Also, the down-regulation of some genes such as H19 and
N-methyltransferase (NNMT) may suggest that epigenetic alterations are induced.
Furthermore, upstream effects of genes regulated by the estrogen receptor alpha 1
(ESR1) transcription factor have been predicted. Proteomic analysis identified
2290 proteins, of which 108 were differentially expressed (47 up-regulated and 61
down-regulated). Among these differentially expressed proteins DNA methyl
transferase (DNMT)1 was found to be up-regulated; this protein participates in
the maintenance of DNA methylation, supporting an epigenetic role for miR-30d.
Finally MeDIP showed an increase in methylation in the H19 DMR region. In
conclusion transient in vitro overexpression of the receptivity-up-regulated
miRNA miR-30d in hEECs seems to activate genes which are associated with hormonal
response and the epigenetic status of these cells.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24489115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014;18(2):212-6.

Partial least squares based gene expression analysis in estrogen receptor
positive and negative breast tumors.

Ma W(1), Zhang TF, Lu P, Lu SH.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Department, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
China. shihsin_l@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is categorized into two broad groups: estrogen receptor
positive (ER+) and ER negative (ER-) groups. Previous study proposed that under
trastuzumab-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy, tumor initiating cell (TIC) featured 
ER- tumors response better than ER+ tumors. Exploration of the molecular
difference of these two groups may help developing new therapeutic strategies,
especially for ER- patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: With gene expression profile from the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database, we performed partial least squares (PLS) based analysis, 
which is more sensitive than common variance/regression analysis.
RESULTS: We acquired 512 differentially expressed genes. Four pathways were found
to be enriched with differentially expressed genes, involving immune system,
metabolism and genetic information processing process. Network analysis
identified five hub genes with degrees higher than 10, including APP, ESR1,
SMAD3, HDAC2, and PRKAA1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide new understanding for the molecular difference 
between TIC featured ER- and ER+ breast tumors with the hope offer supports for
therapeutic studies.

PMID: 24488910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Fertil Steril. 2014 Feb;101(2):323-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2013.12.022.

Aromatase and estrogen receptor a deficiency.

Bulun SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois. Electronic address: s-bulun@northwestern.edu.

Studies on the phenotypes of women and men with mutations disrupting estrogen
biosynthesis and action have significantly advanced our knowledge of the
physiologic roles of estrogen in humans. Aromatase deficiency results from
autosomal recessive inheritance of mutations in the CYP19A1 gene. It gives rise
to ambiguous genitalia in 46,XX fetuses. At puberty, affected girls have
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, do not develop secondary sexual characteristics, 
and exhibit progressive virilization. The affected 46,XY men have normal male
sexual differentiation and pubertal maturation. These men, however, are extremely
tall and have eunucoid proportions with continued linear growth into adulthood,
severely delayed epiphyseal closure, and osteoporosis due to estrogen deficiency.
Although estrogen has been shown to be essential for normal sperm production and 
function in mice, its role in fertility is not clear in men. Thus far, one man
and an unrelated woman with estrogen resistance due to mutations in the estrogen 
receptor a (ESR1) gene have been described. Their clinical presentations are
similar to that of aromatase-deficient men and women.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3939057
PMID: 24485503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 18;8(12):e82806. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082806.
eCollection 2013.

Association between estrogen receptor a gene (ESR1) PvuII (C/T) and XbaI (A/G)
polymorphisms and hip fracture risk: evidence from a meta-analysis.

Tang L(1), Cheng GL(1), Xu ZH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Jintan Hospital, Jiangsu University, Changzhou,
China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Genetic factors are important in the pathogenesis of
fractures. Notably, estrogen receptor a (ESR1) has been suggested as a possible
candidate gene for hip fractures; however, published studies of ESR1 gene
polymorphisms have been hampered by small sample sizes and inconclusive or
ambiguous results. The aim of this meta-analysis is to investigate the
associations between two novel common ESR1 polymorphisms (intron 1 polymorphisms 
PvuII-rs2234693: C>T and XbaI-rs9340799: A>G) and hip fracture.
METHODS: Crude odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to
evaluate the strength of the association.
RESULTS: Five case-control and three cohort studies were assessed, including a
total of 1,838 hip fracture cases and 14,972 healthy controls. This meta-analysis
revealed that the PvuII T allele is a highly significant risk factor for hip
fracture susceptibility, with an effect magnitude similar in male and
pre-menopausal and post-menopausal female patients. In stratified analysis based 
on ethnicity, the PvuII T allele remained significantly correlated with increased
risk of hip fracture in Caucasian populations; this correlation, however, was not
found in Asian populations. Unlike the PvuII polymorphism, we did not find
significant differences in the XbaI (A>G) polymorphism allele or genotype
distributions of hip fracture patients and controls. We also found no obvious
association between the XbaI polymorphism and hip fracture in any of the racial
or gender subgroups.
CONCLUSION: Our findings show that the ESR1 PvuII T allele may increase the risk 
of hip fracture and that the XbaI polymorphism is not associated with hip
fracture.

PMCID: PMC3903335
PMID: 24482673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Reproduction. 2014 Apr 8;147(5):703-17. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0648. Print 2014 May.

Expression of genes involved in the embryo-maternal interaction in the
early-pregnant canine uterus.

Kautz E(1), Gram A, Aslan S, Ay SS, Selçuk M, Kanca H, Koldas E, Akal E, Karakas 
K, Findik M, Boos A, Kowalewski MP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 260, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

Although there is no acute luteolytic mechanism in the absence of pregnancy in
the bitch, a precise and well-timed embryo-maternal interaction seems to be
required for the initiation and maintenance of gestation. As only limited
information is available about these processes in dogs, in this study, the
uterine expression of possible decidualization markers was investigated during
the pre-implantation stage (days 10-12) of pregnancy and in the corresponding
nonpregnant controls. In addition, the expression of selected genes associated
with blastocyst development and/or implantation was investigated in embryos
flushed from the uteri of bitches used for this study (unhatched and hatched
blastocysts). There was an upregulated expression of prolactin receptor (PRLR)
and IGF2 observed pre-implantation. The expression of PRL and of IGF1 was
unaffected, and neither was the expression of progesterone- or estrogen receptor 
ß (ESR2). In contrast, (ESR1) levels were elevated during early pregnancy.
Prostaglandin (PG)-system revealed upregulated expression of PGE2-synthase and
its receptors, PTGER2 and PTGER4, and of the PG-transporter. Elevated levels of
AKR1C3 mRNA, but not the protein itself, were noted. Expression of
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2) remained unaffected. Most of the
transcripts were predominantly localized to the uterine epithelial cells,
myometrium and, to a lesser extent, to the uterine stroma. PGES (PTGES) mRNA was 
abundantly expressed in both groups of embryos and appeared higher in the hatched
ones. The expression level of IGF2 mRNA appeared higher than that of IGF1 mRNA in
hatched embryos. In unhatched embryos IGF1, IGF2, and PTGS2 mRNA levels were
below the detection limit.

PMID: 24481956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 May;41(5):3235-43. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3186-6. Epub 2014
Jan 31.

Association of ESR1 and C6orf97 gene polymorphism with osteoporosis in
postmenopausal women.

Luo L(1), Xia W, Nie M, Sun Y, Jiang Y, Zhao J, He S, Xu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology & Beijing Tsinghua Chang Gung Hospital
of Tsinghua University, Beijing, 102218, China.

The estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and Chromosome 6 Open Reading Frame 97 (C6orf97)
gene polymorphisms were earlier reported to be associated with osteoporosis in
the European cohort. The aim of this study was to investigate the association of 
four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) with bone mineral density (BMD),
fracture, vertebral fracture, bone turnover or 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] in
1,753 randomly selected postmenopausal women in China. Vertebral fracture, BMD of
lumbar spine (2-4), femoral neck and total hip were measured respectively. Serum 
N-terminal procollagen of type 1 collagen (P1NP), ß-isomerized type I collagen
C-telopeptide breakdown products (ß-CTX) and 25(OH)D3 were also determined.
Binary logistic regression revealed significant associations between fracture
risk with rs1999805 (P=0.041, OR 1.633, 95%CI 1.020-2.616) and rs6929137
(P=0.005, OR 1.932, 95%CI 1.226-3.045) in recessive model. Significant
association was also observed between vertebral fracture risk and rs1038304
(P=0.039, OR 0.549, 95%CI 0.311-0.969) in recessive model. Liner regression
analyses showed that only the CC group of rs4870044 was significantly associated 
with total hip in dominant model (P=0.034). Our findings suggest that ESR1 and
C6orf97 gene polymorphism is associated with fracture and vertebral fracture risk
in Chinese postmenopausal women.

PMID: 24481879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 May 6;21(3):R195-208. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0512. Print
2014 Jun.

Genetically engineered ERa-positive breast cancer mouse models.

Dabydeen SA(1), Furth PA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology Medicine, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Georgetown University, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, Research Building, Room 520A,
Washington, District of Columbia 20057, USA.

The majority of human breast cancers are estrogen receptor-positive (ER+), but
this has proven challenging to model in genetically engineered mice. This review 
summarizes information on 21 mouse models that develop ER+ mammary cancer. Where 
available, information on cancer pathology and gene expression profiles is
referenced to assist in understanding which histological subtype of ER+ human
cancer each model might represent. ESR1, CCDN1, prolactin, TGFa, AIB1, ESPL1, and
WNT1 overexpression, PIK3CA gain of function, as well as loss of P53 (Trp53) or
STAT1 are associated with ER+ mammary cancer. Treatment with the PPAR<U+03B3> agonist
efatutazone in a mouse with Brca1 and p53 deficiency and
7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene exposure in combination with an activated
myristoylated form of AKT1 also induce ER+ mammary cancer. A spontaneous mutant
in nude mice that develops metastatic ER+ mammary cancer is included. Age of
cancer development ranges from 3 to 26 months and the percentage of cancers that 
are ER+ vary from 21 to 100%. Not all models are characterized as to their
estrogen dependency and/or response to anti-hormonal therapy. Strain backgrounds 
include C57Bl/6, FVB, BALB/c, 129S6/SvEv, CB6F1, and NIH nude. Most models have
only been studied on one strain background. In summary, while a range of models
are available for studies of pathogenesis and therapy of ER+ breast cancers, many
could benefit from further characterization, and opportunity for development of
new models remains.

PMCID: PMC4013173
PMID: 24481326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Apr;33(4):897-904. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1637. Epub 2014 Jan
28.

DNA methylation patterns of steroid receptor genes ESR1, ESR2 and PGR in deep
endometriosis compromising the rectum.

Meyer JL(1), Zimbardi D(1), Podgaec S(2), Amorim RL(3), Abrão MS(2), Rainho
CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Biosciences, São Paulo State University
(UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
São Paulo University (USP), São Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of Clinical
Veterinary Medicine, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo,
Brazil.

Endometriosis is characterized by the presence of endometrial-like tissue located
outside the uterine cavity. Recent evidence suggests that endometriosis may be an
epigenetic disease, as well as an estrogen-dependent disease. Based on the unique
steroid hormone receptor expression profile observed in endometriotic lesions as 
compared to eutopic endometrium, the present study aimed to gain further insight 
into the DNA methylation patterns of alternative promoters of the steroid
receptor genes ESR1, ESR2 and PGR in intestinal deep endometriosis, one of the
most aggressive forms of endometriosis. The DNA methylation patterns were
evaluated by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (MS-PCR) after
bisulfite modification in 44 endometriotic tissues as well as in 7 matched
eutopic endometrium. No differences in the DNA methylation were observed for the 
ESR1 and ESR2 genes. Methylation of the PGR gene was observed in 39% (17 out of
44) and 19% (7 out of 37) of the cases in the promoter regions B (PGRB) and A
(PGRA), respectively. Both PGR promoter regions were methylated in 3 cases. PGRB 
methylated alleles were detected exclusively in the endometriotic lesions when
compared to the eutopic endometrium obtained from the same patient. The effect of
DNA methylation in inhibiting the PGR gene expression was corroborated by
immuno-staining for PgR protein in a subset of tissue samples. The present study 
demonstrated that epigenetic changes occur in both promoter regions of the PGR
gene in intestinal endometriosis. Since eutopic and ectopic tissues do not
respond sufficiently to progesterone in women with endometriosis, further study
is necessary to evaluate the effect of epigenetic alterations in
progesterone-resistance in this enigmatic disease.

PMID: 24481237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 27;9(1):e87377. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087377. eCollection
2014.

Activation of ERa signaling differentially modulates IFN-<U+03B3> induced HLA-class II
expression in breast cancer cells.

Mostafa AA(1), Codner D(1), Hirasawa K(1), Komatsu Y(1), Young MN(1), Steimle
V(2), Drover S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of BioMedical Sciences, Immunology and Infectious Diseases Research
Group, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's,
Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. (2)Département de Biologie, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

The coordinate regulation of HLA class II (HLA-II) is controlled by the class II 
transactivator, CIITA, and is crucial for the development of anti-tumor immunity.
HLA-II in breast carcinoma is associated with increased IFN-<U+03B3> levels, reduced
expression of the estrogen receptor (ER) and reduced age at diagnosis. Here, we
tested the hypothesis that estradiol (E2) and ERa signaling contribute to the
regulation of IFN-<U+03B3> inducible HLA-II in breast cancer cells. Using a panel of
established ER<U+207B> and ER<U+207A> breast cancer cell lines, we showed that E2 attenuated
HLA-DR in two ER<U+207A> lines (MCF-7 and BT-474), but not in T47D, while it augmented
expression in ER<U+207B> lines, SK-BR-3 and MDA-MB-231. To further study the
mechanism(s), we used paired transfectants: ERa<U+207A> MC2 (MDA-MB-231 c10A transfected
with the wild type ERa gene) and ERa<U+207B> VC5 (MDA-MB-231 c10A transfected with the
empty vector), treated or not with E2 and IFN-<U+03B3>. HLA-II and CIITA were severely
reduced in MC2 compared to VC5 and were further exacerbated by E2 treatment.
Reduced expression occurred at the level of the IFN-<U+03B3> inducible CIITA promoter
IV. The anti-estrogen ICI 182,780 and gene silencing with ESR1 siRNA reversed the
E2 inhibitory effects, signifying an antagonistic role for activated ERa on CIITA
pIV activity. Moreover, STAT1 signaling, necessary for CIITA pIV activation, and 
selected STAT1 regulated genes were variably downregulated by E2 in transfected
and endogenous ERa positive breast cancer cells, whereas STAT1 signaling was
noticeably augmented in ERa<U+207B> breast cancer cells. Collectively, these results
imply immune escape mechanisms in ERa<U+207A> breast cancer may be facilitated through
an ERa suppressive mechanism on IFN-<U+03B3> signaling.

PMCID: PMC3903652
PMID: 24475282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2014 Jan 16;5:1. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00001.
eCollection 2014.

Role of estrogen receptors and g protein-coupled estrogen receptor in regulation 
of hypothalamus-pituitary-testis axis and spermatogenesis.

Chimento A(1), Sirianni R(1), Casaburi I(1), Pezzi V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Applied Biology, Department of Pharmacy, Health and Nutrition
Sciences, University of Calabria , Cosenza , Italy.

Male reproductive function is under the control of both gonadotropins and
androgens through a negative feedback loop that involves the hypothalamus,
pituitary, and testis known as hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPG). Indeed,
estrogens also play an important role in regulating HPG axis but the study on
relative contribution to the inhibition of gonadotropins secretion exerted by the
amount of estrogens produced within the hypothalamus and/or the pituitary or by
the amount of circulating estrogens is still ongoing. Moreover, it is known that 
the maintenance of spermatogenesis is controlled by gonadotropins and
testosterone, the effects of which are modulated by a complex network of locally 
produced factors, including estrogens. Physiological effects of estrogens are
mediated by the classical nuclear estrogen receptor alpha and estrogen receptor
beta, which mediate both genomic and rapid signaling events. In addition,
estrogens induce rapid non-genomic responses through a membrane-associated G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER). Ours and other studies reported that,
in the testis, GPER is expressed in both normal germ cells and somatic cells and 
it is involved in mediating the estrogen action in spermatogenesis controlling
proliferative and/or apoptotic events. Interestingly, GPER expression has been
revealed also in the hypothalamus and pituitary. However, its role in mediating
estrogen rapid actions in this context is under investigation. Recent studies
indicate that GPER is involved in modulating gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) release as well as gonadotropins secretion. In this review, we will
summarize the current knowledge concerning the role of estrogen/estrogen
receptors molecular pathways in regulating GnRH, follicle-stimulating hormone,
and luteinizing hormone release at the hypothalamic and pituitary levels in males
as well as in controlling specific testicular functions such as spermatogenesis, 
focusing our attention mainly on estrogen signaling mediated by GPER.

PMCID: PMC3893621
PMID: 24474947  [PubMed]


474. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 28;111(4):1443-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1317165111. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Estrogen receptor a polymorphism in a species with alternative behavioral
phenotypes.

Horton BM(1), Hudson WH, Ortlund EA, Shirk S, Thomas JW, Young ER, Zinzow-Kramer 
WM, Maney DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322.

The evolution of behavior relies on changes at the level of the genome; yet the
ability to attribute a behavioral change to a specific, naturally occurring
genetic change is rare in vertebrates. In the white-throated sparrow (Zonotrichia
albicollis), a chromosomal polymorphism (ZAL2/2(m)) is known to segregate with a 
behavioral phenotype. Individuals with the ZAL2(m) haplotype engage in more
territorial aggression and less parental behavior than individuals without it.
These behaviors are thought to be mediated by sensitivity to sex steroids, and
the chromosomal rearrangement underlying the polymorphism has captured a prime
candidate gene: estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), which encodes estrogen receptor a
(ERa). We therefore hypothesized that the behavioral effects of the ZAL2(m)
rearrangement are mediated by polymorphism in ESR1. We report here that (i) the
ESR1 promoter region contains fixed polymorphisms distinguishing the ZAL2(m) and 
ZAL2 alleles; (ii); those polymorphisms regulate transcription efficiency in
vitro and therefore potentially do the same in vivo (iii); the local expression
of ERa in the brain depends strongly on genotype in a free-living population; and
(iv) ERa expression in the medial amygdala and medial preoptic area may fully
mediate the effects of genotype on territorial aggression and parenting,
respectively. Thus, our study provides a rare glimpse of how a chromosomal
polymorphism has affected the brain and social behavior in a vertebrate. Our
results suggest that in this species, differentiation of ESR1 has played a causal
role in the evolution of phenotypes with alternative life-history strategies.

PMCID: PMC3910653
PMID: 24474771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 22;34(4):436-44. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.569. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

TFAP2C governs the luminal epithelial phenotype in mammary development and
carcinogenesis.

Cyr AR(1), Kulak MV(2), Park JM(2), Bogachek MV(2), Spanheimer PM(2), Woodfield
GW(2), White-Baer LS(2), O'Malley YQ(2), Sugg SL(2), Olivier AK(3), Zhang W(3),
Domann FE(4), Weigel RJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA [2]
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (3)Department
of Pathology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (4)1] Department of
Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA [2] Department of Radiation
Oncology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA [3] Department of Pathology,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (5)1] Department of Surgery, University
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA [2] Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA, USA.

Molecular subtypes of breast cancer are characterized by distinct patterns of
gene expression that are predictive of outcome and response to therapy. The
luminal breast cancer subtypes are defined by the expression of estrogen
receptor-alpha (ERa)-associated genes, many of which are directly responsive to
the transcription factor activator protein 2C (TFAP2C). TFAP2C participates in a 
gene regulatory network controlling cell growth and differentiation during
ectodermal development and regulating ESR1/ERa and other luminal cell-associated 
genes in breast cancer. TFAP2C has been established as a prognostic factor in
human breast cancer, however, its role in the establishment and maintenance of
the luminal cell phenotype during carcinogenesis and mammary gland development
have remained elusive. Herein, we demonstrate a critical role for TFAP2C in
maintaining the luminal phenotype in human breast cancer and in influencing the
luminal cell phenotype during normal mammary development. Knockdown of TFAP2C in 
luminal breast carcinoma cells induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition with
morphological and phenotypic changes characterized by a loss of
luminal-associated gene expression and a concomitant gain of basal-associated
gene expression. Conditional knockout of the mouse homolog of TFAP2C, Tcfap2c, in
mouse mammary epithelium driven by MMTV-Cre promoted aberrant growth of the
mammary tree leading to a reduction in the CD24(hi)/CD49f(mid) luminal cell
population and concomitant gain of the CD24(mid)/CD49f(hi) basal cell population 
at maturity. Our results establish TFAP2C as a key transcriptional regulator for 
maintaining the luminal phenotype in human breast carcinoma. Furthermore, Tcfap2c
influences development of the luminal cell type during mammary development. The
data suggest that TFAP2C has an important role in regulated luminal-specific
genes and may be a viable therapeutic target in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4112181
PMID: 24469049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 23;9(1):e86570. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086570. eCollection
2014.

Impact of the controlled release of a connexin 43 peptide on corneal wound
closure in an STZ model of type I diabetes.

Moore K(1), Ghatnekar G(2), Gourdie RG(3), Potts JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of South Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina,
United States of America. (2)FirstString Research Inc., Mount Pleasant, South
Carolina, United States of America ; Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina, United States of America. (3)Virginia Polytechnic and
State University Carilion, Roanoke, Virginia, United States of America.

The alpha-carboxy terminus 1 (aCT1) peptide is a synthetically produced mimetic
modified from the DDLEI C-terminus sequence of connexin 43 (Cx43). Previous
research using various wound healing models have found promising therapeutic
effects when applying the drug, resulting in increased wound healing rates and
reduced scarring. Previous data suggested a rapid metabolism rate in vitro,
creating an interest in long term release. Using a streptozotocin (STZ) type I
diabetic rat model with a surgically induced corneal injury, we delivered aCT1
both directly, in a pluronic gel solution, and in a sustained system, using
polymeric alginate-poly-l-ornithine (A-PLO) microcapsules (MC). Fluorescent
staining of wound area over a 5 day period indicated a significant increase in
wound closure rates for both aCT1 and aCT1 MC treated groups, withaCT1 MC groups 
showing the most rapid wound closure overall. Analysis of inflammatory reaction
to the treatment groups indicated significantly lower levels of both Interferon
Inducible T-Cell Alpha Chemoattractant (ITAC) and Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha
(TNFa) markers using confocal quantification and ELISA assays. Additional
analysis examining genes selected from the EMT pathway using RT-PCR and Western
blotting suggested aCT1 modification of Transforming Growth Factor Beta 2
(TGFß2), Keratin 8 (Krt8), Estrogen Receptor 1 (Esr1), and Glucose Transporter 4 
(Glut4) over a 14 day period. Combined, this data indicated a possible
suppression of the inflammatory response by aCT1, leading to increased wound
healing rates.

PMCID: PMC3900565
PMID: 24466155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(7):4180-95. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1415. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

Computational modeling identifies key gene regulatory interactions underlying
phenobarbital-mediated tumor promotion.

Luisier R(1), Unterberger EB, Goodman JI, Schwarz M, Moggs J, Terranova R, van
Nimwegen E.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery and Investigative Safety, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical
Research, 4057 Basel, Switzerland, Department of Toxicology, Institute of
Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Tübingen,
72074 Tübingen, Germany, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan
State University, MI 48824, USA and Biozentrum, University of Basel and Swiss
Institute of Bioinformatics, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.

Gene regulatory interactions underlying the early stages of non-genotoxic
carcinogenesis are poorly understood. Here, we have identified key candidate
regulators of phenobarbital (PB)-mediated mouse liver tumorigenesis, a
well-characterized model of non-genotoxic carcinogenesis, by applying a new
computational modeling approach to a comprehensive collection of in vivo gene
expression studies. We have combined our previously developed motif activity
response analysis (MARA), which models gene expression patterns in terms of
computationally predicted transcription factor binding sites with singular value 
decomposition (SVD) of the inferred motif activities, to disentangle the roles
that different transcriptional regulators play in specific biological pathways of
tumor promotion. Furthermore, transgenic mouse models enabled us to identify
which of these regulatory activities was downstream of constitutive androstane
receptor and ß-catenin signaling, both crucial components of PB-mediated liver
tumorigenesis. We propose novel roles for E2F and ZFP161 in PB-mediated
hepatocyte proliferation and suggest that PB-mediated suppression of ESR1
activity contributes to the development of a tumor-prone environment. Our study
shows that combining MARA with SVD allows for automated identification of
independent transcription regulatory programs within a complex in vivo tissue
environment and provides novel mechanistic insights into PB-mediated
hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3985636
PMID: 24464994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Biol Reprod. 2014 Feb 27;90(2):43. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.115899. Print 2014
Feb.

Adult glucocorticoid exposure leads to transcriptional and DNA methylation
changes in nuclear steroid receptors in the hippocampus and kidney of mouse male 
offspring.

Petropoulos S(1), Matthews SG, Szyf M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

Synthetic glucocorticoids (sGCs) are commonly prescribed for the management of
inflammatory and endocrine disorders. However, nothing is known regarding the
effects of sGC on adult germline methylome and whether these effects can be
transmitted to the next generation. We hypothesized that administration of sGC to
adult male mice alters DNA methylation in mature sperm and modifies the
transcription and methylation of steroid receptors in male F1 offspring. Adult
C57BL/6 males (n = 10/group) were injected on five consecutive days with 1 mg/kg 
sGC (i.e., dexamethasone) or vehicle and euthanized 35 or 60 days after initial
treatment or bred with control females (60 days postinitial treatment; n =
5/group). A significant increase in global non-CpG methylation was observed in F0
sperm 60 days following sGC treatment. In the hippocampus and kidney of Postnatal
Day 50 (PND50) and PND240 male offspring derived from fathers exposed to sGC,
significant differences in mineralocorticoid receptor (Nr3c2; Mr), estrogen alpha
receptor (Nr3a1; Ers1), and glucocorticoid receptor (Nr3c1; Gr) expression were
observed. Furthermore, significant demethylation in regulatory regions of Mr, Gr,
and Esr1 was observed in the PND50 kidney derived from fathers exposed to sGC.
This is the first demonstration that paternal pharmacological exposure to sGC can
alter the expression and DNA methylation of nuclear steroid receptors in brain
and somatic tissues of offspring. These findings provide proof of principle that 
adult male exposure to sGC can affect DNA methylation and gene expression in
offspring, indicating the possibility that adult experiences that evoke increases
in endogenous glucocorticoid (i.e., stress) might have similar effects.

PMID: 24451982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 May;41(5):2745-55. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3129-2. Epub 2014
Jan 22.

Effect of dietary n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on transcription factor
regulation in the bovine endometrium.

Waters SM(1), Coyne GS, Kenny DA, Morris DG.

Author information: 
(1)Animal and Bioscience Research Department, Animal and Grassland Research and
Innovation Centre, Teagasc, Grange, Dunsany, Co. Meath, Ireland,
sinead.waters@teagasc.ie.

Dietary n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (n-3 PUFA) supplementation is postulated
to have positive effects on fertility. The impact of dietary n-3 PUFA
supplementation on physiological and biochemical processes involved in
reproduction is likely to be associated with significant alterations in gene
expression in key reproductive tissues which is in turn regulated by
transcription factors. Beef heifers were supplemented with a rumen protected
source of either a saturated fatty acid or high n-3 PUFA diet per animal per day 
for 45 days and uterine endometrial tissue was harvested post slaughter. A
microarray analysis was conducted and bioinformatic tools were employed to
evaluate the effect of n-3 PUFA supplementation on gene expression in the bovine 
endometrium. Clustering of microarray gene expression data was performed to
identify co-expressed genes. Functional annotation of each cluster of genes was
carried out using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Furthermore, oPOSSUM was employed
to identify transcription factors involved in gene expression changes due to
supplementary PUFA. Gene functions which showed a significant response to n-3
PUFA supplementation included tissue development, immune function and
reproductive function. Numerous transcription factors such as FOXD1, FOXD3,
NFKB1, ESR1, PGR, FOXA2, NKX3-1 and PPARa were identified as potential regulators
of gene expression in the endometrium of cattle supplemented with n-3 PUFA. This 
study demonstrates the complex nature of the alterations in the transcriptional
regulation process in the uterine endometrium of cattle following dietary
supplementation which may positively influence the uterine environment.

PMID: 24449365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Dev Biol. 2014 Mar 1;387(1):28-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.01.003. Epub 2014
Jan 17.

A potential molecular pathogenesis of cardiac/laterality defects in
Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental syndrome.

Tanaka K(1), Kato A(1), Angelocci C(1), Watanabe M(2), Kato Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University College of
Medicine, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA. (2)Institute of Socio-Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8502, Japan. (3)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University College of Medicine, Tallahassee,
FL 32306, USA. Electronic address: yoichi.kato@med.fsu.edu.

Pitx2 is the last effector of the left-right (LR) cascade known to date and plays
a crucial role in the patterning of LR asymmetry. In Xenopus embryos, the
expression of Pitx2 gene in the left lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) is directly
regulated by Xnr1 signaling, which is mediated by Smads and FoxH1. Previous
studies suggest that the suppression of Pitx2 gene in the left LPM is a potential
cause of cardiac/laterality defects in Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental (OFCD) syndrome,
which is known to be caused by mutations in BCL6 co-repressor (BCOR) gene.
Recently, our work has revealed that the BCL6/BCOR complex blocks Notch-dependent
transcriptional activity to protect the expression of Pitx2 in the left LPM from 
the inhibitory activity of Notch signaling. These studies indicated that
uncontrolled Notch activity in the left LPM caused by dysfunction of BCOR may
result in cardiac/laterality defects of OFCD syndrome. However, this
Notch-dependent inhibitory mechanism of Pitx2 gene transcription still remains
unknown. Here we report that transcriptional repressor ESR1, which acts
downstream of Notch signaling, inhibits the expression of Pitx2 gene by binding
to a left side-specific enhancer (ASE) region in Pitx2 gene and recruiting
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to this region. Once HDAC1 is tethered, histone
acetyltransferase p300 is no longer recruited to the Xnr1-dependent
transcriptional complex on the ASE region, leading to the suppression of Pitx2
gene in the left LPM. The study presented here uncovers the regulatory mechanism 
of Pitx2 gene transcription which may contribute to an understanding of
pathogenesis of OFCD syndrome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3951022
PMID: 24440151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jun 1;23(11):3054-68. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt675. Epub 2014 Jan 
14.

Genetic determinants of heel bone properties: genome-wide association
meta-analysis and replication in the GEFOS/GENOMOS consortium.

Moayyeri A, Hsu YH, Karasik D, Estrada K, Xiao SM, Nielson C, Srikanth P, Giroux 
S, Wilson SG, Zheng HF, Smith AV, Pye SR, Leo PJ, Teumer A, Hwang JY, Ohlsson C, 
McGuigan F, Minster RL, Hayward C, Olmos JM, Lyytikäinen LP, Lewis JR, Swart KM, 
Masi L, Oldmeadow C, Holliday EG, Cheng S, van Schoor NM, Harvey NC, Kruk M, del 
Greco M F, Igl W, Trummer O, Grigoriou E, Luben R, Liu CT, Zhou Y, Oei L,
Medina-Gomez C, Zmuda J, Tranah G, Brown SJ, Williams FM, Soranzo N, Jakobsdottir
J, Siggeirsdottir K, Holliday KL, Hannemann A, Go MJ, Garcia M, Polasek O,
Laaksonen M, Zhu K, Enneman AW, McEvoy M, Peel R, Sham PC, Jaworski M, Johansson 
Å, Hicks AA, Pludowski P, Scott R, Dhonukshe-Rutten RA, van der Velde N, Kähönen 
M, Viikari JS, Sievänen H, Raitakari OT, González-Macías J, Hernández JL,
Mellström D, Ljunggren O, Cho YS, Völker U, Nauck M, Homuth G, Völzke H, Haring
R, Brown MA, McCloskey E, Nicholson GC, Eastell R, Eisman JA, Jones G, Reid IR,
Dennison EM, Wark J, Boonen S, Vanderschueren D, Wu FC, Aspelund T, Richards JB, 
Bauer D, Hofman A, Khaw KT, Dedoussis G, Obermayer-Pietsch B, Gyllensten U,
Pramstaller PP, Lorenc RS, Cooper C, Kung AW, Lips P, Alen M, Attia J, Brandi ML,
de Groot LC, Lehtimäki T, Riancho JA, Campbell H, Liu Y, Harris TB, Akesson K,
Karlsson M, Lee JY, Wallaschofski H, Duncan EL, O'Neill TW, Gudnason V, Spector
TD, Rousseau F, Orwoll E, Cummings SR, Wareham NJ, Rivadeneira F, Uitterlinden
AG, Prince RL, Kiel DP, Reeve J, Kaptoge SK.

Quantitative ultrasound of the heel captures heel bone properties that
independently predict fracture risk and, with bone mineral density (BMD) assessed
by X-ray (DXA), may be convenient alternatives for evaluating osteoporosis and
fracture risk. We performed a meta-analysis of genome-wide association (GWA)
studies to assess the genetic determinants of heel broadband ultrasound
attenuation (BUA; n = 14 260), velocity of sound (VOS; n = 15 514) and BMD (n =
4566) in 13 discovery cohorts. Independent replication involved seven cohorts
with GWA data (in silico n = 11 452) and new genotyping in 15 cohorts (de novo n 
= 24 902). In combined random effects, meta-analysis of the discovery and
replication cohorts, nine single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) had genome-wide 
significant (P < 5 × 10(-8)) associations with heel bone properties. Alongside
SNPs within or near previously identified osteoporosis susceptibility genes
including ESR1 (6q25.1: rs4869739, rs3020331, rs2982552), SPTBN1 (2p16.2:
rs11898505), RSPO3 (6q22.33: rs7741021), WNT16 (7q31.31: rs2908007), DKK1
(10q21.1: rs7902708) and GPATCH1 (19q13.11: rs10416265), we identified a new
locus on chromosome 11q14.2 (rs597319 close to TMEM135, a gene recently linked to
osteoblastogenesis and longevity) significantly associated with both BUA and VOS 
(P < 8.23 × 10(-14)). In meta-analyses involving 25 cohorts with up to 14 985
fracture cases, six of 10 SNPs associated with heel bone properties at P < 5 ×
10(-6) also had the expected direction of association with any fracture (P <
0.05), including three SNPs with P < 0.005: 6q22.33 (rs7741021), 7q31.31
(rs2908007) and 10q21.1 (rs7902708). In conclusion, this GWA study reveals the
effect of several genes common to central DXA-derived BMD and heel ultrasound/DXA
measures and points to a new genetic locus with potential implications for better
understanding of osteoporosis pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC4038791
PMID: 24430505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Tumour Biol. 2014 May;35(5):4517-27. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1594-1. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

Genetic polymorphisms of ESR1, ESR2, CYP17A1, and CYP19A1 and the risk of breast 
cancer: a case control study from North India.

Chattopadhyay S(1), Siddiqui S, Akhtar MS, Najm MZ, Deo SV, Shukla NK, Husain SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi, 110025, India.

Estrogen is a key driver of breast cancer and genes involved in its signaling and
biosynthesis are crucial in breast cancer progression. In this study, we
investigated the role of estrogen signaling and synthesis related genes
polymorphism in susceptibility to breast cancer risk in North India population in
a case-control approach. We examined the association of single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in estrogen receptors, ESR1 (rs2234693) and ESR2 (rs2987983); 
estrogen biosynthesis enzymes, CYP17A1 (rs743572); and aromatase, CYP19A1
(rs700519) with breast cancer risk. Cases (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>360) were matched to controls
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>360) by age, sex, ethnicity, and geographical location. Results provided
evidence that all the genetic variants were significantly associated with breast 
cancer risk among North Indian women. Furthermore, on performing stratified
analysis between breast cancer risk and different clinicopathological
characteristics, we observed strong associations for menopausal status, estrogen 
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), human epidermal growth factor receptor
2 (HER2) status, clinical stage, and histological grade. Our results suggest that
these genes could be used as molecular markers to assess breast cancer
susceptibility and predicting prognosis in North India population.

PMID: 24430361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Dis Markers. 2013;35(6):907-13.

ESR1 rs9340799 is associated with endometriosis-related infertility and in vitro 
fertilization failure.

Paskulin DD, Cunha-Filho JS, Paskulin LD, Souza CA, Ashton-Prolla P.

Estrogen receptor alpha has a central role in human fertility by regulating
estrogen action in all human reproductive tissues. Leukemia inhibitory factor
(LIF) expression, a cytokine critical for blastocyst implantation, is mediated by
estrogen signaling, so we hypothesized that ESR1 gene polymorphisms might be
candidate risk markers for endometriosis-related infertility and in vitro
fertilization (IVF) failure. We included 98 infertile women with endometriosis,
115 infertile women with at least one IVF failure and also 134 fertile women as
controls. TaqMan SNP assays were used for genotyping LIF (rs929271), MDM2
(rs2279744), MDM4 (rs1563828), USP7 (rs1529916), and ESR1 (rs9340799 and
rs2234693) polymorphisms. The SNP ESR1 rs9340799 was associated with
endometriosis-related infertility (P < 0.001) and also with IVF failure (P =
0.018). After controlling for age, infertile women with ESR1 rs9340799 GG
genotype presented 4-fold increased risk of endometriosis (OR 4.67, 95% CI
1.84-11.83, P = 0.001) and 3-fold increased risk of IVF failure (OR 3.33, 95% CI 
1.38-8.03, P = 0.007). Our results demonstrate an association between ESR1
rs9340799 polymorphism and infertile women with endometriosis and also with women
who were submitted to IVF procedures and had no blastocyst implantation.

PMCID: PMC3880708
PMID: 24427778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. BMC Genet. 2014 Jan 15;15:7. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-15-7.

A genome-wide scan for signatures of selection in Chinese indigenous and
commercial pig breeds.

Yang S, Li X, Li K, Fan B(1), Tang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Farm Animal Genetic Resources and Germplasm Innovation of
Ministry of Agriculture, Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100193, P,R, China. fanbin@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Modern breeding and artificial selection play critical roles in pig
domestication and shape the genetic variation of different breeds. China has many
indigenous pig breeds with various characteristics in morphology and production
performance that differ from those of foreign commercial pig breeds. However, the
signatures of selection on genes implying for economic traits between Chinese
indigenous and commercial pigs have been poorly understood.
RESULTS: We identified footprints of positive selection at the whole genome
level, comprising 44,652 SNPs genotyped in six Chinese indigenous pig breeds, one
developed breed and two commercial breeds. An empirical genome-wide distribution 
of Fst (F-statistics) was constructed based on estimations of Fst for each SNP
across these nine breeds. We detected selection at the genome level using the
High-Fst outlier method and found that 81 candidate genes show high evidence of
positive selection. Furthermore, the results of network analyses showed that the 
genes that displayed evidence of positive selection were mainly involved in the
development of tissues and organs, and the immune response. In addition, we
calculated the pairwise Fst between Chinese indigenous and commercial breeds (CHN
VS EURO) and between Northern and Southern Chinese indigenous breeds (Northern VS
Southern). The IGF1R and ESR1 genes showed evidence of positive selection in the 
CHN VS EURO and Northern VS Southern groups, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we first identified the genomic regions that showed
evidences of selection between Chinese indigenous and commercial pig breeds using
the High-Fst outlier method. These regions were found to be involved in the
development of tissues and organs, the immune response, growth and litter size.
The results of this study provide new insights into understanding the genetic
variation and domestication in pigs.

PMCID: PMC3898232
PMID: 24422716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Chem Res Toxicol. 2014 Mar 17;27(3):421-32. doi: 10.1021/tx400409c. Epub 2014 Jan
28.

Drug-induced rhabdomyolysis: from systems pharmacology analysis to biochemical
flux.

Hur J(1), Liu Z, Tong W, Laaksonen R, Bai JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan , Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109,
United States.

The goal of this study was to integrate systems pharmacology and biochemical flux
to delineate drug-induced rhabdomyolysis by leveraging prior knowledge and
publicly accessible data. A list of 211 rhabdomyolysis-inducing drugs (RIDs) was 
compiled and curated from multiple sources. Extended pharmacological network
analysis revealed that the intermediators directly interacting with the
pharmacological targets of RIDs were significantly enriched with functions such
as regulation of cell cycle, apoptosis, and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. A
total of 78 intermediators were shown to be significantly connected to at least
five RIDs, including estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), synuclein gamma (SNCG), and
janus kinase 2 (JAK2). Transcriptomic analysis of RIDs profiled in Connectivity
Map on the global scale revealed that multiple pathways are perturbed by RIDs,
including ErbB signaling and lipid metabolism pathways, and that carnitine
palmitoyl transferase 2 (CPT2) was in the top 1 percent of the most
differentially perturbed genes. CPT2 was downregulated by nine drugs that
perturbed the genes significantly enriched in oxidative phosphorylation and
energy-metabolism pathways. With statins as the use case, biochemical pathway
analysis on the local scale implicated a role for CPT2 in statin-induced
perturbation of energy homeostasis, which is in agreement with reports of
statin-CPT2 interaction. Considering the complexity of human biology, an
integrative multiple-approach analysis composed of a biochemical flux network,
pharmacological on- and off-target networks, and transcriptomic signature is
important for understanding drug safety and for providing insight into clinical
gene-drug interactions.

PMID: 24422454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;74(5):1484-94. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2020. Epub
2014 Jan 10.

Differential regulation of estrogen receptor a expression in breast cancer cells 
by metastasis-associated protein 1.

Kang HJ(1), Lee MH, Kang HL, Kim SH, Ahn JR, Na H, Na TY, Kim YN, Seong JK, Lee
MO.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: College of Pharmacy and Bio-MAX institute, Research
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences; and College of Veterinary Medicine, BK21
Plus Program for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) is a component of the nucleosome
remodeling and histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex, which plays an important role 
in progression of breast cancer. Although MTA1 is known as a repressor of the
transactivation function of estrogen receptor a (ERa), its involvement in the
epigenetic control of transcription of the ERa gene ESR1 has not been studied.
Here, we show that silencing of MTA1 reduced the level of expression of ERa in
ERa-positive cells but increased it in ERa-negative cells. In both MCF7 and
MDA-MB-231, MTA1 was recruited to the region +146 to +461 bp downstream of the
transcription start site of ESR1 (ERpro315). Proteomics analysis of the MTA1
complex that was pulled down by an oligonucleotide encoding ERpro315 revealed
that the transcription factor AP-2<U+03B3> (TFAP2C) and the IFN-<U+03B3>-inducible protein 16
(IFI16) were components of the complex. Interestingly, in MCF7, TFAP2C activated 
the reporter encoding ERpro315 and the level of ERa mRNA. By contrast, in
MDA-MB-231, IFI16 repressed the promoter activity and silencing of MTA1 increased
expression of ERa. Importantly, class II HDACs are involved in the MTA1-mediated 
differential regulation of ERa. Finally, an MDA-MB-231-derived cell line that
stably expressed shIFI16 or shMTA1 was more susceptible to tamoxifen-induced
growth inhibition in in vitro and in vivo experiments. Taken together, our
findings suggest that the MTA1-TFAP2C or the MTA1-IFI16 complex may contribute to
the epigenetic regulation of ESR1 expression in breast cancer and may determine
the chemosensitivity of tumors to tamoxifen therapy in patients with breast
cancer.

©2014 AACR

PMID: 24413532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Epigenetics. 2014 Apr;9(4):492-502. doi: 10.4161/epi.27650. Epub 2014 Jan 10.

Patterns of DNA methylation in the normal colon vary by anatomical location,
gender, and age.

Kaz AM(1), Wong CJ(2), Dzieciatkowski S(2), Luo Y(3), Schoen RE(4), Grady WM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Research; Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center;
Seattle, WA USA; Research and Development Service; VA Puget Sound Health Care
System; Seattle, WA USA; Department of Medicine; University of Washington School 
of Medicine; Seattle, WA USA. (2)Division of Clinical Research; Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center; Seattle, WA USA. (3)Division of Clinical Research; Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center; Seattle, WA USA; Department of Colorectal
Surgery; the Sixth Affiliated Hospital; Sun Yat-Sen University; Guangzhou, PR
China; Gastrointestinal Institute; Sun Yat-Sen University; Guangzhou, PR China.
(4)Department of Medicine; University of Pittsburgh Medical Center; Pittsburgh,
PA USA. (5)Division of Clinical Research; Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center;
Seattle, WA USA; Department of Medicine; University of Washington School of
Medicine; Seattle, WA USA.

Alterations in DNA methylation have been proposed to create a field cancerization
state in the colon, where molecular alterations that predispose cells to
transformation occur in histologically normal tissue. However, our understanding 
of the role of DNA methylation in field cancerization is limited by an incomplete
characterization of the methylation state of the normal colon. In order to
determine the colon's normal methylation state, we extracted DNA from normal
colon biopsies from the rectum, sigmoid, transverse, and ascending colon and
assessed the methylation status of the DNA by pyrosequencing candidate loci as
well as with HumanMethylation450 arrays. We found that methylation levels of
repetitive elements LINE-1 and SAT-a showed minimal variability throughout the
colon in contrast to other loci. Promoter methylation of EVL was highest in the
rectum and progressively lower in the proximal segments, whereas ESR1 methylation
was higher in older individuals. Genome-wide methylation analysis of normal DNA
revealed 8388, 82, and 93 differentially methylated loci that distinguished right
from left colon, males from females, and older vs. younger individuals,
respectively. Although variability in methylation between biopsies and among
different colon segments was minimal for repetitive elements, analyses of
specific cancer-related genes as well as a genome-wide methylation analysis
demonstrated differential methylation based on colon location, individual age,
and gender. These studies advance our knowledge regarding the variation of DNA
methylation in the normal colon, a prerequisite for future studies aimed at
understanding methylation differences indicative of a colon field effect.

PMCID: PMC4121360
PMID: 24413027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Mol Diagn. 2014 Mar;16(2):253-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2013.11.003. Epub 2014 
Jan 9.

Separate quality-control measures are necessary for estimation of RNA and
methylated DNA from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens by quantitative
PCR.

Korlimarla A(1), Prabhu JS(2), Anupama CE(2), Remacle J(2), Wahi K(2), Sridhar
TS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, St. John's Research Institute, Bangalore,
India. Electronic address: aruna@sjri.res.in. (2)Division of Molecular Medicine, 
St. John's Research Institute, Bangalore, India.

Estimations of RNA abundance and DNA methylation by quantitative PCR (qPCR) from 
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue specimens are not yet routine in 
clinical laboratory practice. Excluding specimens with poorly preserved nucleic
acids is an important quality-control step for avoiding unreliable results.
Because the assays for RNA abundance and DNA methylation have different critical 
limiting factors, we examined the extent of overlap of excluded specimens for RNA
abundance versus methylated DNA. The transcript abundance of three reference
genes and of the test gene, estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), was estimated by SYBR
Green qPCR in 250 breast cancer specimens. The estrogen receptor (ER) protein was
identified by IHC, and concordance between ESR1 and ER was estimated by Cohen's
<U+03BA>. TaqMan PCR for the ALU-C4 sequence was performed with bisulfite-treated DNA to
determine usability in the MethyLight assay. Excluding specimens with mean
reference gene CT values exceeding the group mean by >1 SD led to significant
improvement of the concordance of ESR1 and ER. Specimens with usable DNA after
bisulfite treatment likewise had ALU-C4 CT values of less than the group mean + 1
SD. Samples with low-quality RNA and DNA were partly nonoverlapping. RNA and DNA 
extracted from the same FFPE block need separate exclusion criteria for qPCR
assays of transcript abundance and methylated DNA.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24412525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Front Genet. 2013 Dec 25;4:304. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00304. eCollection 2013.

The role of SNP-loop diuretic interactions in hypertension across ethnic groups
in HyperGEN.

de Las Fuentes L(1), Sung YJ(2), Schwander KL(2), Kalathiveetil S(2), Hunt SC(3),
Arnett DK(4), Rao DC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Washington University School 
of Medicine St. Louis, MO, USA ; Division of Biostatistics, Washington University
School of Medicine St. Louis, MO, USA. (2)Division of Biostatistics, Washington
University School of Medicine St. Louis, MO, USA. (3)Division of Cardiovascular
Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology, University of Alabama at 
Birmingham Birmingham, AL, USA.

Blood pressure (BP) is significantly influenced by genetic factors; however, less
than 3% of the BP variance has been accounted for by variants identified from
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of primarily European-descent cohorts.
Other genetic influences, including gene-environment (GxE) interactions, may
explain more of the unexplained variance in BP. African Americans (AA) have a
higher prevalence and earlier age of onset of hypertension (HTN) as compared with
European Americans (EA); responses to anti-hypertensive drugs vary across race
groups. To examine potential interactions between the use of loop diuretics and
HTN traits, we analyzed systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) blood BP from 1222 AA 
and 1231 EA participants in the Hypertension Genetic Epidemiology Network
(HyperGEN). Population-specific score tests were used to test associations of SBP
and DBP, using a panel of genotyped and imputed single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) for AA (2.9 million SNPs) and EA (2.3 million SNPs). Several promising
loci were identified through gene-loop diuretic interactions, although no SNP
reached genome-wide significance after adjustment for genomic inflation. In AA,
SNPs in or near the genes NUDT12, CHL1, GRIA1, CACNB2, and PYHIN1 were identified
for SBP, and SNPs near ID3 were identified for DBP. For EA, promising SNPs for
SBP were identified in ESR1 and for DBP in SPATS2L and EYA2. Among these SNPs,
none were common across phenotypes or population groups. Biologic plausibility
exists for many of the identified genes, suggesting that these are candidate
genes for regulation of BP and/or anti-hypertensive drug response. The lack of
genome-wide significance is understandable in this small study employing
gene-drug interactions. These findings provide a set of prioritized
SNPs/candidate genes for future studies in HTN. Studies in more diversified
population samples may help identify previously missed variants.

PMCID: PMC3872290
PMID: 24400021  [PubMed]


490. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Apr 1;20(7):1757-67. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2332.
Epub 2014 Jan 7.

Emergence of constitutively active estrogen receptor-a mutations in pretreated
advanced estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.

Jeselsohn R(1), Yelensky R, Buchwalter G, Frampton G, Meric-Bernstam F,
Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Ferrer-Lozano J, Perez-Fidalgo JA, Cristofanilli M, Gómez H, 
Arteaga CL, Giltnane J, Balko JM, Cronin MT, Jarosz M, Sun J, Hawryluk M, Lipson 
D, Otto G, Ross JS, Dvir A, Soussan-Gutman L, Wolf I, Rubinek T, Gilmore L,
Schnitt S, Come SE, Pusztai L, Stephens P, Brown M, Miller VA.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute; Department of Medicine, Brigham
and Women's Hospital; Departments of Pathology and Breast Medical Oncology
Program, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston;
Foundation Medicine, Cambridge, Massachusetts; Departments of Investigational
Cancer Therapeutics, Surgical Oncology, and Systems Biology and Breast Medical
Oncology, The University of MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; Fundacion 
de Investigacion INCLIVA-Institute for Health Research; Departments of
Hematology-Oncology, Hospital Clinico Universitario de Valencia, Valencia, Spain;
Jefferson Breast Care Center, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Neoplásicas
(INEN), Lima, Perú; Breast Cancer Program, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee; Teva Pharmaceuticals,
Petach Tikva; Oncology Division, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv,
Israel; and Section of Breast Medical Oncology, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Apr 1;20(7):1724-6.

PURPOSE: We undertook this study to determine the prevalence of estrogen receptor
(ER) a (ESR1) mutations throughout the natural history of hormone-dependent
breast cancer and to delineate the functional roles of the most commonly detected
alterations.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We studied a total of 249 tumor specimens from 208 patients.
The specimens include 134 ER-positive (ER(+)/HER2(-)) and, as controls, 115
ER-negative (ER(-)) tumors. The ER(+) samples consist of 58 primary breast
cancers and 76 metastatic samples. All tumors were sequenced to high unique
coverage using next-generation sequencing targeting the coding sequence of the
estrogen receptor and an additional 182 cancer-related genes.
RESULTS: Recurring somatic mutations in codons 537 and 538 within the
ligand-binding domain of ER were detected in ER(+) metastatic disease. Overall,
the frequency of these mutations was 12% [9/76; 95% confidence interval (CI),
6%-21%] in metastatic tumors and in a subgroup of patients who received an
average of 7 lines of treatment the frequency was 20% (5/25; 95% CI, 7%-41%).
These mutations were not detected in primary or treatment-naïve ER(+) cancer or
in any stage of ER(-) disease. Functional studies in cell line models demonstrate
that these mutations render estrogen receptor constitutive activity and confer
partial resistance to currently available endocrine treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we show evidence for the temporal selection of
functional ESR1 mutations as potential drivers of endocrine resistance during the
progression of ER(+) breast cancer.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3998833
PMID: 24398047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Gene. 2014 Mar 1;537(1):10-4. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.12.054. Epub 2013 Dec 31.

Relation of the estrogen receptor and vitamin D receptor polymorphisms with bone 
mineral density in postmenopausal Mexican-mestizo women.

Rojano-Mejía D(1), Coral-Vázquez RM(2), Coronel A(3), Cortes-Espinosa L(4), del
Carmen Aguirre-García M(5), Valencia-Villalvazo EY(3), Canto P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Medicina Física y Rehabilitación, Centro, UMAE "Lomas Verdes",
Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, México, D.F., Mexico. (2)Sección de
Posgrado, Escuela Superior de Medicina, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, México,
D.F., Mexico; Subdirección de Enseñanza e Investigación, Centro Médico Nacional
"20 de Noviembre", Instituto de Seguridad y Servicios Sociales de los
Trabajadores del Estado, México, D.F., Mexico. (3)División de Investigación
Biomédica, Subdirección de Enseñanza e Investigación, Centro Médico Nacional "20 
de Noviembre", Instituto de Seguridad y Servicios Sociales de los Trabajadores
del Estado, México, D.F., Mexico. (4)Servicio de Ginecología y Obstetricia,
Hospital Regional Tacuba, Instituto de Seguridad y Servicios Sociales de los
Trabajadores del Estado, México, D.F., Mexico. (5)Unidad de Medicina Familiar No.
20, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, México, D.F., Mexico. (6)División de
Investigación Biomédica, Subdirección de Enseñanza e Investigación, Centro Médico
Nacional "20 de Noviembre", Instituto de Seguridad y Servicios Sociales de los
Trabajadores del Estado, México, D.F., Mexico. Electronic address:
ipcanto@yahoo.com.mx.

BACKGROUND: Since osteoporosis is a complex disease characterized by low bone
mineral density (BMD), which is determined by an interaction of genetics with
metabolic and environmental factors, the aim of this study was to analyze the
possible association among one polymorphism of VDR and two polymorphisms of ESR1;
as well as their haplotypes with BMD in postmenopausal Mexican-mestizo women.
METHODS: We studied 742 postmenopausal Mexican-mestizo women. A structured
questionnaire for risk factors was applied and BMD was measured in the lumbar
spine and total hip by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. DNA was obtained from
blood leukocytes. One polymorphism of VDR (rs11568820) and two of ESR1 (rs2234693
and rs9340799) were studied. Real-time PCR allelic discrimination was used for
genotyping. The differences between the means of the BMDs according to genotype
were analyzed with covariance. Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was tested. Pairwise
linkage disequilibrium between single nucleotide polymorphisms was calculated by 
direct correlation r(2); haplotype analysis was conducted.
RESULTS: Rs9340799 of ESR1 and one haplotype formed by the two polymorphisms of
the ESR1 were significantly associated with FN-BMD variations. Moreover, analysis
of the genotype of rs11568820 of VDR and the rs2234693 of ESR1 showed no
significant differences with BMD variations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that rs9340799 and one haplotype of ESR1 were
significantly associated with BMD only at the femoral neck and this association
remained after adjusting for covariates.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24389498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Microsc Res Tech. 2014 Mar;77(3):201-10. doi: 10.1002/jemt.22328. Epub 2013 Dec
26.

Ovarian hormones and fasting differentially regulate pituitary receptors for
estrogen and gonadotropin-releasing hormone in rabbit female.

Parillo F(1), Zerani M, Maranesi M, Dall'Aglio C, Galeati G, Brecchia G, Boiti C,
González-Mariscal G.

Author information: 
(1)Scuola di Bioscienze e Medicina veterinaria, Università di Camerino, 62024,
Matelica, Italy.

To investigate the mechanisms by which caloric restriction affects reproductive
function in female rabbits, we measured, in animals intact or ovariectomized
(OVX) estrogen-primed and fed ad libitum or fasted for 48 h, the adenohypophysial
expression of estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) and gonadotropin releasing hormone
receptor (GnRHR) and the dynamic secretion of LH following GnRH stimulation.
Fasting increased the number of GnRHR-immunoreactive (-IR) cells in intact
animals, whereas reduced the density of ESR1-IR cells in OVX rabbits. Estrogen
priming decreased the number of ESR1-IR cells in fasted and OVX animals.
Ovariectomy increased the number of ESR1-IR cells in fed rabbits, but caused an
opposite effect in both fed and fasted animals treated with estrogen. Fasting
down regulated the mRNA levels for ESR1 and GnRHR. Estrogen-priming reduced the
abundance for ESR1 mRNA in both fed and fasted rabbits, and that for GnRHR in
fasted rabbits. Ovariectomy halved ESR1 mRNA levels independently of treatment
and feeding condition, whereas increased (P<U+2009><<U+2009>001) that for GnRHR in
estrogen-primed rabbits. In all rabbits, an LH surge occurred 30 min after GnRH
injection but the lowest levels were found in intact fasted rabbits and the
highest in fasted, estrogen-primed animals. The LH profile was similar in intact 
and OVX rabbits and neither fasting nor estrogen priming modified it. In
conclusion, fasting differentially modifies the ESR1 and GnRHR expression in the 
pituitary, depending on the presence of gonadal hormones, indicating complex
interactions between metabolic signals and ovarian steroids.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24375763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cancer Lett. 2014 Apr 28;346(1):94-103. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.12.023. Epub
2013 Dec 24.

A novel anti-cancer agent, acetyltanshinone IIA, inhibits oestrogen receptor
positive breast cancer cell growth by down-regulating the oestrogen receptor.

Yu T(1), Zhou Z(1), Mu Y(2), de Lima Lopes G(3), Luo KQ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bioengineering, School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. (2)School of Biological Sciences,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. (3)Medical Oncology, Johns Hopkins
Singapore International Medical Centre, Singapore. (4)Division of Bioengineering,
School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore. Electronic address: kluo@ntu.edu.sg.

In this paper we show that acetyltanshinone IIA (ATA), a novel anti-cancer agent,
preferentially inhibits cell growth of oestrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast
cancer cells and that it is more potent than the commonly used anti-breast cancer
agent, tamoxifen. The metabolic product of ATA, hydroquinone tanshinone IIA (HTA)
binds to the ERa and causes its degradation mainly in the nucleus via an
ubiquitin-mediated proteasome-dependent pathway. In addition, ATA also reduced
the mRNA levels of the ERa encoding gene, ESR1, distinguishing ATA from another
anti-breast cancer drug, fulvestrant. Finally, ATA reduced the transcription of
an ER-responsive gene, GREB1.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24374015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 12;16(6):494. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0494-7.

Estrogen receptor mutations and their role in breast cancer progression.

Alluri PG(1,)(2), Speers C(3), Chinnaiyan AM(4,)(5,)(6,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1500 
E. Medical Center Drive, B2-C445 UH, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-5010, USA.
palluri@med.umich.edu. (2)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University
of Michigan Medical School, 1400 E. Medical Center Drive, 5316 CCC, Ann Arbor,
MI, 48109-5940, USA. palluri@med.umich.edu. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, 
University of Michigan Medical School, 1500 E. Medical Center Drive, B2-C445 UH, 
Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-5010, USA. cspeers@med.umich.edu. (4)Michigan Center for
Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1400 E. Medical
Center Drive, 5316 CCC, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-5940, USA. arul@med.umich.edu.
(5)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Medical School, 1400 E.
Medical Center Drive, 5316 CCGC 5940, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-5940, USA.
arul@med.umich.edu. (6)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, 1301 Catherine, M5240 Med Sci I, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-5602, USA.
arul@med.umich.edu. (7)Department of Urology, University of Michigan Medical
School, 1500 E. Medical Center Drive, 3875 TC, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109-5330, USA.
arul@med.umich.edu. (8)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan
Medical School, 1500 E. Medical Center Drive, 5316 CCC, Ann Arbor, MI,
48109-5940, USA. arul@med.umich.edu.

Endocrine therapy is the mainstay of treatment in estrogen receptor-positive
breast cancers and significantly reduces disease recurrence and breast
cancer-related mortality. However, acquired resistance to therapy has been noted 
in nearly one-third of women treated with tamoxifen and other endocrine
therapies. Mutations in the estrogen receptor have long been speculated to play a
role in endocrine therapy resistance but have been rarely detected. However,
recent studies utilizing next-generation sequencing on estrogen
receptor-positive, metastatic clinical samples have revealed that recurrent ESR1 
mutations are far more frequent than previously thought and may play an important
role in acquired endocrine therapy resistance. Here we review recent advances in 
detection and characterization of ESR1 mutations in advanced, endocrine
therapy-resistant breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC4429420
PMID: 25928204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Gynecol Oncol. 2014 Feb;132(2):334-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.12.021. Epub
2013 Dec 22.

POSTN/TGFBI-associated stromal signature predicts poor prognosis in serous
epithelial ovarian cancer.

Karlan BY(1), Dering J(2), Walsh C(3), Orsulic S(3), Lester J(3), Anderson LA(2),
Ginther CL(2), Fejzo M(2), Slamon D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Women's Cancer Program, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address:
Beth.Karlan@cshs.org. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology and Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Women's Cancer Program, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer
Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To identify molecular prognosticators and therapeutic targets for
high-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs) using genetic analyses driven
by biologic features of EOC pathogenesis.
METHODS: Ovarian tissue samples (n = 172; 122 serous EOCs, 30 other EOCs, 20
normal/benign) collected prospectively from sequential patients undergoing
gynecologic surgery were analyzed using RNA expression microarrays. Samples were 
classified based on expression of genes with potential relevance in ovarian
cancer. Gene sets were defined using Rosetta Similarity Search Tool (ROAST) and
analysis of variance (ANOVA). Gene copy number variations were identified by
array comparative genomic hybridization.
RESULTS: No distinct subgroups of EOC could be identified by unsupervised
clustering, however, analyses based on genes correlated with periostin (POSTN)
and estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) yielded distinct subgroups. When 95 high-grade
serous EOCs were grouped by genes based on ANOVA comparing ESR1/WT1 and
POSTN/TGFBI samples, overall survival (OS) was significantly shorter for 43
patients with tumors expressing genes associated with POSTN/TGFBI compared to 52 
patients with tumors expressing genes associated with ESR1/WT1 (median 30 versus 
49 months, respectively; P = 0.022). Several targets with therapeutic potential
were identified within each subgroup. BRCA germline mutations were more frequent 
in the ESR1/WT1 subgroup. Proliferation-associated genes and TP53 status (mutated
or wild-type) did not correlate with survival. Findings were validated using
independent ovarian cancer datasets.
CONCLUSIONS: Two distinct molecular subgroups of high-grade serous EOCs based on 
POSTN/TGFBI and ESR1/WT1 expressions were identified with significantly different
OS. Specific differentially expressed genes between these subgroups provide
potential prognostic and therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24368280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 18;8(12):e84189. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084189.
eCollection 2013.

ESR1 amplification in breast cancer by optimized RNase FISH: frequent but
low-level and heterogeneous.

Moelans CB(1), Holst F(2), Hellwinkel O(3), Simon R(4), van Diest PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (2)Section of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Department of Clinical
Science, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway ; Department of Pathology,
University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (3)Department of
Legal Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany.

Prevalence of ESR1 amplification in breast cancer is highly disputed and
discrepancies have been related to different technical protocols and different
scoring approaches. In addition, pre-mRNA artifacts have been proposed to
influence outcome of ESR1 FISH analysis. We analyzed ESR1 gene copy number status
combining an improved RNase FISH protocol with multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) after laser microdissection. FISH showed a high prevalence
of ESR1 gains and amplifications despite RNase treatment but MLPA did not confirm
ESR1 copy number increases detected by FISH in more than half of cases. We
suggest that the combination of the ESR1-specific intra-tumor heterogeneity and
low-level copy number increase accounts for these discrepancies.

PMCID: PMC3867473
PMID: 24367641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Environ Sci Technol. 2014 Jan 21;48(2):1271-9. doi: 10.1021/es404258h. Epub 2014 
Jan 9.

Effects of glyphosate and its formulation, roundup, on reproduction in zebrafish 
(Danio rerio).

Uren Webster TM(1), Laing LV, Florance H, Santos EM.

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences, College of Life & Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter , 
Geoffrey Pope Building, Exeter, EX4 4QD, United Kingdom.

Roundup and its active ingredient glyphosate are among the most widely used
herbicides worldwide and may contaminate surface waters. Research suggests both
Roundup and glyphosate induce oxidative stress in fish and may also cause
reproductive toxicity in mammalian systems. We aimed to investigate the
reproductive effects of Roundup and glyphosate in fish and the potential
associated mechanisms of toxicity. To do this, we conducted a 21-day exposure of 
breeding zebrafish (Danio rerio) to 0.01, 0.5, and 10 mg/L (glyphosate acid
equivalent) Roundup and 10 mg/L glyphosate. 10 mg/L glyphosate reduced egg
production but not fertilization rate in breeding colonies. Both 10 mg/L Roundup 
and glyphosate increased early stage embryo mortalities and premature hatching.
However, exposure during embryogenesis alone did not increase embryo mortality,
suggesting that this effect was caused primarily by exposure during
gametogenesis. Transcript profiling of the gonads revealed 10 mg/L Roundup and
glyphosate induced changes in the expression of cyp19a1 and esr1 in the ovary and
hsd3b2, cat, and sod1 in the testis. Our results demonstrate that these chemicals
cause reproductive toxicity in zebrafish, although only at high concentrations
unlikely to occur in the environment, and likely mechanisms of toxicity include
disruption of the steroidogenic biosynthesis pathway and oxidative stress.

PMID: 24364672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Acta Histochem. 2014 May;116(4):559-69. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2013.11.004. Epub
2013 Dec 19.

Immunolocalization of estrogen and androgen receptors in the caput epididymidis
of the fat sand rat (Psammomys obesus): Effects of seasonal variations,
castration and efferent duct ligation.

Menad R(1), Smaï S(2), Moudilou E(3), Khammar F(4), Exbrayat JM(5),
Gernigon-Spychalowicz T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Small Vertebrates' Reproduction, Laboratory of Research on Arid Areas, Faculty
of Biological Sciences, Houari Boumediene University of Sciences and Technology, 
El Alia, Algiers, Algeria. Electronic address: menadrafik@gmail.com. (2)Small
Vertebrates' Reproduction, Laboratory of Research on Arid Areas, Faculty of
Biological Sciences, Houari Boumediene University of Sciences and Technology, El 
Alia, Algiers, Algeria. (3)University of Lyon, UMRS 449, Laboratory of General
Biology, Catholic University of Lyon, Reproduction and Comparative
Development/EPHE, Lyon Cedex 02, France. (4)Mammal Ecophysiology, Laboratory of
Research on Arid Areas, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Houari Boumediene
University of Sciences and Technology, El Alia, Algiers, Algeria. (5)University
of Lyon, UMRS 449, Laboratory of General Biology, Catholic University of Lyon,
Reproduction and Comparative Development/EPHE, Lyon Cedex 02, France. Electronic 
address: jmexbrayat@univ-catholyon.fr.

The fat sand rat (Psammomys obesus) is a model to study seasonal reproductive
cycle changes and several metabolic disorders. In order to show a possible
involvement of estrogens in the male reproductive functions, the expression of
estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2) and androgen receptor (AR) were investigated
in the caput epididymidis of fat sand rats during the breeding season, resting
season, after castration, after castration followed by testosterone treatment,
and after ligation of efferent ducts. In the breeding season, principal cells
presented a strong immunostaining of AR in both nuclei and cytoplasm, a strong
staining of ESR1, mainly in the apical zone, and a strong immunoexpression of
ESR2, mainly in nuclei. In the resting season, a moderate immunostaining of AR in
both cytoplasm and nuclei was observed. ESR1 staining showed a strong
immunoreactivity in the nuclei. In contrast, the nuclei were negative for ESR2.
After castration, a low and selective signal distribution was observed: the
nuclei were moderately positive for AR and ESR2, and negative for ESR1. After
castration and testosterone treatment, an androgen-dependence for AR and the
restoration of ESR1 but not ESR2 immunoexpression were observed. After ligation
of the efferent ducts, a considerable reduction of AR immunoreactivity was
observed in contrast to ESR1 and ESR2, which gave a strong immunostaining signal.
These results illustrate the complexity of the regulation of the androgen and
estrogen receptor expression in the epididymis and argue for the coexistence of
both androgenic and estrogenic pathways.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24360974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. G3 (Bethesda). 2014 Feb 19;4(2):307-14. doi: 10.1534/g3.113.008755.

Genome-wide association study of periodontal health measured by probing depth in 
adults ages 18-49 years.

Shaffer JR(1), Polk DE, Wang X, Feingold E, Weeks DE, Lee MK, Cuenco KT, Weyant
RJ, Crout RJ, McNeil DW, Marazita ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261.

The etiology of chronic periodontitis clearly includes a heritable component. Our
purpose was to perform a small exploratory genome-wide association study in
adults ages 18-49 years to nominate genes associated with periodontal
disease-related phenotypes for future consideration. Full-mouth periodontal
pocket depth probing was performed on participants (N = 673), with affected
status defined as two or more sextants with probing depths of 5.5 mm or greater. 
Two variations of this phenotype that differed in how missing teeth were treated 
were used in analysis. More than 1.2 million genetic markers across the genome
were genotyped or imputed and tested for genetic association. We identified ten
suggestive loci (p-value = 1E-5), including genes/loci that have been previously 
implicated in chronic periodontitis: LAMA2, HAS2, CDH2, ESR1, and the genomic
region on chromosome 14q21-22 between SOS2 and NIN. Moreover, we nominated novel 
loci not previously implicated in chronic periodontitis or related pathways,
including the regions 3p22 near OSBPL10 (a lipid receptor implicated in
hyperlipidemia), 4p15 near HSP90AB2P (a heat shock pseudogene), 11p15 near GVINP1
(a GTPase pseudogene), 14q31 near SEL1L (an intracellular transporter), and 18q12
in FHOD3 (an actin cytoskeleton regulator). Replication of these results in
additional samples is needed. This is one of the first research efforts to
identify genetic polymorphisms associated with chronic periodontitis-related
phenotypes by the genome-wide association study approach. Though small, efforts
such this are needed in order to nominate novel genes and generate new hypotheses
for exploration and testing in future studies.

PMCID: PMC3931564
PMID: 24347629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 5;8(12):e81110. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081110. eCollection
2013.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib induces an inhibitory chromatin environment
at a distal enhancer of the estrogen receptor-a gene.

Powers GL(1), Rajbhandari P, Solodin NM, Bickford B, Alarid ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McArdle Laboratories for Cancer Research and
University of Wisconsin Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Expression of the estrogen receptor-a (ERa) gene, ESR1, is a clinical biomarker
used to predict therapeutic outcome of breast cancer. Hence, there is significant
interest in understanding the mechanisms regulating ESR1 gene expression.
Proteasome activity is increased in cancer and we previously showed that
proteasome inhibition leads to loss of ESR1 gene expression in breast cancer
cells. Expression of ESR1 mRNA in breast cancer cells is controlled predominantly
through a proximal promoter within ~400 base pair (bp) of the transcription start
site (TSS). Here, we show that loss of ESR1 gene expression induced by the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib is associated with inactivation of a distal
enhancer located 150 kilobases (kb) from the TSS. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays reveal several bortezomib-induced changes at the distal site including
decreased occupancy of three critical transcription factors, GATA3, FOXA1, and
AP2<U+03B3>. Bortezomib treatment also resulted in decreased histone H3 and H4
acetylation and decreased occupancy of histone acetyltransferase, p300. These
data suggest a mechanism to explain proteasome inhibitor-induced loss of ESR1
mRNA expression that highlights the importance of the chromatin environment at
the -150 kb distal enhancer in regulation of basal expression of ESR1 in breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3855213
PMID: 24339902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



61. J Nucl Med. 2013 Oct;54(10):1697-702. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.112.113373. Epub 2013
Aug 22.

Feasibility and predictability of perioperative PET and estrogen receptor ligand 
in patients with invasive breast cancer.

Gemignani ML(1), Patil S, Seshan VE, Sampson M, Humm JL, Lewis JS, Brogi E,
Larson SM, Morrow M, Pandit-Taskar N.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York.

The presence of estrogen receptor (ER) in breast cancer is a prognostic indicator
for both disease-free and overall survival. 16a-(18)F-fluoro-17ß-estradiol
((18)F-FES) with PET is a noninvasive test for evaluation of ER expression and
has been used for predicting response to endocrine therapy in patients with
ER-positive metastatic breast cancer. The purpose of this study was to correlate 
(18)F-FES PET and ER expression in patients with primary, operable breast
cancer.METHODS: Forty-eight patients were prospectively enrolled in an
institutional review board-approved protocol and signed an informed consent form.
All patients had undergone (18)F-FES PET preoperatively. Clinical
characteristics, tumor characteristics, and treatment outcomes were recorded.
Immunohistochemical analysis for ER and progesterone receptor (PgR) percentage
expression (46 surgical, 2 core biopsy specimens) was performed. (18)F-FES PET
standardized uptake value (SUV) of the breast lesion was correlated with
percentage immunohistochemistry ER and PgR expression. (18)F-FES PET SUV was
quantified, with a value of 1.5 or more considered positive, and ER and PgR was
quantified, with 1% or more considered positive. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tissue was available for 44 patients (42 surgical, 2 core biopsy specimens). We
used a microarray platform, and estrogen-related gene expression data (ESR1,
ESR2, and PGR) were compared with (18)F-FES PET SUV (Spearman rank correlation). 
Tumor size, ductal histology, grade, HER2-neu overexpression, PgR expression,
estradiol level, body mass index (BMI), and lean BMI were compared with (18)F-FES
PET uptake using univariate and multivariate analysis.
RESULTS: Forty-eight patients completed our protocol, and 2 patients did not
undergo surgery because bone metastases were identified preoperatively on
(18)F-FES PET. Eighty-three percent of our patients were stage I or II, with a
median tumor size of 1.9 cm. Forty-one patients underwent a sentinel node biopsy.
Twenty-one patients had nodal involvement. (18)F-FES PET identified 5 patients
with axillary nodal uptake (median SUV, 3.0; range, 1.7-6.9). These 5 patients
had ER-positive breast cancer, and all had more than 4 positive nodes at the time
of axillary node dissection. (18)F-FES PET SUV was associated with
immunohistochemistry ER expression. The sensitivity and specificity of the
(18)F-FES PET for the breast lesion were 0.85 and 0.75, respectively. Estrogen
and progesterone gene expression (ESR1, ESR2, and PGR) was not associated with
(18)F-FES PET SUV (Spearman rank correlation). We found a significant correlation
between (18)F-FES PET SUV and tumor size (P = 0.0015) but not with ductal
histology, grade, HER2-neu overexpression, PgR, estradiol, BMI, or lean BMI
(logistic regression). ER expression (P < 0.001) and tumor size (P < 0.0001) were
significant on multivariate regression analysis.
CONCLUSION: (18)F-FES PET SUV correlated with ER immunohistochemistry expression 
but not gene expression in our patients with early breast cancer. We found that
size of primary tumor was significantly associated with (18)F-FES PET SUV.
(18)F-FES PET is highly predictive for metastatic disease and helped in the
identification of patients with metastatic disease in a preoperative setting.

PMCID: PMC4404505
PMID: 23970364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Gene. 2013 Nov 1;530(1):66-74. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.052. Epub 2013 Aug 14.

DAX1 regulatory networks unveil conserved and potentially new functions.

Martins RS(1), Power DM, Fuentes J, Deloffre LA, Canário AV.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Marine Sciences, CCMAR-CIMAR Associate Laboratory, University of
Algarve, Campus de Gambelas, 8005-139 Faro, Portugal. Electronic address:
rsmartin@ualg.pt.

DAX1 is an orphan nuclear receptor with actions in mammalian sex determination,
regulation of steroidogenesis, embryonic development and neural differentiation. 
Conserved patterns of DAX1 gene expression from mammals to fish have been taken
to suggest conserved function. In the present study, the European sea bass,
Dicentrarchus labrax, DAX1 promoter was isolated and its conserved features
compared to other fish and mammalian DAX1 promoters in order to derive common
regulators and functional gene networks. Fish and mammalian DAX1 promoters share 
common sets of transcription factor frameworks which were also present in the
promoter region of another 127 genes. Pathway analysis clustered these into
candidate gene networks associated with the fish and mammalian DAX1. The networks
identified are concordant with described functions for DAX1 in embryogenesis,
regulation of transcription, endocrine development and steroid production. Novel 
candidate gene network partners were also identified, which implicate DAX1 in ion
homeostasis and transport, lipid transport and skeletal development. Experimental
evidence is provided supporting roles for DAX1 in steroid signalling and
osmoregulation in fish. These results highlight the usefulness of the in silico
comparative approach to analyse gene regulation for hypothesis generation.
Conserved promoter architecture can be used also to predict potentially new gene 
functions. The approach reported can be applied to genes from model and non-model
species.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23954228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 8;8(8):e72219. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072219. eCollection 
2013.

Prognostic significance of ESR1 amplification and ESR1 PvuII, CYP2C19*2,
UGT2B15*2 polymorphisms in breast cancer patients.

Markiewicz A(1), Welnicka-Jaskiewicz M, Skokowski J, Jaskiewicz J, Szade J,
Jassem J, Zaczek AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology,
University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: Amplification of the ESR1 gene, coding for estrogen receptor alpha,
was shown to predict responsiveness to tamoxifen, however its prognostic impact
in breast cancer patients has not been thoroughly investigated. Other factors
that could contribute to responsiveness to tamoxifen treatment are polymorphisms 
in ESR1 gene and genes involved in tamoxifen metabolism. The aim of this study
was to assess the prognostic role of ESR1 gene dosage in a consecutive group of
breast cancer patients and to correlate this feature with clinico-pathological
factors. Additionally, ESR1 PvuII, CYP2C19*2 and UGT2B15*2 polymorphisms were
analyzed in the tamoxifen-treated subgroup of patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Primary tumor samples from 281 stage I-III consecutive
breast cancer patients were analyzed for ESR1 gene dosage using real-time PCR
with locked nucleic acids hydrolysis probes. In the tamoxifen-treated subgroup of
patients, ESR1 PvuII, CYP2C19*2 and UGT2B15*2 polymorphism in leukocytes genomic 
DNA were analyzed. Results were correlated with clinico-pathological factors and 
with disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: ESR1 amplification (with a cut-off level of 2.0) was found in 12% of the
entire group of breast cancer patients, and in 18% of the ER-negative subgroup.
This feature was associated with decreased DFS both in the entire group (P=0.007)
and in the ER-negative subgroup (P=0.03), but not in the tamoxifen-treated
patients. Patients with ESR1 PvuII wt/wt genotype and at least one UGT2B15 wt
allele had a worse DFS (P=0.03) and showed a trend towards decreased Os (P=0.08) 
in comparison to patients with ESR1 PvuII wt/vt or vt/vt genotype and UGT2B15
*2/*2 genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 amplification can occur in ER-negative tumors and may carry
poor prognosis. In the tamoxifen-treated subgroup, poor prognosis was related to 
the combined presence of ESR1 PvuII wt/wt and UGT2B15wt/wt or wt/*2 genotype.

PMCID: PMC3738574
PMID: 23951298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Sex Dev. 2013;7(6):303-7. doi: 10.1159/000353877. Epub 2013 Aug 15.

Sex-specific gonadal and gene expression changes throughout development in
fathead minnow.

Leet JK(1), Lesteberg KE, Schoenfuss HL, Olmstead AW, Amberg JJ, Ankley GT,
Sepúlveda MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, Ind., USA.

Although fathead minnows (Pimephales promelas) are commonly used as a model fish 
in endocrine disruption studies, past studies have not characterized sex-specific
baseline expression of genes involved in sex differentiation during development
in this species. Using a sex-linked DNA marker to verify gender, we evaluated the
expression over time of genes involved in sex differentiation (dmrt1, cyp19a,
cyp17, star, esr1, ar) in developing fathead minnows (10-45 days post hatch).
Evaluation of these molecular markers in combination with gender identification
help us to better understand the mechanisms regulating sex differentiation in
fathead minnows and how endocrine-disrupting chemicals may alter these processes.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23948860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 23;8(7):e69367. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069367. Print 2013.

Genetic variants in hormone-related genes and risk of breast cancer.

Clendenen T(1), Zeleniuch-Jacquotte A, Wirgin I, Koenig KL, Afanasyeva Y, Lundin 
E, Arslan AA, Axelsson T, Försti A, Hallmans G, Hemminki K, Lenner P, Roy N,
Shore RE, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, New York, United States of America. tess.clendenen@nyumc.org

Sex hormones play a key role in the development of breast cancer. Certain
polymorphic variants (SNPs and repeat polymorphisms) in hormone-related genes are
associated with sex hormone levels. However, the relationship observed between
these genetic variants and breast cancer risk has been inconsistent. We conducted
a case-control study nested within two prospective cohorts to assess the
relationship between specific genetic variants in hormone-related genes and
breast cancer risk. In total, 1164 cases and 2111 individually-matched controls
were included in the study. We did not observe an association between potential
functional genetic polymorphisms in the estrogen pathway, SHBG rs6259, ESR1
rs2234693, CYP19 rs10046 and rs4775936, and UGT1A1 rs8175347, or the progesterone
pathway, PGR rs1042838, with the risk of breast cancer. Our results suggest that 
these genetic variants do not have a strong effect on breast cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3720532
PMID: 23935996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013 Dec;23(12):1763-8. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2013.06.003. Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Prospective analysis of the association between estrogen receptor gene variants
and the risk of cognitive decline in elderly women.

Ryan J(1), Carrière I, Amieva H, Rouaud O, Berr C, Ritchie K, Scarabin PY,
Ancelin ML.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1061, Neuropsychiatry: Epidemiological and Clinical Research,
Montpellier F-34093, France; Université Montpellier1, Montpellier F-34000,
France; Cancer & Disease Epigenetics, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Flemington Road Parkville, 3052 Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
joanne.ryan@inserm.fr.

A plethora of data suggests a role for estrogen in cognitive function and genetic
variants in the estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2 have been implicated in a range 
of hormone-sensitive diseases. It remains unknown however, whether ESR
polymorphisms are associated with the risk of decline in specific domains of
cognitive function. Data came from 3799 non-demented, community-dwelling elderly 
women recruited in France to the 3C Study. A short cognitive test battery was
administered at baseline and 2, 4 and 7 years follow-up to assess global
function, verbal fluency, visual memory, psychomotor speed and executive
function. Detailed socio-demographic, behavioral, physical and mental health
information was also gathered and genotyping of five common ESR1 and ESR2
polymorphisms was also performed. In multivariable-adjusted Cox analysis, ESR1
rs2234693 and rs9340799 were not significantly associated with the risk of
decline on any of the cognitive tasks. However, significant associations with
ESR2 polymorphisms were identified. The A allele of rs1256049 was associated with
an increased risk of substantial decline in visual memory (HR:1.64, 95% CI:
1.23-2.18, p=0.0007), psychomotor speed (HR:1.43, 95% CI: 1.12-1.83, p=0.004),
and on the incidence of Mild Cognitive Impairment (HR:1.31, 95% CI: 1.05-1.64,
p=0.02). There was also a weaker association between the A allele of rs4986938
and a decreased risk of decline in psychomotor speed. Our large multicentre
prospective study provides preliminary evidence that ESR2 genetic variants may be
associated with specific cognitive domains and suggests that further examination 
of the role of this gene in cognitive function is warranted.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23932494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Rhythms. 2013 Aug;28(4):291-300. doi: 10.1177/0748730413497190.

Photic phase-response curve in 2 strains of mice with impaired responsiveness to 
estrogens.

Blattner MS(1), Mahoney MM.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Program and Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61802, USA. mmm1@illinois.edu

Steroid hormones including estrogens modulate the expression of daily activity
and circadian rhythms, including free-running period, phase angle of activity
onset, and response to light. The mechanisms underlying these effects, however,
are not fully understood. We tested the hypothesis that estrogen signaling is
required for photic responsiveness of the circadian timing system. We used
estrogen receptor subtype 1 (ESR1) knock-out mice (ERKO) and nonclassic estrogen 
receptor knock-in mice (NERKI). ERKO animals are unable to respond to estrogen at
ESR1, and NERKI animals lack the ability to respond to estrogens via estrogen
response element-mediated transcription but still respond via nonclassical
mechanisms. We analyzed behavioral shifts in activity onset in response to 1-h
light pulses given across the subjective 24-h day in gonadally intact male and
female NERKI, ERKO, and wild-type (WT) littermates. We also examined Fos protein 
expression in the suprachiasmatic nucleus, the site of the master circadian
pacemaker, at 2 times of day. We found a significant effect of genotype on phase 
shifts in response to light pulses given in the subjective night. Female WT mice 
had a significantly larger phase response than ERKO females during the early
subjective night (phase shift of 98 min and 58 min, respectively; p < 0.05).
NERKI females were intermediate to WT and ERKO females, suggesting a contribution
of nonclassical estrogen signaling on circadian timekeeping functions. This
genotype effect is not observed in males; they did not have a difference in phase
shifts following a light pulse at any time point. WT males, however, shifted an
average of 47 min less than did females at zeitgeber time (ZT) 16 (ZT 0 lights-on
and ZT 12 lights-off). These data indicate that estrogens modify the response of 
the circadian timekeeping system to light via classical and nonclassical
signaling pathways.

PMID: 23929556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Endocrinology. 2013 Nov;154(11):4158-69. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1446. Epub 2013 Aug
8.

Morpholino-mediated knockdown of ERa, ERßa, and ERßb mRNAs in zebrafish (Danio
rerio) embryos reveals differential regulation of estrogen-inducible genes.

Griffin LB(1), January KE, Ho KW, Cotter KA, Callard GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Mall, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215. gvc@bu.edu.

Genetically distinct estrogen receptor (ER) subtypes (ERa and ERß) play a major
role in mediating estrogen actions in vertebrates, but their unique and
overlapping functions are not entirely clear. Although mammals have 1 gene of
each subtype (ESR1 and ESR2), teleost fish have a single esr1 (ERa) and 2 esr2
(ERßa and ERßb) genes. To determine the in vivo role of different ER isoforms in 
regulating estrogen-inducible transcription targets, zebrafish (Danio rerio)
embryos were microinjected with esr-specific morpholino (MO) oligonucleotides to 
disrupt splicing of the exon III/intron III junction in the DNA-binding domain.
Each MO knocked down its respective normal transcript and increased production of
variants with a retained intron III (esr1 MO) or a deleted or mis-spliced exon
III (esr2a and esr2b MOs). Both esr1 and esr2b MOs blocked estradiol induction of
vitellogenin and ERa mRNAs, predominant hepatic genes, but esr2b was the only MO 
that blocked induction of cytochrome P450 aromatase B mRNA, a predominant brain
gene. Knockdown of ERßa with the esr2a MO had no effect on estrogen induction of 
the 3 mRNAs but, when coinjected with esr1 MO, attenuated the effect of ERa
knockdown. Results indicate that ERa and ERßb, acting separately or cooperatively
on specific gene targets, are positive transcriptional regulators of estrogen
action, but the role of ERßa, if any, is unclear. We conclude that MO technology 
in zebrafish embryos is an advantageous approach for investigating the interplay 
of ER subtypes in a true physiological context.

PMCID: PMC3800766
PMID: 23928376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):894-903. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.233. Epub 2013 Aug 8.

Transcription factor-pathway coexpression analysis reveals cooperation between
SP1 and ESR1 on dysregulating cell cycle arrest in non-hyperdiploid multiple
myeloma.

Wang X(1), Yan Z(2), Fulciniti M(3), Li Y(1), Gkotzamanidou M(3), Amin SB(2),
Shah PK(2), Zhang Y(1), Munshi NC(3), Li C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational
Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 
and Harvard Medical School, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA. (4)1]
Department of Bioinformatics, School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China [2] Department of Biostatistics and Computational
Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA.

Multiple myeloma is a hematological cancer of plasma B cells and remains
incurable. Two major subtypes of myeloma, hyperdiploid MM (HMM) and
non-hyperdiploid MM (NHMM), have distinct chromosomal alterations and different
survival outcomes. Transcription factors (TrFs) have been implicated in myeloma
oncogenesis, but their dysregulation in myeloma subtypes are less studied. Here, 
we developed a TrF-pathway coexpression analysis to identify altered coexpression
between two sample types. We apply the method to the two myeloma subtypes and the
cell cycle arrest pathway, which is significantly differentially expressed
between the two subtypes. We find that TrFs MYC, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and HOXA9 have
significantly lower coexpression with cell cycle arrest in HMM, co-occurring with
their overactivation in HMM. In contrast, TrFs ESR1 (estrogen receptor 1), SP1
and E2F1 have significantly lower coexpression with cell cycle arrest in NHMM.
SP1 chromatin immunoprecipitation targets are enriched by cell cycle arrest
genes. These results motivate a cooperation model of ESR1 and SP1 in regulating
cell cycle arrest, and a hypothesis that their overactivation in NHMM disrupts
proper regulation of cell cycle arrest. Cotargeting ESR1 and SP1 shows a
synergistic effect on inhibiting myeloma proliferation in NHMM cell lines.
Therefore, studying TrF-pathway coexpression dysregulation in human cancers
facilitates forming novel hypotheses toward clinical utility.

PMCID: PMC4155324
PMID: 23925045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 29;8(7):e70634. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070634. Print 2013.

Prognostic significance of ESR1 gene amplification, mRNA/protein expression and
functional profiles in high-risk early breast cancer: a translational study of
the Hellenic Cooperative Oncology Group (HeCOG).

Pentheroudakis G(1), Kotoula V, Eleftheraki AG, Tsolaki E, Wirtz RM, Kalogeras
KT, Batistatou A, Bobos M, Dimopoulos MA, Timotheadou E, Gogas H, Christodoulou
C, Papadopoulou K, Efstratiou I, Scopa CD, Papaspyrou I, Vlachodimitropoulos D,
Linardou H, Samantas E, Pectasides D, Pavlidis N, Fountzilas G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Ioannina University Hospital, Ioannina,
Greece. gpenther@otenet.gr

BACKGROUND: Discrepant data have been published on the incidence and prognostic
significance of ESR1 gene amplification in early breast cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor blocks were
collected from women with early breast cancer participating in two HeCOG adjuvant
trials. Messenger RNA was studied by quantitative PCR, ER protein expression was 
centrally assessed using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and ESR1 gene copy number by 
dual fluorescent in situ hybridization probes.
RESULTS: In a total of 1010 women with resected node-positive early breast
adenocarcinoma, the tumoral ESR1/CEP6 gene ratio was suggestive of deletion in
159 (15.7%), gene gain in 551 (54.6%) and amplification in 42 cases (4.2%), with 
only 30 tumors (3%) harboring five or more ESR1 copies. Gene copy number ratio
showed a significant, though weak correlation to mRNA and protein expression
(Spearman's Rho <0.23, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01). ESR1 clusters were observed in 9.5% (57 gain,
38 amplification) of cases. In contrast to mRNA and protein expression, which
were favorable prognosticators, gene copy number changes did not obtain
prognostic significance. When ESR1/CEP6 gene ratio was combined with function (as
defined by ER protein and mRNA expression) in a molecular classifier, the Gene
Functional profile, it was functional status that impacted on prognosis. In
univariate analysis, patients with functional tumors (positive ER protein
expression and gene ratio normal or gain/amplification) fared better than those
with non-functional tumors with ESR1 gain (HR for relapse or death 0.49-0.64,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.003). Significant interactions were observed between gene
gain/amplification and paclitaxel therapy (trend for DFS benefit from paclitaxel 
only in patients with ESR1 gain/amplification, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.066) and Gene Functional
profile with HER2 amplification (Gene Functional profile prognostic only in
HER2-normal cases, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.029).
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 gene deletion and amplification do not constitute per se
prognostic markers, instead they can be classified to distinct prognostic groups 
according to their protein-mediated functional status.

PMCID: PMC3726626
PMID: 23923010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Arch Womens Ment Health. 2013 Dec;16(6):499-509. doi: 10.1007/s00737-013-0373-8. 
Epub 2013 Aug 7.

Association study of the estrogen receptor gene ESR1 with postpartum
depression--a pilot study.

Pinsonneault JK(1), Sullivan D, Sadee W, Soares CN, Hampson E, Steiner M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Program in Pharmacogenomics, The Ohio State
University College of Medicine, 333 West 10th Ave, Columbus, OH, 43214, USA,
pinsonneault.2@osu.edu.

Perinatal mood disorders, such as postpartum depression (PPD), are costly for
society, with potentially serious consequences for mother and child. While
multiple genes appear to play a role in PPD susceptibility, the contributions of 
specific genetic variations remain unclear. Previously implicated as a candidate 
gene, the estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) is a key player in mediating
hormonal differences during pregnancy and the postpartum period. This study
addresses genetic factors in perinatal mood disorders, testing nine polymorphisms
in ESR1. Two hundred fifty-seven postpartum women were screened for mood
disorders, including 52 women with PPD and 32 without any symptoms of mood
disorders. We detected a significant association for the upstream TA
microsatellite repeat with Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale scores
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007). The same variant was also associated with the occurrence of PPD.
Separately, 11 candidate functional polymorphisms in 7 additional genes were
genotyped to investigate gene-gene interaction with the ESR1 TA repeat,
identifying a potential interaction with the serotonin transporter. Our results
support a role for ESR1 in the etiology of PPD, possibly through the modulation
of serotonin signaling. Our findings for ESR1 could have broad implications for
other disorders and therapies that involve estrogens.

PMCID: PMC3833886
PMID: 23917948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2013 Jun;52(2):197-203. doi: 10.1016/j.tjog.2013.04.008.

Association between single nucleotide polymorphisms of the estrogen receptor 1
and receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand genes and bone mineral
density in postmenopausal Taiwanese.

Cheng BH(1), Wang TH, Kang HY, Lin YC, Huang CC, Hsu TY, Kung FT, Huang KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,
Kaohsiung Medical Center, Chang Gung University, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of the genes encoding the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and the
receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL) and bone mineral
density (BMD) in postmenopausal Taiwanese.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five ESR1 SNPs and three RANKL SNPs in 467 women were
genotyped. Results of genotyping were correlated with BMD that had been adjusted 
for body mass index (BMI), age, and years after menopause.
RESULTS: Those with the ESR1 Crs1884054 allele were found to have a lower BMD at 
LS2-4/Lateral view (p = 0.005 and permutated p = 0.046), and those with the ESR1 
haplotype Trs2234693-Ars922996 had a higher risk for low BMD also at LS2-4/Lat
(OR = 1.8, 95% CI = 1.1-2.9). In addition, women without the RANKL haplotype
Grs2148072-Crs2200287-Grs922996 had a higher risk for low BMD at LS1-4/AP (OR =
2.09, 95% CI = 1.21 ~ 3.64). Stratification analyses revealed that those with
ESR1 AArs1884054 and RANKL Ars2148072 (p = 0.032) or RANKL Trs2200287 (p = 0.007)
had a lower BMD at LS1-4/AP.
CONCLUSION: Genotypes of these SNPs of ESR1 and RANKL may help us predict the
osteoporosis risk in menopausal women.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 23915851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Neoplasma. 2013;60(6):635-46. doi: 10.4149/neo_2013_082.

Evaluation of protein expression and DNA methylation profiles detected by
pyrosequencing in invasive breast cancer.

Zmetakova I, Danihel L, Smolkova B, Mego M, Kajabova V, Krivulcik T, Rusnak I,
Rychly B, Danis D, Repiska V, Blasko P, Karaba M, Benca J, Pechan J, Fridrichova 
I.

Breast carcinoma is the most common cancer with high mortality caused by
metastatic disease. New molecular biomarkers predicting the tumour's metastatic
potential would therefore improve metastasis prevention and personalised care.
The aim of the study was to investigate the relationship between DNA methylation 
levels in invasivity and metastasising associated genes with aberrant protein
expression and also to evaluate whether a similar DNA methylation level is
present in the tumour and circulating cell-free DNA for utilising plasma DNA
methylation as prognostic biomarker. By using pyrosequencing, we analysed DNA
methylation levels of 11 genes, namely APC, ADAM23, CXCL12, ESR1, PGR B, CDH1,
RASSF1A, SYK, TIMP3, BRMS1 and SOCS1 in tumour, plasma and peripheral blood cells
from 34 patients with primary breast cancer, as well as plasma and peripheral
blood cells from 50 healthy controls. Simultaneously, the expression of related
proteins in paraffin-embedded tumour samples was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry. Statistical analysis was performed by SPSS statistics 15.0 
software. Tumour DNA hypermethylation was found in most commonly methylated
RASSF1A (71.9%), APC (55.9%), ADAM23 (38%) and CXCL12 (34.4%) genes with
methylation levels up to 86, 86, 53 and 64 %, respectively. In tumours,
significantly higher methylation levels were found in nine genes, compared with
the patients´ peripheral blood cell DNA. Furthermore, in patients methylation
levels in peripheral blood cell DNA were significantly higher than in controls in
CXCL12, ESR1 and TIMP3 genes, but the values did not exceed 15%. On the other
hand, no correlations were observed in patients between DNA methylation in
tumours and cell-free plasma DNA. Moreover, in patients and controls nearly
identical values of cumulative DNA methylation (43.6 % ± 20.1 vs. 43.7 % ± 15.0) 
were observed in plasma samples. A variable spectrum from high to none
expressions presented in tumour tissues in all of the proteins evaluated, however
in APC and CXCL12 genes a visible decreasing trend of mean DNA methylation level 
with increasing expression of the corresponding protein was observed. The DNA
methylation profiles manifested in our group of breast carcinomas are cancer
specific, but they are not the only cause that affects the silencing of evaluated
genes and the decrease of relevant protein products. The clinical utility of DNA 
methylation testing in peripheral blood cell DNA for cancer diagnosis and therapy
need to be further investigated.

PMID: 23906298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biol Reprod. 2013 Sep 12;89(3):54. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.108829. Print 2013
Sep.

In vitro mimicking of estrous cycle stages in porcine oviduct epithelium cells:
estradiol and progesterone regulate differentiation, gene expression, and
cellular function.

Chen S(1), Einspanier R, Schoen J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Freie
Universitaet Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Throughout the estrous cycle the oviduct epithelium undergoes dramatic
morphological and functional changes. To elucidate cyclic cellular events and
associated regulation mechanisms of 17beta estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P4), 
we mimicked estrous cycle stages in vitro using a culture system of primary
porcine oviduct epithelium cells (POEC). Cells were polarized in an air/liquid
interface and then treated with E2 and P4 for physiological time periods: In
experiment 1, high concentration of P4 with low concentration of E2 for 10 days
resembled diestrus; in experiment 2, following the previous diestrus, sequential 
high E2 with low P4 for 2.5 days represented estrus. Histomorphometry and
electron microscopy showed cyclic changes in cellular height, cell population,
and cilia density under the influence of hormone stimulation. Transepithelial
electrical resistance was high in simulated diestrus but reduced in estrus. Thus,
E2 and P4 affect cellular polarity, transformation of ciliated and secretory
cells, as well as electrical conductivity of oviduct epithelium. Simulation of
diestrus led to significant decrease in expression of hormone receptors (PGR and 
ESR1) and other epithelial markers (MUC16, OVGP1, and HSP90B1), while sequential 
simulated estrus caused an increase in these markers. The hormonal regulation of 
some marker genes was clearly time-dependent. Furthermore, POEC showed increased 
sperm-binding capacity in simulated estrus. In this study, we also present a
novel approach based on the AndroVision software, which can be routinely utilized
as a parameter for ciliary activity, and for the first time, we showed fluid
movement patterns along the epithelium lining in vitro.

PMID: 23904510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Oncotarget. 2013 Jun;4(6):875-83.

pRb controls estrogen receptor alpha protein stability and activity.

Caligiuri I(1), Toffoli G, Giordano A, Rizzolio F.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for
Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

A cross talk between the Estrogen Receptor (ESR1) and the Retinoblastoma (pRb)
pathway has been demonstrated to influence the therapeutic response of breast
cancer patients but the full mechanism remains poorly understood. Here we show
that the N-terminal domain of pRb interacts with the CD domain of ESR1 to allow
for the assembly of intermediate complex chaperone proteins HSP90 and p23. We
demonstrated that a loss of pRb in human/mouse breast cells decreases the
expression of the ESR1 protein through the proteasome pathway. Our work reveals a
novel regulatory mechanism of ESR1 basal turnover and activity and an
unanticipated relationship with the pRb tumor suppressor.

PMCID: PMC3757244
PMID: 23900261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Reprod Sci. 2014 Mar;21(3):305-18. doi: 10.1177/1933719113497267. Epub 2013 Jul
30.

Endometriosis is characterized by a distinct pattern of histone 3 and histone 4
lysine modifications.

Monteiro JB(1), Colón-Díaz M, García M, Gutierrez S, Colón M, Seto E, Laboy J,
Flores I.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Biochemistry, Ponce School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Ponce, Puerto Rico.

BACKGROUND: The histone modification patterns in endometriosis have not been
fully characterized. This gap in knowledge results in a poor understanding of the
epigenetic mechanisms (and potential therapeutic targets) at play. We aimed to
(1) assess global acetylation status of histone 3 (H3) and histone 4 (H4), (2)
measure levels of H3 and H4 lysine (K) acetylation and methylation, and (3) to
identify histone acetylation patterns in promoter regions of candidate genes in
tissues from patients and controls.
METHODS: Global and K-specific acetylation/methylation levels of histones were
measured in 24 lesions, 15 endometrium from patients, and 26 endometrium from
controls. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-polymerase chain reaction was used
to determine the histone acetylation status of the promoter regions of candidate 
genes in tissues.
RESULTS: The lesions were globally hypoacetylated at H3 (but not H4) compared to 
eutopic endometrium from controls. Lesions had significantly lower levels of
H3K9ac and H4K16ac compared to eutopic endometrium from patients and controls.
Tissues from patients were hypermethylated at H3K4, H3K9, and H3K27 compared to
endometrium from controls. The ChIP analysis showed hypoacetylation of H3/H4
within promoter regions of candidate genes known to be downregulated in
endometriosis (e.g., HOXA10, ESR1, CDH1, and p21 (WAF1/Cip1) ) in lesions versus 
control endometrium. The stereoidogenic factor 1 (SF1) promoter region was
enriched for acetylated H3 and H4 in lesions versus control tissues, correlating 
with its reported high expression in lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: This study describes the histone code of lesions and endometrium
from patients with endometriosis and provides support for a possible role of
histone modification in modulation of gene expression in endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC3936415
PMID: 23899551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2013 Oct;9(10):565. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2013.151. Epub 2013
Jul 30.

Reproductive endocrinology: ESR1 mutation causes estrogen resistance and puberty 
delay in women.

Kugelberg E.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Jul 11;369(2):164-71.

PMID: 23897169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 19;8(7):e68798. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068798. Print 2013.

Indications of clinical and genetic predictors for aromatase inhibitors related
musculoskeletal adverse events in Chinese Han women with breast cancer.

Wang J(1), Lu K, Song Y, Xie L, Zhao S, Wang Y, Sun W, Liu L, Zhao H, Tang D, Ma 
W, Pan B, Xuan Q, Liu H, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, China.

BACKGROUND: Women with breast cancer treated with aromatase inhibitors (AIs) may 
experience musculoskeletal symptoms that lead to discontinuation of effective
therapy. The purpose of the current study is to evaluate the clinical and genetic
predictors for AIs-related musculoskeletal adverse events(MS-AEs).
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We recruited 436 postmenopausal Chinese Han
women receiving adjuvant AIs therapy for early-stage hormone-sensitive breast
cancer. Patients completed a self-administered questionnaire assessing the
presence of musculoskeletal symptoms that started or worsened after initiating
AIs. 27 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of ESR1, ESR2 and PGR were analyzed
by Sequenom MassARRAY assays and /or PCR-based TaqMan assays.Of the 436 enrolled 
women, 206 cases experienced musculoskeletal symptoms.Patients who received
taxane chemotherapy were more than two times more likely than other patients to
have AIs-related MS-AEs. Genetic assay had showed that only two ESR1 SNPs,
rs2234693 and rs9340799 were associated with AIs-related MS-AEs.TT genotype and
the T allele in rs2234693 was statistically significantly lower in AIs-Related
MS-AEs group than controls (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>9.49E-7). The frequency of AA genotype
and the A allele in rs9340799 was higher (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.20E-5; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.09E-4).
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: Our results suggested that prior taxane-based
chemotherapy was the clinical predictor, while rs2234693 and rs9340799 were the
genetic predictors for AIs-related MS-AEs.

PMCID: PMC3716812
PMID: 23894347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Gene. 2013 Oct 10;528(2):216-20. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.008. Epub 2013 Jul
24.

Impact of genetic variants of IL-6, IL6R, LRP5, ESR1 and SP7 genes on bone
mineral density in postmenopausal Mexican-Mestizo women with obesity.

Méndez JP(1), Rojano-Mejía D, Coral-Vázquez RM, Coronel A, Pedraza J, Casas MJ,
Soriano R, García-García E, Vilchis F, Canto P.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación en Obesidad, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México, México, D.F., Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Since obesity and osteoporosis present a high genetic predisposition 
and polymorphisms of IL-6, IL6R, LRP5, ESR1 and SP7 may influence the risk of
both diseases, the aim of this study was to analyze the possible association of
polymorphisms in these genes, as well as their haplotypes, with BMD variations in
postmenopausal Mexican-Mestizo women with grade 2 or grade 3 obesity.
METHODS: One hundred eighty unrelated postmenopausal women with grade 2 or grade 
3 obesity were included. BMD was measured in total hip and lumbar spine by
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. DNA was obtained from blood leukocytes.
Rs1800795 of IL-6, rs2228145 of IL6R, rs3736228 of LRP5, rs9340799 (XbaI) and
rs2234693 (PvuII), of ESR1, rs10876432 and rs2016266, of SP7 (and their
haplotypes), were studied by real-time PCR allelic discrimination. Deviations
from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium were tested. Pairwise linkage disequilibrium
between single nucleotide polymorphisms was calculated by direct correlation
r(2), and haplotype analysis was conducted.
RESULTS: Using WHO criteria, 54.5% had grade 2 obesity, and 45.5% had grade 3
obesity. Regarding DXA results, 11.1% women had osteoporosis, 41.7% had
osteopenia, and 47.2% had normal BMD. Genotype and haplotype analysis showed no
significant differences with BMD variations at the lumbar spine, total hip or
femoral neck.
CONCLUSIONS: We did not find a significant association between the polymorphisms 
analyzed or their haplotypes and BMD variations in postmenopausal women with
obesity. The higher BMD observed in women with obesity could be the result of an 
adaptive response to the higher loading of the skeleton.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23891823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013 Nov;38(11):2575-84. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.06.004. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Associations between polymorphisms in sex steroid related genes and autistic-like
traits.

Zettergren A(1), Jonsson L, Johansson D, Melke J, Lundström S, Anckarsäter H,
Lichtenstein P, Westberg L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Pharmacology,
University of Gothenburg, Sweden. Electronic address:
anna.zettergren@pharm.gu.se.

Sex differences in psychiatric disorders are common, which is particularly
striking in autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) that are four times more prevalent
in boys. High levels of testosterone during early development have been
hypothesized to be a risk factor for ASDs, supported by several studies showing
fetal testosterone levels, as well as indirect measures of prenatal
androgenization, to be associated with ASDs and autistic-like traits (ALTs).
Further, the importance of sex steroid related genes in ASDs is supported by
studies reporting associations between polymorphisms in genes involved in sex
steroid synthesis/metabolism and ASDs and ALTs. The aim of the present study was 
to investigate possible associations between 29 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in eight genes related to sex steroids and autistic features. Individuals 
included in the study belong to a subset (n=1771) from The Child and Adolescent
Twin Study in Sweden (CATSS), which are all assessed for ALTs. For two SNPs,
rs2747648 located in the 3'-UTR of ESR1 encoding the estrogen receptor alpha and 
rs523349 (Leu89Val) located in SRD5A2 encoding 5-alpha-reductase, type 2, highly 
significant associations with ALTs were found in boys and girls, respectively.
The results of the present study suggest that SNPs in sex steroid related genes, 
known to affect gene expression (rs2747648 in ESR1) and enzymatic activity
(Leu89Val in SRD5A2), seem to be associated with ALTs in a general population. In
conclusion, the current findings provide further support for a role of sex
steroids in the pathophysiology of ASDs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23867117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Biol Reprod. 2013 Sep 27;89(3):66. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.111054. Print 2013
Sep.

Global gene expression analysis in human uterine epithelial cells defines new
targets of glucocorticoid and estradiol antagonism.

Whirledge S(1), Xu X, Cidlowski JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Transduction, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.

In preparation for embryo implantation and pregnancy, the uterine epithelium
undergoes a genomic and biological transition that mediates adhesion and invasion
of the blastocyst. These events resemble an inflammatory response, and the immune
system likely takes an active role in the establishment and maintenance of
pregnancy. Although glucocorticoids are primary mediators of the immune system,
the functional role of glucocorticoid signaling in the uterine epithelium is not 
well defined. To investigate the dynamic relationship between glucocorticoids and
reproductive hormones, we performed whole-genome microarray analysis in a human
uterine endometrial cancer cell line (ECC1 cells) treated with the synthetic
glucocorticoid dexamethasone (Dex) alone or in combination with estradiol (E2).
Over 10,000 genes were significantly regulated in the presence of Dex and/or E2. 
Surprisingly, unique targets of Dex and E2 together represented the largest group
of regulated genes. Ingenuity pathway analysis found both overlapping and
independent regulated networks for each hormone. Several hundred genes were found
to be coregulated by Dex and E2, including several that were antagonistically
regulated. The effects of glucocorticoids and E2 are mediated primarily through
the glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1) and estrogen receptor (ESR1), respectively.
In silico promoter analysis revealed that NR3C1 and ESR1 response elements are
enriched in antagonistically regulated genes, and signaling through these
receptors was required for antagonism. Glucocorticoid and E2 antagonism of target
genes may represent a critical junction between the immune system and female
reproductive system. Moreover, identification and ontology analysis of
glucocorticoid-regulated genes in a uterine epithelial-like cell line suggests
that glucocorticoid signaling regulates important biological functions, including
immune cell trafficking and embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC4435104
PMID: 23843231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Jul;140(2):363-73. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2619-6. 
Epub 2013 Jul 11.

CYP2D6 genotype in relation to tamoxifen efficacy in a Dutch cohort of the
tamoxifen exemestane adjuvant multinational (TEAM) trial.

Dezentjé VO(1), van Schaik RH, Vletter-Bogaartz JM, van der Straaten T, Wessels
JA, Kranenbarg EM, Berns EM, Seynaeve C, Putter H, van de Velde CJ, Nortier JW,
Gelderblom H, Guchelaar HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box
9600, 2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The clinical importance of CYP2D6 genotype as predictor of tamoxifen efficacy is 
still unclear. Recent genotyping studies on CYP2D6 using DNA derived from tumor
blocks have been criticized because loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in tumors may
lead to false genotype assignment. Postmenopausal early breast cancer patients
who were randomized to receive tamoxifen, followed by exemestane in a large
randomized controlled trial were genotyped for five CYP2D6 alleles. CYP2D6
genotypes and phenotypes were related to disease-free survival during tamoxifen
use (DFS-t) in 731 patients. By analyzing microsatellites flanking the CYP2D6
gene, patients whose genotyping results were potentially affected by LOH were
excluded. In addition, exploratory analyses on 24 genetic variants of other
metabolic enzymes and the estrogen receptor were performed. For the CYP2D6
analysis, only 2.3 % of the samples were excluded, because influence of LOH could
not be ruled out. No association was found between the CYP2D6 genotype or
predicted phenotype and DFS-t (poor vs. extensive metabolizers: unadjusted hazard
ratio 1.33, 95 % CI 0.52-3.43; P = 0.55). DFS-t was associated with UGT2B15*2
(Vt/Vt + Wt/Vt vs. Wt/Wt: adjusted hazard ratio 0.47, 95 % CI 0.25-0.89;
P = 0.019) and the estrogen receptor-1 polymorphism ESR1 PvuII (gene-dose effect:
adjusted hazard ratio 1.63, 95 % CI 1.04-2.54; P = 0.033). In postmenopausal
early breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen followed by
exemestane neither CYP2D6 genotype nor phenotype did affect DFS-t. This is in
accordance with two recent studies in the BIG1-98 and ATAC trials. Our study is
the first CYP2D6 association study using DNA from paraffin-embedded tumor tissue 
in which potentially false interpretation of genotyping results because of LOH
was excluded. Polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor-1 and UGT2B15 may be
associated with tamoxifen efficacy, but these findings need replication.

PMID: 23842856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. N Engl J Med. 2013 Jul 11;369(2):164-71. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1303611.

Delayed puberty and estrogen resistance in a woman with estrogen receptor a
variant.

Quaynor SD(1), Stradtman EW Jr, Kim HG, Shen Y, Chorich LP, Schreihofer DA,
Layman LC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Reproductive Endocrinology, Infertility, and Genetics, Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, and
the Neuroscience Program, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2013 Oct;9(10):565.
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Oct 24;369(17):1663-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2013 Oct 24;369(17):1664.

Although androgen resistance has been characterized in men with a normal
chromosome complement and mutations in the androgen-receptor gene, a mutation in 
the gene encoding estrogen receptor a (ESR1) was previously described only in one
man and not, to our knowledge, in a woman. We now describe an 18-year-old woman
without breast development and with markedly elevated serum levels of estrogens
and bilateral multicystic ovaries. She was found to have a homozygous
loss-of-function ESR1 mutation in a completely conserved residue that interferes 
with estrogen signaling. Her clinical presentation was similar to that in the
mouse orthologue knockout. This case shows that disruption of ESR1 causes
profound estrogen resistance in women. (Funded by the National Institutes of
Health.).

PMCID: PMC3823379
PMID: 23841731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Anim Genet. 2013 Dec;44(6):661-8. doi: 10.1111/age.12071. Epub 2013 Jul 10.

Enhancing the egg's natural defence against bacterial penetration by increasing
cuticle deposition.

Bain MM(1), McDade K, Burchmore R, Law A, Wilson PW, Schmutz M, Preisinger R,
Dunn IC.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences (MVLS), IBAHCM, University of
Glasgow, Garscube Estate, Bearsden Road, Glasgow, G61 1QH, Scotland, UK.

The cuticle is a proteinaceous layer covering the avian egg and is believed to
form a defence to microorganism ingress. In birds that lay eggs in challenging
environments, the cuticle is thicker, suggesting evolutionary pressure; however, 
in poultry, selection pressure for this trait has been removed because of
artificial incubation. This study aimed to quantify cuticle deposition and to
estimate its genetic parameters and its role on trans-shell penetration of
bacteria. Additionally, cuticle proteins were characterised to establish whether 
alleles for these genes explained variation in deposition. A novel and reliable
quantification was achieved using the difference in reflectance of the egg at
650 nm before and after staining with a specific dye. The heritability of this
novel measurement was moderate (0.27), and bacteria penetration was dependent on 
the natural variation in cuticle deposition. Eggs with the best cuticle were
never penetrated by bacteria (P < 0.001). The cuticle proteome consisted of six
major proteins. A significant association was found between alleles of one of
these protein genes, ovocleidin-116 (MEPE), and cuticle deposition (P = 0.015)
and also between alleles of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene and cuticle
deposition (P = 0.008). With the heritability observed, genetic selection should 
be possible to increase cuticle deposition in commercial poultry, so reducing
trans-generational transmission of microorganisms and reversing the lack of
selection pressure for this trait during recent domestication.

© 2013 The Authors, Animal Genetics © 2013 Stichting International Foundation for
Animal Genetics.

PMID: 23837723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Onco Targets Ther. 2013 Jun 17;6:713-23. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S44918. Print 2013.

Aberrant DNA methylation of ESR1 and p14ARF genes could be useful as prognostic
indicators in osteosarcoma.

Sonaglio V(1), de Carvalho AC, Toledo SR, Salinas-Souza C, Carvalho AL, Petrilli 
AS, de Camargo B, Vettore AL.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatrics Department, A C Camargo Hospital, São Paulo, Brazil.

Osteosarcoma (OS) is the eighth most common form of childhood and adolescence
cancer. Approximately 10%-20% of patients present metastatic disease at diagnosis
and the 5-year overall survival remains around 70% for nonmetastatic patients and
around 30% for metastatic patients. Metastatic disease at diagnosis and the
necrosis grade induced by preoperative treatment are the only well-established
prognostic factors for osteosarcoma. The DNA aberrant methylation is a frequent
epigenetic alteration in humans and has been described as a molecular marker in
different tumor types. This study evaluated the DNA aberrant methylation status
of 18 genes in 34 OS samples without previous chemotherapy treatment and in four 
normal bone specimens and compared the methylation profile with
clinicopathological characteristics of the patients. We were able to define a
three-gene panel (AIM1, p14ARF, and ESR1) in which methylation was correlated
with OS cases. The hypermethylation of p14ARF showed a significant association
with the absence of metastases at diagnoses, while ESR1 hypermethylation was
marginally associated with worse overall survival. This study demonstrated that
aberrant promoter methylation is a common event in OS and provides evidence that 
p14ARF and ESR1 hypermethylation could be useful as a prognostic indicator for
this disease.

PMCID: PMC3699305
PMID: 23836983  [PubMed]


86. Andrology. 2013 Sep;1(5):670-81. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2013.00103.x. Epub 2013
Jul 9.

Experimental varicocoele in rats affects mechanisms that control expression and
function of the androgen receptor.

Soares TS(1), Fernandes SA, Lima ML, Stumpp T, Schoorlemmer GH, Lazari MF, Porto 
CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology, São Paulo, 
Brazil.

Varicocoele is an important cause of male infertility. Normal male reproductive
function and fertility depends on a delicate balance between androgen receptor
(AR) and the classic oestrogen receptors ESR1 (ERa) and ESR2 (ERß). Using a model
of surgically induced varicocoele in rats, this study aimed to investigate the
effects of varicocoele on the expression of AR, ESR1, ESR2 and G-protein coupled 
oestrogen receptor (GPER). Varicocoele did not affect the mRNA and protein
expression of ESR1 and ESR2 in both testes. Varicocoele did not affect the mRNA
and protein expression of GPER in the right testis, but slightly reduced the mRNA
and increased the protein levels in the left testis. Varicocoele did not affect
the mRNA for AR, but reduced the protein levels in both testes. A proteomic
approach was used in an attempt to find differentially expressed targets with
possible correlation with AR downregulation. Varicocoele caused the differential 
expression of 29 proteins. Six proteins were upregulated, including the receptor 
for activated C kinase 1 (RACK1), and 23 were downregulated, including
dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase, alpha-enolase and pyrophosphatase 1. Western blot
analysis confirmed that varicocoele upregulated the expression of RACK1, a
protein involved with tyrosine phosphorylation and regulation of AR
transcriptional activity, AR metabolism and dynamics of the blood-testis barrier.
In conclusion, this study suggests that varicocoele affects mechanisms that
control AR expression and function. This regulation of AR may play an important
role in the varicocoele-induced testicular dysfunction. Furthermore, varicocoele 
downregulates several other proteins in the testis that may be useful markers of 
spermatozoa function and male infertility.

© 2013 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMID: 23836701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. BMC Cancer. 2013 Jul 2;13:326. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-326.

Interrogating differences in expression of targeted gene sets to predict breast
cancer outcome.

Andres SA(1), Brock GN, Wittliff JL.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Receptor Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology,
Brown Cancer Center and the Institute for Molecular Diversity & Drug Design,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genomics provides opportunities to develop precise tests for
diagnostics, therapy selection and monitoring. From analyses of our studies and
those of published results, 32 candidate genes were identified, whose expression 
appears related to clinical outcome of breast cancer. Expression of these genes
was validated by qPCR and correlated with clinical follow-up to identify a gene
subset for development of a prognostic test.
METHODS: RNA was isolated from 225 frozen invasive ductal carcinomas,and qRT-PCR 
was performed. Univariate hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals for breast
cancer mortality and recurrence were calculated for each of the 32 candidate
genes. A multivariable gene expression model for predicting each outcome was
determined using the LASSO, with 1000 splits of the data into training and
testing sets to determine predictive accuracy based on the C-index. Models with
gene expression data were compared to models with standard clinical covariates
and models with both gene expression and clinical covariates.
RESULTS: Univariate analyses revealed over-expression of RABEP1, PGR, NAT1,
PTP4A2, SLC39A6, ESR1, EVL, TBC1D9, FUT8, and SCUBE2 were all associated with
reduced time to disease-related mortality (HR between 0.8 and 0.91, adjusted p < 
0.05), while RABEP1, PGR, SLC39A6, and FUT8 were also associated with reduced
recurrence times. Multivariable analyses using the LASSO revealed PGR, ESR1,
NAT1, GABRP, TBC1D9, SLC39A6, and LRBA to be the most important predictors for
both disease mortality and recurrence. Median C-indexes on test data sets for the
gene expression, clinical, and combined models were 0.65, 0.63, and 0.65 for
disease mortality and 0.64, 0.63, and 0.66 for disease recurrence, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular signatures consisting of five genes (PGR, GABRP, TBC1D9,
SLC39A6 and LRBA) for disease mortality and of six genes (PGR, ESR1, GABRP,
TBC1D9, SLC39A6 and LRBA) for disease recurrence were identified. These
signatures were as effective as standard clinical parameters in predicting
recurrence/mortality, and when combined, offered some improvement relative to
clinical information alone for disease recurrence (median difference in C-values 
of 0.03, 95% CI of -0.08 to 0.13). Collectively, results suggest that these genes
form the basis for a clinical laboratory test to predict clinical outcome of
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3707751
PMID: 23819905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2013 Sep 15;191:113-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.06.011.
Epub 2013 Jun 24.

Molecular characterization of five steroid receptors from pengze crucian carp and
their expression profiles of juveniles in response to 17a-ethinylestradiol and
17a-methyltestosterone.

Zheng Y(1), Wang L, Li M, Liang H, Qin F, Liu S, Wang H, Wu T, Zhang Y, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
China.

Pengze crucian carp (Carassius auratus var. pengze, Pcc), a triploid gynogenetic 
fish, was used in this study to investigate the cross-talk between EDCs and
steroid receptors. The full-length cDNAs of five steroid receptors (esr1, er
alpha2, esr2a, esr2b, ar) and partial cDNA of vtg B were isolated. The tissue
distributions of these genes were analyzed in adult fish by qRT-PCR. Then the
expression profiles of five steroid receptors (esrs and ar) and vtg B were
detected in the juveniles exposed to 17a-ethinylestradiol (EE2, 0.1, 1 and
10ng/L) and 17a-methyltestosterone (MT, 50µg/L) for 4weeks. The results
demonstrated that esrs, ar, and vtg B were predominantly expressed in liver of
adult fish. However, among these detected genes, esr1 and er alpha2 mRNAs are
sensitive biomarkers in response to EE2 at 0.1, 1, and 10ng/L for 1 and 2weeks
compared to esr2a, esr2b, ar, and vtg B in the juveniles of mono-female
gynogenetic fish. Totally, the subtypes of esrs show biphasic responses to EE2
exposures for 4weeks, and most of the EE2 exposures at 0.1, 1, and 10ng/L for 1, 
2, 3 and 4weeks did not induce the mRNA expressions of vtg B. However, 1-, 2-,
and 4-week 50µg/L MT all significantly stimulated vtg B transcripts. Further
investigations are needed to elucidate the mechanism underlying the insensitivity
or down-regulation of vtg B mRNA in response to EE2 in juvenile Pcc.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23806426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Climacteric. 2014 Jun;17(3):247-51. doi: 10.3109/13697137.2013.819330. Epub 2013 
Sep 3.

Lack of association between ESR1 gene polymorphisms and premature ovarian failure
in Serbian women.

Li J(1), Vujovic S, Dalgleish R, Thompson J, Dragojevic-Dikic S, Al-Azzawi F.

Author information: 
(1)* Gynaecology Research Unit, University Hospitals of Leicester , Leicester ,
UK.

OBJECTIVE: It has previously been reported that estrogen receptor-alpha (ERa)
gene (ESR1: estrogen receptor 1) polymorphisms are associated with premature
ovarian failure (POF). The aim of this study was to investigate whether these
genetic polymorphisms of ESR1 are associated with POF in Serbian women.
METHODS: A series of 197 POF cases matched with 547 fertile controls was
recruited by the Institute for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolic Disorders of
Serbia between 2007 and 2010. Genomic DNA was extracted from saliva using
Oragene® DNA sample collection kits. Two single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), 
PvuII and XbaI, in ESR1 were genotyped by dynamic allele-specific hybridization. 
Haplotype analyses were performed with the restriction fragment length
polymorphism method. SNP and haplotype effects were analyzed by logistic
regression models.
RESULTS: No significant difference was found in the distribution of ESR1 PvuII
and XbaI polymorphisms or haplotypes between the POF and control groups.
CONCLUSION: The two ESR1 SNPs, PvuII and XbaI, are not commonly associated with
POF in Serbian women and may not contribute to the genetic basis of the
condition.

PMID: 23805834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 21;8(6):e66999. Print 2013.

ESR1 Gene Polymorphisms and Prostate Cancer Risk: A HuGE Review and
Meta-Analysis.

Wang YM(1), Liu ZW, Guo JB, Wang XF, Zhao XX, Zheng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hospice, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, China.

BACKGROUND: Many published data on the association between single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ESR1 gene and prostate cancer susceptibility are
inconclusive. The aim of this Human Genome Epidemiology (HuGE) review and
meta-analysis is to derive a more precise estimation of this relationship.
METHODS: A literature search of PubMed, Embase, Web of Science and Chinese
Biomedical (CBM) databases was conducted from their inception through July 1st,
2012. Crude odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated
to assess the strength of association.
RESULTS: Twelve case-control studies were included with a total 2,165 prostate
cancer cases and 3,361 healthy controls. When all the eligible studies were
pooled into the meta-analysis, ESR1 PvuII (C>T) and XbaI (A>G) polymorphisms
showed no association with the risk of prostate cancer. However, in the
stratified analyses based on ethnicity and country, the results indicated that
ESR1 PvuII (C>T) polymorphism was significantly associated with increased risk of
prostate cancer among Asian populations, especially among Indian population;
while ESR1 XbaI (A>G) polymorphism may significantly increase the risk of
prostate cancer among American population. Furthermore, we also performed a
pooled analysis for all eligible case-control studies to explore the role of
codon 10 (T>C), codon 325 (C>G), codon 594 (G>A) and +261G>C polymorphisms in
prostate cancer risk. Nevertheless, no significant associations between these
polymorphisms and the risk of prostate cancer were observed.
CONCLUSION: Results from the current meta-analysis indicate that ESR1 PvuII (C>T)
polymorphism may be a risk factor for prostate cancer among Asian populations,
especially among Indian population; while ESR1 XbaI (A>G) polymorphism may
increase the risk of prostate cancer among American population.

PMCID: PMC3689664
PMID: 23805288  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


91. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2013 Jul;29(7):716-9. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2013.798275.

Gene receptor polymorphism as a risk factor for BMD deterioration in adolescent
girls with anorexia nervosa.

Stergioti E(1), Deligeoroglou E, Economou E, Tsitsika A, Dimopoulos KD, Daponte
A, Katsioulis A, Creatsas G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric - Adolescent Gynecology and Reconstructive Surgery, 2nd 
Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, Aretaieion University Hospital, Athens,
Greece. e.stergioti@gmail.com

Anorexia nervosa is a serious eating disorder that is associated with decreased
bone mineral density and greater lifetime risk for fractures. This
case-controlled study, analyzed single nucleotide polymorphisms of genes encoding
vitamin D receptor, estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1), collagen type I and
calcitonin receptor (CTR). Relationships between genotype and body mass index,
cycling status and lumbar spine bone mineral density (LBMD) were determined in 40
adolescent girls with anorexia nervosa and 10 age-matched controls. The
distribution of CTR-AluI genotypes differed between groups, but this polymorphism
was not associated with LBMD Z-score. Distribution of ESR1-XbaI genotypes did not
differ between groups, but the AA genotype was associated with decreased LBMD
Z-score (=-1) (OR = 24.79, 95% CI, 1.01-606.08). Carriers of the A allele were
more likely to have decreased LBMD Z-scores compared with carriers of the G
allele (OR = 4.12, 95% CI, 1.23-13.85, p = 0.022). In conclusion, our study shows
that anorexic patients with wild-type genotype ESR-XbaI receptor are in greater
risk for decreased BMD in relation to those with the mutated gene. Prompt
recognition of these patients is crucial because early administration of the
proper therapeutic treatment may contribute to the prevention of adverse sequelae
on bone metabolism.

PMID: 23772785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 4;8(6):e66284. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066284. Print 2013.

Reciprocal interactions between breast tumor and its adipose microenvironment
based on a 3D adipose equivalent model.

Delort L(1), Lequeux C, Dubois V, Dubouloz A, Billard H, Mojallal A, Damour O,
Vasson MP, Caldefie-Chézet F.

Author information: 
(1)Clermont Université, Université d'Auvergne, UFR Pharmacie, Laboratoire SVFp,
Clermont-Ferrand, France. laetitia.delort@udamail.fr

Breast cancer has become the most common cancer among women in industrialized
countries. Obesity is well established as a risk factor, in particular owing to
the attendant secretion of the entities called adipokines; there is growing
evidence for a role of cells and factors present in the mammary tumor
microenvironment such as fibroblasts, preadipocytes, adipocytes and their
secretions. To study how the microenvironment influences breast cancer growth, we
developed a novel tridimensional adipose model epithelialized with normal human
keratinocytes or with breast cancer cell lines. These mimicked a breast tumor in 
contact with an adipose microenvironment and allowed monitoring of the
interactions between the cells. Leptin and adiponectin, two major adipokines, and
their respective receptors, ObRt and AdipoR1, were expressed in the model, but
not the second adiponectin receptor, AdipoR2. The differentiation of
preadipocytes into adipocytes was greater when they were in contact with the
breast cancer cell lines. The contact of breast cancer cell lines with the
microenvironment completely modified their transcriptional programs by increasing
the expression of genes involved in cell proliferation (cyclinD1, MAPK),
angiogenesis (MMP9, VEGF) and hormonal pathways (ESR1, IL6). This tridimensional 
adipose model provides new insights into the interactions between breast cancer
cells and their adipose microenvironment, and provides a tool to develop new
drugs for the treatment of both cancer and obesity.

PMCID: PMC3672201
PMID: 23750285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jul 12;51(1):203-12. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0085. Print 2013.

Estrogen receptor a (ESR1) over-expression mediated apoptosis in Hep3B cells by
binding with SP1 proteins.

Tu CC(1), Kumar VB, Day CH, Kuo WW, Yeh SP, Chen RJ, Liao CR, Chen HY, Tsai FJ,
Wu WJ, Huang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Toxicology and Institute of Medicine, Chung
Shan University, Taichung, Taiwan Division of Chest Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, Armed Force Taichung General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

Previous studies have reported that estrogen receptors (ERs) are expressed in
normal human liver, chronic hepatitis, and benign hepatic tumor tissues. However,
decreased expression of ERs can be observed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and
the role of ERs in HCC is not fully understood. Thus, the present study aimed to 
investigate the molecular mechanism induced by the overexpression of ERa (ERa
(ESR1)) in Hep3B cells. We first detected the induction of apoptosis in
ER-negative Hep3B cells using DNA fragmentation assay and flow cytometry. We
found that ERa and ERa plus 17ß-estradiol treatment increased apoptosis in Hep3B 
cells. Additionally, western blotting showed increased expression of active
caspase 3 and tumor necrosis factor a (TNFa (TNF)) in ERa-transfected cells. To
further understand the importance of SP1-binding sites in the TNFa promoter,
ERa-negative Hep3B cells were co-transfected with ERa and a wild-type TNFa
plasmid or TNFa with deleted SP1 regions. Deletion of both distant and primal SP1
sites abolished the activity of ERa, and similar results were observed by
blocking the expression of SP1 protein using mithramycin (MA). This result
indicates that SP1 protein is essential for ERa-activated TNFa promoter activity.
Co-immunoprecipitation assay further confirmed the binding interaction between
ERa and SP1 in a ligand-dependent manner. In general, we demonstrate that the
overexpression of ERa mediates apoptosis in ERa-negative Hep3B cells by the
binding of ERa to SP1 protein. Additionally, this ERa-SP1 complex binds to the
proximal and distal sites of the TNFa gene promoter and further induces the
expression of active caspase 3 in a ligand-dependent manner.

PMID: 23733894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Eur J Med Res. 2013 Jun 3;18:15. doi: 10.1186/2047-783X-18-15.

Screening of osteoprotegerin-related feature genes in osteoporosis and functional
analysis with DNA microarray.

Wu X(1), Guo S, Shen G, Ma X, Tang C, Xie K, Liu J, Guo W, Yan Y, Luo E.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, Fourth Military Medical University, No, 17, 
Changle West Road, Xi'an, Shanxi 710032, China.

BACKGROUND: Osteoporosis affects 200 million people worldwide and places an
enormous economic burden on society. We aim to identify the feature genes that
are related to osteoprotegerin in osteoporosis and to perform function analysis
with DNA microarray from human bone marrow.
METHODS: We downloaded the gene expression profile GSE35957 from Gene Expression 
Omnibus database including nine gene chips from bone marrow mesenchymal stem
cells of five osteoporotic and four non-osteoporotic subjects. The differentially
expressed genes between normal and disease samples were identified by LIMMA
package in R language. The interactions among the osteoprotegerin gene (OPG) and 
differentially expressed genes were searched and visualized by Cytoscape. MCODE
and Bingo were used to perform module analysis. Finally, GENECODIS was used to
obtain enriched pathways of genes in an interaction network.
RESULTS: A total of 656 genes were identified as differentially expressed genes
between osteoporotic and non-osteoporotic samples. IL17RC, COL1A1, and ESR1 were 
identified to interact with OPG directly from the protein-protein interaction
network. A module containing ERS1 was screened out, and this module was most
significantly enriched in organ development. Pathway enrichment analysis
suggested genes in the interaction network were related to focal adhesion.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression pattern of IL17RC, COL1A1, and ESR1 can be useful in 
osteoporosis detection, which may help in identifying those populations at high
risk for osteoporosis, and in directing treatment of osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC3735399
PMID: 23731710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Transl Oncol. 2013 Jun 1;6(3):297-304. Print 2013 Jun.

RASSF1A Promoter Methylation Levels Positively Correlate with Estrogen Receptor
Expression in Breast Cancer Patients.

Kajabova V(1), Smolkova B, Zmetakova I, Sebova K, Krivulcik T, Bella V, Kajo K,
Machalekova K, Fridrichova I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Cancer Research Institute of Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.

The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between the promoter
methylation in five cancer-associated genes and clinicopathologic features for
identification of molecular markers of tumor metastatic potential and hormone
therapy response efficiency in breast cancer. The methylation levels in
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues, plasma, and blood cells from 151 sporadic breast
cancer patients and blood samples of 50 controls were evaluated by quantitative
multiplex methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction. DNA methylation of
RAS-association domain family member 1 (RASSF1A), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1),
cadherin 1, type 1, E-cadherin (CDH1), TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor 3 (TIMP3) 
and spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) genes was detected in the tumors of 124, 19, 15,
15, and 6 patients with mean levels of 48.45%, 3.81%, 2.36%, 27.55%, and 10.81%, 
respectively. Plasma samples exhibited methylation in the same genes in 25, 10,
15, 17, and 3 patients with levels of 22.54%, 17.20%, 22.87%, 31.93%, and 27.42%,
respectively. Cumulative methylation results confirmed different spectra in tumor
and plasma samples. Simultaneous methylation in tumors and plasma were shown in
less than 17% of patients. RASSF1A methylation levels in tumor samples
statistically differ according to tumor size (P = .029), estrogen receptor (ER)
and progesterone receptor (PR) status (P = .000 and P = .004), and
immunohistochemical subtype (P = .000). Moreover, the positive correlation was
found between RASSF1A methylation levels and percentage of cancer cells
expressing ER and PR. The direct relationship between RASSF1A promoter
methylation and expression of ER could aid the prognosis of hormonal therapy
response.

PMCID: PMC3660798
PMID: 23730409  [PubMed]


96. J Ginseng Res. 2012 Apr;36(2):169-75. doi: 10.5142/jgr.2012.36.2.169.

Estrogen receptor is activated by korean red ginseng in vitro but not in vivo.

Shim MK(1), Lee YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Institute of Biotechnology,
College of Life Science, Sejong University, Seoul 143-747, Korea.

Ginseng has been used as a traditional medicine for treatment of many diseases
and for general health maintenance in people of all ages. Ginseng is also used to
ameliorate menopausal systems. We investigated the estrogenic activity of Korean 
red ginseng (KRG) in a transient transfection system, using estrogen receptor
(ER) and estrogen-responsive luciferase plasmids in MCF-7 cells. The extract
activated both ERa and ERß. KRG modulated the mRNA levels of estrogen-responsive 
genes such as pS2 and ESR1 and decreased the protein level of ERa. In order to
examine in vivo estrogenic activity of KRG, sixteen female Sprague-Dawley rats
separated into four groups were studied for nine weeks: non-ovariectomized (OVX) 
rats treated with olive oil, OVX rats treated with olive oil, OVX rats treated
with 17-ß-estradiol (E2) in olive oil, and OVX rats treated with KRG extract in
olive oil. The experiments were repeated for three times and the data of twelve
rats were combined. Body weight of OVX rats was greater than that of
sham-operated control rats and was decreased by E2 treatment. Uterine weight
increased after E2 treatment compared to OVX rats. However, no difference in body
or uterine weight was observed with KRG intake. KRG induced reductions in total
cholesterol, low density lipoprotein cholesterol/total cholesterol, high density 
lipoprotein cholesterol/total cholesterol, and low density lipoprotein
cholesterol/high density lipoprotein cholesterol, but not to the same degree as
did E2 intake. These results show that KRG does contain estrogenic activity as
manifested by in vitro study but the activity is not strong enough to elicit
physiological responses.

PMCID: PMC3659583
PMID: 23717117  [PubMed]


97. J Hepatol. 2013 Oct;59(4):797-804. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.05.028. Epub 2013 May
25.

Gender matters: estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1
and 2 control the gender-specific transcriptional regulation of human uridine
diphosphate glucuronosyltransferases genes (UGT1A).

Kalthoff S(1), Winkler A, Freiberg N, Manns MP, Strassburg CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Gender influences incidence, progression, and therapy of
hepatogastrointestinal diseases. The aim of this study was to elucidate the
molecular mechanism of gender-specific UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT1A)
regulation, representing important hepatogastrointestinal detoxification enzymes 
for xenobiotics, drugs, and endobiotics.
METHODS: UGT1A-gene activation was studied by reporter gene experiments and
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1/ERa) co-transfection using KYSE70- and HepG2 cells 
(male origin), and SW403 cells (female origin). Cell lines, and humanized
transgenic UGT1A (htgUGT1A) mice (female/male) were treated with the ERa
inhibitor tamoxifen. UGT1A mRNA expression was analyzed by TaqMan PCR, the
recruitment of ERa, histone deacetylases (HDAC), and the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and ERa expression in
gastrointestinal mouse tissues by Western blot and immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: In KYSE70 cells (male), UGT1A gene expression was induced 5-10 fold, and
inhibited in the presence of ERa by 55-77%. In SW403 (female) cells, absent
inducibility was restored after tamoxifen treatment. In the jejunum and colon of 
tgUGT1A mice, UGT1A induction that was exclusively detected in male mice could be
restored in female mice after tamoxifen pre-treatment. ChIP assays demonstrated
the recruitment of ERa and HDACs to the xenobiotic response elements of UGT1A
promoters during gene repression. Western blot showed higher ERa expression in
the female jejunum and colon.
CONCLUSIONS: We show gender-specific transcriptional control of UGT1A genes in
jejunum and colon, which is repressed by ERa and the recruitment of HDCAs to the 
UGT1A promoter sequence in females. A molecular mechanism controlling
gender-specific drug metabolism and its therapeutic reversal is demonstrated.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23714156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Toxicology. 2013 Aug 9;310:29-38. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.05.002. Epub 2013 May
22.

Neonatal exposure to zearalenone induces long term modulation of ABC transporter 
expression in testis.

Koraïchi F(1), Inoubli L, Lakhdari N, Meunier L, Vega A, Mauduit C, Benahmed M,
Prouillac C, Lecoeur S.

Author information: 
(1)CarMeN, INRA 1235/INSERM 1060/UCBL1/INSA Lyon/HCL, Faculté de Médecine, LYON
SUD-BP 12, 165 Chemin du Grand Revoyet, 69921 Oullins Cedex, France.

Mycotoxin zearalenone (ZEN) is a cereal contaminant produced by various species
of Fusarium fungi. When interacting with estrogen receptors, ZEN leads to animal 
fertility disturbances and other reproductive pathologies. Few data are available
on the effects of perinatal exposure to ZEN, particularly in the blood-testis
barrier. The aim of this study was to assess the impact of ZEN in adult rats
exposed neonatally. We focused on the expression and cellular localization of
major ABC transporters expressed in adult rat testis, comparing ZEN effects with 
those of Estradiol Benzoate (EB) neonatal exposure. Dose-dependent and long term 
modulations of mRNA and protein levels of Abcb1, Abcc1, Abcg2, Abcc4 and Abcc5
were observed, along with Abcc4 protein cellular delocalization. ZEN exposure of 
SerW3 Sertoli cells showed modulation of Abcb1, Abcc4 and Abcc5. Comparison with 
EB exposure showed similar modulation profiles for Abcg2 but differential
modulations for Abcb1, Abcc1, Abcc4 and Abcc5 in vivo, and a similar profile for 
Abcb1 modulation by ZEN and EB, but differential modulation for Abcc4 and Abcc5
in vitro. ZEN and EB effects were inhibited by in vitro addition of the pure
anti-estrogen ICI 182.780, suggesting the at least partial implication of ZEN
estrogenic activity in these modulations. These results suggested that ZEN
neonatal exposure could affect the exposure of testis to ABC transporter
substrates, and negatively influence spermatogenesis and male fertility.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 15;73(14):4510-20. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4152. Epub 
2013 May 23.

c-Src modulates estrogen-induced stress and apoptosis in estrogen-deprived breast
cancer cells.

Fan P(1), Griffith OL, Agboke FA, Anur P, Zou X, McDaniel RE, Creswell K, Kim SH,
Katzenellenbogen JA, Gray JW, Jordan VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The emergence of anti-estrogen resistance in breast cancer is an important
clinical phenomenon affecting long-term survival in this disease. Identifying
factors that convey cell survival in this setting may guide improvements in
treatment. Estrogen (E2) can induce apoptosis in breast cancer cells that have
been selected for survival after E2 deprivation for long periods (MCF-7:5C
cells), but the mechanisms underlying E2-induced stress in this setting have not 
been elucidated. Here, we report that the c-Src kinase functions as a key adapter
protein for the estrogen receptor (ER, ESR1) in its activation of stress
responses induced by E2 in MCF-7:5C cells. E2 elevated phosphorylation of c-Src, 
which was blocked by 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT), suggesting that E2 activated
c-Src through the ER. We found that E2 activated the sensors of the unfolded
protein response (UPR), IRE1a (ERN1) and PERK kinase (EIF2AK3), the latter of
which phosphorylates eukaryotic translation initiation factor-2a (eIF2a). E2 also
dramatically increased reactive oxygen species production and upregulated
expression of heme oxygenase HO-1 (HMOX1), an indicator of oxidative stress,
along with the central energy sensor kinase AMPK (PRKAA2). Pharmacologic or RNA
interference-mediated inhibition of c-Src abolished the phosphorylation of eIF2a 
and AMPK, blocked E2-induced ROS production, and inhibited E2-induced apoptosis. 
Together, our results establish that c-Src kinase mediates stresses generated by 
E2 in long-term E2-deprived cells that trigger apoptosis. This work offers a
mechanistic rationale for a new approach in the treatment of endocrine-resistant 
breast cancer.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3715569
PMID: 23704208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Dec;228(12):2343-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24405.

Gene methylation in rectal cancer: predictive marker of response to
chemoradiotherapy?

Molinari C(1), Casadio V, Foca F, Zingaretti C, Giannini M, Avanzolini A, Lucci
E, Saragoni L, Passardi A, Amadori D, Calistri D, Zoli W.

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per lo Studio e
la Cura dei Tumori (IRST), Meldola, Italy.

Although numerous studies have focused on the link between CpG island methylator 
phenotypes and the development of colorectal cancer, few studies have dealt
specifically with methylation profiling in rectal cancer and its role in
predicting response to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (NCRT). We characterized
methylation profiles in normal and neoplastic tissue samples from patients with
rectal cancer and assessed the role of this molecular profile in predicting
chemoradioactivity. We evaluated 74 pretreatment tumor samples and 16 apparently 
normal tissue biopsies from rectal cancer patients submitted to NCRT. The
methylation profile of 24 different tumor suppressor genes was analyzed from FFPE
samples by methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification 
(MS-MLPA). Methylation status was studied in relation to tissue type and clinical
pathological parameters, in particular, pathological response evaluated by tumor 
regression grade (TRG). ESR1, CDH13, RARB, IGSF4, and APC genes showed high
methylation levels in tumor samples (range 18.92-49.77) with respect to normal
tissue. Methylation levels of the remaining genes were low and similar in both
normal (range 1.91-14.56) and tumor tissue (range 1.84-11). Analysis of the
association between methylation and response to therapy in tumor samples showed
that only TIMP3 methylation status differed significantly within the four TRG
classes (ANOVA, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Results from the present explorative study suggest
that quantitative epigenetic classification of rectal cancer by MS-MLPA clearly
distinguishes tumor tissue from apparently normal mucosa. Conversely, with the
exception of TIMP3 gene, the methylation of selected genes does not seem to
correlate with response to NCRT.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23702823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Int J Oncol. 2013 Jul;43(1):88-94. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1951. Epub 2013 May 20.

Estrogen receptor 1 gene as a tumor suppressor gene in hepatocellular carcinoma
detected by triple-combination array analysis.

Hishida M(1), Nomoto S, Inokawa Y, Hayashi M, Kanda M, Okamura Y, Nishikawa Y,
Tanaka C, Kobayashi D, Yamada S, Nakayama G, Fujii T, Sugimoto H, Koike M,
Fujiwara M, Takeda S, Kodera Y.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterological Surgery (Department of Surgery II), Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya University, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the top five causes of cancer-related
deaths worldwide. Recent developments in the treatment of HCC remain insufficient
to cure unresectable disease or to prevent HCC. Consistent efforts are,
therefore, needed to deepen understanding of pathogenesis of the disease.
Genome-wide gene expression profile analyses can now detect various candidate
genes that are modified by HCC. We have developed a new technique to identify
tumor suppressor genes, triple-combination array analysis, which combines gene
expression profiles, single nucleotide polymorphism and methylation arrays to
identify genes with altered expression. Using HCC tissue samples,
triple-combination array analysis was performed to identify a candidate tumor
suppressor gene. Subsequently, samples from 48 HCC patients were subjected to
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and methylation-specific PCR to
further elucidate clinical relevance of the gene. Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) was 
detected as a candidate tumor suppressor gene. Of the 48 clinical samples, 40
(83.3%) showed ESR1 promoter hypermethylation. In 24 (50%) HCC samples, the
expression levels of the ESR1 gene was decreased by >90%. The decreased
expression was significantly related to high liver damage score, pathological
invasion of the intrahepatic portal vein, the size of tumor (>3 cm in diameter)
and hepatitis B virus infection. The present study represents another example
that triple-combination array is a convenient technique for detecting genes with 
altered expression in disease. The ESR1 gene was identified as a candidate tumor 
suppressor gene in HCC and further validation is warranted.

PMID: 23695389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. PLoS One. 2013 May 17;8(5):e64139. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064139. Print 2013.

Cross-contamination of a UROtsa stock with T24 cells--molecular comparison of
different cell lines and stocks.

Johnen G(1), Rozynek P, von der Gathen Y, Bryk O, Zdrenka R, Johannes C, Weber
DG, Igwilo-Okuefuna OB, Raiko I, Hippler J, Brüning T, Dopp E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Prevention and Occupational Medicine of the German Social
Accident Insurance, Institute of the Ruhr University Bochum, IPA, Bochum,
Germany. johnen@ipa-dguv.de

BACKGROUND: UROtsa is an authentic, immortalized human urothelial cell line that 
is used to study the effects of metals and other toxic substances, mostly in the 
context of bladder cancer carcinogenesis. Unusual properties on the molecular
level of a provided UROtsa cell line stock prompted us to verify its identity.
METHODS: UROtsa cell line stocks from different sources were tested on several
molecular levels and compared with other cell lines. MicroRNA and mRNA expression
was determined by Real-Time PCR. Chromosome numbers were checked and PCR of
different regions of the large T-antigen was performed. DNA methylation of RARB, 
PGR, RASSF1, CDH1, FHIT, ESR1, C1QTNF6, PTGS2, SOCS3, MGMT, and LINE1 was
analyzed by pyrosequencing and compared with results from the cell lines RT4,
T24, HeLa, BEAS-2B, and HepG2. Finally, short tandem repeat (STR) profiling was
applied.
RESULTS: All tested UROtsa cell line stocks lacked large T-antigen. STR analysis 
unequivocally identified our main UROtsa stock as the bladder cancer cell line
T24, which was different from two authentic UROtsa stocks that served as
controls. Analysis of DNA methylation patterns and RNA expression confirmed their
differences. Methylation pattern and mRNA expression of the contaminating T24
cell line showed moderate changes even after long-term culture of up to 56 weeks,
whereas miRNAs and chromosome numbers varied markedly.
CONCLUSIONS: It is important to check the identity of cell lines, especially
those that are not distributed by major cell banks. However, for some cell lines 
STR profiles are not available. Therefore, new cell lines should either be
submitted to cell banks or at least their STR profile determined and published as
part of their initial characterization. Our results should help to improve the
identification of UROtsa and other cells on different molecular levels and
provide information on the use of urothelial cells for long-term experiments.

PMCID: PMC3656924
PMID: 23691160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Andrology. 2014 Jan;2(1):155. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2013.00097.x. Epub 2013
May 20.

Retracted: Impact of polymorphisms in the oestrogen receptors alpha and beta
(ESR1, ESR2) genes on risk of vasculogenic erectile dysfunction.

[No authors listed]

Erratum in
    Andrology. 2014 Jan;2(1):155.

Retraction of
    Andrology. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2013.00097.x.

The above article from Andrology, 'Impact of polymorphisms in the oestrogen
receptors alpha and beta (ESR1, ESR2) genes on risk of vasculogenic erectile
dysfunction' by M. R. Safarinejad, A. Taghva, N. Shafiei and S. Safarinejad
published online on 20 May 2013 in Wiley Online Library has been retracted by
agreement between the journal Editors-in-Chief, Douglas Carrell and Ewa
Rajpert-De Meyts and John Wiley and Sons Ltd. The retraction has been decided due
to failure by the lead author to verify the data contained in the study, and to
provide evidence of the role of co-authors and their institutional affiliations.

© 2013 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMID: 23686919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Jan 25;382(1):633-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.04.026.
Epub 2013 May 16.

Chromatin and epigenetic determinants of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1)
signaling.

Magnani L(1), Lupien M.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre-University Health
Network, Canada; Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada;
Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Electronic address: l.magnani@imperial.ac.uk.

The oestrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) is a transcription factor that potentiates
the response to diverse stimuli, including oestrogen and growth factors, in
various tissue types. Its recruitment to the DNA is directly regulated by the
chromatin landscape, inclusive of chromatin compaction and epigenetic
modifications. In this review we discuss our current understanding of the
interplay between ESR1 signaling and the chromatin landscape. We present how the 
chromatin landscape primes the lineage-specific response and contributes to
stimuli-specific signaling. Finally, we discuss recent efforts to decipher the
relationship between genetic and epigenetic as it relates to ESR1 signaling in
breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23684889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Cephalalgia. 2013 Oct;33(14):1139-47. doi: 10.1177/0333102413486321. Epub 2013
May 14.

Association of oestrogen-receptor gene (ESR1) polymorphisms with migraine in the 
large Norfolk Island pedigree.

Rodriguez-Acevedo AJ(1), Maher BH, Lea RA, Benton M, Griffiths LR.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Centre, Griffith Health Institute, Griffith University,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Oestrogen receptor 1 ( ESR1) is located in region 6q25.1 and encodes 
a ligand-activated transcription factor composed of several domains important for
hormone binding and transcription activation. Progesterone receptor ( PGR) is
located in 11q22-23 and mediates the role of progesterone interacting with
different transcriptional co-regulators. ESR1 and PGR have previously been
implicated in migraine susceptibility. Here, we report the results of an
association study of these genes in a migraine pedigree from the genetic isolate 
of Norfolk Island, a population descended from a small number of Isle of Man
"Bounty Mutineer" and Tahitian founders.
METHODS: A significant number of molecular markers in the ESR1 (143) and PGR (43)
genes were evaluated in a sample of 285 related individuals (135 males; 150
females). A pedigree-based analysis in the GenABEL package was used to analyse
the results.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: A total of 10 markers in the ESR1 gene showed
association with migraine ( P <U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in the Norfolk Island population. No
association was detected with PGR . Three haplotypes in ESR1 were found to be
associated with migraine ( P <U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004, 0.03, 0.005). Future genetic studies in
larger populations and expression analysis are required to clarify the role of
ESR1 in migraine susceptibility.

PMID: 23674830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 May 11;15(3):R37. doi: 10.1186/bcr3421.

Molecular apocrine breast cancers are aggressive estrogen receptor negative
tumors overexpressing either HER2 or GCDFP15.

Lehmann-Che J, Hamy AS, Porcher R, Barritault M, Bouhidel F, Habuellelah H,
Leman-Detours S, de Roquancourt A, Cahen-Doidy L, Bourstyn E, de Cremoux P, de
Bazelaire C, Albiter M, Giacchetti S, Cuvier C, Janin A, Espié M, de Thé H,
Bertheau P.

INTRODUCTION: Molecular apocrine (MA) tumors are estrogen receptor (ER) negative 
breast cancers characterized by androgen receptor (AR) expression. We analyzed a 
group of 58 transcriptionally defined MA tumors and proposed a new tool to
identify these tumors.
METHODS: We performed quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) for ESR1, 
AR, FOXA1 and AR-related genes, and immunohistochemistry (IHC) for ER, PR, Human 
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2), CK5/6, CK17, EGFR, Ki67, AR, FOXA1 and
GCDFP15 and we analyzed clinical features.
RESULTS: MA tumors were all characterized by ESR1(-) AR(+) FOXA1(+) and
AR-related genes positive mRNA profile. IHC staining on these tumors showed 93%
ER(-), only 58% AR(+) and 90% FOXA1(+). 67% and 57% MA tumors were HER2(3+) and
GCDFP15(+), respectively. Almost all MA tumors (94%) had the IHC signature
HER2(3+) or GCDFP15(+) but none of the 13 control basal-like (BL) tumors did.
Clinically, MA tumors were rather aggressive, with poor prognostic factors.
CONCLUSION: MA tumors could be better defined by their qRT-PCR-AR profile than by
AR IHC. In addition, we found that HER2 or GCDFP15 protein overexpression is a
sensitive and specific tool to differentiate MA from BL in the context of ER
negative tumors. A composite molecular and IHC signature could, therefore, help
to identify MA tumors in daily practice.

PMCID: PMC4053236
PMID: 23663520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Genet Mol Res. 2013 Apr 25;12(2):1327-35. doi: 10.4238/2013.April.25.4.

HNF1b is involved in prostate cancer risk via modulating androgenic hormone
effects and coordination with other genes.

Hu YL(1), Zhong D, Pang F, Ning QY, Zhang YY, Li G, Wu JZ, Mo ZN.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Scientific Research Centre, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning,
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China.

Prostate cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed male malignancies. Genome
wide association studies have revealed HNF1b to be a major risk gene for prostate
cancer susceptibility. We examined the mechanisms of involvement of HNF1b in
prostate cancer development. We integrated data from Gene Expression Omnibus
prostate cancer genes from the Dragon Database of Genes Implicated in Prostate
Cancer, and used meta-analysis data to generate a panel of HNF1b-associated
prostate cancer risk genes. An RT-PCR was used to assess expression levels in
DU145, PC3, LNCaP, and RWEP-1 cells. Twelve genes (BAG1, DDR1, ERBB4, ESR1,
HSPD1, IGFBP2, IGFBP5, NR4A1, PAWR, PIK3CG, RAP2A, and TPD52) were found to be
associated with both HNF1b and prostate cancer risk. Six of them (BAG1, ERBB4,
ESR1, HSPD1, NR4A1, and PIK3CG) were mapped to the KEGG pathway, and submitted to
further gene expression assessment. HNF1b, NR4A1, and HSPD1 were found to be
highly expressed in the LNCaP androgenic hormone-dependent cell line. Compared to
expression levels in wild-type prostate cancer cells, NR4A1, HSPD1, ERBB4, and
ESR1 expression levels were also found to be significantly increased in the
HNF1b-transfected cells. We conclude that the mechanism of action of HNF1b in
prostate cancer involves modulation of the association between androgenic hormone
and prostate cancer cells. Gene-gene interaction and coordination should be taken
into account to determine relationships between specific loci and diseases.

PMID: 23661456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Br Poult Sci. 2013;54(2):252-8. doi: 10.1080/00071668.2013.767439.

The phytoestrogen daidzein may affect reproductive performance of Zhedong White
geese by regulating gene mRNA levels in the HPG axis.

Zhao X(1), Shao T, Wang YQ, Lu XL, Luo JB, Zhou WD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Science, Zhejiang Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou, 310021.

1. The effect of daidzein, a naturally occurring phytoestrogen, on the
reproductive performance of 120 female Zhedong White geese was determined. The
geese were divided into 4 groups which were fed on diets containing 0 (Control), 
10 (Da1), 20 (Da2) and 30 (Da3) mg daidzein per kg diet. Egg production and
weight, fertility and hatchability rates, concentrations of estradiol (E2),
triiodothyronine (T3), progesterone (P4), thyroxine (T4) and growth hormone (GH) 
in serum, and mRNA levels of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH), ß-follicle
stimulating hormone (FSHß), follicle stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR),
oestrogen receptor1 (ESR1), oestrogen receptor2 (ESR2), prolactin (PRL),
prolactin receptor (PRLR), and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
in the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPGA) were measured. 2. Daidzein
increased egg weight and fertility but had no detectable effect on egg production
and hatchability. 3. Daidzein affected serum P4 and GH concentrations and T4
rhythm, up-regulated GnRH mRNA and PRLR mRNA levels in the hypothalamus,
down-regulated PRLR mRNA in the hypothalamus, PRL mRNA in the pituitary, and ESR2
mRNA levels in the ovary, respectively. The mRNA rhythms of PRLR in the
hypothalamus, PRL, PRLR and FSHß in the pituitary, FSHR, ESR1 and ESR2 in the
ovary were significantly changed in the Da2 group. 4. It is suggested that an
appropriate dose of daidzein might improve reproductive performance by affecting 
serum hormone concentrations and rhythms and regulating gene mRNA levels in the
HPGA of female Zhedong White geese.

PMID: 23647190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Endocrinol. 2013 Jun 1;218(1):125-33. doi: 10.1530/JOE-13-0029. Print 2013 Jul.

Oestrogen action on thyroid progenitor cells: relevant for the pathogenesis of
thyroid nodules?

Xu S(1), Chen G, Peng W, Renko K, Derwahl M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, St Hedwig Hospital, Berlin,
Germany.

Benign and malignant thyroid nodules are more prevalent in females than in males.
Experimental data suggest that the proliferative effect of oestrogen rather than 
polymorphisms is responsible for this gender difference. This study analysed
whether both differentiated thyroid cells and thyroid stem and progenitor cells
are targets of oestrogen action. In thyroid stem/progenitor cells derived from
nodular goitres, the ability of 17ß-oestradiol (E2) to induce the formation of
thyrospheres and the expression of oestrogen receptors (ERs) and the effect of E2
on the growth and expression of markers of stem cells and thyroid differentiation
(TSH receptor, thyroperoxidase, thyroglobulin and sodium iodide symporter (NIS)) 
were analysed. E2 induced thyrosphere formation, albeit to a lower extent than
other growth factors. Thyroid stem and progenitor cells expressed ERa (ESR1) and 
ERß (ESR2) with eight times higher expression levels of ERa mRNA compared with
the differentiated thyrocytes. E2 was a potent stimulator of the growth of
thyroid stem/progenitor cells. In contrast, TSH-induced differentiation of
progenitor cells, in particular, the expression of NIS, was significantly
inhibited by E2. In conclusion, oestrogen stimulated the growth and
simultaneously inhibited the differentiation of thyroid nodule-derived
stem/progenitor cells. From these data and based on the concept of cellular
heterogeneity, we hypothesize a supportive role of oestrogen in the propagation
of thyroid stem/progenitor cells leading to the selection of a progeny of
growth-prone cells with a decreased differentiation. These cells may be the
origin of hypofunctioning or non-functioning thyroid nodules in females.

PMID: 23645248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Gene. 2013 Jul 25;524(2):84-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.04.064. Epub 2013 May 3.

Effects of passive smoking on breast cancer risk in pre/post-menopausal women as 
modified by polymorphisms of PARP1 and ESR1.

Tang LY(1), Chen LJ, Qi ML, Su Y, Su FX, Lin Y, Wang KP, Jia WH, Zhuang ZX, Ren
ZF.

Author information: 
(1)The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510630,
China.

OBJECTIVES: The association between passive smoking and breast cancer risk
differs in pre- and post-menopausal women. We aimed to explore the modification
effects of PARP1 rs1136410 and ESR1 rs2234693 on the association between passive 
smoking and breast cancer risk among pre- and post-menopausal women.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A case-control study of 839 breast cancer cases and 863
controls was conducted. The gene-environment interactions were tested after
adjusting for potential breast cancer risk factors with unconditional logistic
regression models.
RESULTS: We found that the effect of passive smoking was modified by the
genotypes in both pre- and post-menopausal women, but in opposite directions. The
combination of the TC/CC genotypes of ESR1 rs2234693 and passive smoking
significantly increased the risk of breast cancer [OR (95%CI): 2.06 (1.39-3.05)] 
in pre-menopausal women. A significant association was observed between TT
genotype and passive smoking [OR (95%CI): 2.40 (1.27-4.53)] in postmenopausal
women. For PARP1 rs1136410, similar differential associations were observed, but 
the interactions were not significant.
CONCLUSIONS: These results imply that the risk of breast cancer from passive
smoking may be influenced by genetic factors, and that the association may differ
depending on menopausal status.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23644255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2013 Apr 12;6(4):282-8. Print 2013.

ESR1 single nucleotide polymorphisms predict breast cancer susceptibility in the 
central European Caucasian population.

Lipphardt MF(1), Deryal M, Ong MF, Schmidt W, Mahlknecht U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Immunotherapy and Gene Therapy,
José Carreras Research Center, Saarland University Medical Center D-66421
Homburg/Saar, Germany.

Estrogen and progesterone hormones are key regulators of a wide variety of
biological processes. In addition to their influence on reproduction, cell
differentiation and apoptosis, they affect inflammatory response, cell metabolism
and most importantly, they regulate physiological breast tissue proliferation and
differentiation as well as the development and progression of breast cancer. In
order to assess whether genetic variants in the steroid hormone receptor gene
ESR1 (estrogen receptor alpha) had an effect on sporadic breast cancer
susceptibility, we assessed 7 ESR1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for
associations with breast cancer susceptibility and clinical parameters in 221
breast cancer patients and 221 controls, respectively. We identified ESR1 intron 
SNP +2464 C/T (rs3020314) and ESR1 intron SNP -4576 A/C (rs1514348) to correlate 
with breast cancer susceptibility and progesterone receptor expression status.
Patients genotyped CT for ESR1 intron SNP +2464 (rs3020314) (p = 0.045) or
genotyped AC for ESR1 intron SNP -4576 (rs1514348) (p = 0.000026) were identified
to carry a significant risk as to the development of breast cancer in the Central
European Caucasian population (both together: p = 0.000488). Our study could
confirm previous associations and revealed new associations of SNP rs1514348 with
susceptibility to breast cancer and clinical outcome, which might be used as new 
additional SNP markers.

PMCID: PMC3631553
PMID: 23641305  [PubMed]


112. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2013 Jul;169(2):370-5. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2013.03.029. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Spread of endometriosis to pelvic sentinel lymph nodes: gene expression analysis.

Bürkle B(1), Notscheid NK, Scheich J, Hefler L, Tempfer CB, Horvat R, Rezniczek
GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
Marienhospital Herne, Düngelstrasse 33, Herne, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Endometriotic spread to the lymphatic system has been described, but
little is known about the molecular events and changes in gene expression
associated with this process. We sought to determine the expression levels of a
panel of 28 genes in samples of primary endometriosis lesions (EL), isolated
endometriotic-like cells (IELC)-positive pelvic sentinel lymph nodes (PSLN), and 
IELC-negative PSLN, in order to identify candidate genes that may play a role in 
this process.
STUDY DESIGN: Quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry (IHC) of
primary EL and PSLN samples with and without IELC from patients with ovarian
and/or peritoneal endometriosis.
RESULTS: Gene expression was analyzed in EL (n=13), IELC-positive PSLN (PSLN+,
n=11), and IELC-negative PSLN (PSLN-, n=8). Gene expression differences between
PSLN+ and PSLN- were analyzed and evaluated in relation to their expression
levels in EL. Genes expressed at high levels in EL but not in PSLN- and known to 
be expressed in IELC (such as ESR1, PGR) served as controls and the expected gene
dilution effect was clearly observed. Expression of a set of genes (CXCR4, CD68, 
MKI67, and CD44) was found to be higher in PSLN+ vs. PSLN-, while lowest in EL,
indicating upregulation in IELC. In contrast, EPCAM and E-cadherin, which were
strongly expressed in EL, were not found to be expressed in PSLN+, and thus
likely absent from IELC. IHC confirmed the expression of CXCR4, CD44s, and CD44v6
in IELC, as well as the absence of E-cadherin from IELC.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that spread of endometriosis to PSLN is accompanied
by differential expression of several genes, including EPCAM, CDH1 (E-cadherin), 
CXCR4, and CD44, suggesting an involvement of CD44 splice variants as well as
CXCR4 signalling in this process.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23639674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2013 Sep;32(9):2018-25. doi: 10.1002/etc.2267. Epub 2013
Jun 27.

Gene expression responses for detecting sublethal effects of xenobiotics and
whole effluents on a Xenopus laevis embryo assay.

San Segundo L(1), Martini F, Pablos MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of the Environment, National Institute for Agricultural and Food
Research and Technology, Madrid, Spain. san-segundo.laura@inia.es

In the present study, the authors investigated the effects of bisphenol A,
chlorpyrifos, methylparaben, and 2 effluent samples from wastewater treatment
plants located in the province of Madrid, Spain, on the messenger RNA expression 
of specific genes involved in early development (ESR1, pax6, bmp4, and myf5) and 
a gene involved in the general stress response (hsp70) during Xenopus laevis
embryo development. Gene expression was analyzed after 4<U+2009>h, 24<U+2009>h, and 96<U+2009>h of
exposure by semiquantitative reverse-transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
Concentration ranges of the compounds and dilutions for the samples were selected
to cause morphological alterations in embryos after 96<U+2009>h of exposure. Transcript 
levels of ESR1, pax6, and hsp70 were differentially altered at early
developmental stages with patterns specific to the contaminant and the exposure
time. However, further studies are needed to establish transcript levels of
specific genes as biomarkers of sublethal effects in an environmental
risk-assessment framework. Besides, studies including more generic responses,
such as genes encoding antioxidant enzymes, together with genes related to
embryonic development have to be developed to look for a battery of mechanistic
endpoints for the evaluation of chemical exposure at the molecular level in a
first-tier assessment.

Copyright © 2013 SETAC.

PMID: 23637088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Genome Res. 2013 Aug;23(8):1210-23. doi: 10.1101/gr.152306.112. Epub 2013 May 1.

Enhancer transcripts mark active estrogen receptor binding sites.

Hah N(1), Murakami S, Nagari A, Danko CG, Kraus WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York 14853, USA.

We have integrated and analyzed a large number of data sets from a variety of
genomic assays using a novel computational pipeline to provide a global view of
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1; a.k.a. ERa) enhancers in MCF-7 human breast cancer
cells. Using this approach, we have defined a class of primary transcripts
(eRNAs) that are transcribed uni- or bidirectionally from estrogen receptor
binding sites (ERBSs) with an average transcription unit length of ~3-5 kb. The
majority are up-regulated by short treatments with estradiol (i.e., 10, 25, or 40
min) with kinetics that precede or match the induction of the target genes. The
production of eRNAs at ERBSs is strongly correlated with the enrichment of a
number of genomic features that are associated with enhancers (e.g., H3K4me1,
H3K27ac, EP300/CREBBP, RNA polymerase II, open chromatin architecture), as well
as enhancer looping to target gene promoters. In the absence of eRNA production, 
strong enrichment of these features is not observed, even though ESR1 binding is 
evident. We find that flavopiridol, a CDK9 inhibitor that blocks transcription
elongation, inhibits eRNA production but does not affect other molecular
indicators of enhancer activity, suggesting that eRNA production occurs after the
assembly of active enhancers. Finally, we show that an enhancer transcription
"signature" based on GRO-seq data can be used for de novo enhancer prediction
across cell types. Together, our studies shed new light on the activity of ESR1
at its enhancer sites and provide new insights about enhancer function.

PMCID: PMC3730096
PMID: 23636943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jul;30(1):25-34. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2433. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Association of MDM2 SNP309 and TP53 Arg72Pro polymorphisms with risk of
endometrial cancer.

Yoneda T(1), Kuboyama A, Kato K, Ohgami T, Okamoto K, Saito T, Wake N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

The incidence of endometrial cancer, a common gynecological malignancy, is
increasing in Japan. We have previously shown that the ER/MDM2/p53/p21 pathway
plays an important role in endometrial carcinogenesis. In the present study, we
investigated the effects of germline single nucleotide polymorphisms in murine
double minute 2 (MDM2) SNP309, TP53 Arg72Pro, ESR1 PvuII and XbaI, and p21 codon 
31 on endometrial cancer risk. We evaluated these polymorphisms in DNA samples
from 125 endometrial cancer cases and 200 controls using polymerase chain
reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism. The association of each 
genetic polymorphism with endometrial cancer was examined by the odds ratio and
95% confidence interval, which were obtained using logistic regression analysis. 
The SNP309 GG genotype non-significantly increased the risk of endometrial
cancer. The 95% confidence interval for the GG genotype vs. the TT genotype of
MDM2 SNP309 was 1.76 (0.93-3.30). Endometrial cancer was not associated with
tested SNP genotypes for TP53, ESR1 and p21. The combination of SNP309 GG + TG
and TP53 codon 72 Arg/Arg significantly increased endometrial cancer risk. The
adjusted OR was 2.53 (95% confidence interval, 1.03-6.21) and P for the
interaction was 0.04. This result was supported by in vitro data showing that
endometrial cancer cell lines with the SNP309 G allele failed to show growth
inhibition by treatment with RITA, which reduces p53-MDM2 binding. The presence
of the SNP309 G allele and TP53 codon 72 Arg/Arg genotype is associated with an
increased risk of endometrial cancer in Japanese women.

PMCID: PMC3729233
PMID: 23624782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 19;8(4):e61726. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061726. Print 2013.

Diethylstilboestrol exposure does not reduce testosterone production in human
fetal testis xenografts.

Mitchell RT(1), Sharpe RM, Anderson RA, McKinnell C, Macpherson S, Smith LB,
Wallace WH, Kelnar CJ, van den Driesche S.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Reproductive Health, Edinburgh University, Edinburgh, Scotland,
UK. rod.mitchell@ed.ac.uk

In rodents, in utero exposure to exogenous estrogens including
diethylstilboestrol (DES) results in major suppression of steroidogenesis in
fetal testes. Whether similar effects occur in the human fetal testis is
equivocal. Based on the results of the rodent studies, we hypothesised that
exposure of human fetal testes to DES would result in a reduction in testosterone
production. We show, using a xenograft approach, that testosterone production is 
not reduced in human fetal testis following DES exposure. Human fetal testes
(15-19 weeks' gestation, n<U+200A>=<U+200A>6) were xenografted into castrate male nude mice
which were then treated for 35 days with vehicle or 100 µg/kg DES three times a
week. For comparison, similar treatment was applied to pregnant rats from
e13.5-e20.5 and effects on fetal testes evaluated at e21.5. Xenograft
testosterone production was assessed by measuring host seminal vesicle (SV)
weights as an indirect measure over the entire grafting period, and single
measurement of serum testosterone at termination. Human fetal testis xenografts
showed similar survival in DES and vehicle-exposed hosts. SV weight (44.3 v 26.6 
mg, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01) was significantly increased in DES compared to vehicle-exposed
hosts, respectively, indicating an overall increase in xenograft testosterone
production over the grafting period, whilst serum testosterone at termination was
unchanged. In contrast intra-testicular testosterone levels were reduced by 89%, 
in fetal rats exposed to DES. In rats, DES effects are mediated via Estrogen
Receptor a (ESR1). We determined ESR1 protein and mRNA expression in human and
rat fetal testis. ESR1 was expressed in rat, but not in human, fetal Leydig
cells. We conclude that human fetal testis exposure to DES does not impair
testosterone production as it does in rats, probably because ESR1 is not
expressed in human fetal Leydig cells. This indicates that DES exposure is likely
to pose minimal risk to masculinization of the human fetus.

PMCID: PMC3631175
PMID: 23620786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Curr Drug Targets. 2013 Jul;14(8):850-5.

The impact of genetics profile (gene polymorphisms) in obese non-PCOS women
entering an IVF/ICSI program.

Anagnostou E(1), Drakakis P, Marinopoulos S, Mavrogianni D, Loutradis D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Reproduction, IVF Unit, 1st Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Alexandra Hospital, Athens University Medical School, Athens, Greece.

Data concerning the effects of increased body mass index (BMI) on ovarian and
pregnancy outcome are rich, but the results are rather controversial. Regarding
pharmacogenetics, gene polymorphisms of hormonal receptor genes, such as Estrogen
Receptor alpha (ESR1), Estrogen Receptor beta (ESR2) and FSH receptor (FSHR)
genes, are associated with ovarian stimulation and pregnancy outcome and may
constitute a useful tool for ART experts for the prediction of this outcome. The 
aim of this study is to track differences in the distribution of gene
polymorphisms among obese non-PCOS and non-obese patients concerning three
distinct genes which are involved in the ovarian stimulation mechanism: PvuII
polymorphism of ESR1 gene, RsaI polymorphism of ESR2 gene and Ser680Asn variation
of FSHR gene, using restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and
real-time polymerase chain reaction. A total of 151 normally ovulating female
patients underwent IVF or ICSI. Interestingly, the pregnancy rate in the BMI=30
kg/m² group was higher in a statistically significant way (40.9% versus 17.8%,
p=0.023). The obese patients of this study were in need of increased total FSH
dose in order to achieve a satisfactory oocyte number (p<0.001) and needed more
days of stimulation (p=0.002), but also presented lower basal FSH levels
(p=0.032), which may explain, to an extend, the better pregnancy outcome.
Concerning the polymorphisms of ESR1, ESR2 and FSHR genes, we did not observe
differences in the genotype distribution when we compared the obese non-PCOS
population with the non-obese population. Thus, obesity does not constitute an
additional indication to perform a genetic analysis before entering an IVF/ICSI
program.

PMID: 23614677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 May;139(1):267-75. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2494-1. 
Epub 2013 Apr 23.

Association between a novel polymorphism (rs2046210) of the 6q25.1 locus and
breast cancer risk.

Yang Z(1), Shen J, Cao Z, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, People's Republic of China.

The novel single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs2046210, was identified in a
breast cancer genome-wide association study of Chinese women. The SNP is located 
on 6q25.1 in proximity to the C6orf97 and estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) genes. To
replicate this susceptibility, a number of case-control studies have been
conducted in various populations. However, some results were inconclusive due to 
the restriction of sample size or ethnic diversity. To derive a more precise
estimation of the relationship between rs2046210 and genetic risk of breast
cancer, we performed the first comprehensive meta-analysis which included 121,494
cases and 119,295 controls from 14 published studies. Overall, significant
increased risk between the A allele of rs2046210 and breast cancer was found in
the total population (allelic model: OR = 1.16, 95 %CI = 1.11-1.21, P
heterogeneity < 0.0001; dominant model: OR = 1.22, 95 %CI = 1.14-1.29, P
heterogeneity < 0.0001; recessive model: OR = 1.21, 95 %CI = 1.13-1.29, P
heterogeneity < 0.0001). When stratified by ethnicity, significant elevated risk 
was found among Europeans and Asians. However, no significant association was
detected in African descent population. In the subgroup analyses according to
estrogen receptor (ER) positive/negative status, our results suggested that this 
polymorphism tended to increase breast cancer risk in ER negative tumors by a
greater magnitude compared to ER positive tumors. In addition, our subgroup
analysis also indicated that this SNP was significantly associated with the risk 
of breast cancer for BRCA1 mutation carriers and exhibited weaker association
with the risk for BRCA2 mutation carriers. Substantial heterogeneity was present 
in the overall analysis, but largely disappeared after stratification by
ethnicity. Despite some limitations, this meta-analysis demonstrates that the
rs2046210 polymorphism may be a risk factor associated with increased breast
cancer risk. However, the association varies in different ethnicities.

PMID: 23609471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Endocrinol. 2013 Jun 1;218(1):117-24. doi: 10.1530/JOE-13-0074. Print 2013 Jul.

Postnatal development of gastric aromatase and portal venous estradiol-17ß levels
in male rats.

Kobayashi H(1), Yoshida S, Sun YJ, Shirasawa N, Naito A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Structural Science, Yamagata University Faculty of
Medicine, 2-2-2 Iida-nishi, Yamagata 990-9585, Japan.

Gastric parietal cells synthesize and secrete estradiol-17ß (E2) into gastric
veins joining the portal vein, and a large amount of gastric E2 first binds to
its receptors in the liver. However, the role of the gastric E2 is not entirely
clear during postnatal development. The objective of this study was to reveal the
onset of aromatase and other steroid-synthesizing enzymes in the gastric mucosa; 
to determine the period of rising E2 levels in the portal vein; and to further
understand the relationship between gastric E2 and liver estrogen receptor a
(ERa). The immunoblot bands and the immunohistochemistry of gastric mucosa
revealed that aromatase protein began to express itself at 20 days and then
increased in the levels of aromatase protein from 20 days onward. Expression of
mRNAs for gastric aromatase (Cyp19a1) and other steroid-synthesizing enzymes,
17a-Hydroxylase (Cyp17a1) and 17ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD17b3), also
increased similar to the increment of aromatase protein. Portal venous E2 levels 
were elevated after 20 days and increased remarkably between 23 and 30 days,
similar to gastric aromatase mRNA levels. The E2 level was approximately three
times higher at 40 days than that at 20 days. The liver weight and Esr1 levels
began to increase after 20 days and the increment was positively correlated with 
the change of portal venous E2 levels. These findings suggest that some changes
may occur around 20 days to regulate the gastric E2 synthesis and secretion.

PMID: 23606751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 8;8(4):e60851. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060851. Print 2013.

Eight functional polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor 1 gene and endometrial
cancer risk: a meta-analysis.

Zhou X(1), Gu Y, Wang DN, Ni S, Yan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, Liaoning, Shenyang, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Emerging evidence indicates that common functional
polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene may have an impact on an
individual's susceptibility to endometrial cancer, but individually published
results are inconclusive. The aim of this meta-analysis is to derive a more
precise estimation of the associations between eight polymorphisms in the ESR1
gene and endometrial cancer risk.
METHODS: A literature search of PubMed, Embase, Web of Science and China Biology 
Medicine (CBM) databases was conducted on publications published before November 
1(st), 2012. Crude odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were
calculated. Statistical analyses were performed using the STATA 12.0 software.
RESULTS: Thirteen case-control studies were included with a total of 7,649
endometrial cancer cases and 16,855 healthy controls. When all the eligible
studies were pooled into the meta-analysis, the results indicated that PvuII
(C>T) polymorphism was associated with an increased risk of endometrial cancer,
especially among Caucasian populations. There were also significant associations 
between rs3020314 (C>T) polymorphism and an increased risk of endometrial cancer.
Furthermore, rs2234670 (S/L) polymorphism may decrease the risk of endometrial
cancer. However, no statistically significant associations were found in XbaI
(A>G), Codon 325 (C>G), Codon 243 (C>T), VNTR (S/L) and rs2046210 (G>A)
polymorphisms.
CONCLUSION: The current meta-analysis suggests that PvuII (C>T) and rs3020314
(C>T) polymorphisms may be risk factors for endometrial cancer, especially among 
Caucasian populations.

PMCID: PMC3620469
PMID: 23593326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Environ Sci Technol. 2013 May 21;47(10):5372-82. doi: 10.1021/es3044888. Epub
2013 May 2.

Estrogen-like effects in male goldfish co-exposed to fluoxetine and 17
alpha-ethinylestradiol.

Silva de Assis HC(1), Simmons DB, Zamora JM, Lado WE, Al-Ansari AM, Sherry JP,
Blais JM, Metcalfe CD, Trudeau VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Federal University of Paraná, 81531-980, Curitiba,
Paraná, Brazil. helassis@ufpr.br

The antidepressant fluoxetine (FLX) and the synthetic estrogen, 17
alpha-ethinylestradiol (EE2), are present in municipal sewage discharges. To
better understand possible interactions between them, male goldfish were exposed 
to an ethanol control or to nominal concentrations of FLX (0.54 µg/L) and EE2 (5 
ng/L) alone and in combination for 14 days. Real-time reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction was used to assess effects on hepatic gene expression
and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry to analyze the plasma
proteome. The results showed an increase in estrogen receptor alpha (esr1) and
vitellogenin (vtg) gene expression by 1.9-2.4-fold in the FLX and EE2 groups, but
this did not reach statistical significance. In contrast, co-exposure up
regulated esr1 and vtg gene expression by 5.5- and 5.3-fold, respectively.
Fluoxetine and EE2 alone did not affect estrogen receptor beta (esr2), but the
co-exposure down regulated esr2 expression by 50%. There was a significant
increase in the number of plasma proteins that were related to endocrine system
disorders in the FLX and FLX plus EE2 groups. The level of VTG protein was
increased in the plasma from goldfish exposed to EE2, FLX, and FLX plus EE2. Our 
study demonstrates that low concentrations of FLX and EE2 in a simple mixture
produce strong estrogen-like effects in the male goldfish.

PMID: 23590834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Nat Rev Urol. 2013 Jun;10(6):317-26. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2013.53. Epub 2013 Apr
16.

Role of oestrogen receptors in bladder cancer development.

Hsu I(1), Vitkus S, Da J, Yeh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, University of
Rochester Medical Center, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Early studies documented the existence of sexual dimorphism in bladder cancer
occurrence and progression, with a greater bladder cancer incidence in males than
females. However, the progression of bladder cancer after diagnosis is much
quicker in females than males. These findings can be explained by the effects of 
female hormones (predominantly oestrogens) and their binding receptors, including
oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1; also known as ERa), oestrogen receptor 2 (ESR2; also 
known as ERß), and GPR30 protein on bladder cancer incidence and progression.
Results from studies using various in vitro cell lines and in vivo mouse models
demonstrate differential roles of oestrogen receptors in cancer initiation and
progression. ERa suppresses bladder cancer initiation and invasion, whereas ERß
promotes bladder cancer initiation and progression. Mechanistic studies suggest
that ERa and ERß exert these effects via modulation of the AKT pathway and DNA
replication complex, respectively. Targeting these signalling pathways--for
example, with ERa agonists, ERß antagonists, or selective oestrogen receptor
modulators such as
4-[2-phenyl-5,7-bis(trifluoromethyl)pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidin-3-yl]phenol (also
known as PHTPP)--could lead to the development of new therapeutic approaches for 
controlling bladder cancer progression.

PMID: 23588401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Int J Cancer. 2013 Oct 15;133(8):1825-31. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28209. Epub 2013 May
7.

Prognostic and predictive value of estrogen receptor 1 expression in completely
resected non-small cell lung cancer.

Brueckl WM(1), Al-Batran SE, Ficker JH, Claas S, Atmaca A, Hartmann A, Rieker RJ,
Wirtz RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, 3, Klinikum Nürnberg, Nuremberg, Germany.
wolfgang.brueckl@klinikum-nuernberg.de

Adjuvant chemotherapy (ACT) leads to a modest improvement in survival among
patients with completely resected non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) but
molecular predictors are still rare. Publicly available gene microarray, clinical
and follow-up data from two different studies on early-stage NSCLC were used to
determine the expression of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1). Expression values were
calculated against clinical and survival data in a training set (n = 138) and a
test set (subpopulation from the adjuvant JBR.10 study) allowing the
determination of the prognostic effect of ESR1 in the observational arm as well
as the predictive effect of ESR1 regarding ACT. Data were well balanced in terms 
of ESR1 expression. ESR1 high expression was of significant positive prognostic
value in the training set and this could be confirmed in the test set cohort
(hazard ratio for overall survival 0.248, 95% confidence interval: 0.088-0.701; p
= 0.008). Additionally, ESR1 low tumors showed a benefit from ACT in terms of
5-year survival (33.3% observation arm and 77.8% ACT arm; p = 0.003), whereas
patients with ESR1 high tumors did not have any benefit from ACT (test of
interaction p = 0.024). ESR1 is an independent positive prognostic factor for
survival in early-stage NSCLC patients. Patients with ESR1 high tumors did not
benefit from ACT.

Copyright © 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23580323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS One. 2013;8(4):e59173. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059173. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Multi-analytic approach elucidates significant role of hormonal and
hepatocanalicular transporter genetic variants in gallstone disease in North
Indian population.

Srivastava A(1), Mishra A, Singh R, Rai R, Srivastava N, Mittal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences (SGPGIMS) Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

OBJECTIVE: Cholesterol gallstone disease (CGD) is a multifactorial and multistep 
disease. Apart from female gender and increasing age being the documented
non-modifiable risk factor for gallstones the pathobiological mechanisms
underlying the phenotypic expression of CGD appear to be rather complex, and one 
or more variations in genes could play critical roles in the diverse pathways
further progressing to cholesterol crystal formation. In the present study we
performed genotyping score, Multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) and
Classification and Regression Tree analysis (CART) to identify combinations of
alleles among the hormonal, hepatocanalicular transporter and adipogenesis
differentiation pathway genes in modifying the risk for CGD.
DESIGN: The present case-control study recruited total of 450 subjects, including
230 CGD patients and 220 controls. We analyzed common ESR1, ESR2, PGR, ADRB3,
ADRA2A, ABCG8, SLCO1B1, PPAR<U+03B3>2, and SREBP2 gene polymorphisms to find out
combinations of genetic variants contributing to CGD risk, using multi-analytical
approaches (G-score, MDR, and CART).
RESULTS: Single locus analysis by logistic regression showed association of ESR1 
IVS1-397C>T (rs2234693), IVS1-351A>G (rs9340799) PGR ins/del (rs1042838)
ADRB3-190 T>C (rs4994) ABCG8 D19H (rs11887534), SLCO1B1 Exon4 C>A (rs11045819)
and SREBP2 1784G>C (rs2228314) with CGD risk. However, the MDR and CART analysis 
revealed ESR1 IVS1-397C>T (rs2234693) ADRB3-190 T>C (rs4994) and ABCG8 D19H
(rs11887534) polymorphisms as the best polymorphic signature for discriminating
between cases and controls. The overall odds ratio for the applied
multi-analytical approaches ranged from 4.33 to 10.05 showing an incremental risk
for cholesterol crystal formation. In conclusion, our muti-analytical approach
suggests that, ESR1, ADRB3, in addition to ABCG8 genetic variants confer
significant risk for cholesterol gallstone disease.

PMCID: PMC3620121
PMID: 23577061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. BMC Vet Res. 2013 Apr 10;9:69. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-9-69.

The ESR1 gene is associated with risk for canine mammary tumours.

Borge KS(1), Melin M, Rivera P, Thoresen SI, Webster MT, von Euler H,
Lindblad-Toh K, Lingaas F.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Genetics, Department of Basic Sciences and Aquatic Medicine,
Norwegian School of Veterinary Science, P,O Box 8146 Dep,, 0033 Oslo, Norway.
KajaSverdrup.Borge@nvh.no

BACKGROUND: The limited within-breed genetic heterogeneity and an enrichment of
disease-predisposing alleles have made the dog a very suitable model for the
identification of genes associated with risk for specific diseases. Canine
mammary cancer is an example of such a disease. However, the underlying inherited
risk factors for canine mammary tumours (CMTs) are still largely unknown. In this
study, 52 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ten human cancer-associated
genes were genotyped in two different datasets in order to identify genes/alleles
associated with the development of CMTs. The first dataset consisted of English
Springer Spaniel (ESS) CMT cases and controls. ESS is a dog breed known to be at 
increased risk of developing CMTs. In the second dataset, dogs from breeds known 
to have a high frequency of CMTs were compared to dogs from breeds with a lower
occurrence of these tumours.
RESULTS: We found significant associations to CMT for SNPs and haplotypes in the 
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene in the ESS material (best PBonf<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.021). A large
number of SNPs, among them several SNPs in ESR1, showed significantly different
allele frequencies between the high and low risk breed groups (best
PBonf<U+2009>=<U+2009>8.8E-32, best PBPerm<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.076).
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of CMT-associated SNPs in ESR1 in two independent
datasets suggests that this gene might be involved in CMT development. These
findings also support that CMT may serve as a good model for human breast cancer 
research.

PMCID: PMC3637093
PMID: 23574728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014 May;22(5):489-98. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.08.006. 
Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Estrogen receptor a polymorphisms and the risk of cognitive decline: A 2-year
follow-up study.

Ma SL(1), Tang NL(2), Leung GT(3), Fung AW(3), Lam LC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, China; Functional Genomics and Biostatistical Computing Laboratory,
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China.
(2)Functional Genomics and Biostatistical Computing Laboratory, Shenzhen Research
Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China; Department of Chemical
Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China;
Laboratory of Genetics of Disease Susceptibility, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health
Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China. Electronic address:
nelsontang@cuhk.edu.hk. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, China.

OBJECTIVE: The neuroprotective role of estrogen is supported by biochemical
studies, but the results from clinical trials of estrogen replacement therapy on 
cognitive decline are controversial. One possible missing link might be the
interindividual difference in estrogen receptor expression. In this study, the
association of estrogen receptor a (ESR1) polymorphisms and cognitive decline was
investigated.
METHODS: Chinese older adults (n = 284) were recruited, and the cognitive profile
was follow-up over 2-year period. Twenty ESR1 polymorphisms were investigated and
correlated with the cognitive decline for the subjects.
RESULTS: Significant association was found between ESR1 polymorphisms (rs9340799 
[ESR1+351], rs1801132 [ESR1+975], rs6557171, rs9397456, and rs1884049) and
subjects with no dementia (Clinical Dementia Rating, CDR 0) and very mild
dementia (CDR 0.5). Several ESR1 polymorphisms were associated with cognitive
decline as assessed by Chinese versions of Mini-Mental State Examination and
Alzheimer Disease Association Scales-Cognitive Subscale. Different sets of ESR1
polymorphisms were associated with cognitive decline from CDR 0 to 0.5 and CDR
0.5 to 1. ESR1 polymorphisms (rs3853248, rs22334693 [ESR1+397], rs9340799
[ESR1+351], rs9397456, rs1801132 [ESR1+975], rs2179922, rs932477, and rs9341016) 
were associated with the deterioration of episodic memory among subjects with
baseline CDR 0, indicating these polymorphisms might be markers for episodic
memory decline at an earlier stage.
CONCLUSION: This study showed association between ESR polymorphisms and cognitive
decline or specific areas in cognitive profile. These findings might be useful in
identifying individuals at risk for early intervention, and more research is
required to elucidate the underlying mechanisms.

Copyright © 2014 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23567436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58291. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058291. Epub 2013 Mar 29.

Expression of estrogen receptor a 36 (ESR36) in the hamster ovary throughout the 
estrous cycle: effects of gonadotropins.

Chakraborty P(1), Roy SK.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.

Estradiol-17ß (E) plays an important role in ovarian follicular development.
Evidence indicates that some of the effect of E is mediated by the transmembrane 
estrogen receptor. In this study, we examined the spatio-temporal expression of
recently discovered ERa36 (ESR36), a splice variant of Esr1 and a receptor for
non-genomic E signaling, in the hamster ovary during the estrous cycle and the
role of gonadotropins and ovarian steroid hormones in ESR36 expression. ESR36
expression was high on estrus (D1:0900 h) and declined precipitously by proestrus
(D4:0900 h) and remained low up to D4:1600 h. Immunofluorescence findings
corroborated immunoblot findings and revealed that ESR36 was expressed only in
the cell membrane of both follicular and non-follicular cells, except the
oocytes. Ovarian ESR36 was capable of binding to the E-affinity matrix, and have 
different molecular weight than that of the ESR1 or GPER. Hypophysectomy (Hx)
resulted in a marked decline in ESR36 protein levels. FSH and LH, alone or
combined, markedly upregulated ESR36 protein in Hx hamsters to the levels
observed in D1 hamsters, but neither E nor P had any effect. Inhibition of the
gonadotropin surge by phenobarbital treatment on D4:1100 h attenuated ESR36
expression in D1:0900 h ovaries, but the decline was restored by either FSH or LH
replacement on D4 afternoon. This is the first report to show that ESR36, which
is distinct from ESR1 or GPER is expressed in the plasma membrane of ovarian
follicular and non-follicular cells, binds to E and its expression is regulated
directly by the gonadotropins. In light of our previous findings, the results
suggest that ovarian cells contain at least two distinct membrane estrogen
receptors, such as GPER and ESR36, and strongly suggest for a non-genomic action 
of E regulating ovarian follicular functions.

PMCID: PMC3612073
PMID: 23555574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Apr;138(3):807-16. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2504-3. 
Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Genetic associations with toxicity-related discontinuation of aromatase inhibitor
therapy for breast cancer.

Henry NL(1), Skaar TC, Dantzer J, Li L, Kidwell K, Gersch C, Nguyen AT, Rae JM,
Desta Z, Oesterreich S, Philips S, Carpenter JS, Storniolo AM, Stearns V, Hayes
DF, Flockhart DA.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Oncology Program, University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center,
1500 East Medical Center Drive, Med Inn Bldg C450, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5843, USA.
norahh@med.umich.edu

Up to 25 % of patients discontinue adjuvant aromatase inhibitor (AI) therapy due 
to intolerable symptoms. Predictors of which patients will be unable to tolerate 
these medications have not been defined. We hypothesized that inherited variants 
in candidate genes are associated with treatment discontinuation because of
AI-associated toxicity. We prospectively evaluated reasons for treatment
discontinuation in women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer initiating 
adjuvant AI through a multicenter, prospective, randomized clinical trial of
exemestane versus letrozole. Using multiple genetic models, we evaluated
potential associations between discontinuation of AI therapy because of toxicity 
and 138 variants in 24 candidate genes, selected a priori, primarily with roles
in estrogen metabolism and signaling. To account for multiple comparisons,
statistical significance was defined as p < 0.00036. Of the 467 enrolled patients
with available germline DNA, 152 (33 %) discontinued AI therapy because of
toxicity. Using a recessive statistical model, an intronic variant in ESR1
(rs9322336) was associated with increased risk of musculoskeletal
toxicity-related exemestane discontinuation [HR 5.0 (95 % CI 2.1-11.8), p <
0.0002]. An inherited variant potentially affecting estrogen signaling may be
associated with exemestane-associated toxicity, which could partially account for
intra-patient differences in AI tolerability. Validation of this finding is
required.

PMCID: PMC3646626
PMID: 23546553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Aug;34(8):1889-99. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt107. Epub 2013 Mar
29.

MicroRNA-191, an estrogen-responsive microRNA, functions as an oncogenic
regulator in human breast cancer.

Nagpal N(1), Ahmad HM, Molparia B, Kulshreshtha R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Indian Institute of
Technology, New Delhi, India.

Estrogen- and microRNA-mediated gene regulation play a crucial role in breast
cancer biology. However, a functional link between the two major players remains 
unclear. This study reveals miR-191 as an estrogen-inducible onco-miR in breast
cancer, which promotes several hallmarks of cancer including enhanced cell
proliferation, migration, chemoresistance and survival in tumor microenvironment.
miR-191 is a direct estrogen receptor (ER) target and our results suggest
existence of a positive regulatory feedback loop. We show miR-191 as critical
mediator of estrogen-mediated cell proliferation. Investigations of mechanistic
details of miR-191 functions identify several cancer-related genes like BDNF,
CDK6 and SATB1 as miR-191 targets. miR-191 and SATB1 show inverse correlation of 
expression. miR-191-mediated enhanced cell proliferation and migration are partly
dependent on targeted downregulation of SATB1. Further, functional validation of 
estrogen:miR-191:SATB1 link suggests a cascade initiated by estrogen that induces
miR-191 in ER-dependent manner to target SATB1, a global chromatin remodeler,
thereby contributing to estrogen-specific gene signature to regulate genes like
ANXA1, PIWIL2, CASP4, ESR1/ESR2, PLAC1 and SOCS2 involved in breast cancer
progression and migration. Overall, the identification of
estrogen/ER/miR-191/SATB1 cascade seems to be a significant pathway in estrogen
signaling in breast cancer with miR-191 as oncogenic player.

PMID: 23542418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Oncogene. 2014 Mar 13;33(11):1438-47. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.78. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Pin1 modulates ERa levels in breast cancer through inhibition of
phosphorylation-dependent ubiquitination and degradation.

Rajbhandari P(1), Schalper KA(2), Solodin NM(1), Ellison-Zelski SJ(1), Ping Lu
K(3), Rimm DL(2), Alarid ET(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, UW Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Yale University 
Medical School, New Haven, CT, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Cancer Biology
Program, Beth Isreal Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA.

Estrogen receptor-alpha (ERa) is an important biomarker used to classify and
direct therapy decisions in breast cancer (BC). Both ERa protein and its
transcript, ESR1, are used to predict response to tamoxifen therapy, yet certain 
tumors have discordant levels of ERa protein and ESR1, which is currently
unexplained. Cellular ERa protein levels can be controlled post-translationally
by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway through a mechanism that depends on
phosphorylation at residue S118. Phospho-S118 (pS118-ERa) is a substrate for the 
peptidyl prolyl isomerase, Pin1, which mediates cis-trans isomerization of the
pS118-P119 bond to enhance ERa transcriptional function. Here, we demonstrate
that Pin1 can increase ERa protein without affecting ESR1 transcript levels by
inhibiting proteasome-dependent receptor degradation. Pin1 disrupts ERa
ubiquitination by interfering with receptor interactions with the E3 ligase,
E6AP, which also is shown to bind pS118-ERa. Quantitative in situ assessments of 
ERa protein, ESR1, and Pin1 in human tumors from a retrospective cohort show that
Pin1 levels correlate with ERa protein but not to ESR1 levels. These data show
that ERa protein is post-translationally regulated by Pin1 in a proportion of
breast carcinomas. As Pin1 impacts both ERa protein levels and transactivation
function, these data implicate Pin1 as a potential surrogate marker for
predicting outcome of ERa-positive BC.

PMCID: PMC3815749
PMID: 23542176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 1;73(7):2025-30. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1699. Epub
2013 Mar 27.

Genetic susceptibility to triple-negative breast cancer.

Stevens KN(1), Vachon CM, Couch FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC), defined by the absence of estrogen
receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER-2 expression, account for 12% to 24% of 
all breast cancers. TNBC is associated with early recurrence of disease and poor 
outcome. Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 breast cancer susceptibility
genes have been associated with up to 15% of TNBC, and TNBC accounts for 70% of
breast tumors arising in BRCA1 mutation carriers and 16% to 23% of breast tumors 
in BRCA2 carriers. Whether germline mutations in other breast cancer
susceptibility genes also predispose to TNBC remains to be determined. Common
variation in a subset of the 72 known breast cancer susceptibility loci
identified through genome-wide association studies and other large-scale
genotyping efforts have also been associated with risk of TNBC (TOX3, ESR1,
RAD51L1, TERT, 19p13.1, 20q11, MDM4, 2p24.1, and FTO). Furthermore, variation in 
the 19p13.1 locus and the MDM4 locus has been associated with TNBC, but not other
forms of breast cancer, suggesting that these are TNBC-specific loci. Thus, TNBC 
can be distinguished from other breast cancer subtypes by a unique pattern of
common and rare germline predisposition alleles. Additional efforts to combine
genetic and epidemiologic data are needed to better understand the etiology of
this aggressive form of breast cancer, to identify prevention and therapeutic
targets, and to impact clinical practice through the development of risk
prediction models.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3654815
PMID: 23536562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Reprod Biol. 2013 Mar;13(1):96-9. doi: 10.1016/j.repbio.2013.01.178. Epub 2013
Jan 31.

Association of PvuII polymorphism in ESR1 gene with impaired ovarian reserve in
patients from Ukraine.

Livshyts G(1), Podlesnaja S, Kravchenko S, Livshits L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genomics, Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine.

The association of ESR1 PvuII polymorphism (rs2334693) with impaired ovarian
reserve was studied by genotyping this polymorphism using PCR-RFLP in patients
and two control groups from Ukraine. Statistically significant differences in the
prevalence of p-allele frequency (-397T) was seen in the group of patients with
impaired ovarian reserve (0.597) compared to control groups I under 35years
(0.480) and II over 35years (0.453), both p<0.05. The data suggest that PvuII
polymorphism of ESR1 is associated with diminished ovarian reserve.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z o.o.

PMID: 23522078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Algorithms Mol Biol. 2013 Mar 23;8(1):9. doi: 10.1186/1748-7188-8-9.

Coexpression and coregulation analysis of time-series gene expression data in
estrogen-induced breast cancer cell.

Bhar A(1), Haubrock M, Mukhopadhyay A, Maulik U, Bandyopadhyay S, Wingender E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics, University Medical Center Goettingen, University 
of Goettingen, Goldschmidtstrasse 1, Goettingen, D-37077, Germany.
anirban.bhar@bioinf.med.uni-goettingen.de.

BACKGROUND: Estrogen is a chemical messenger that has an influence on many breast
cancers as it helps cells to grow and divide. These cancers are often known as
estrogen responsive cancers in which estrogen receptor occupies the surface of
the cells. The successful treatment of breast cancers requires understanding gene
expression, identifying of tumor markers, acquiring knowledge of cellular
pathways, etc. In this paper we introduce our proposed triclustering algorithm
d-TRIMAX that aims to find genes that are coexpressed over subset of samples
across a subset of time points. Here we introduce a novel mean-squared residue
for such 3D dataset. Our proposed algorithm yields triclusters that have a
mean-squared residue score below a threshold d.
RESULTS: We have applied our algorithm on one simulated dataset and one real-life
dataset. The real-life dataset is a time-series dataset in estrogen induced
breast cancer cell line. To establish the biological significance of genes
belonging to resultant triclusters we have performed gene ontology, KEGG pathway 
and transcription factor binding site enrichment analysis. Additionally, we
represent each resultant tricluster by computing its eigengene and verify whether
its eigengene is also differentially expressed at early, middle and late estrogen
responsive stages. We also identified hub-genes for each resultant triclusters
and verified whether the hub-genes are found to be associated with breast cancer.
Through our analysis CCL2, CD47, NFIB, BRD4, HPGD, CSNK1E, NPC1L1, PTEN, PTPN2
and ADAM9 are identified as hub-genes which are already known to be associated
with breast cancer. The other genes that have also been identified as hub-genes
might be associated with breast cancer or estrogen responsive elements. The TFBS 
enrichment analysis also reveals that transcription factor POU2F1 binds to the
promoter region of ESR1 that encodes estrogen receptor a. Transcription factor
E2F1 binds to the promoter regions of coexpressed genes MCM7, ANAPC1 and WEE1.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus our integrative approach provides insights into breast cancer
prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3827943
PMID: 23521829  [PubMed]


134. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Jan;26(2):337-45. doi: 10.1071/RD13007.

Predictive value of bovine follicular components as markers of oocyte
developmental potential.

Matoba S(1), Bender K(2), Fahey AG(1), Mamo S(1), Brennan L(2), Lonergan P(1),
Fair T(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture and Food Science, University College Dublin, Belfield,
Dublin 4, Ireland. (2)Institute of Food and Health, Conway Institute, University 
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

The follicle is a unique micro-environment within which the oocyte can develop
and mature to a fertilisable gamete. The aim of this study was to investigate the
ability of a panel of follicular parameters, including intrafollicular steroid
and metabolomic profiles and theca, granulosa and cumulus cell candidate gene
mRNA abundance, to predict the potential of bovine oocytes to develop to the
blastocyst stage in vitro. Individual follicles were dissected from abattoir
ovaries, carefully ruptured under a stereomicroscope and the oocyte was recovered
and individually processed through in vitro maturation, fertilisation and
culture. The mean (±s.e.m.) follicular concentrations of testosterone (62.8±4.8
ngmL(-1)), progesterone (616.8±31.9 ngmL(-1)) and oestradiol (14.4±2.4 ngmL(-1)) 
were not different (P>0.05) between oocytes that formed (competent) or failed to 
form (incompetent) blastocysts. Principal-component analysis of the quantified
aqueous metabolites in follicular fluid showed differences between oocytes that
formed blastocysts and oocytes that degenerated; l-alanine, glycine and
l-glutamate were positively correlated and urea was negatively correlated with
blastocyst formation. Follicular fluid associated with competent oocytes was
significantly lower in palmitic acid (P=0.023) and total fatty acids (P=0.031)
and significantly higher in linolenic acid (P=0.036) than follicular fluid from
incompetent oocytes. Significantly higher (P<0.05) transcript abundance of LHCGR 
in granulosa cells, ESR1 and VCAN in thecal cells and TNFAIP6 in cumulus cells
was associated with competent compared with incompetent oocytes.

PMID: 23514964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. 2013 Jul;116(1):69-74. doi:
10.1016/j.oooo.2012.12.015. Epub 2013 Mar 17.

Carcinoma ex-pleomorphic adenoma of upper lip showing copy number loss of tumor
suppressor genes.

Mariano FV(1), Rincon D, Gondak RO, Jorge R, Lopes MA, Altemani A, de Almeida OP,
Kowalski LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis, Piracicaba Dental School, University of
Campinas, Piracicaba, SP, Brasil. mariano@fcm.unicamp.br

BACKGROUND: Carcinoma ex-pleomorphic adenoma (CXPA) is a malignant salivary gland
tumor that arises rarely in the minor salivary glands. Although the etiology of
CXPA remains unclear, the role of some tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes in
CXPA is documented; however, other genes still need to be studied.
STUDY DESIGN AND OBJECTIVE: An uncommon case of CXPA involving the upper lip is
presented, which was analyzed by a panel of tumor suppressor genes by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification.
RESULTS: The genes investigated in this study, a loss of copy number was detected
for CASP8, CD44, CDH1, DAPK1, ESR1, RASSF1, and TP73. Immunohistochemical
reactions for the validation of some of these results showed negativity for CD44,
RASSF1, and p73.
CONCLUSION: A loss of copy number of the genes CD44, RASSF1, and TP73 may
contribute to the carcinogenesis of CXPAs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23510689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Aging Male. 2013 Jun;16(2):52-7. doi: 10.3109/13685538.2013.772134. Epub 2013 Mar
19.

Estrogen receptor alpha single nucleotide polymorphism as predictor of diabetes
type 2 risk in hypogonadal men.

Linnér C(1), Svartberg J, Giwercman A, Giwercman YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Molecular Genetic Reproductive Medicine, Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden. carl.linner@med.lu.se

Estradiol (E2) is, apart from its role as a reproductive hormone, also important 
for cardiac function and bone maturation in both genders. It has also been shown 
to play a role in insulin production, energy expenditure and in inducing
lipolysis. The aim of the study was to investigate if low circulating
testosterone or E2 levels in combination with variants in the estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) and estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) genes were of importance for the
risk of type-2 diabetes. The single nucleotide polymorphisms rs2207396 and
rs1256049, in ESR1 and ESR2, respectively, were analysed by allele specific PCR
in 172 elderly men from the population-based Tromsø study. The results were
adjusted for age. In individuals with low total (=11<U+2009>nmol/L) or free testosterone
(=0.18<U+2009>nmol/L) being carriers of the variant A-allele in ESR1 was associated with
7.3 and 15.9 times, respectively, increased odds ratio of being diagnosed with
diabetes mellitus type 2 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.018, respectively). Lower
concentrations of E2 did not seem to increase the risk of being diagnosed with
diabetes. In conclusion, in hypogonadal men, the rs2207396 variant in ESR1
predicts the risk of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 23506158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2013 Apr;30(4):555-61. doi: 10.1007/s10815-013-9971-7.
Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Do estrogen receptor alpha polymorphisms have any impact on the outcome in an ART
program?

Anagnostou E(1), Malamas F, Mavrogianni D, Dinopoulou V, Drakakis P, Kallianidis 
K, Loutradis D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Reproduction, IVF Unit, 1st Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Alexandra Hospital, Athens University Medical School, 80 Vasilissis
Sofias Avenue, 11528, Athens, Greece.

PURPOSE: To investigate two of the most studied estrogen receptor alpha
polymorphisms (PvuII and XbaI) in combination, in order to evaluate their impact 
on an ART program outcome.
METHODS: 203 normally ovulating women who underwent IVF or ICSI treatment were
genotyped for PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms in ESR1 intron 1 using Real-Time PCR. 
The relationship between the presence of polymorphic alleles and the ovulation
induction parameters and outcome was examined.
RESULTS: Women were grouped according to the number of polymorphic alleles they
carried in two groups (0-2 versus 3-4 polymorphic alleles). The presence of 3 or 
more polymorphic alleles was associated with significantly lower E2 levels on the
day of hCG administration and a significantly lower rate of good quality embryos.
CONCLUSION: There is an association between ESR1 polymorphisms and some ART
parameters such as the level of E2 on the day of hCG administration and the
quality of the embryos. These results underline the importance of ESR1 as a
candidate gene for the prediction of ovarian response to IVF/ICSI protocols.
Future research work concerning several more genes is necessary for a better
evaluation of patients before entering an IVF/ICSI program.

PMCID: PMC3644136
PMID: 23494590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Jan;10(1):27-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.12.008. Epub
2013 Mar 13.

Estrogen receptor polymorphisms and incident dementia: the prospective 3C study.

Ryan J(1), Carrière I(2), Carcaillon L(3), Dartigues JF(4), Auriacombe S(4),
Rouaud O(5), Berr C(2), Ritchie K(6), Scarabin PY(3), Ancelin ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1061, Neuropsychiatry: Epidemiological and Clinical Research,
Montpellier, France; Université Montpellier1, Montpellier, France; Murdoch
Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Victoria, Australia.
Electronic address: joanne.ryan@inserm.fr. (2)Inserm, U1061, Neuropsychiatry:
Epidemiological and Clinical Research, Montpellier, France; Université
Montpellier1, Montpellier, France. (3)Inserm, U1018, Université Paris Sud 11,
Villejuif, France. (4)Inserm, U897, Université Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France.
(5)CHRU Dijon, Centre Mémoire Ressources et Recherche, Dijon, France. (6)Inserm, 
U1061, Neuropsychiatry: Epidemiological and Clinical Research, Montpellier,
France; Université Montpellier1, Montpellier, France; Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Genetic variation in the estrogen receptor (ESR) may be associated
with the incidence of Alzheimer's disease (AD), but this association could be
modified by genetic and environmental factors.
METHODS: The association between five ESR a (ESR1) and ß (ESR2) polymorphisms
with 7-year dementia incidence was examined among 6959 older men and women from
the Three City Study using multivariate-adjusted Cox regression models with
delayed entry. Gender, the apolipoprotein E (APOE) e4 allele, and hormone
treatment were considered as potential effect modifiers of this association.
RESULTS: Among women, the CC genotype of ESR1rs2234693 was specifically
associated with a small increased risk of AD (adjusted hazard ratio [HR]: 1.54,
95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.03-2.28, P = .03). However, women with this
genotype had a substantially increased risk of AD associated with the APOE e4
allele (adjusted HR: 3.24, 95% CI: 1.81-5.79 for women rs2234693 CC; compared
with HR: 1.87, 95% CI: 1.37-2.56 for all women). There was also evidence of a
nominally significant interaction between the ESR1 and ESR2 polymorphisms on the 
risk of all dementias (P = .04). Hormone treatment did not modify these
associations, and there were no significant associations in men.
CONCLUSIONS: Although there was only weak support for a gender-specific
association between the common ESR1rs2234693 polymorphism and AD, this
polymorphism may act as an effect modifier, modifying the association between an 
ESR2 polymorphism and dementia, as well as the risk of AD associated with the
APOE e4 allele.

Copyright © 2014 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23491264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Nov;21(11):1286-92. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.38. Epub 2013
Mar 13.

Comparison of genetic variation of breast cancer susceptibility genes in Chinese 
and German populations.

Barzan D(1), Veldwijk MR, Herskind C, Li Y, Zhang B, Sperk E, Du WD, Zhang XJ,
Wenz F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Universitätsmedizin Mannheim, Medical
Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) identified several genetic risk factors
for breast cancer, however, most of them were validated among women of European
ancestry. This study examined single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) contributing
to breast cancer in Chinese (984 cases and 2206 controls) and German (311 cases
and 960 controls) populations. Eighteen SNPs significantly associated with breast
cancer, previously identified in GWAS were genotyped. Twelve SNPs passed quality 
control and were subjected to statistical analysis. Seven SNPs were confirmed to 
be significantly associated with breast cancer in the Chinese population,
reflecting three independent loci (ESR1, FGFR2, TOX3) and five of these were also
confirmed in the German population. The strongest association was identified for 
rs2046210 in the Chinese (odds ratio (OR)=1.42, 95% confidence interval
(CI)=1.28-1.59, P=1.9 × 10(-10)) and rs3803662 in the German population (OR=1.43,
95% CI=1.17-1.74, P=4.01 × 10(-4)), located upstream of the ESR1 and TOX3 gene,
respectively. For the first time, rs3757318 at 6q25.1, located next to the gene
encoding estrogen receptor a (ESR1) was found to be strongly associated with
breast cancer (OR=1.33, 95% CI=1.18-1.49, P=1.94 × 10(-6)) in the Chinese
population. The frequency of this variant was markedly lower in the German
population and the association was not significant. Despite the genetic
differences, essentially the same risk loci were identified in the Chinese and
the German populations. Our study suggested the existence of common genetic
factors as well as disease susceptibility differences for breast cancer in both
populations and highlighted the importance of performing comparison analyses for 
disease susceptibility within ethnic populations.

PMCID: PMC3798843
PMID: 23486537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Bone Miner Metab. 2013 Nov;31(6):708-16. doi: 10.1007/s00774-013-0431-3. Epub
2013 Mar 9.

Genetic factors influencing bone mineral content in a black South African
population.

May A(1), Pettifor JM, Norris SA, Ramsay M, Lombard Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences,
National Health Laboratory Service, University of the Witwatersrand,
Watkins-Pitchford Building, Room 109, Cnr Hospital and De Korte Street,
Braamfontein, 2000, Johannesburg, South Africa.

Bone mass differs according to ethnic classification, with individuals of African
ancestry attaining the highest measurements across numerous skeletal sites.
Elevated bone mass is even maintained in those individuals exposed to adverse
environmental factors, suggesting a prominent genetic effect that may have
clinical or therapeutic value. Using a candidate gene approach, we investigated
associations of six candidate genes (ESR1, TNFRSF11A, TNFRSF11B, TNFSF11, SOST
and SPP1) with bone mass at the hip and lumbar spine amongst pre-pubertal black
South African children (mean age 10.6 years) who formed part of the longitudinal 
Birth to Twenty cohort. 151 black children were genotyped at 366 polymorphic
loci, including 112 previously associated and 254 tagging single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). Linear regression was used to highlight significant
associations whilst adjusting for height, weight, sex and bone area. Twenty-seven
markers (8 previously associated and 19 tag SNPs; P < 0.05) were found to be
associated with either femoral neck (18) or lumbar spine (9) bone mineral
content. These signals were derived from three genes, namely ESR1 (17), TNFRSF11B
(9) and SPP1 (1). One marker (rs2485209) maintained its association with the
femoral neck after correction for multiple testing (P = 0.038). When compared to 
results amongst Caucasian adults, we detected differences with respect to
associated skeletal sites. Allele frequencies and linkage disequilibrium patterns
were also significantly different between populations. Hence, our results support
the existence of a strong genetic effect acting at the femoral neck in black
South African children, whilst simultaneously highlighting possible causes that
account for inter-ethnic bone mass diversity.

PMCID: PMC3825635
PMID: 23475190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Int J Med Sci. 2013;10(4):457-66. doi: 10.7150/ijms.5234. Epub 2013 Mar 2.

Meta-analysis of the association of the rs2234693 and rs9340799 polymorphisms of 
estrogen receptor alpha gene with coronary heart disease risk in Chinese Han
population.

Wei CD(1), Zheng HY, Wu W, Dai W, Tong YQ, Wang M, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Molecular Diagnosis, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430060, Hubei, China.

OBJECTIVE: The association between a common variant of the ESR1 gene rs2234693
and rs9340799 polymorphisms with coronary heart disease (CHD) have been reported,
but the available data on this relationship are inconsistent. A meta-analysis was
performed to quantitative analysis the association of ESR1 gene polymorphisms and
CHD risk using previous case-control studies in Chinese Han population.
METHODS: Several electronic databases were searched for relevant articles up to
August 2012. After data collection, a meta-analysis was performed to assess
heterogeneity, combine results and evaluate variations. Different effect models
were used according to the difference in heterogeneity. Sensitivity analysis was 
assessed by omitting one study at a time. Publication bias was examined using
Begg's funnel plot and Egger's linear regression test.
RESULTS: Ten studies covering 3400 subjects on rs2234693 and rs9340799
polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene with CHD risk was included in this meta-analysis. 
For rs2234693 polymorphism, ten studies were combined to the meta-analysis. A
significantly increased CHD risk was found in a dominant model (OR=1.35, 955
CI=1.01-1.81, P=0.05), recessive model (OR=1.40, 95% CI=1.15-1.69, P=0.0007), and
additive model (OR=1.67, 95% CI=1.19-2.34, P=0.003). Subgroup for male but not
for female showed that the CC genotype could increase the risk of CHD compared
with TT and TC genotype in Chinese Han population. Concerning rs9340799
polymorphism, eight studies were combined to the meta-analysis. And no evidence
of significant association with CHD risk was found in all genetic models.
CONCLUSION: Our meta-analysis of 10 studies involving Chinese Han population
suggests that the CC genotype of the ESR1 rs2234693 polymorphism is significantly
associated with an increased risk of CHD in males only. There was no evidence
however, of a significant association between the ESR1 rs9340799 polymorphism and
CHD risk.

PMCID: PMC3590607
PMID: 23471591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Apr;138(3):861-8. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2459-4.
Epub 2013 Mar 7.

Association of low-penetrance alleles with male breast cancer risk and
clinicopathological characteristics: results from a multicenter study in Italy.

Ottini L(1), Silvestri V, Saieva C, Rizzolo P, Zanna I, Falchetti M, Masala G,
Navazio AS, Graziano V, Bianchi S, Manoukian S, Barile M, Peterlongo P, D'Amico
C, Varesco L, Tommasi S, Russo A, Giannini G, Cortesi L, Viel A, Montagna M,
Radice P, Palli D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Viale Regina 
Elena 324, 00161 Rome, Italy. laura.ottini@uniroma1.it

It is well-known that male breast cancer (MBC) susceptibility is mainly due to
high-penetrance BRCA1/2 mutations. Here, we investigated whether common
low-penetrance breast cancer (BC) susceptibility alleles may influence MBC risk
in Italian population and whether variant alleles may be associated with specific
clinicopathological features of MBCs. In the frame of the Italian Multicenter
Study on MBC, we genotyped 413 MBCs and 745 age-matched male controls at 9 SNPs
annotating known BC susceptibility loci. By multivariate logistic regression
models, we found a significant increased MBC risk for 3 SNPs, in particular, with
codominant models, for rs2046210/ESR1 (OR = 1.71; 95 % CI: 1.43-2.05; p =
0.0001), rs3803662/TOX3 (OR = 1.59; 95 % CI: 1.32-1.92; p = 0.0001), and
rs2981582/FGFR2 (OR = 1.26; 95 % CI: 1.05-1.50; p = 0.013). Furthermore, we
showed that the prevalence of the risk genotypes of ESR1 tended to be higher in
ER- tumors (p = 0.062). In a case-case multivariate analysis, a statistically
significant association between ESR1 and ER- tumors was found (OR = 1.88; 95 %
CI: 1.03-3.49; p = 0.039). Overall, our data, based on a large and
well-characterized MBC series, support the hypothesis that common low-penetrance 
BC susceptibility alleles play a role in MBC susceptibility and, interestingly,
indicate that ESR1 is associated with a distinct tumor subtype defined by
ER-negative status.

PMID: 23468243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Toxicol Sci. 2013 May;133(1):157-73. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft035. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Prenatal bisphenol A exposure alters sex-specific estrogen receptor expression in
the neonatal rat hypothalamus and amygdala.

Cao J(1), Rebuli ME, Rogers J, Todd KL, Leyrer SM, Ferguson SA, Patisaul HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, NCSU, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA.

Bisphenol A (BPA) exposure is ubiquitous, and in laboratory animals, early-life
BPA exposure has been shown to alter sex-specific neural organization,
neuroendocrine physiology, and behavior. The specific mechanisms underlying these
brain-related outcomes, however, remain largely unknown, constraining the
capacity to ascertain the potential human relevance of neural effects observed in
animal models. In the perinatal rat brain, estrogen is masculinizing, suggesting 
that BPA-induced perturbation of estrogen receptor (ESR) expression may underpin 
later in-life neuroendocrine effects. We hypothesized that prenatal BPA exposure 
alters sex-specific ESR1 (ERa) and ESR2 (ERß) expression in postnatal limbic
nuclei. Sprague Dawley rats were mated and gavaged on gestational days (GDs) 6-21
with vehicle, 2.5 or 25 µg/kg bw/day BPA, or 5 or 10 µg/kg bw/day ethinyl
estradiol. An additional group was restrained but not gavaged (naïve control).
Offspring were sacrificed the day after birth to quantify ESR gene expression
throughout the hypothalamus and amygdala by in situ hybridization. Relative to
the vehicle group, significant effects of BPA were observed on ESR1 and ESR2
expression throughout the mediobasal hypothalamus and amygdala in both sexes.
Significant differences in ESR expression were also observed in the mediobasal
hypothalamus and amygdala of the naïve control group compared with the vehicle
group, highlighting the potential for gavage to influence gene expression in the 
developing brain. These results indicate that ESR expression in the neonatal
brain of both sexes can be altered by low-dose prenatal BPA exposure.

PMCID: PMC3627558
PMID: 23457122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Feb;30(1):21-5. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2013.01.006.

[Association between ESR1 gene polymorphisms and haplotypes with schizophrenia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang LW(1), He SP, Zhang JL, Tong DX, He Y, Cheng XL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Medical Genetics, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) and haplotypes of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene with schizophrenia.
METHODS: Three SNPs (rs2234693, rs9340799 and rs3798759) were determined in 333
schizophrenic patients and 315 healthy subjects with polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. Allelic and 
genotypic frequencies and particular haplotypes were compared between the two
groups using Chi-square test.
RESULTS: The allelic and genotypic frequencies of rs2234693 and rs9340799 showed 
no significant difference between the two groups (P U+003E 0.05). However, a
significant difference was detected in the frequencies of rs3798759 G allele and 
GG genotype between the two groups (P U+003C 0.01). Single factor analysis
stratified by sex also found that frequencies of rs3798759 GG and TG genotypes
and G allele were significantly higher in female schizophrenia patients compared 
with healthy females (P U+003C 0.05). Haplotypes C-A-G and C-G-G were more common
in schizophrenia group (P U+003C 0.05).
CONCLUSION: polymorphisms of rs3798759 may be a risk factor for female patients
with schizophrenia, and haplotypes C-A-G and C-G-G may be risk factors for
schizophrenia.

PMID: 23450473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Folia Biol (Praha). 2012;58(6):246-50.

Methylation analysis of tumour suppressor genes in ovarian cancer using MS-MLPA.

Chmelarová M(1), Krepinská E, Spacek J, Laco J, Nekvindová J, Palicka V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Diagnostics, Faculty Hospital, Faculty
of Medicine Hradec Králové, Charles University-Prague, Hradec Králové, Czech
Republic. ChmelarovaMarcela@seznam.cz

Epigenetic changes are considered to be a frequent event during tumour
development. Hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands represents an alternative
mechanism for inactivation of tumour suppressor genes, DNA repair genes, cell
cycle regulators and transcription factors. The aim of this study was to
investigate promoter methylation of specific genes in ovarian cancer by
comparison with normal ovarian tissue. To search for epigenetic events we used
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA)
to compare the methylation status of 69 tissue samples of ovarian cancer with 40 
control samples. Using a 15% cut-off for methylation, we observed significantly
higher methylation in genes MGMT, PAX5, CDH13, WT1, THBS1, GATA5 in the ovarian
cancer group, while in the ESR1 gene we observed significantly higher methylation
in the control group compared with the ovarian cancer group. These findings could
potentially be used in screening of ovarian cancer and may have implications for 
future chemotherapy based on epigenetic changes.

PMID: 23438850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(2):e1003247. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003247. Epub 2013 Feb 
21.

Genetic determinants of trabecular and cortical volumetric bone mineral densities
and bone microstructure.

Paternoster L(1), Lorentzon M, Lehtimäki T, Eriksson J, Kähönen M, Raitakari O,
Laaksonen M, Sievänen H, Viikari J, Lyytikäinen LP, Mellström D, Karlsson M,
Ljunggren O, Grundberg E, Kemp JP, Sayers A, Nethander M, Evans DM, Vandenput L, 
Tobias JH, Ohlsson C.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Causal Analyses in Translational Epidemiology, University of
Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.

Most previous genetic epidemiology studies within the field of osteoporosis have 
focused on the genetics of the complex trait areal bone mineral density (aBMD),
not being able to differentiate genetic determinants of cortical volumetric BMD
(vBMD), trabecular vBMD, and bone microstructural traits. The objective of this
study was to separately identify genetic determinants of these bone traits as
analysed by peripheral quantitative computed tomography (pQCT). Separate GWA
meta-analyses for cortical and trabecular vBMDs were performed. The cortical vBMD
GWA meta-analysis (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>5,878) followed by replication (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1,052) identified
genetic variants in four separate loci reaching genome-wide significance (RANKL, 
rs1021188, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.6×10<U+207B>¹4; LOC285735, rs271170, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.7×10<U+207B>¹²; OPG, rs7839059,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.2×10<U+207B>¹°; and ESR1/C6orf97, rs6909279, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.1×10<U+207B><U+2079>). The trabecular vBMD
GWA meta-analysis (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,500) followed by replication (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1,022) identified one 
locus reaching genome-wide significance (FMN2/GREM2, rs9287237, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.9×10<U+207B><U+2079>).
High-resolution pQCT analyses, giving information about bone microstructure, were
available in a subset of the GOOD cohort (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>729). rs1021188 was significantly
associated with cortical porosity while rs9287237 was significantly associated
with trabecular bone fraction. The genetic variant in the FMN2/GREM2 locus was
associated with fracture risk in the MrOS Sweden cohort (HR per extra T allele
0.75, 95% confidence interval 0.60-0.93) and GREM2 expression in human
osteoblasts. In conclusion, five genetic loci associated with trabecular or
cortical vBMD were identified. Two of these (FMN2/GREM2 and LOC285735) are novel 
bone-related loci, while the other three have previously been reported to be
associated with aBMD. The genetic variants associated with cortical and
trabecular bone parameters differed, underscoring the complexity of the genetics 
of bone parameters. We propose that a genetic variant in the RANKL locus
influences cortical vBMD, at least partly, via effects on cortical porosity, and 
that a genetic variant in the FMN2/GREM2 locus influences GREM2 expression in
osteoblasts and thereby trabecular number and thickness as well as fracture risk.

PMCID: PMC3578773
PMID: 23437003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Oncol Lett. 2013 Feb;5(2):569-573. Epub 2012 Nov 22.

rs12976445 variant in the pri-miR-125a correlates with a lower level of
hsa-miR-125a and ERBB2 overexpression in breast cancer patients.

Lehmann TP(1), Korski K, Ibbs M, Zawierucha P, Grodecka-Gazdecka S, Jagodzinski
PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

Expression of MIR125A is diminished in breast tumors, however the reason for the 
hsa-mir-125a decrease in the cancer is not known. HER2 is encoded by ERBB2, a
target for hsa-miR-125a which interacts with the 3'UTR of ERBB2 mRNA. The present
study reveals that a polymorphism (rs12976445) within the pri-miR-125a sequence
correlates with the amount of mature hsa-miR-125a in breast tumor samples. miRNA,
RNA and DNA were extracted from breast cancer samples obtained from 26 patients. 
Following immunohistological evaluation of the samples, the ERBB2, PGR and ESR1
mRNA profiles were also analyzed using real-time PCR. Genomic DNA was sequenced
using MIR125A flanking primers. PCR products were analyzed using a BaeGI
restriction enzyme specific to the rs12976445 variant. The rs12976445 variant
(C/T and C/C) correlated with a lower level of hsa-miR-125a in comparison with
the T/T variant. The expression of HER2 mRNA was increased in tumors with the
rs12976445 variant (C/T and C/C) compared with T/T. We conclude that rs12976445
may be a potential prognostic marker of HER2 expression in breast cancer. Its
predictive value on the efficacy of trastuzumab treatment in patients with
HER2-positive breast cancer warrants further study.

PMCID: PMC3573016
PMID: 23420759  [PubMed]


148. Chemosphere. 2013 May;91(8):1099-106. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.01.012.
Epub 2013 Feb 8.

Endocrine-related effects of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) in zebrafish, H295R
steroidogenesis and receptor reporter gene assays.

Du G(1), Huang H, Hu J, Qin Y, Wu D, Song L, Xia Y, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China.

Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), a persistent perfluorinated compound, is
distributed widely in wildlife and humans. Recent studies showed that PFOA is a
suspected endocrine disruptor. But the results are somewhat contradictory and the
mechanisms are unclear. In this study, we investigated the endocrine-related
effects of PFOA using a series of assays. The lower dose effect of PFOA on
development and endocrine-related gene expression were assessed in a short-term
zebrafish assay in vivo. To clarify the mechanism of PFOA, in vitro assays were
performed. We tested the hormone receptor activities of ER, AR, and TR against
PFOA using reporter gene assays. The hormone levels of estradiol (E2) and
testosterone (T), the expression of major steroidogenic genes and the key
steroidogenic gene regulator steroidogenic factors 1 (SF-1) were measured after
PFOA exposure in H295R steroidogenesis assay. Exposure of zebrafish embryo to
PFOA resulted in higher expression of esr1, hhex and pax. PFOA is able to
interfere with hormone receptor ER and TR. In H295R cells, PFOA could increase
the E2 production and decrease the T production, altered the expression of major 
steroidogenic genes and regulator SF-1. The current findings indicated the
potential endocrine-related effects of PFOA and provided novel information for
human risk assessment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23399300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013;14 Suppl 2:S7. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-S2-S7. Epub
2013 Jan 21.

Discovery and analysis of consistent active sub-networks in cancers.

Gaire RK(1), Smith L, Humbert P, Bailey J, Stuckey PJ, Haviv I.

Author information: 
(1)NICTA, Victoria Laboratory and Department of Computing and Information
Systems, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic 3010, Australia.
rgaire@csse.unimelb.edu.au

Gene expression profiles can show significant changes when genetically diseased
cells are compared with non-diseased cells. Biological networks are often used to
identify active subnetworks (ASNs) of the diseases from the expression profiles
to understand the reason behind the observed changes. Current methodologies for
discovering ASNs mostly use undirected PPI networks and node centric approaches. 
This can limit their ability to find the meaningful ASNs when using integrated
networks having comprehensive information than the traditional protein-protein
interaction networks. Using appropriate scoring functions to assess both genes
and their interactions may allow the discovery of better ASNs. In this paper, we 
present CASNet, which aims to identify better ASNs using (i) integrated
interaction networks (mixed graphs), (ii) directions of regulations of genes, and
(iii) combined node and edge scores. We simplify and extend previous
methodologies to incorporate edge evaluations and lessen their sensitivity to
significance thresholds. We formulate our objective functions using mixed integer
programming (MIP) and show that optimal solutions may be obtained. We compare the
ASNs obtained by CASNet and similar other approaches to show that CASNet can
often discover more meaningful and stable regulatory ASNs. Our analysis of a
breast cancer dataset finds that the positive feedback loops across 7 genes, AR, 
ESR1, MYC, E2F2, PGR, BCL2 and CCND1 are conserved across the basal/triple
negative subtypes in multiple datasets that could potentially explain the
aggressive nature of this cancer subtype. Furthermore, comparison of the basal
subtype of breast cancer and the mesenchymal subtype of glioblastoma ASNs shows
that an ASN in the vicinity of IL6 is conserved across the two subtypes. This
result suggests that subtypes of different cancers can show molecular
similarities indicating that the therapeutic approaches in different types of
cancers may be shared.

PMCID: PMC3549822
PMID: 23368093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Feb;138(1):59-67. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2432-2.
Epub 2013 Feb 10.

The detection of ESR1/PGR/ERBB2 mRNA levels by RT-QPCR: a better approach for
subtyping breast cancer and predicting prognosis.

Du X(1), Li XQ, Li L, Xu YY, Feng YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tianjin Medical University
Cancer Institute and Hospital, Huan-Hu-Xi Road, He-Xi District, Tianjin 300060,
China.

The molecular classification of breast cancer mainly focuses on ER, PR, and HER2 
status detected by immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis. To explore the clinical
value of breast cancer classification based on gene-based diagnosis of the triple
markers, we measured ESR1, PGR, and ERBB2 mRNA levels in 294 breast cancer
patients by reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(RT-QPCR), and examined their correlation with ER, PR, and HER2 status detected
by IHC. We observed a significant positive correlation between the mRNA levels of
the triple markers and their protein status (ESR1 vs. ER, Spearman's <U+03C1> = 0.527,
P = 2.3 × 10(-22); PGR vs. PR, Spearman's <U+03C1> = 0.631, P = 5.1 × 10(-34); ERBB2 vs.
HER2, Spearman's <U+03C1> = 0.439, P = 3.0 × 10(-15)). Furthermore, the subtypes
determined by mRNA levels of the triple markers were significantly correlated to 
the subtypes determined based on their protein status (Spearman's <U+03C1> = 0.342,
P = 2.0 × 10(-8)). Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that the subtypes determined by
mRNA levels of the triple-marker could predict the disease-free survival (DFS) in
breast cancer patients. Multivariate analysis showed that the predictive value of
DFS could be confirmed for the subtypes determined by mRNA levels of the triple
markers (HR = 2.285, P = 0.008) but not for those determined by their protein
status. Taken together, our results suggest that the detection of ESR1/PGR/ERBB2 
mRNA levels by RT-QPCR is a better approach for subtyping breast cancer and
predicting the prognosis.

PMID: 23397283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Feb 7;15(1):R11. doi: 10.1186/bcr3384.

HER2 and ESR1 mRNA expression levels and response to neoadjuvant trastuzumab plus
chemotherapy in patients with primary breast cancer.

Denkert C, Huober J, Loibl S, Prinzler J, Kronenwett R, Darb-Esfahani S, Brase
JC, Solbach C, Mehta K, Fasching PA, Sinn BV, Engels K, Reinisch M, Hansmann ML, 
Tesch H, von Minckwitz G, Untch M.

INTRODUCTION: Recent data suggest that benefit from trastuzumab and chemotherapy 
might be related to expression of HER2 and estrogen receptor (ESR1). Therefore,
we investigated HER2 and ESR1 mRNA levels in core biopsies of HER2-positive
breast carcinomas from patients treated within the neoadjuvant GeparQuattro
trial.
METHODS: HER2 levels were centrally analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC),
silver in situ hybridization (SISH) and qRT-PCR in 217 pretherapeutic
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) core biopsies. All tumors had been
HER2-positive by local pathology and had been treated with neoadjuvant
trastuzumab/ chemotherapy in GeparQuattro.
RESULTS: Only 73% of the tumors (158 of 217) were centrally HER2-positive
(cHER2-positive) by IHC/SISH, with cHER2-positive tumors showing a significantly 
higher pCR rate (46.8% vs. 20.3%, P <0.0005). HER2 status by qRT-PCR showed a
concordance of 88.5% with the central IHC/SISH status, with a low pCR rate in
those tumors that were HER2-negative by mRNA analysis (21.1% vs. 49.6%, P
<0.0005). The level of HER2 mRNA expression was linked to response rate in
ESR1-positive tumors, but not in ESR1-negative tumors. HER2 mRNA expression was
significantly associated with pCR in the HER2-positive/ESR1-positive tumors (P = 
0.004), but not in HER2-positive/ESR1-negative tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Only patients with cHER2-positive tumors - irrespective of the
method used - have an increased pCR rate with trastuzumab plus chemotherapy. In
patients with cHER2-negative tumors the pCR rate is comparable to the pCR rate in
the non-trastuzumab treated HER-negative population. Response to trastuzumab is
correlated to HER2 mRNA levels only in ESR1-positive tumors. This study adds
further evidence to the different biology of both subsets within the
HER2-positive group.

PMCID: PMC3672694
PMID: 23391338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Am J Hypertens. 2013 Feb;26(2):191-200. doi: 10.1093/ajh/hps018. Epub 2012 Dec
28.

Analysis of sex hormone genes reveals gender differences in the genetic etiology 
of blood pressure salt sensitivity: the GenSalt study.

Kelly TN(1), Rebholz CM, Gu D, Hixson JE, Rice TK, Cao J, Chen J, Li J, Lu F, Ma 
J, Mu J, Whelton PK, He J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane University School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA. tkelly@tulane.edu

BACKGROUND: We examined the association between 799 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms in 39 sex hormone genes and blood pressure (BP) responses to a
dietary-sodium intervention.
METHODS: A 7-day low-sodium feeding study (51.3 mmol sodium/day) followed by a
7-day high-sodium feeding study (307.8 mmol sodium/day) was conducted among 1,906
Han Chinese participants. Nine BP measurements were obtained at baseline and the 
end of each intervention period using a random-zero sphygmomanometer.
RESULTS: Among men, absolute BP responses to sodium interventions decreased with 
the number of minor alleles of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) markers rs9340844,
rs9397453, rs9371562, rs9397459, and rs9383951. For example, mean diastolic blood
pressure (DBP) responses to low-sodium intervention (95% confidence interval)
were -2.67 (-3.13, -2.22) mm Hg among those with the rs9397453 C/C genotype,
-1.23 (-1.98, -0.48) mm Hg among those with the C/T genotype, and 0.08 (-2.31,
2.47) mm Hg among those with the T/T genotype (P = 1×10(-4); false discovery rate
(FDR)-q = 0.04). Mean DBP responses to high sodium according to the rs9397453
genotypes were 1.46 (1.03, 1.89) mm Hg among those with C/C, 0.19 (-0.54, 0.91)
mm Hg among those with C/T, and -1.10 (-2.82, 0.61) mm Hg among those with T/T (P
= 2×10(-4); FDR-q = 0.04). Similar trends were noted for the association between 
these ESR1 variants and SBP responses to the dietary intervention. There were no 
significant associations between sex hormone gene variants and salt sensitivity
in women, with genotype-gender interactions noted for the ESR1 markers that
achieved significance in men.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified strong, consistent associations between ESR1 gene
variants and salt sensitivity in men. Our results support a gender-specific role 
for ESR1 in the etiology of this complex trait.

PMCID: PMC3626038
PMID: 23382403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Feb;138(1):157-65. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2426-0. 
Epub 2013 Feb 3.

Expression of key oestrogen-regulated genes differs substantially across the
menstrual cycle in oestrogen receptor-positive primary breast cancer.

Haynes BP(1), Viale G, Galimberti V, Rotmensz N, Gibelli B, A'Hern R, Smith IE,
Dowsett M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Academic Biochemistry, Royal Marsden Hospital, Fulham Road,
London SW3 6JJ, UK. ben.haynes@icr.ac.uk

Plasma estradiol (E2) and progesterone vary markedly through the menstrual cycle.
Data on whether these differences in hormone levels affect gene expression in
oestrogen receptor-positive (ER+) tumours are inconsistent. We wished to
determine whether there are substantial changes in the expression of
oestrogen-regulated genes (ERGs) in ER+ breast cancer through the menstrual
cycle. One hundred and seventy five paraffin-embedded ER+ breast carcinomas from 
premenopausal patients were analysed. Timing of the ovarian cycle was confirmed
using serum progesterone levels. Patients were ascribed to one of three
pre-defined menstrual cycle windows: 1 (days 27-35 + 1-6), 2 (days 7-16) and 3
(days 17-26). The RNA expression of ESR1, four ERGs (PGR, GREB1, TFF1 and PDZK1),
and three proliferation genes (MKI67, TOP2A and CDC20) were compared between the 
windows. Gene expression of the four ERGs was 53-129 % higher in window 2 than
window 1 (p = 0.0013, 0.0006, 0.022 and 0.066 for PGR, GREB1, TFF1 and PDZK1,
respectively) and lower (9-41 %) in window 3 compared to window 2 (p = 0.079,
0.31, 0.031 and 0.065 for PGR, GREB1, TFF1 and PDZK1, respectively). Their
average expression (AvERG) was 64 % higher in window 2 than window 1 (p < 0.0001)
and 21 % lower in window 3 than window 2 (p = 0.0043). There were no significant 
differences between the windows for ESR1 and proliferation genes. In agreement
with the gene expression data, progesterone receptor protein levels measured by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) were 164 and 227 % higher in windows 2 and 3,
respectively, compared to window 1 (30.7 and 37.9 % cells positive vs. 11.6 %; p 
= 0.0003 and 0.0004, respectively), while no difference in ER IHC score was
observed. In conclusion, we observed significant differences in the expression of
ERGs in ER+ breast tumours across the menstrual cycle. This variability may
affect the interpretation of gene expression profiles incorporating ERGs and may 
be exploitable as an endogenous test of endocrine responsiveness.

PMID: 23378065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cell. 2013 Jan 31;152(3):633-41. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.12.034.

Integrative eQTL-based analyses reveal the biology of breast cancer risk loci.

Li Q(1), Seo JH, Stranger B, McKenna A, Pe'er I, Laframboise T, Brown M,
Tyekucheva S, Freedman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2013 Jan 31;152(3):387-9.

Germline determinants of gene expression in tumors are infrequently studied due
to the complexity of transcript regulation caused by somatically acquired
alterations. We performed expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL)-based
analyses using the multi-level information provided in The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA). Of the factors we measured, cis-acting eQTLs accounted for 1.2% of the
total variation of tumor gene expression, while somatic copy-number alteration
and CpG methylation accounted for 7.3% and 3.3%, respectively. eQTL analyses of
15 previously reported breast cancer risk loci resulted in the discovery of three
variants that are significantly associated with transcript levels (false
discovery rate [FDR] < 0.1). Our trans-based analysis identified an additional
three risk loci to act through ESR1, MYC, and KLF4. These findings provide a more
comprehensive picture of gene expression determinants in breast cancer as well as
insights into the underlying biology of breast cancer risk loci.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4165609
PMID: 23374354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Toxicol Sci. 2013 Feb;38(1):159-67.

Microarray analysis of 6-mercaptopurine-induced-toxicity-related genes and
microRNAs in the rat placenta.

Taki K(1), Fukushima T, Ise R, Horii I, Yoshida T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Showa
University, Tokyo, Japan. kenji.taki@pfizer.com

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small single-stranded RNAs of 19-25 nucleotides and are
important in posttranscriptional regulation of genes. Recently, the role of
miRNAs in toxicity incidence is reported to be a regulator of key-stopper of gene
expression, however the detailed mechanism of miRNAs is not well known yet.
6-Mercaptopurine (6-MP), the anti-leukemic and immunosuppressive drug, produced
teratogenicity and pregnancy loss. We focused on the placenta to evaluate
toxicity in embryo/fetal development produced by 6-MP treatment. MiRNA expression
in the placenta was analyzed by miRNA microarray. Fifteen miRNAs were upregulated
on GD13 and 5 miRNAs were downregulated on GD15 in 6-MP treatment rat placentas. 
Some miRNAs may have functions in apoptosis (miR-195, miR-21, miR-29c and
miR-34a), inflammation (miR-146b), and ischemia (miR-144 and miR-451). In the
maternal plasma, expression of miR-144 was significantly reduced by 6-MP
treatment when examined by real-time RT-PCR. We determined toxicity-related gene 
expression in the rat placenta. Gene expression analysis was carried out by DNA
oligo microarray using rat placenta total RNAs. Compared between predicted
targets of miRNAs and microarray data in 6-MP-treated rat placenta, expressions
of hormone receptor genes (estrogen receptor 1; Esr1, progesterone receptor; Pgr,
and prolactin receptor; Prlr), xanthine oxidase (Xdh), Slc38a5 and Phlda2 genes
were changed. The histopathologically found increase in trophoblastic giant cells
and reduced placental growth by 6-MP treatment were well correlated to these gene
expressions. These data suggest that some miRNAs may link to toxicological
reactions in 6-MP-induced placental toxicity.

PMID: 23358152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Hum Genet. 2013 May;132(5):523-36. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1269-4. Epub 2013 Jan 
25.

Genetic variants associated with breast cancer risk for Ashkenazi Jewish women
with strong family histories but no identifiable BRCA1/2 mutation.

Rinella ES(1), Shao Y, Yackowski L, Pramanik S, Oratz R, Schnabel F, Guha S,
LeDuc C, Campbell CL, Klugman SD, Terry MB, Senie RT, Andrulis IL, Daly M, John
EM, Roses D, Chung WK, Ostrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York,
NY, USA.

The ability to establish genetic risk models is critical for early identification
and optimal treatment of breast cancer. For such a model to gain clinical
utility, more variants must be identified beyond those discovered in previous
genome-wide association studies (GWAS). This is especially true for women at high
risk because of family history, but without BRCA1/2 mutations. This study
incorporates three datasets in a GWAS analysis of women with Ashkenazi Jewish
(AJ) homogeneous ancestry. Two independent discovery cohorts comprised 239 and
238 AJ women with invasive breast cancer or preinvasive ductal carcinoma in situ 
and strong family histories of breast cancer, but lacking the three BRCA1/2
founder mutations, along with 294 and 230 AJ controls, respectively. An
independent, third cohort of 203 AJ cases with familial breast cancer history and
263 healthy controls of AJ women was used for validation. A total of 19 SNPs were
identified as associated with familial breast cancer risk in AJ women. Among
these SNPs, 13 were identified from a panel of 109 discovery SNPs, including an
FGFR2 haplotype. In addition, six previously identified breast cancer GWAS SNPs
were confirmed in this population. Seven of the 19 markers were significant in a 
multivariate predictive model of familial breast cancer in AJ women, three novel 
SNPs [rs17663555(5q13.2), rs566164(6q21), and rs11075884(16q22.2)], the FGFR2
haplotype, and three previously published SNPs [rs13387042(2q35),
rs2046210(ESR1), and rs3112612(TOX3)], yielding moderate predictive power with an
area under the curve (AUC) of the ROC (receiver-operator characteristic curve) of
0.74. Population-specific genetic variants in addition to variants shared with
populations of European ancestry may improve breast cancer risk prediction among 
AJ women from high-risk families without founder BRCA1/2 mutations.

PMCID: PMC4072456
PMID: 23354978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 5;110(6):2294-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1220811110.
Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Estrogen receptor-a in osteocytes is important for trabecular bone formation in
male mice.

Windahl SH(1), Börjesson AE, Farman HH, Engdahl C, Movérare-Skrtic S, Sjögren K, 
Lagerquist MK, Kindblom JM, Koskela A, Tuukkanen J, Divieti Pajevic P, Feng JQ,
Dahlman-Wright K, Antonson P, Gustafsson JÅ, Ohlsson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Nutrition, Centre for Bone and
Arthritis Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.

The bone-sparing effect of estrogen in both males and females is primarily
mediated via estrogen receptor-a (ERa), encoded by the Esr1 gene. ERa in
osteoclasts is crucial for the trabecular bone-sparing effect of estrogen in
females, but it is dispensable for trabecular bone in male mice and for cortical 
bone in both genders. We hypothesized that ERa in osteocytes is important for
trabecular bone in male mice and for cortical bone in both males and females.
Dmp1-Cre mice were crossed with ERa(flox/flox) mice to generate mice lacking ERa 
protein expression specifically in osteocytes (Dmp1-ERa(-/-)). Male Dmp1-ERa(-/-)
mice displayed a substantial reduction in trabecular bone volume (-20%, P < 0.01)
compared with controls. Dynamic histomorphometry revealed reduced bone formation 
rate (-45%, P < 0.01) but the number of osteoclasts per bone surface was
unaffected in the male Dmp1-ERa(-/-) mice. The male Dmp1-ERa(-/-) mice had
reduced expression of several osteoblast/osteocyte markers in bone, including
Runx2, Sp7, and Dmp1 (P < 0.05). Gonadal intact Dmp1-ERa(-/-) female mice had no 
significant reduction in trabecular bone volume but ovariectomized Dmp1-ERa(-/-) 
female mice displayed an attenuated trabecular bone response to
supraphysiological E2 treatment. Dmp1-ERa(-/-) mice of both genders had
unaffected cortical bone. In conclusion, ERa in osteocytes regulates trabecular
bone formation and thereby trabecular bone volume in male mice but it is
dispensable for the trabecular bone in female mice and the cortical bone in both 
genders. We propose that the physiological trabecular bone-sparing effect of
estrogen is mediated via ERa in osteocytes in males, but via ERa in osteoclasts
in females.

PMCID: PMC3568324
PMID: 23345419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013 Mar;6(3):217-31. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-12-0212. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Gene expression changes in adipose tissue with diet- and/or exercise-induced
weight loss.

Campbell KL(1), Foster-Schubert KE, Makar KW, Kratz M, Hagman D, Schur EA,
Habermann N, Horton M, Abbenhardt C, Kuan LY, Xiao L, Davison J, Morgan M, Wang
CY, Duggan C, McTiernan A, Ulrich CM.

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Division of Preventive Oncology,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 460, Heidelberg 69120, 
Germany. neli.ulrich@nct-heidelberg.de

Adipose tissue plays a role in obesity-related cancers via increased production
of inflammatory factors, steroid hormones, and altered adipokines. The impact of 
weight loss on adipose tissue gene expression may provide insights into pathways 
linking obesity with cancer risk. We conducted an ancillary study within a
randomized trial of diet, exercise, or combined diet + exercise versus control
among overweight/obese postmenopausal women. In 45 women, subcutaneous adipose
tissue biopsies were conducted at baseline and after 6 months, and changes in
adipose tissue gene expression were determined by microarray with an emphasis on 
prespecified candidate pathways as well as by unsupervised clustering of more
than 37,000 transcripts (Illumina). Analyses were conducted first by
randomization group and then by degree of weight change at 6-months in all women 
combined. At 6 months, diet, exercise, and diet + exercise participants lost a
mean of 8.8, 2.5, and 7.9 kg (all P < 0.05 vs. no change in controls). There was 
no significant change in candidate gene expression by intervention group. In
analysis by weight change category, greater weight loss was associated a decrease
in 17ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1 (HSD17B1, Ptrend < 0.01) and leptin (LEP,
Ptrend < 0.01) expression, and marginally significant increased expression of
estrogen receptor-1 (ESR1, Ptrend = 0.08) and insulin-like growth factor-binding 
protein-3 (IGFBP3, Ptrend = 0.08). Unsupervised clustering revealed 83
transcripts with statistically significant changes. Multiple gene expression
changes correlated with changes in associated serum biomarkers. Weight loss was
associated with changes in adipose tissue gene expression after 6 months,
particularly in two pathways postulated to link obesity and cancer, that is,
steroid hormone metabolism and IGF signaling. Cancer Prev Res; 6(3); 217-31.
©2013 AACR.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3738189
PMID: 23341572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Nutrigenet Nutrigenomics. 2012;5(6):327-38. doi: 10.1159/000345819. Epub 2013
Jan 16.

Short-term folate supplementation in physiological doses has no effect on ESR1
and MLH1 methylation in colonic mucosa of individuals with adenoma.

Al-Ghnaniem Abbadi R(1), Emery P, Pufulete M.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Nutritional Sciences Division, King's College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Low folate intake may increase risk of colorectal cancer by
altering gene-specific methylation in the colon. We determined whether
supplementation with physiological doses of folate could alter methylation in the
oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and mutL homolog 1 (MLH1) genes in colonic mucosa of 
subjects with colorectal adenoma.
METHODS: This was a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Subjects 
received either 400 µg/day folic acid (n = 15) or placebo (n = 14) for 10 weeks. 
Blood and colonic tissue samples were collected at baseline and after
intervention to determine biomarkers of folate and vitamin B12 status, MTHFR
C677T and MS A2756G genotypes, and ESR1 and MLH1 methylation.
RESULTS: Although serum and red cell folate increased (p < 0.001 vs. placebo) and
plasma homocysteine decreased (p = 0018 vs. placebo) in the folic acid group,
there were no significant changes in ESR1 (p = 0.649 vs. placebo) or MLH1 (p =
0.211 vs. placebo) methylation. There was a significant effect of gender on ESR1 
methylation (p = 0.004) and significant gender and genotype (MTHFR C677T and MS
A2756G) interactions (p = 0.04 and p = 0.014, respectively) that were independent
of treatment group allocation.
CONCLUSIONS: Short-term folate supplementation in physiological doses decreases
plasma homocysteine but has no effect on ESR1 and MLH1 methylation in colonic
mucosa of individuals with adenoma. Further studies to investigate the
interactions between gender, genotype and DNA methylation suggested in this study
are warranted.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23328702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 1;19(5):1094-105. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3039.
Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Lack of estrogen receptor-a is associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition 
and PI3K alterations in endometrial carcinoma.

Wik E(1), Ræder MB, Krakstad C, Trovik J, Birkeland E, Hoivik EA, Mjos S, Werner 
HM, Mannelqvist M, Stefansson IM, Oyan AM, Kalland KH, Akslen LA, Salvesen HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen, Norway. elisabeth.wik@med.uib.no

PURPOSE: We hypothesized that estrogen receptor-a (ER-a) status in endometrial
carcinomas, associated with poor prognosis, is reflected in transcriptional
signatures suggesting targets for new therapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Endometrial carcinoma samples in a primary investigation
cohort (n = 76) and three independent validation cohorts (n = 155/286/111) were
analyzed through integrated molecular profiling. Biomarkers were assessed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC), DNA oligonucleotide microarray, quantitative PCR
(qPCR), single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array, and Sanger sequencing in the 
cohorts, annotated for comprehensive histopathologic and clinical data, including
follow-up.
RESULTS: ER-a immunohistochemical staining was strongly associated with mRNA
expression of the receptor gene (ESR1) and patient survival (both P < 0.001).
ER-a negativity associated with activation of genes involved in Wnt-, Sonic
Hedgehog-, and TGF-ß signaling in the investigation cohort, indicating
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The association between low ER-a and EMT
was validated in three independent datasets. Furthermore, phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K) and mTOR inhibitors were among the top-ranked drug signatures
negatively correlated with the ER-a-negative tumors. Low ER-a was significantly
associated with PIK3CA amplifications but not mutations. Also, low ER-a was
correlated to high expression of Stathmin, a marker associated with PTEN loss,
and a high PI3K activation signature.
CONCLUSION: Lack of ER-a in endometrial cancer is associated with EMT and reduced
survival. We present a rationale for investigating ER-a's potential to predict
response to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors in clinical trials and also suggest EMT
inhibitors to ER-a-negative endometrial carcinomas.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 23319822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53577. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053577. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

Cardiomyocyte specific deletion of Crif1 causes mitochondrial cardiomyopathy in
mice.

Shin J(1), Lee SH, Kwon MC, Yang DK, Seo HR, Kim J, Kim YY, Im SK, Abel ED, Kim
KT, Park WJ, Kong YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Gwanak-gu,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Mitochondria are key organelles dedicated to energy production. Crif1, which
interacts with the large subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome, is indispensable 
for the mitochondrial translation and membrane insertion of respiratory subunits.
To explore the physiological function of Crif1 in the heart, Crif1(f/f) mice were
crossed with Myh6-cre/Esr1 transgenic mice, which harbor cardiomyocyte-specific
Cre activity in a tamoxifen-dependent manner. The tamoxifen injections were given
at six weeks postnatal, and the mutant mice survived only five months due to
hypertrophic heart failure. In the mutant cardiac muscles, mitochondrial mass
dramatically increased, while the inner structure was altered with lack of
cristae. Mutant cardiac muscles showed decreased rates of oxygen consumption and 
ATP production, suggesting that Crif1 plays a critical role in the maintenance of
both mitochondrial structure and respiration in cardiac muscles.

PMCID: PMC3537664
PMID: 23308255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;41(11):765-6. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2012.11.012.

[Association of ESR1 methylation at promoter region with progression of cervical 
lesion in Uyghur women].

[Article in Chinese]

Aliyeguli A, Abida A, He H, Abulizi A.

PMID: 23302339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. BMC Syst Biol. 2012;6 Suppl 3:S16. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-6-S3-S16. Epub 2012 Dec
17.

Genome-wide meta-analysis of genetic susceptible genes for Type 2 Diabetes.

Hale PJ(1), López-Yunez AM, Chen JY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics, Indiana University-Purdue University, Indianapolis, IN,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Many genetic studies, including single gene studies and Genome-wide
association studies (GWAS), aim to identify risk alleles for genetic diseases
such as Type II Diabetes (T2D). However, in T2D studies, there is a significant
amount of the hereditary risk that cannot be simply explained by individual risk 
genes. There is a need for developing systems biology approaches to integrate
comprehensive genetic information and provide new insight on T2D biology.
METHODS: We performed comprehensive integrative analysis of Single Nucleotide
Polymorphisms (SNP's) individually curated from T2D GWAS results and mapped them 
to T2D candidate risk genes. Using protein-protein interaction data, we
constructed a T2D-specific molecular interaction network consisting of T2D
genetic risk genes and their interacting gene partners. We then studied the
relationship between these T2D genes and curated gene sets.
RESULTS: We determined that T2D candidate risk genes are concentrated in certain 
parts of the genome, specifically in chromosome 20. Using the T2D genetic
network, we identified highly-interconnected network "hub" genes. By
incorporating T2D GWAS results, T2D pathways, and T2D genes' functional category 
information, we further ranked T2D risk genes, T2D-related pathways, and
T2D-related functional categories. We found that highly-interconnected T2D
disease network "hub" genes most highly associated to T2D genetic risks to be
PI3KR1, ESR1, and ENPP1. The well-characterized TCF7L2, contractor to our
expectation, was not among the highest-ranked T2D gene list. Many interacted
pathways play a role in T2D genetic risks, which includes insulin signalling
pathway, type II diabetes pathway, maturity onset diabetes of the young,
adipocytokine signalling pathway, and pathways in cancer. We also observed
significant crosstalk among T2D gene subnetworks which include insulin secretion,
regulation of insulin secretion, response to peptide hormone stimulus, response
to insulin stimulus, peptide secretion, glucose homeostasis, and hormone
transport. Overview maps involving T2D genes, gene sets, pathways, and their
interactions are all reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Large-scale systems biology meta-analyses of GWAS results can
improve interpretations of genetic variations and genetic risk factors. T2D
genetic risks can be attributable to the summative genetic effects of many genes 
involved in a broad range of signalling pathways and functional networks. The
framework developed for T2D studies may serve as a guide for studying other
complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC3524015
PMID: 23281828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e53013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053013. Epub 2012 Dec 27.

Bone mineral density-associated polymorphisms are associated with obesity-related
traits in Korean adults in a sex-dependent manner.

Cha S(1), Yu H, Kim JY.

Author information: 
(1)Constitutional Medicine and Diagnosis Research Group, Medical Research
Division, Korea Institute of Oriental Medicine, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
scha@kiom.re.kr

Obesity and osteoporosis share common physiological factors, including the
presence of atherosclerosis, a risk factor for cardiometabolic disease, as well
as a common progenitor that differentiates into both adipocytes and osteoblasts. 
Among the 23 polymorphisms associated with bone mineral density (BMD) in recent
genome-wide association studies (GWASs), an Osterix polymorphism has been
identified and associated with childhood obesity in girls. Therefore, we focused 
on elucidating polymorphisms associated with adulthood obesity in a sex-dependent
manner among the previously published BMD-associated polymorphisms from GWASs. We
performed 2 screenings of 18 BMD-associated polymorphisms for obesity-related
traits in 2,362 adults aged >20 years. We excluded 13 polymorphisms showing
deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium or no association with obesity-related
traits (body mass index, waist circumference (WC), and waist-to-hip ratio). Among
5 selected polymorphisms (rs9594738 of RANKL, rs17066364 of NUFIP1, rs7227401 of 
OSBPL1A, and rs1856057 and rs2982573 of ESR1) analyzed, 2 polymorphisms
(rs9594738 and rs17066364) were associated with obesity-related traits. We found 
sex-dependent associations such that the 4 polymorphisms (excluding rs9594738 of 
RANKL) were associated with abdominal traits such as WC and waist-to-hip ratio
only in men. In addition, when the combined genetic risk score (GRS) for WC
increase was calculated with 4 SNPs (rs9594738, rs17066364, rs7227401, and
rs1856057) exhibiting similar trends for both sexes, the magnitude of the GRS
effect for the WC increase was larger in men than in women (effect size = 0.856
cm, P = 0.0000452 for men; effect size = 0.598 cm, P = 0.00228 for women). In
summary, we found 4 polymorphisms, previously related to osteoporosis, to be
associated to obesity-related traits in a sex-dependent manner in Korean adults, 
particularly in men.

PMCID: PMC3531417
PMID: 23300848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cereb Cortex. 2014 May;24(5):1230-46. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs401. Epub 2013 Jan
2.

Common variants in psychiatric risk genes predict brain structure at birth.

Knickmeyer RC(1), Wang J, Zhu H, Geng X, Woolson S, Hamer RM, Konneker T, Lin W, 
Styner M, Gilmore JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry.

Studies in adolescents and adults have demonstrated that polymorphisms in
putative psychiatric risk genes are associated with differences in brain
structure, but cannot address when in development these relationships arise. To
determine if common genetic variants in disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1 (DISC1;
rs821616 and rs6675281), catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT; rs4680), neuregulin 
1 (NRG1; rs35753505 and rs6994992), apolipoprotein E (APOE; e3e4 vs. e3e3),
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1; rs9340799 and rs2234693), brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF; rs6265), and glutamate decarboxylase 1 (GAD1;
rs2270335) are associated with individual differences in brain tissue volumes in 
neonates, we applied both automated region-of-interest volumetry and tensor-based
morphometry to a sample of 272 neonates who had received high-resolution magnetic
resonance imaging scans. ESR1 (rs9340799) predicted intracranial volume. Local
variation in gray matter (GM) volume was significantly associated with
polymorphisms in DISC1 (rs821616), COMT, NRG1, APOE, ESR1 (rs9340799), and BDNF. 
No associations were identified for DISC1 (rs6675281), ESR1 (rs2234693), or GAD1.
Of note, neonates homozygous for the DISC1 (rs821616) serine allele exhibited
numerous large clusters of reduced GM in the frontal lobes, and neonates
homozygous for the COMT valine allele exhibited reduced GM in the temporal cortex
and hippocampus, mirroring findings in adults. The results highlight the
importance of prenatal brain development in mediating psychiatric risk.

PMCID: PMC3977618
PMID: 23283688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Reprod Domest Anim. 2012 Dec;47 Suppl 6:30-4. doi: 10.1111/rda.12065.

Feline gonads exhibit tissue specific alternative splicing of oestrogen receptor 
alpha (ESR1).

Schoen J(1), Sharbati S, Ritter J, Jewgenow K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany. schoen@fu-berlin.de

Male felids frequently show teratospermia. At least in the domestic cat model,
teratospermia is accompanied by impaired regulation of testicular apoptosis. We
hypothesize that this phenomenon is caused by dysregulations in oestrogen
signalling pathways. Both classical oestrogen receptors (ESR1 and 2) are
expressed in species and/or tissue-specific manners and display different
variants, inter alia, caused by alternative splicing. In vitro studies showed
that exon deleted transcripts are translated into proteins and that some of the
variants modify the effects of the full-length ERs. It has been proposed that
some of the functional and morphological dysregulations, for example, during
spermatogenesis, could directly derive from this phenomenon. In the present basic
study, we investigated the expression pattern of ESR1 splicing variants in the
gonads of domestic cats. Testicular, epididymal as well as ovarian tissue samples
were collected from routine castrations. ESR1 variants were detected by means of 
RT-PCR using primers spanning one to three exons. We detected the variants <U+0394>4 and
<U+0394>7 in all tissue samples investigated. Additionally, the testicular parenchyma
expressed the variant <U+0394>6 and double exon deletions of ESR1 (<U+0394>4/6 and <U+0394>6/7). Using
an antiserum recognizing all previously identified ESR1 splicing variants, we
revealed ESR1 proteins being expressed in nearly all cells of the testicular and 
ovarian parenchyma. ESR1 <U+0394>6 protein, however, detected by an antiserum
specifically raised against the <U+0394>6 variant, was predominantly located in Sertoli 
cells. As the exon deletion variants are significantly expressed and show a
distinct expression pattern, they could specifically modulate the cellular
responsiveness to hormonal stimuli within the gonads.

© 2012 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 23279460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Indian J Clin Biochem. 2012 Jan;27(1):69-73. doi: 10.1007/s12291-011-0179-2. Epub
2012 Jan 6.

Association of Estrogen Receptor-a Gene & Metallothionein-1 Gene Polymorphisms in
Type 2 Diabetic Women of Andhra Pradesh.

Ganasyam SR(1), Rao TB, Murthy YS, Jyothy A, Sujatha M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Genetics and Hospital for Genetic
Diseases, Osmania University, Begumpet, Hyderabad, 500016 Andhra Pradesh India.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) is a multifactorial disease where both genetic and 
environmental factors contribute to its pathogenesis. Estrogen plays an important
role in type 2 DM pathogenesis. A number of polymorphisms have been reported in
the estrogen receptor (ESR1), including the XbaI and PvuII restriction enzyme
polymorphisms of ESR1,which may be involved in disease pathogenesis.
Metallothioneins (MT) act as potent antioxidants against various oxidative
damages. Very few studies have indicated the association between Estrogen
Receptor-a, MT1 gene polymorphisms with type2 DM. A total of 100 type 2 diabetic 
women and 100 age, sex matched controls were recruited. Using the PCR based RFLP 
method, the PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms of ESR1 and in MT1A (rs8052394 and
rs11076161) gene polymorphisms were analysed. The genotype distribution and
frequency of mutated allele showed no significant differences between diabetic
and non-diabetic groups in PvuII (<U+03C7>2 = 2.443; P = 0.1181) or XbaI (<U+03C7>2 = 1.789;
P = 0.1812) and rs8052394 (<U+03C7>2 = 1.154; P = 0.2840) or rs11076161 (<U+03C7>2 = 0.4141;
P = 0.5199), polymorphisms. This is the first Indian study to conclude that ESR1 
and MT1 gene polymorphisms are not associated with increased susceptibility to
type 2 diabetes in Indian women.

PMCID: PMC3286578
PMID: 23277715  [PubMed]


168. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2014 Jan-Feb;10(1):14-22. doi: 10.1016/j.soard.2012.10.011. 
Epub 2012 Nov 14.

ESR1 gene and insulin resistance remission are associated with serum uric acid
decline for severely obese patients undergoing bariatric surgery.

Wang W(1), Liou TH(2), Lee WJ(3), Hsu CT(4), Lee MF(5), Chen HH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Weight Management Center, Taipei Medical University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan (ROC); Department of Surgery, Taipei Medical University Hospital, 
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (ROC). (2)Obesity Research Center,
Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (ROC); Graduate
Institute of Injury Prevention, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan (ROC). 
(3)Department of Surgery, Min-Sheng General Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan (ROC).
(4)Department of Nursing, En Hua Hospital, New Taipei, Taiwan (ROC).
(5)Department of Nutrition and Health Sciences, Chang Jung Christian University, 
Tainan, Taiwan (ROC). (6)Department of Nutrition and Health Sciences, Chang Jung 
Christian University, Tainan, Taiwan (ROC); Department of Medical Nutrition
Therapy, Pan-Chiao Cathay Hospital, New Taipei, Taiwan (ROC). Electronic address:
hsinhung@mail.cjcu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Hyperuricemia is associated with obesity. Few studies have reported
the effects of different types of bariatric surgery on uric acid metabolism. The 
aim of our study was to determine the relationships between serum uric acid
reduction and estrogen receptor-a (ESR1) gene polymorphism, as well as the type
of bariatric surgery received. The potential physiological pathways involved in
postsurgery serum uric acid reduction were also discussed.
METHODS: A total of 508 severely obese Han Chinese patients, aged 20 to 50 years,
with a body mass index (BMI)=35 kg/m(2) were selected. Patients received either
laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB; n = 164) or laparoscopic
mini-gastric bypass (LMGB; n = 344). A 12-month follow-up was performed to
explore the effects of the type of bariatric surgery and ESR1 polymorphism on
serum uric acid reduction.
RESULTS: The rs712221 polymorphism of ESR1 affects serum uric acid reduction
after bariatric surgery. The LMGB group exhibited a greater reduction in serum
uric acid level compared with the LAGB counterpart after adjusting for sex, age, 
and metabolic confounders (-2.3 ± 2.1 mg/dL versus-1.2 ± 1.1 mg/dL; P = .002).
Patients with the rs712221 genotype exhibited better glycemic control and a
greater serum uric acid reduction at 12 months after surgery. The effects of the 
rs712221 polymorphism in LMGB patients resulted in the greatest serum uric acid
reduction (-2.7 ± 1.4 mg/dL).
CONCLUSIONS: For severely obese Han Chinese patients, bariatric surgery appears
to reduce serum uric acid levels, potentially mediated by synergic effects of
surgery type, BMI reduction, rs712221 locus, insulin sensitivity, and changed
dietary factors via an unknown mechanism.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Bariatric Surgery. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23273711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52445. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052445. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

A common polymorphism near the ESR1 gene is associated with risk of breast
cancer: evidence from a case-control study and a meta-analysis.

Guo H(1), Ming J, Liu C, Li Z, Zhang N, Cheng H, Wang W, Shi W, Shen N, Zhao Q,
Li D, Yi P, Wang L, Wang R, Xin Y, Zhao X, Nie X, Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Thyroid Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic 
of China.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies have reported that a polymorphism
near the estrogen receptor gene (ESR1) (rs2046210) is associated with a risk of
breast cancer, with the A allele conferring an increased risk. However,
considering the controversial results from more recent replicated studies, we
conducted a case-control study in an independent Chinese Han population and a
meta-analysis to clarify the association of this polymorphism with breast cancer 
risk.
METHOD AND FINDINGS: A hospital-based case-control study including 461 cases and 
537 controls from a Chinese Han population was conducted initially, and this
study showed that the rs2046210 A allele was significantly associated with breast
cancer risk, with an OR of 1.32 (95% CI <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.10-1.59). Subsequently, a
meta-analysis integrating the current study and previous publications with a
total of 53,379 cases and 55,493 controls was performed to further confirm our
findings. Similarly, a significant association between this polymorphism and
breast cancer risk was also observed in the overall population especially among
Asians, with ORs for per A allele of 1.14 (95% CI <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.10-1.18) in the overall
population and 1.27 (95% CI <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.23-1.31) in the Asian population.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide strong evidence to support that the common
polymorphism near the ESR1 gene, rs2046210, is associated with an increased risk 
of breast cancer in Asian and European populations but not in Africans, although 
the biological mechanisms need to be further investigated.

PMCID: PMC3525547
PMID: 23272245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Feb;66(2):140-5. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-200929. Epub
2012 Dec 25.

Clinical significance of ESR1 gene copy number changes in breast cancer as
measured by fluorescence in situ hybridisation.

Lin CH(1), Liu JM, Lu YS, Lan C, Lee WC, Kuo KT, Wang CC, Chang DY, Huang CS,
Cheng AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

AIMS: The ESR1 gene encodes for oestrogen receptor (ER) a, which plays a crucial 
role in mammary carcinogenesis and clinical outcome in patients with breast
cancer. However, the clinical significance of the ESR1 gene copy number change
for breast cancer has not been clarified.
METHODS: ESR1 gene copy number was determined by fluorescence in situ
hybridisation (FISH) on tissue sections. A minimum of 20 tumour cells were
counted per section, and a FISH ratio of ESR1 gene to CEP6 = 2.0 was considered
ESR1 amplification. A ratio >1.2 but <2.0 was considered ESR1 gain. The ESR1 copy
number was further measured by quantitative real-time PCR (Q-PCR) with ASXL2 as a
reference.
RESULTS: FISH revealed ESR1 amplification in six cases (4.0%) and ESR1 gain in 13
cases (8.7%) from a total of 150 cases. ESR1 gain and amplification were more
common in older patients (p<0.001), and correlated well with ER protein
expression (p=0.03) measured by immunohistochemistry, and ESR1 copy number
(p<0.001) measured by Q-PCR. Furthermore, the multivariate analysis revealed that
ESR1 amplification was associated with a shorter disease-free survival (HR=5.56, 
p=0.03) and a shorter overall survival (HR=5.11, p=0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: In general, the frequency of ESR1 amplification in breast cancer is 
low when measured by FISH in large sections. ESR1 gain and amplification in
breast cancer may be associated with older age and poorer outcomes.

PMID: 23268322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Virchows Arch. 2013 Feb;462(2):141-54. doi: 10.1007/s00428-012-1357-1. Epub 2012 
Dec 20.

Sample parameters affecting the clinical relevance of RNA biomarkers in
translational breast cancer research.

Kotoula V(1), Kalogeras KT, Kouvatseas G, Televantou D, Kronenwett R, Wirtz RM,
Fountzilas G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of
Medicine, University Campus, 54006 Thessaloniki, Greece. vkotoula@auth.gr

In the frame of translational breast cancer research, eligibility criteria for
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue (FFPE) material processing for gene
expression studies include tumor cell content (TCC) and sample site (primary vs
metastatic tumors). Herein we asked whether the observed differences in gene
expression between paired samples with respect to TCC and sample site also have
different clinical significance. We assessed ESR1, ERBB2, MAPT, MMP7, and RACGAP1
mRNA expression with real time PCR in paired samples before (NMD) and after
macrodissection (MD) from 98 primary tumors (P(MD), P(NMD)) and 72 metastatic
lymph nodes (LN(MD), LN(NMD)), as well as from 93 matched P (mP) and LN (mLN).
TCC range was 2.5-75 % in the NMD series and 28-98 % in the MD and in the mP/mLN 
series. The prognostic effect of these markers, individually or in clusters,
remained stable between paired P(MD/NMD). In comparison, cluster classification
failed in the LN(NMD) group with lower TCC. In the mP/mLN cohort, RACGAP1 mRNA
expression was of prognostic significance when tested in mLN samples (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001).
Similarly, luminal B, HER2, and triple negative tumors were of dismal prognosis
when classified in the LN component of the same series (mLN, overall survival:
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.013, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.034, and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007, respectively). In conclusion, the clinical
relevance of the RNA markers examined may be affected by TCC in metastatic LN
samples but not in primary tumors, while it differs between primary tumors and
matched metastases. These data will facilitate the design of translational
studies involving FFPE sample series.

PMCID: PMC3568476
PMID: 23262785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Contraception. 2013 Jul;88(1):183-8. doi: 10.1016/j.contraception.2012.11.001.
Epub 2012 Dec 11.

Association of estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms with autonomic
modulation of heart rate in users and nonusers of oral contraceptives.

Rebelo AC(1), Verlengia R, Kunz VC, Tamburus NY, Silva de Sá MF, Hirata RD, Cerda
A, Hirata MH, da Silva E.

Author information: 
(1)Federal University of Goiás, Department of Morphology, (Campus II), 74001-970 
- Caixa Postal: 13, Goiânia, GO, Brazil. anacristina.silvarebelo@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: This study examined the association between estrogen receptor a gene 
(ESR1) polymorphisms and blood pressure (BP), heart rate (HR) and autonomic
modulation of HR in a sample population.
STUDY DESIGN: Two hundred thirty-two young healthy women were selected, and those
using oral contraceptives (OC) were compared with nonusers (control group).
Short-term HR variability (HRV) was evaluated in both the supine and sitting
positions using temporal indices rMSSD [square root of the mean squared
differences of successive R-R intervals (RRi) divided by the number of RRi minus 
one], SDNN (root mean square of differences from mean RRi, divided by the number 
of RRi) and frequency domain methods. Power spectral components were reported at 
low frequency (LF) and high frequency (HF) and as LF/HF ratio. ESR1 c.454-397T>C 
(rs2234693) and c.454-351A>G (rs9340799) polymorphisms were determined by
polymerase chain reaction and fragment restriction analysis.
RESULTS: The ESR1 T>C and A>G polymorphisms had no effect on HR, rMSSD, SDNN, LF,
HF or LF/HF ratio (supine or sitting), independently of OC use. The ESR1 T-A,
T-G, C-A and C-G haplotypes were not associated with HR, BP or HRV.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 variants had no effect on the autonomic modulation of HR in
young women users and nonusers of OC and may not be implicated in cardiovascular 
risk in young women.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23245353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(10):5105-11.

Menopausal status modifies breast cancer risk associated with ESR1 PvuII and XbaI
polymorphisms in Asian women: a HuGE review and meta-analysis.

Li LW(1), Xu L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Published data on the association between single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ESR1 gene and breast cancer susceptibility are
inconclusive or controversial. The aim of this Human Genome Epidemiology (HuGE)
review and meta-analysis was to derive a more precise estimation of this
relationship.
METHODS: A literature search of Pubmed, Embase, Web of science and CBM databases 
was conducted from inception through September 1 th, 2012. Crude odds ratios
(ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to assess the strength of
association.
RESULTS: A total of five studies including 1,678 breast cancer cases and 1,678
general population controls in Asian populations were involved in this
meta-analysis. When all the eligible studies were pooled into the meta-analysis, 
the higher transcriptional activity variant allele T of ESR1 PvuII (C>T)
(rs2234693) in pre-menopausal breast cancer women showed a significant relation
to increased risk (OR = 1.13, 95%CI: 1.01-1.28, P = 0.040) in contrast to their
post-menopausal counterparts which showed non-significant increased risk (OR =
1.01, 95%CI: 0.87-1.18, P = 0.858). Nevertheless, no significant association
between ESR1 XbaI (A>G) (rs9340799) polymorphism and the risk of breast cancer
was observed in pre-menopausal and post-menopausal individuals.
CONCLUSION: Based on a homogeneous Asian population, results from the current
meta-analysis indicates that the ESR1 PvuII (C>T) polymorphism places
pre-menopausal breast cancer women at risk for breast cancer, while ESR1 XbaI
(A>G) polymorphism is not likely to predict the risk of breast cancer.

PMID: 23244119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Mar;40(3):2617-25. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2348-7. Epub 2012
Dec 15.

Mutant p53 binds to estrogen receptor negative promoter via DNMT1 and HDAC1 in
MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells.

Arabsolghar R(1), Azimi T, Rasti M.

Author information: 
(1)Recombinant Protein Lab, Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine,
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

DNA methylation and histone deacetylation are two epigenetic mechanisms involved 
in the lack of estrogen receptor (ER) expression. Our previous studies
demonstrated that mutant p53 along with repression complex proteins including
DNMT1, HDAC1 and MeCP2 is associated with ER-negative promoter in MDA-MB-468
cells. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene
silencing in these cells, we down-regulated DNMT1 and HDAC1 expression using
siRNAs and studied the ability of DNMT1, HDAC1, MeCP2 and p53 in binding to ESR1 
promoter CpG island. Our results showed that DNMT1 or HDAC1 down-regulation
disassembled the repression complex proteins and mutant p53 from ER-negative
promoter. The partial demethylation of ESR1 promoter and ER re-expression in
down-regulated cells supports these findings. In vivo binding studies
demonstrated that mutation of p53 protein in this cell line did not affect its
binding capacity to DNMT1, HDAC1 and MeCP2 proteins. Our observations suggest
that not only histone deacetylase activity of HDAC1 contributes to inactivation
of methylated ESR1 gene but also HDAC1 presence on ESR1 promoter is important for
assembly of DNMT1 in repression complex. In addition, our data revealed that
mutant p53 protein binds to the promoter of ESR1 through direct interaction with 
HDAC1 and indirect interaction with DNMT1, MeCP2 proteins in the ER-negative
MDA-MB-468 cells.

PMID: 23242655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Exp Ther Med. 2012 Dec;4(6):1092-1096. Epub 2012 Sep 18.

Methylation of tumor suppressor genes in ovarian cancer.

Ozdemir F(1), Altinisik J, Karateke A, Coksuer H, Buyru N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical
Faculty;

Aberrant methylation of gene promoter regions is one of the mechanisms for
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes in human malignancies. In this study, the 
methylation pattern of 24 tumor suppressor genes was analyzed in 75 samples of
ovarian cancer using the methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe 
amplification (MS-MLPA) assay. Of the 24 tumor suppressor genes examined,
aberrant methylation was observed in 17. The three most frequently methylated
genes were CDKN2B, CDH13 and RASSF1, followed by ESR1 and MLH1. Methylation
frequencies ranged from 1.3% for CDKN2A, RARß, CASP8, VHL and TP73 to 24% for
CDKN2B. The corresponding normal DNA from each patient was also investigated.
Methylation was detected in tumors, although not in normal tissues, with the
exception of two samples, indicating aberrant methylation in tumors. Clear cell
carcinoma samples exhibited a higher frequency of CDKN2B promoter
hypermethylation compared to those of other histological types (P=0.05). Our data
indicate that methylation of the CDKN2B gene is a frequent event in ovarian
carcinogenesis and that analysis of only three genes is sufficient to detect the 
presence of methylation in 35% of ovarian cancer cases. However, more studies
using a much larger sample size are needed to define the potential role of DNA
methylation as a marker for ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3494110
PMID: 23226780  [PubMed]


176. Horm Behav. 2013 Mar;63(3):447-53. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.11.017. Epub 2012
Nov 30.

ESR1 polymorphisms, daily hassles, anger expression, and depressive symptoms in
adolescent boys and girls.

Vermeersch H(1), T'sjoen G, Kaufman JM, Van Houtte M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sociology, University of Ghent, Korte Meer 5, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium. Hans.Vermeersch@ugent.be

Studies reporting associations between genetic factors and mood-related traits
have often been criticized (i) for failing to take into account the role of the
social environment in which individuals act and (ii) for not maintaining a
'transparent narrative connection' between genes and outcomes. In a sample of
adolescents, we analyzed whether PvuII and XbaI, two polymorphisms on the ESR1
(Estrogen Receptor Gene a) were related to depressive symptoms, and considered
whether daily hassles moderated this relationship and whether anger expression
style mediated this relationship. Analyses suggested that ESR1 polymorphisms are 
relevant to the intra-sexual variability in depressive symptoms in boys and that 
the experience of daily hassles moderated this relationship. No such
relationships were found in girls. Additionally, ESR1 polymorphisms are related
to anger expression styles in girls. Anger-related variables, however, did not
mediate the relationship between ESR1 polymorphisms and depressive symptoms, in
boys nor in girls.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23206990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Int J Mol Sci. 2012 Oct 22;13(10):13691-703. doi: 10.3390/ijms131013691.

Lack of association of estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms with
cardiorespiratory and metabolic variables in young women.

Rebelo AC(1), Verlengia R, Kunz V, Tamburus N, Cerda A, Hirata R, Hirata M, Silva
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, (Campus II), Federal University of Goiás, 74001-970,
Goiânia, GO, Brazil. anacristina.silvarebelo@gmail.com.

This study examined the association of estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1)
polymorphisms with cardiorespiratory and metabolic parameters in young women. In 
total, 354 healthy women were selected for cardiopulmonary exercise testing and
short-term heart rate (HR) variability (HRV) evaluation. The HRV analysis was
determined by the temporal indices rMSSD (square root of the mean squared
differences of successive R-R intervals (RRi) divided by the number of RRi minus 
one), SDNN (root mean square of differences from mean RRi, divided by the number 
of RRi) and power spectrum components by low frequency (LF), high frequency (HF) 
and LF/HF ratio. Blood samples were obtained for serum lipids, estradiol and DNA 
extraction. ESR1 rs2234693 and rs9340799 polymorphisms were analyzed by PCR and
fragment restriction analysis. HR and oxygen uptake (VO(2)) values did not differ
between the ESR1 polymorphisms with respect to autonomic modulation. We not find 
a relationship between ESR1 T-A, T-G, C-A and C-G haplotypes and
cardiorespiratory and metabolic variables. Multiple linear regression analysis
demonstrated that VO(2), total cholesterol and triglycerides influence HRV (p <
0.05). The results suggest that ESR1 variants have no effect on cardiorespiratory
and metabolic variables, while HRV indices are influenced by aerobic capacity and
lipids in healthy women.

PMCID: PMC3497348
PMID: 23202974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2012;52(11):1006-8.

[Cortical spreading depression and molecular genetics in migraine].

[Article in Japanese]

Kowa H(1), Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Brain and Neurological Sciences, Faculty 
of Medicine, Tottori University.

Cortical spreading depression (CSD) is a slowly propagated wave of depolarization
of neurons and glial cells, followed by a subsequent sustained suppression of
spontaneous neuronal activity. Functional imaging studies of migraine patients
have shown dramatic changes in blood flow and brain activity whose
characteristics are similar to those of CSD, implicated in migraine visual aura. 
Although the trigeminal nerve innervates the meninges and participates in the
genesis of migraine headaches, triggering mechanisms remain controversial and
poorly understood. It is demonstrated by animal models that CSD activates
trigeminovascular afferents and evokes a series of cortical meningeal and
brainstem events consistent with the development of headache. Three familial
hemiplegic migraine, a rare monogenic subtype of migraine with aura, genes have
been identified, which all encode ion transporters, suggesting that disturbances 
in ion and neurotransmitter balances in the brain are responsible for this
migraine type. Additional molecular insight into the pathophysiology of migraine 
may come from other monogenic syndromes such as CADASIL, RVCL. Several genetic
associations with candidate migraine genes like ESR1, MTHFR, and INSR, have been 
convincingly replicated. The genome-wide association studies may be a successful 
strategy toward identification of migraine susceptibility genes.

PMID: 23196498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2012 Dec;12(1):377-90. doi: 10.1515/hmbci-2012-0025.

Co-expression of genes with estrogen receptor-a and progesterone receptor in
human breast carcinoma tissue.

Andres SA, Wittliff JL.

Abstract Background: To detect genes associated with the expression of ESR1 and
PGR - as well as of their protein products, estrogen receptor (ER) and
progesterone receptor (PR) - 221 de-identified invasive ductal carcinomas of the 
breast were investigated. Our long-term goal is to decipher relationships between
the expression of ER- and PR-associated genes and breast cancer behavior to
improve diagnostics and identify new molecular targets for drug design.MATERIALS 
AND METHODS: Frozen tissue sections were evaluated for structural integrity and
pathology after hematoxylin and eosin staining. ER and PR protein levels were
quantified by either enzyme immunoassay or radio-ligand binding assay. Total RNA 
preparations were reverse transcribed for qPCR measurements of ESR1, PGR and 31
gene candidates.
RESULTS: Both ESR1 and PGR expression levels were correlated with their cognate
receptor protein expression (Pearson correlations of 0.82 and 0.68, p<0.001,
respectively), to assess molecular relationships between clinically relevant
biomarkers in tissue specimens. Coordinate expression of EVL, NAT1, TBC1D9,
SCUBE2, RABEP1, SLC39A6, TCEAL1, FUT8, XBP1, PTP4A2 or GATA3 with either ESR1 or 
PGR was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Examination of relationships between ESR1 and PGR gene expression
and that of other genes of interest indicated: a high degree of correlation
between ESR1 levels and expression of NAT1, SCUBE2, XBP1 and GATA3; and a high
degree of correlation between PGR expression and that of NAT1, ESR1, SCUBE2 and
RABEP1. These results suggest that direct relationships of these genes exist with
estrogen and progestin receptor mediated pathways. Pathway analysis software
provided additional evidence of gene interactions.

PMID: 25436697  [PubMed]


180. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Feb 1;19(3):699-709. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2812.
Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Molecular markers in key steroidogenic pathways, circulating steroid levels, and 
prostate cancer progression.

Lévesque É(1), Huang SP, Audet-Walsh É, Lacombe L, Bao BY, Fradet Y, Laverdière
I, Rouleau M, Huang CY, Yu CC, Caron P, Guillemette C.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenomics Laboratory and L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec (CHUQ) Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Laval
University, Québec, Canada.

PURPOSE: Prostate cancer is a heterogeneous genetic disease, and molecular
methods for predicting prognosis in patients with aggressive form of the disease 
are urgently needed to better personalize treatment approaches. The objective was
to identify host genetic variations in candidate steroidogenic genes affecting
hormone levels and prostate cancer progression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The study examined two independent cohorts composed of 526
Caucasian men with organ-confined prostate cancer and 601 Taiwanese men on
androgen-deprivation therapy. Caucasians were genotyped for 109 haplotype-tagging
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in CYP17A1, ESR1, CYP19A1, and HSD3B1, and 
their prognostic significance on disease progression was assessed using
Kaplan-Meier survival curves and Cox regression models. Positive findings,
including previously identified SRD5A1, SRD5A2, HSD17B2, HSD17B3, and HSD17B12
polymorphisms, were then explored in Taiwanese men (n = 32 SNPs). The influence
of positive markers on the circulating hormonal levels was then appraised in
Caucasians using specific and sensitive mass spectrometry-based methods.
RESULTS: After adjusting for known risk factors, variants of CYP17A1 (rs6162),
HSD17B2 (rs4243229 and rs7201637), and ESR1 (rs1062577) were associated with
progressive disease in both cohorts. Indeed, the presence of these variations was
significantly associated with progression in Caucasians (HR, 2.29-4.10; P =
0.0014-2 × 10(-7)) and survival in Taiwanese patients [HR = 3.74; 95% confidence 
interval (CI): 1.71-8.19, P = 0.009]. Remarkably, the CYP17A1 rs6162 polymorphism
was linked to plasma dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate (DHEA-S) levels (P = 0.03),
HSD17B2 rs7201637 with levels of dihydrotestosterone (P = 0.03), and ESR1
rs1062577 with levels of estrone-S and androsterone-glucuronide (P = 0.05).
CONCLUSION: This study identifies, in different ethnic groups and at different
disease stages, CYP17A1, HSD17B2, and ESR1 as attractive prognostic molecular
markers of prostate cancer progression.

PMID: 23186779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Oct;369(1-2):217-25. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1384-x. Epub 
2012 Jul 19.

Genetic variants of EGFR (142285G>A) and ESR1 (2014G>A) gene polymorphisms and
risk of breast cancer.

Sobti RC(1), Askari M, Nikbakht M, Singh N, Sharma SC, Abitew AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India.
rcsobti@pu.ac.in

Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers in women worldwide. The estrogen 
receptor alpha (ESR1) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been known
to play a vital role in development and progression of breast cancer. The aim of 
the present study was to determine the relationship, if any, between genetic
polymorphism in (ESR1) 2014G>A (T594T) and (EGFR) 142285G>A (R521K) with risk of 
breast cancer and the prognosis in a heterogeneous North Indian population that
is known for its diverse ethnicity. A case-control study in a total of 300
individuals comprising of 150 breast cancer patients and 150 normal controls was 
performed. PCR-RFLP was employed for genotyping. The G/A heterozygous genotype
EGFR R521K, was slightly higher in cases (56.7 %) than in controls (48.3 %) (P = 
0.20). The results indicated that EGFR polymorphism does not show any significant
association with breast cancer in this population. On the other hand, the mutant 
A/A genotype ESR1 codon 594, showed a 6.4-folds risk for breast cancer and this
association was highly significant (P = 0.00) as compared to wild GG genotype,
the heterozygous G/A genotype also showed a significant association with disease 
(P = 0.00, OR = 2.03). In addition, the frequency of A allele was also higher in 
cases (36 %) than in controls (19 %) and a highly significant difference was
observed with wild G allele (63.3 % in cases and 6.6 % in controls). This clearly
indicates that there appears to be an influence of ESR1 codon 594 genotypes on
genetic susceptibility to breast cancer. Further a significantly higher risk was 
observed in individuals who had diabetes {OR = 3.04 (1.68-5.50), P = 0.00} and
females with ESR polymorphism in pre-menopause patients that had undergone
menopause above the age of 50 years {OR = 3.58 (1.86-6.90), P < 0.05}. The
different ethnic backgrounds and geographical locations have complimented the
present genotypic analysis and have highlighted the influence of ethnicity, race 
and geographic location in genetic predisposition to breast cancer.

PMID: 22810499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40162. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040162. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

Significant role of estrogen and progesterone receptor sequence variants in
gallbladder cancer predisposition: a multi-analytical strategy.

Srivastava A(1), Sharma KL, Srivastava N, Misra S, Mittal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow, India.

BACKGROUND: Carcinoma of gallbladder (GBC) is an aggressive malignancy. The
higher incidence of gallbladder cancer in women has been partly attributed to
hormonal factors. Therefore the present study was designed to explore the role of
genetic variants in estrogen (ESR1, ESR2) and progesterone (PGR) receptors in
conferring risk of gallbladder cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The present case-control study recruited total of 860
subjects, including 410 GBC patients, 230 gallstone patients and 220 controls. We
examined the associations of 6 selected polymorphisms in three genes: ESR1
(rs2234693, rs9340799, rs1801132), ESR2 (rs1271572, rs1256049) and PGR
(rs1042838) with GBC risk. Genotyping for all the polymorphisms was done using
PCR-RFLP. Multifactor dimensionality reduction and classification and regression 
tree approaches were combined with logistic regression to discover high-order
gene-gene interactions in hormonal pathway.
RESULTS: On comparing the genotype frequency distribution in gallstone and GBC
patients with that of healthy subjects, the homozygous variant genotypes of
ESR1-397TT (rs2234693) polymorphism showed significant risk for developing
gallstone [odds ratio: OR = 2.9] and GBC [OR = 1.8] respectively. Detailed
haplotypes analysis suggested that ESR1 T( rs2234693)G( rs9340799)C( rs1801132)
have significant association in conferring risk for both gallstones [OR = 2.2]
and GBC [OR = 3.0]. However, the variant-containing genotypes (DI+II) of PGR
(rs1042838) showed low risk in both GBC [OR = 0.4] and gallstone patients [OR =
0.4].On performing the MDR analysis, ESR1 IVS1-397C>T, ESR1 IVS1-351A>G, and
ESR2-789 A>C yielded the highest testing accuracy of 0.634. These results were
further supported by the CART analysis which revealed that individuals with the
combined genotypes of ESR1-397 CT or TT, ESR1-351 AG or GG and ESR2 -789 AA had
the highest risk for GBC [OR = 3.9].
CONCLUSION: Using multi-analytical approaches, our study showed important role of
ESR1 IVS1-397C>T, ESR1 IVS1-351A>G, and ESR2-789 A>C variants in GBC
susceptibility and the risk appears to be mediated through gallstone dependent
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3393738
PMID: 22808109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Bone Miner Res. 2012 Dec;27(12):2582-91. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1711.

Susceptibility genes for osteoporotic fracture in postmenopausal Chinese women.

Wang C(1), Zhang Z, Zhang H, He JW, Gu JM, Hu WW, Hu YQ, Li M, Liu YJ, Fu WZ, Yue
H, Ke YH, Zhang ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Osteoporosis and Bone Diseases, Metabolic Bone Disease and
Genetics Research Unit, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's
Hospital, Shanghai, China.

To identify the susceptibility genes for osteoporotic fracture in postmenopausal 
Chinese women, a two-stage case-control association study using joint analysis
was conducted in 1046 patients with nontraumatic vertebra, hip, or distal radius 
fractures and 2303 healthy controls. First, 113 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 16 potential osteoporosis candidate genes reported in recent genomewide
association studies, meta-analyses studies, large-scale association studies, and 
functional studies were genotyped in a small-sample-size subgroup consisting of
541 patients with osteoporotic fractures and 554 healthy controls. Variants and
haplotypes in SPTBN1, TNFRSF11B, CNR2, LRP4, and ESR1 that have been identified
as being associated with osteoporotic fractures were further reanalyzed in the
entire case-control group. We identified one SNP in TNFRSF11B (rs3102734), three 
SNPs in ESR1 (rs9397448, rs2234693, and rs1643821), two SNPs in LRP4 (rs17790156 
and rs898604), and four SNPs in SPTBN1 (rs2971886, rs2941583, rs2941584, and
rs12475342) were associated with all of the broadly defined osteoporotic
fractures. The most significant polymorphism was rs3102734, with increased risk
of osteoporotic fractures (odds ratio, 1.35; 95% confidence interval [CI],
1.17-1.55, Bonferroni p<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.6<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4) ). Furthermore, rs3102734, rs2941584,
rs12475342, rs9397448, rs2234693, and rs898604 exhibited significant allelic,
genotypic, and/or haplotypic associations with vertebral fractures. SNPs
rs12475342, rs9397448, and rs2234693 showed significant genotypic associations
with hip fractures, whereas rs3102734, rs2073617, rs1643821, rs12475342, and
rs2971886 exhibited significant genotypic and/or haplotypic associations with
distal radius fractures. Accordingly, we suggest that in addition to the clinical
risk factors, the variants in TNFRSF11B, SPTBN1, ESR1, and LRP4 are
susceptibility genetic loci for osteoporotic fracture in postmenopausal Chinese
women.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 22807154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Hum Biol. 2012 Sep-Oct;24(5):682-9. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.22297. Epub 2012 Jul
17.

Estrogen receptor 1 promoter polymorphism and digit ratio in men.

Vaillancourt KL(1), Dinsdale NL, Hurd PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: The 2D:4D digit ratio, the relative lengths of the index and ring
fingers in humans, is a widely used proxy measure for prenatal testosterone
exposure. Varying distributions of androgen and estrogen receptors on the second 
and fourth digits, both of which regulate digit development, appears to be the
basis for this effect. Polymorphism in a tandem repeat in the gene coding for the
estrogen receptor a (ESR1) in zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) not only
explains a significant amount of variation in digit ratio but also seems to
explain the significant correlation between digit ratio and sexual behavior in
these birds. Here, we investigate the effect of TA polymorphism in ESR1 on 2D:4D 
and aggressive behavior in men.
METHODS: We genotyped ESR1 polymorphism in samples collected for a previous study
in which we had demonstrated an association between androgen receptor
polymorphism and aggression, but not 2D:4D.
RESULTS: We found a significant effect of ESR1 TA repeat number on left hand
2D:4D ratio. More TA repeats were associated with higher, more feminized, digit
ratios. We found no effect on right hand 2D:4D. We also found an effect of ESR1
polymorphism on aggressive behavior. Greater heterozygosity in TA(n) was
associated with lower physical aggression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that a significant amount of left hand 2D:4D
variation and aggressive behavior is due to this variation in ESR1, and that some
of the correlation between digit ratio and social behavior is due to pleiotropic 
effects of ESR1 variation on the two traits.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22806965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40494. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040494. Epub 2012 Jul 11.

Microsatellites in the estrogen receptor (ESR1, ESR2) and androgen receptor (AR) 
genes and breast cancer risk in African American and Nigerian women.

Zheng Y(1), Huo D, Zhang J, Yoshimatsu TF, Niu Q, Olopade OI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Cancer Genetics and Global Health, Department of Medicine,
The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Genetic variants in hormone receptor genes may be crucial predisposing factors
for breast cancer, and microsatellites in the estrogen receptor (ESR1, ESR2) and 
androgen receptor (AR) genes have been suggested to play a role. We studied 258
African-American (AA) women with breast cancer and 259 hospital-based controls,
as well as 349 Nigerian (NG) female breast cancer patients and 296 community
controls. Three microsatellites, ESR1_TA, ESR2_CA and AR_CAG, in the ESR1, ESR2
and AR genes, respectively, were genotyped. Their repeat lengths were then
analyzed as continuous and dichotomous variables. Analyses of continuous
variables showed no association with breast cancer risk in either AA or NG at
ESR1_TA; AA cases had shorter repeats in the long allele of ESR2_CA than AA
controls (Mann-Whitney P=<U+200A>0.036; logistic regression P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.04, OR=<U+200A>0.91, 95% CI
0.83-1.00), whereas NG patients had longer repeats in the short allele than NG
controls (Mann-Whitney P=<U+200A>0.0018; logistic regression P=<U+200A>0.04, OR=<U+200A>1.06, 95% CI
1.00-1.11); and AA cases carried longer repeats in the short allele of AR_CAG
than AA controls (Mann-Whitney P=<U+200A>0.038; logistic regression P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03, OR=<U+200A>1.08, 
95% CI 1.01-1.15). When allele sizes were categorized as dichotomous variables,
we discovered that women with two long alleles of ESR2_CA had increased risk of
breast cancer (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.38, 95% CI 1.10-1.74; P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.006). This is the first study
to investigate these three microsatellites in hormonal receptor genes in relation
to breast cancer risk in an indigenous African population. After adjusting for
multiple-testing, our findings suggest that ESR2_CA is associated with breast
cancer risk in Nigerian women, whereas ESR1_TA and AR_CAG seem to have no
association with the disease among African American or Nigerian women.

PMCID: PMC3394707
PMID: 22792352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Feb 1;521(2):465-78. doi: 10.1002/cne.23185.

Sex-specific expression of estrogen receptors a and ß and Kiss1 in the postnatal 
rat amygdala.

Cao J(1), Patisaul HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27695, USA.

The rodent amygdaloid complex is composed of numerous subnuclei important for the
sex-specific regulation of sociosexual behavior. Although estrogen receptors
(ERs) are critical for organizing functional and cytoarchitectural sex
differences in these subnuclei, a detailed developmental profile of ER expression
in the amygdaloid complex is not available. Moreover, the kisspeptin gene (Kiss1)
was recently identified in the adult amygdala, but it remains unknown if it is
expressed during development. To fill these data gaps, rat brains (5-7/group)
were assessed on postnatal days (PNDs) 0, 2, 4, 7, and 19 for ER alpha (ERa;
Esr1), beta (ERß; Esr2), and Kiss1 expression using in situ hybridization.
Expression was quantified in the posterodorsal portion of the medial amygdala
posterodorsal (MePD), lateral (PLCo), and medial (PMCo) components of the
posterior cortical nucleus, and the amygdalohippocampal area (AHi). ERa
expression was high throughout the amygdala at birth, but sexually dimorphic only
in the AHi. ERa expression in the MePD and the PLCo showed a U-shaped expression 
pattern over time. In the PMCo, ERa expression decreased from PND 2 and remained 
low through PND 19. Sexually dimorphic expression of ERß in the MePD was observed
on PND 0, with higher levels in females, but reversed by PND 4 due to declining
levels in females. No Kiss1 signal was observed in the postnatal amygdala,
suggesting that expression arises after puberty. These data reveal that ER
expression is region-specific within the neonatal amygdala. These differences
likely contribute to sex differences in sociosexual behavior across the lifespan.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3492514
PMID: 22791648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2013 Jan;28(1):35-42. doi: 10.1007/s00384-012-1532-5. Epub 
2012 Jul 13.

Quantitative profiling of CpG island methylation in human stool for colorectal
cancer detection.

Elliott GO(1), Johnson IT, Scarll J, Dainty J, Williams EA, Garg D, Coupe A,
Bradburn DM, Mathers JC, Belshaw NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7UA, UK.
giles.elliott@ifr.ac.uk

PURPOSE: The aims of this study were to investigate the use of quantitative CGI
methylation data from stool DNA to classify colon cancer patients and to relate
stool CGI methylation levels to those found in corresponding tissue samples.
METHODS: We applied a quantitative methylation-specific PCR assay to determine
CGI methylation levels of six genes, previously shown to be aberrantly methylated
during colorectal carcinogenesis. Assays were performed on DNA from biopsies of
"normal" mucosa and stool samples from 57 patients classified as disease-free,
adenoma, or cancer by endoscopy, and in tumour tissue from cancer patients.
Additionally, CGI methylation was analysed in stool DNA from an asymptomatic
population of individuals covering a broad age range (mean<U+2009>=<U+2009>47<U+2009>±<U+2009>24 years)
RESULTS: CGI methylation levels in stool DNA were significantly higher than in
DNA from macroscopically normal mucosa, and a significant correlation between
stool and mucosa was observed for ESR1 only. Multivariate statistical analyses
using the methylation levels of each CGI in stool DNA as a continuous variable
revealed a highly significant (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003) classification of cancer vs. non-cancer
(adenoma + disease-free) patients (sensitivity<U+2009>=<U+2009>65 %, specificity<U+2009>=<U+2009>81 %).
CONCLUSION: CGI methylation profiling of stool DNA successfully identified
patients with cancer despite the methylation status of CGIs in stool DNA not
generally reflecting those in DNA from the colonic mucosa.

PMID: 22791128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Anim Reprod Sci. 2012 Jul;133(1-2):16-26. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.06.013.
Epub 2012 Jun 23.

Impact of preovulatory estradiol concentrations on conceptus development and
uterine gene expression.

Bridges GA(1), Mussard ML, Pate JL, Ott TL, Hansen TR, Day ML.

Author information: 
(1)North Central Research and Outreach Center, University of Minnesota, Grand
Rapids, 55744, United States.

This experiment was conducted to determine the effect of altering preovulatory
estradiol concentrations, through manipulation of length of proestrus, on
peripheral progesterone concentrations, conceptus development, interferon tau
(IFNT) production and uterine gene expression in cattle. Approximately 6 days
after a time-synchronized ovulation, all antral follicles (=5 mm) were ablated
from the ovaries in beef heifers. To manipulate preovulatory estradiol
concentrations, the length of proestrus prior to the GnRH-induced LH surge was
altered between treatments. Heifers were administered PGF(2a) either -2.5 days
(2.5 days of proestrus; HiE2; n=5) or -1.5 days (1.5 days of proestrus; LoE2;
n=5) prior to GnRH (Day 0 of the experiment; 6.75 days after follicle ablation). 
Follicular dynamics and estradiol concentrations were evaluated during proestrus 
and progesterone concentrations were analyzed in the subsequent estrous cycle. On
Day 7, embryos were transferred into all heifers using standard procedures. On
Day 15.5 heifers were slaughtered, the reproductive tract was flushed to collect 
the conceptus and uterine flush media, and the uterine tissue was processed for
subsequent analyses. Peripheral progesterone concentrations, conceptus
development and IFNT production were similar between treatments. However, amount 
of nuclear progesterone receptor in the deep glandular epithelium and mRNA
concentrations for estradiol receptor alpha (ESR1) in the uterine endometrium
were less in the LoE2 than HiE2 treatment. These changes in uterine
characteristics in heifers with lower preovulatory estradiol concentrations were 
not related to aspects of conceptus development monitored, however, it is
speculated that the alterations in mRNA and receptor protein detected may
contribute to pregnancy failure subsequent to day 15.5 of gestation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22789700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 5;14(4):R101. doi: 10.1186/bcr3220.

Promoter hypermethylation in male breast cancer: analysis by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification.

Kornegoor R, Moelans CB, Verschuur-Maes AH, Hogenes MCh, de Bruin PC, Oudejans
JJ, van Diest PJ.

INTRODUCTION: Epigenetic events are, along with genetic alteration, important in 
the development and progression of cancer. Promoter hypermethylation causes gene 
silencing and is thought to be an early event in carcinogenesis. The role of
promoter hypermethylation in male breast cancer has not yet been studied.
METHODS: In a group of 108 male breast cancers, the methylation status of 25
genes was studied using methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification. Methylation of more than 15% was regarded indicative for promoter 
hypermethylation. Methylation status was correlated with clinicopathological
features, with patients' outcome and with 28 female breast cancer cases.
RESULTS: Promoter hypermethylation of the genes MSH6, WT1, PAX5, CDH13, GATA5 and
PAX6 was seen in more than 50% of the cases, but was uncommon or absent in normal
male breast tissue. High overall methylation status was correlated with high
grade (P = 0.003) and was an independent predictor of poor survival (P = 0.048;
hazard ratio 2.5). ESR1 and GSTP1 hypermethylation were associated with high
mitotic count (P = 0.037 and P = 0.002, respectively) and high grade (both P =
0.001). No correlation with survival was seen for individual genes. Compared with
female breast cancers (logistic regression), promoter hypermethylation was less
common in a variety of genes, particularly ESR1 (P = 0.005), BRCA1 (P = 0.010)
and BRCA2 (P < 0.001). The most frequently hypermethylated genes (MSH6, CDH13,
PAX5, PAX6 and WT1) were similar for male and female breast cancer.
CONCLUSION: Promoter hypermethylation is common in male breast cancer and high
methylation status correlates with aggressive phenotype and poor survival. ESR1
and GSTP1 promoter hypermethylation seem to be involved in development and/or
progression of high-grade male breast cancer. Although female and male breast
cancer share a set of commonly methylated genes, many of the studied genes are
less frequently methylated in male breast cancer, pointing towards possible
differences between male and female breast carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3680933
PMID: 22765268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Oct;39(10):9331-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1747-0. Epub 2012
Jul 4.

Association between estrogen receptor alpha c.454-397T>C and c.454-351A>G and
ischemic stroke risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Li BH(1), Zhang LL, Yin YW, Pi Y, Guo L, Yang QW, Gao CY, Fang CQ, Wang JZ, Xiang
J, Li JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Surgery Research, Daping Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, 10 Changjiang Branch Road, Yuzhong District,
Chongqing 400042, People's Republic of China.

The association between estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) c.454-397T>C and
c.454-351A>G polymorphism and ischemic stroke remains controversial. The aim of
this study was to perform a meta-analysis to investigate a more authentic
association between c.454-397T>C and c.454-351A>G mutation and ischemic stroke.
Systematic searches of electronic databases Embase, PubMed, Web of Science as
well as hand-searching of the references of identified articles and the meeting
abstracts were performed. Study selection, data abstraction and study quality
evaluation were independently conducted in duplicate. Statistical analyses were
performed using software Stata 11.0. The pooled odds ratios (ORs) with 95 %
confidence intervals (95 % CIs) were performed. Different effect models were used
according to the difference in heterogeneity. Publication bias was tested by
Begg's funnel plot and Egger's regression test. For c.454-397T>C mutation, five
studies were combined. Significant association was found in allelic model (OR =
1.12, 95 % CI = 1.01-1.25, p = 0.03), additive model (OR = 1.25, 95 % CI =
1.01-1.54, p = 0.04), and recessive model (OR = 1.23, 95 % CI = 1.02-1.49, p =
0.03), whereas no evidence of association was found for dominant model (OR =
1.10, 95 % CI = 0.85-1.42, p = 0.47). For c.454-351A>G mutation, no evidence of
association was found for all genetic models. Our meta-analysis suggests that
ESR1 c.454-397T>C mutation is significantly associated with increased risk of
ischemic stroke, whereas no evidence of association was found for ESR1
c.454-351A>G mutation.

PMID: 22760258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Aug;135(1):301-6. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2143-0.
Epub 2012 Jul 3.

PAM50 assay and the three-gene model for identifying the major and clinically
relevant molecular subtypes of breast cancer.

Prat A(1), Parker JS, Fan C, Perou CM.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

It has recently been proposed that a three-gene model (SCMGENE) that measures
ESR1, ERBB2, and AURKA identifies the major breast cancer intrinsic subtypes and 
provides robust discrimination for clinical use in a manner very similar to a
50-gene subtype predictor (PAM50). However, the clinical relevance of both
predictors was not fully explored, which is needed given that a ~30 % discordance
rate between these two predictors was observed. Using the same datasets and
subtype calls provided by Haibe-Kains and colleagues, we compared the SCMGENE
assignments and the research-based PAM50 assignments in terms of their ability to
(1) predict patient outcome, (2) predict pathological complete response (pCR)
after anthracycline/taxane-based chemotherapy, and (3) capture the main
biological diversity displayed by all genes from a microarray. In terms of
survival predictions, both assays provided independent prognostic information
from each other and beyond the data provided by standard clinical-pathological
variables; however, the amount of prognostic information was found to be
significantly greater with the PAM50 assay than the SCMGENE assay. In terms of
chemotherapy response, the PAM50 assay was the only assay to provide independent 
predictive information of pCR in multivariate models. Finally, compared to the
SCMGENE predictor, the PAM50 assay explained a significantly greater amount of
gene expression diversity as captured by the two main principal components of the
breast cancer microarray data. Our results show that classification of the major 
and clinically relevant molecular subtypes of breast cancer are best captured
using larger gene panels.

PMCID: PMC3413822
PMID: 22752290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Fertil Steril. 2012 Oct;98(4):965-72.e1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2012.05.048.
Epub 2012 Jun 29.

The CC-allele of the PvuII polymorphic variant in intron 1 of the a-estrogen
receptor gene is significantly more prevalent among infertile women at risk of
premature ovarian aging.

M'Rabet N(1), Moffat R, Helbling S, Kaech A, Zhang H, de Geyter C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University Hospital, University of Basel,
Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: To study the distribution of a set of polymorphic alleles of genes
encoding key regulators of the menstrual cycle in cohorts of women with different
levels of fertility.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING: University hospital.
PATIENT(S): Two hundred fertile women, who reported to have conceived within 3
months, 348 women with ongoing menstrual cycles suffering of infertility, and 48 
infertile women diagnosed with infertility and premature ovarian failure (POF).
INTERVENTION(S): Eleven polymorphisms of genes with known associations with
surrogate parameters of female ovarian function were analyzed.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The prevalence of polymorphic alleles in the three
distinct cohorts after adjustment for age.
RESULT(S): The distributions of the allelic variants were compared with the
fertility status of the recruited women. Using age-adjusted logistic regression
analysis and the Bonferroni correction for multiple corrections, the CC-allele of
the PvuII polymorphic variant in intron 1 of the ESR1 gene was twice as prevalent
among women suffering from infertility. None of the other polymorphisms were
distributed differently among the three cohorts.
CONCLUSION(S): The ESR1-PvuII polymorphism emerges as a potential candidate for
the early prediction of infertility due to premature ovarian aging.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22749220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. BMC Med Genet. 2012 Jun 30;13:53. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-53.

Genetic variants associated with breast size also influence breast cancer risk.

Eriksson N(1), Benton GM, Do CB, Kiefer AK, Mountain JL, Hinds DA, Francke U,
Tung JY.

Author information: 
(1)23andMe, Inc, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA. nick@23andme.com

BACKGROUND: While some factors of breast morphology, such as density, are
directly implicated in breast cancer, the relationship between breast size and
cancer is less clear. Breast size is moderately heritable, yet the genetic
variants leading to differences in breast size have not been identified.
METHODS: To investigate the genetic factors underlying breast size, we conducted 
a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of self-reported bra cup size, controlling
for age, genetic ancestry, breast surgeries, pregnancy history and bra band size,
in a cohort of 16,175 women of European ancestry.
RESULTS: We identified seven single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) significantly
associated with breast size (p<5.10(-8)): rs7816345 near ZNF703, rs4849887 and
(independently) rs17625845 flanking INHBB, rs12173570 near ESR1, rs7089814 in
ZNF365, rs12371778 near PTHLH, and rs62314947 near AREG. Two of these seven SNPs 
are in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with SNPs associated with breast cancer (those
near ESR1 and PTHLH), and a third (ZNF365) is near, but not in LD with, a breast 
cancer SNP. The other three loci (ZNF703, INHBB, and AREG) have strong links to
breast cancer, estrogen regulation, and breast development.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide insight into the genetic factors underlying
normal breast development and show that some of these factors are shared with
breast cancer. While these results do not directly support any possible
epidemiological relationships between breast size and cancer, this study may
contribute to a better understanding of the subtle interactions between breast
morphology and breast cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3483246
PMID: 22747683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2012;176:59-62.

Estrogen receptor 2 expression in back muscles of girls with idiopathic scoliosis
- relation to radiological parameters.

Rusin B(1), Kotwicki T, Glodek A, Andrusiewicz M, Urbaniak P, Kotwicka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Orthopedics and Traumatology, University of Medical
Sciences Poznan, Poland.

Deep paravertebral muscles and female sex hormones are potential elements
participating in idiopathic scoliosis development. Estrogen acts through estrogen
receptors: ESR1 and ESR2. There are no studies describing ESR2 expression in back
muscles in girls with idiopathic scoliosis. The aim of this study was to evaluate
ESR2 expression levels in back muscles on both sides of the spinal curve and
correlation between the expression level and scoliosis parameters. Asymmetrical
ESR2 expression in deep paravertebral muscles was found: 11 girls had higher
expression level on the convex side and 5 girls had higher expression level on
the concave side of the curvature. Patients with ESR2 (convex/concave) ratio = 1 
presented positive correlation between ESR2 ratio and Cobb angle.

PMID: 22744458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Biol Reprod. 2012 Sep 21;87(3):63. Print 2012 Sep.

Bisphenol A inhibits follicle growth and induces atresia in cultured mouse antral
follicles independently of the genomic estrogenic pathway.

Peretz J(1), Craig ZR, Flaws JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is an estrogenic chemical used to manufacture many commonly
used plastic and epoxy resin-based products. BPA ubiquitously binds to estrogen
receptors throughout the body, including estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) in the
ovary. Few studies have investigated the effects of BPA on ovarian antral
follicles. Thus, we tested the hypothesis that BPA alters cell cycle regulators
and induces atresia in antral follicles via the genomic estrogenic pathway,
inhibiting follicle growth. To test this hypothesis, we isolated antral follicles
from 32- to 35-day-old control and Esr1-overexpressing mice and cultured them
with vehicle control (dimethylsulfoxide [DMSO]) or BPA (1-100 µg/ml).
Additionally, antral follicles were isolated from 32- to 35-day-old FVB mice and 
cultured with DMSO, BPA (1-100 µg/ml), estradiol (10 nM), ICI 182,780 (ICI; 1
µM), BPA plus ICI, or BPA plus estradiol. Follicles were measured for growth
every 24 h for 96-120 h and processed either for analysis of estrogen receptor,
cell cycle, and/or atresia factor mRNA expression, or for histological evaluation
of atresia. Results indicate that estradiol and ICI do not protect follicles from
BPA-induced growth inhibition and that estradiol does not protect follicles from 
BPA-induced atresia. Furthermore, overexpressing Esr1 does not increase
susceptibility of follicles to BPA-induced growth inhibition. Additionally, BPA
up-regulates Cdk4, Ccne1, and Trp53 expression, whereas it down-regulates Ccnd2
expression. BPA also up-regulates Bax and Bcl2 expression while inducing atresia 
in antral follicles. These data indicate that BPA abnormally regulates cell cycle
and atresia factors, and this may lead to atresia and inhibited follicle growth
independently of the genomic estrogenic pathway.

PMCID: PMC3464906
PMID: 22743301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. BMC Med Genet. 2012 Jun 24;13:49. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-49.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms and risk of HBV-related acute liver
failure in the Chinese population.

Yan Z(1), Tan W, Dan Y, Zhao W, Deng C, Wang Y, Deng G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: The sexual dimorphism of hepatitis B virus (HBV) -related liver
diseases is related with estrogen and its receptors. Recent reports indicate that
abnormal expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) may be a hallmark for the
progression of liver disease and HBV carriers presenting variant ESR1 have an
extremely aggressive clinical course. Here we examine whether the ESR1
polymorphisms or its haplotypes are related to HBV-related acute liver failure
(ALF) risk among chronic HBV carriers in a Chinese population.
METHODS: A total of 1216 unrelated Han Chinese HBV carriers were recruited in
this hospital-based case-control study, including 359 HBV surface antigen (HBsAg)
carriers affected with ALF and 857 asymptomatic HBsAg carriers. Two ESR1
haplotype tagging polymorphisms, c.30<U+2009>T<U+2009>><U+2009>C (rs2077647) and c.453-397<U+2009>T<U+2009>><U+2009>C
(rs2234693), were genotyped by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment
length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay.
RESULTS: We observed a significantly increased susceptibility to HBV-ALF
associated with the c.30<U+2009>C allele (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>8.65<U+2009>×<U+2009>10-4), c.453-397<U+2009>C allele
(5.37<U+2009>×<U+2009>10-4) and [c.30<U+2009>C; c.453-397<U+2009>C] haplotype (Dominant model, P =0.0004,
odds ratio<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.53, 95% CI 1.23<U+2009>~<U+2009>1.96) compared with the T alleles and [c.30<U+2009>T;
c.453-397<U+2009>T] haplotype of c.30<U+2009>T<U+2009>><U+2009>C and c.453-397<U+2009>T<U+2009>><U+2009>C polymorphisms,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that [c.30<U+2009>C; c.453-397<U+2009>C] haplotype may be a
risk factor for genetic susceptibility to HBV-related ALF in the Chinese
population. It also emphasizes the importance of ESR1 in the pathophysiology of
HBV-related ALF on the population level.

PMCID: PMC3412699
PMID: 22727021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. BMC Womens Health. 2012 Jun 22;12:17.

Interactive effect of genetic susceptibility with height, body mass index, and
hormone replacement therapy on the risk of breast cancer.

Harlid S(1), Butt S, Ivarsson MI, Eyfjörd JE, Lenner P, Manjer J, Dillner J,
Carlson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer today has many established risk factors, both genetic
and environmental, but these risk factors by themselves explain only part of the 
total cancer incidence. We have investigated potential interactions between
certain known genetic and phenotypic risk factors, specifically nine single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and height, body mass index (BMI) and hormone
replacement therapy (HRT).
METHODS: We analyzed samples from three different study populations: two
prospectively followed Swedish cohorts and one Icelandic case-control study.
Totally 2884 invasive breast cancer cases and 4508 controls were analysed in the 
study. Genotypes were determined using Mass spectrometry-Maldi-TOF and phenotypic
variables were derived from measurements and/or questionnaires. Odds Ratios and
95% confidence intervals were calculated using unconditional logistic regression 
with the inclusion of an interaction term in the logistic regression model.
RESULTS: One SNP (rs851987 in ESR1) tended to interact with height, with an
increasingly protective effect of the major allele in taller women (p = 0.007)
and rs13281615 (on 8q24) tended to confer risk only in non users of HRT (p-for
interaction = 0.03). There were no significant interactions after correction for 
multiple testing.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that much larger sample sets would be necessary to
demonstrate interactions between low-risk genetic polymorphisms and the
phenotypic variables height, BMI and HRT on the risk for breast cancer. However
the present hypothesis-generating study has identified tendencies that would be
of interest to evaluate for gene-environment interactions in independent
materials.

PMCID: PMC3460750
PMID: 22726230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2012;3(2):134-43. Epub 2012 May 15.

Female reproductive status and circulating blood leukocyte expression of selected
metabolic or signaling genes involved in sex steroid metabolism.

Osuch JR(1), Hsu WW, Todem D, Landgraf J, Mikucki D, Haan PS, Karmaus W.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, USA; Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, College of
Human Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI,USA.
janet.osuch@hc.msu.edu

OBJECTIVE: To examine the blood leukocyte expression of 22 sex steroid
metabolic/signaling genes according to female reproductive status.
METHODS: Michigan Fisheaters' Cohort participants underwent blood collection
during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle or randomly in non-menstruating
participants. Gene expression (GE) was measured using Taqman hydrolysis probes
and quantitative RT-PCR. Repeatability of four genes was determined in a
subgroup.
RESULTS: Five premenstrual, 57 premenopausal (20 users of systemic hormonal
contraception), and 43 postmenopausal females participated. After Bonferroni
correction for multiple comparisons of median GE between groups, three findings
remained significant: greater GE of AhR in postmenopausal women than in
premenopausal non-users of systemic hormonal contraception; and greater GE of
ESR2 and HSD17B7 in premenstrual girls compared to postmenopausal women. Modest
intra-class correlations were identified for CYP 19, ESR1, and ESR2 GE measured
both in 2007 and 2010, but no intra-class correlation over the same time period
was found for CYP17.
CONCLUSIONS: There was little differential variation of blood leukocyte sex
steroid ge between premenopausal women in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle
and postmenopausal women for most genes analyzed, but it will be necessary to
make statistical adjustments in future epidemiologic studies in two
circumstances: 1) when comparing AhR GE in premenopausal women non-users of
systemic hormone contraception with postmenopausal women and 2) when comparing
ESR2 and HSD17B7 GE in studies that include premenstrual girls. Developmental
differences may explain the differential GE found in ESR2 and HSD17B7 in
premenstrual girls compared with postmenopausal women.

PMCID: PMC3376919
PMID: 22724050  [PubMed]


259. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 Sep 1;263(2):184-94. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2012.06.008. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

Effects of the UV filter benzophenone-3 (oxybenzone) at low concentrations in
zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Blüthgen N(1), Zucchi S, Fent K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Applied Sciences Northwestern
Switzerland, Gründenstrasse 40, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland.

Organic UV filters including benzophenone-3 (BP-3) are widely used to protect
humans and materials from damage by UV irradiation. Despite the environmental
occurrence of BP-3 in the aquatic environment, little is known about its effects 
and modes of action. In the present study we assess molecular and physiological
effects of BP-3 in adult male zebrafish (Danio rerio) and in eleuthero-embryos by
a targeted gene expression approach focusing on the sex hormone system. Fish and 
embryos are exposed for 14 days and 120 hours post fertilization, respectively,
to 2.4-312 µg/L and 8.2-438 µg/L BP-3. Chemical analysis of water and fish
demonstrates that BP-3 is partly transformed to benzophenone-1 (BP-1) and both
compounds are accumulated in adult fish. Biotransformation to BP-1 is absent in
eleuthero-embryos. BP-3 exposure leads to similar alterations of gene expression 
in both adult fish and eleuthero-embryos. In the brain of adult males esr1, ar
and cyp19b are down-regulated at 84 µg/L BP-3. There is no induction of
vitellogenin expression by BP-3, both at the transcriptional and protein level.
An overall down-regulation of the hsd3b, hsd17b3, hsd11b2 and cyp11b2 transcripts
is observed in the testes, suggesting an antiandrogenic activity. No histological
changes were observed in the testes after BP-3 treatment. The study leads to the 
conclusion that low concentrations of BP-3 exhibit similar multiple hormonal
activities at the transcription level in two different life stages of zebrafish. 
Forthcoming studies should show whether this translates to additional
physiological effects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22721600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Hum Reprod. 2012 Sep;27(9):2756-65. doi: 10.1093/humrep/des187. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Effect of folate deficiency on promoter methylation and gene expression of Esr1, 
Cdh1 and Pgr, and its influence on endometrial receptivity and embryo
implantation.

Gao R(1), Ding Y, Liu X, Chen X, Wang Y, Long C, Li S, Guo L, He J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, School of Public Health, Chongqing Medical
University, Box 197, No. 1 Yixueyuan Road, Yuzhong District, 400016 Chongqing, PR
China.

BACKGROUND: Folate, one of the B vitamins, provides the one-carbon units required
for methylation. Folate deficiency has been associated with many pathologies.
However, much less is known about the effect of it on human reproduction,
especially on implantation. The establishment of uterine receptivity is crucial
for successful embryo implantation. Gene expression can be influenced by both
heredity and epigenetics such as DNA methylation. However, it is not known
whether the methylation and expression of genes related to uterine receptivity
can be affected by folate levels. To explore whether folate deficiency affected
the epigenetic regulation of genes related to uterine receptivity, and their
influence on implantation, we investigated the methylation and expression of
cadherin 1 (Cdh1), progesterone receptor (Pgr) and estrogen receptor 1 (Esr1)
genes during implantation and the implantation efficiency using a
folate-deficient pregnant mouse model.
METHODS: Serum folate levels of pregnant mice were measured using the
electro-chemiluminescence immunoassay. The methylation status of Cdh1, Pgr and
Esr1 promoter regions was determined by methylation-specific PCR and bisulfite
sequencing. The expression of Cdh1, Pgr and Esr1 in the implantation-site
endometrium was examined by real-time PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry.
The number and the morphology of pinopodes, important morphological markers of
endometrial receptivity, were examined using scanning electron microscopy. The
number of implantation sites demarcated by distinct blue bands was recorded.
RESULTS: Serum folate levels of the folate-deficient group were lower (5.42 ±
1.35 ng/ml, n= 42) than those of the normal group (24.13 ± 4 .26 ng/ml, n= 37; P 
= 0.003). Here we show that the methylation status and mRNA levels of Esr1 were
decreased (P= 0.021, P= 0.045, respectively), while the Cdh1 and Pgr expression
levels were slightly but not significantly elevated and the methylation status
did not vary in the folate-deficient mice compared with the wild type. Neither
the number nor morphology of pinopodes was affected by folate deficiency.
Furthermore, folate deficiency did not affect the number of implantation sites in
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates for the first time that, unlike the effects 
on Esr1, folate deficiency in mice does not influence the methylation and
expression of Pgr and Cdh1, two genes shown to be essential for uterine
receptivity and embryo implantation. Embryo implantation in mice appears to be
unaffected by a deficiency in folate, suggesting that abnormalities in a
pregnancy caused by folate deficiency start to develop after implantation.

PMID: 22706342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2012 Sep 1;178(2):194-205. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2012.06.004.
Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Molecular characterization of estrogen receptor genes in loach Paramisgurnus
dabryanus and their expression upon 17a-ethinylestradiol exposure in juveniles.

Zhang Y(1), Wang H, Qin F, Liu S, Wu T, Li M, Xu P, Zhang X, Wang X, Hu G, Yuan
C, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
China.

The full-length cDNAs for estrogen receptor 1 (esr1), esr2a and esr2b were
isolated and characterized from the loach (Paramisgurnus dabryanus, Cobitidae,
cypriniformes). P. dabryanus Esr1, Esr2a and Esr2b share high amino acids
identities with their counterparts of cyprinid species. Quantitative real-time
PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to analyze the tissue distribution of esr mRNAs in
one-year-old P. dabryanus. The mRNA expression of esr1 in female liver was
extremely higher than that in other tissues. esr2a mRNA expression in female
intestine and in male muscle was higher than that in other tissues. esr2b mRNA
expression was the highest in both male and female intestine. Two-month-old P.
dabryanus were exposed to 17a-ethinylestradiol (EE2) for 3weeks and the changes
of esr mRNA expression in brain, gonad and liver were analyzed by qRT-PCR.
Results showed that EE2 at 1, 5 and 25 ng/L significantly suppressed testicular
esr1 mRNA expression in male. The ovarian esr2a mRNA expression was significantly
up-regulated at 1 ng/L EE2. In female brain, esr1 mRNA expression was
significantly down-regulated at 5 ng/L EE2. Both in males and females, EE2
exposure increased the hepatic esr1 mRNA expression in a concentration-dependent 
manner. The present study suggests that different esrs in different tissues have 
differential responsiveness to EE2 and the hepatic esr1 is a sensitive biomarker 
to EE2 at environmental concentrations in P. dabryanus juveniles. So, the loach
P. dabryanus, a typical demersal fish, is a promising ecological model organism
to detect estrogenic chemicals in the sediment of aquatic environment by using
molecular biomarkers.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22705038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38700. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038700. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Genetic polymorphisms influence the ovarian response to rFSH stimulation in
patients undergoing in vitro fertilization programs with ICSI.

Boudjenah R(1), Molina-Gomes D, Torre A, Bergere M, Bailly M, Boitrelle F, Taieb 
S, Wainer R, Benahmed M, de Mazancourt P, Selva J, Vialard F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Cytogenetics, Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 
Poissy Saint Germain Medical Centre, Poissy, France. boudjenahradia@yahoo.fr

INTRODUCTION: Obtaining an adequate number of high-quality oocytes is a major
challenge in controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH). To date, a range of
hormonal and clinical parameters have been used to optimize COH but none have
significant predictive value. This variability could be due to the genetic
predispositions of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Here, we assessed the 
individual and combined impacts of thirteen SNPs that reportedly influence the
outcome of in vitro fertilisation (IVF) on the ovarian response to rFSH
stimulation for patients undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection program
(ICSI).
RESULTS: Univariate analysis revealed that only FSHR, ESR2 and p53 SNPs
influenced the number of mature oocytes. The association was statistically
significant for FSHR (p=0.0047) and ESR2 (0.0017) in the overall study population
and for FSHR (p=0.0009) and p53 (p=0.0048) in subgroup that was more homogeneous 
in terms of clinical variables. After Bonferroni correction and a multivariate
analysis, only the differences for FSHR and ESR2 polymorphisms were still
statistically significant. In a multilocus analysis, only the FSHR and AMH SNP
combination significantly influenced oocyte numbers in both population (p<0.01).
DISCUSSION: We confirmed the impact of FSHR and ESR2 polymorphisms on the IVF
outcome. Furthermore, we showed for the first time that a p53 polymorphism (which
is already known to impact embryo implantation) could influence the ovarian
response. However, given that this result lost its statistical significance after
multivariate analysis, more data are needed to draw firm conclusions. Only the
FSHR and AMH polymorphism combination appears to influence mature oocyte numbers 
but this finding also needs to be confirmed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A 13 gene polymorphisms: FSHR(Asn680Ser), p53(Arg72Pro),
AMH(Ile49Ser), ESR2(+1730G>A), ESR1(-397T>C), BMP15(-9C>G), MTHFR1(677C>T),
MTHFR2(1298A>C), HLA-G(-725C>G), VEGF(+405G>C), TNFa(-308A>G), AMHR(-482 A>G),
PAI-1 (4 G/5 G), multiplex PCR assay was designed to genotype women undergoing
ICSI program. We analyzed the overall study population (n=427) and a subgroup
with homogeneous characteristics (n=112).

PMCID: PMC3372493
PMID: 22701696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37928. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037928. Epub 2012 May 31.

Relationship between tumor DNA methylation status and patient characteristics in 
African-American and European-American women with breast cancer.

Wang S(1), Dorsey TH, Terunuma A, Kittles RA, Ambs S, Kwabi-Addo B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Howard University,
Washington, D.C., United States of America.

Aberrant DNA methylation is critical for development and progression of breast
cancer. We investigated the association of CpG island methylation in candidate
genes and clinicopathological features in 65 African-American (AA) and
European-American (EA) breast cancer patients. Quantitative methylation analysis 
was carried out on bisulfite modified genomic DNA and sequencing (pyrosequencing)
for promoter CpG islands of p16, ESR1, RASSF1A, RARß2, CDH13, HIN1, SFRP1 genes
and the LINE1 repetitive element using matched paired non-cancerous and breast
tumor specimen (32 AA and 33 EA women). Five of the genes, all known tumor
suppressor genes (RASSF1A, RARß2, CDH13, HIN1 and SFRP1), were found to be
frequently hypermethylated in breast tumor tissues but not in the adjacent
non-cancerous tissues. Significant differences in the CDH13 methylation status
were observed by comparing DNA methylation between AA and EA patients, with more 
obvious CDH13 methylation differences between the two patient groups in the ER-
disease and among young patients (age<50). In addition, we observed associations 
between CDH13, SFRP1, and RASSF1A methylation and breast cancer subtypes and
between SFRP1 methylation and patient's age. Furthermore, tumors that received
neoadjuvant therapy tended to have reduced RASSF1A methylation when compared with
chemotherapy naïve tumors. Finally, Kaplan Meier survival analysis showed a
significant association between methylation at 3 loci (RASSF1A, RARß2 and CDH13) 
and reduced overall disease survival. In conclusion, the DNA methylation status
of breast tumors was found to be significantly associated with
clinicopathological features and race/ethnicity of the patients.

PMCID: PMC3365111
PMID: 22701537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e31984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031984. Epub 2012 May 31.

Dynamic network of transcription and pathway crosstalk to reveal molecular
mechanism of MGd-treated human lung cancer cells.

Shao L(1), Wang L, Wei Z, Xiong Y, Wang Y, Tang K, Li Y, Feng G, Xing Q, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China.

Recent research has revealed various molecular markers in lung cancer. However,
the organizational principles underlying their genetic regulatory networks still 
await investigation. Here we performed Network Component Analysis (NCA) and
Pathway Crosstalk Analysis (PCA) to construct a regulatory network in human lung 
cancer (A549) cells which were treated with 50 uM motexafin gadolinium (MGd), a
metal cation-containing chemotherapeutic drug for 4, 12, and 24 hours. We
identified a set of key TFs, known target genes for these TFs, and signaling
pathways involved in regulatory networks. Our work showed that putative
interactions between these TFs (such as ESR1/Sp1, E2F1/Sp1, c-MYC-ESR,
Smad3/c-Myc, and NFKB1/RELA), between TFs and their target genes (such as
BMP41/Est1, TSC2/Myc, APE1/Sp1/p53, RARA/HOXA1, and SP1/USF2), and between
signaling pathways (such as PPAR signaling pathway and Adipocytokines signaling
pathway). These results will provide insights into the regulatory mechanism of
MGd-treated human lung cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3365074
PMID: 22693540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012 Jul 22;19(4):509-26. doi: 10.1530/ERC-12-0100. Print
2012 Aug.

Protein arginine methyltransferase 6-dependent gene expression and splicing:
association with breast cancer outcomes.

Dowhan DH(1), Harrison MJ, Eriksson NA, Bailey P, Pearen MA, Fuller PJ, Funder
JW, Simpson ER, Leedman PJ, Tilley WD, Brown MA, Clarke CL, Muscat GE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia. d.dowhan@uq.edu.au

Protein arginine methyltransferase-6 (PRMT6) regulates steroid-dependent
transcription and alternative splicing and is implicated in endocrine system
development and function, cell death, cell cycle, gene expression and cancer.
Despite its role in these processes, little is known about its function and
cellular targets in breast cancer. To identify novel gene targets regulated by
PRMT6 in breast cancer cells, we used a combination of small interfering RNA and 
exon-specific microarray profiling in vitro coupled to in vivo validation in
normal breast and primary human breast tumours. This approach, which allows the
examination of genome-wide changes in individual exon usage and total transcript 
levels, demonstrated that PRMT6 knockdown significantly affected i) the
transcription of 159 genes and ii) alternate splicing of 449 genes. The
PRMT6-dependent transcriptional and alternative splicing targets identified in
vitro were validated in human breast tumours. Using the list of genes
differentially expressed between normal and PRMT6 knockdown cells, we generated a
PRMT6-dependent gene expression signature that provides an indication of PRMT6
dysfunction in breast cancer cells. Interrogation of several well-studied breast 
cancer microarray expression datasets with the PRMT6 gene expression signature
demonstrated that PRMT6 dysfunction is associated with better overall
relapse-free and distant metastasis-free survival in the oestrogen receptor (ER
(ESR1)) breast cancer subgroup. These results suggest that dysregulation of
PRMT6-dependent transcription and alternative splicing may be involved in breast 
cancer pathophysiology and the molecular consequences identifying a unique and
informative biomarker profile.

PMID: 22673335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Virol Methods. 2012 Sep;184(1-2):84-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jviromet.2012.05.022.
Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Patterns of cellular and HPV 16 methylation as biomarkers for cervical neoplasia.

Patel DA(1), Rozek LS, Colacino JA, Van Zomeren-Dohm A, Ruffin MT, Unger ER,
Dolinoy DC, Swan DC, Onyekwuluje J, DeGraffinreid CR, Paskett ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University, FMB 307, 330 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
divya.patel@yale.edu

Aberrant promoter methylation of biologically relevant genes in cervical cancer
and uneven CpG distribution within the human papillomavirus 16 (HPV 16) enhancer 
region have been reported. Cervical samples and questionnaires from 151 women
screened for cervical cancer in Appalachian Ohio were analyzed. Methylation was
measured by bisulfite sequencing in candidate gene sites in ESR1, DCC, p16, and
LINE1 elements. Among 89 HPV 16-positive women, CpG sites in the E6 promoter and 
enhancer regions and the L1 region of the HPV 16 genome were measured.
Methylation levels were compared by cervical cytology and HPV 16 status. HPV
methylation was low regardless of cytology status, however E6 methylation was
significantly higher in women with normal cytology. ESR1 and DCC methylation were
significantly higher in HPV 16-positive women. Increased methylation at sites in 
the E6 promoter region was associated with lower odds of abnormal cytology.
Increased methylation in candidate genes was associated with higher odds of
abnormal cytology, particularly DCC region 2.4, DCC region 2.6, ESR1 region 3.2, 
and LINE1 site 1.2. HPV 16 genome CpG methylation was low except for the L1
region. In general, lower HPV 16 methylation and higher candidate gene
methylation levels were associated with higher odds of abnormal cytology.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3396790
PMID: 22664184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2012 Dec;27(12):1587-95. doi: 10.1007/s00384-012-1505-8.
Epub 2012 May 30.

Genetic variation in insulin pathway genes and distal colorectal adenoma risk.

Levine AJ(1), Ihenacho U, Lee W, Figueiredo JC, Vandenberg DJ, Edlund CK, Davis
BD, Stern MC, Haile RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Genetic Epidemiology, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, NRT 1450 Biggy Street Room 1509A,
Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. ajoanlev@usc.edu

BACKGROUND: Insulin, glucose, and other insulin-related proteins that mediate
insulin signaling are associated with colorectal neoplasia risk, but associations
with common genetic variation in insulin axis genes are less clear. In this
study, we used a comprehensive tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
approach to define genetic variation in six insulin axis genes (IGF1, IGF2,
IGFBP1, IGFBP3, IRS1, and IRS2) and three genes associated with estrogen
signaling (ESR1, ESR2, and PGR).
METHODS: We assessed associations between SNPs and distal colorectal adenoma
(CRA) risk in a case-control study of 1,351 subjects. Cases were individuals with
one or more adenomas diagnosed during sigmoidoscopy, and controls were
individuals with no adenomas at the sigmoidoscopy exam. We used unconditional
logistic regression assuming an additive model to assess SNP-specific risks
adjusting for multiple comparisons with P (act).
RESULTS: Distal adenoma risk was significantly increased for one SNP in IGF2 [per
minor allele OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.41; 95 % confidence interval (CI)<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.16, 1.67; P
(act)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005] and decreased for an ESR2 SNP (per minor allele OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.78; 95 %
CI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.66, 0.91; P (act)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.041). There was no statistically significant
heterogeneity of these associations by race, sex, BMI, physical activity, or, in 
women, hormone replacement therapy use. Risk estimates did not differ in the
colon versus rectum or for smaller (<1 cm) versus larger (>1 cm) adenomas.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that selected genetic variability in IGF2 and
ESR2 may be modifiers of CRA risk.

PMID: 22645077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cancer Epidemiol. 2012 Oct;36(5):445-52. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2012.04.006. Epub
2012 May 25.

Selected polymorphisms in sex hormone-related genes, circulating sex hormones and
risk of endometrial cancer.

Lundin E(1), Wirgin I, Lukanova A, Afanasyeva Y, Krogh V, Axelsson T, Hemminki K,
Clendenen TV, Arslan AA, Ohlson N, Sieri S, Roy N, Koenig KL, Idahl A, Berrino F,
Toniolo P, Hallmans G, Försti A, Muti P, Lenner P, Shore RE, Zeleniuch-Jacquotte 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biosciences, Pathology, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The role of estrogen and progesterone in the development of
endometrial cancer is well documented. Few studies have examined the association 
of genetic variants in sex hormone-related genes with endometrial cancer risk.
METHODS: We conducted a case-control study nested within three cohorts to examine
the association of endometrial cancer risk with polymorphisms in hormone-related 
genes among 391 cases (92% postmenopausal at diagnosis) and 712
individually-matched controls. We also examined the association of these
polymorphisms with circulating levels of sex hormones and SHBG in a
cross-sectional analysis including 596 healthy postmenopausal women at blood
donation (controls from this nested case-control study and from a nested
case-control study of breast cancer in one of the three cohorts).
RESULTS: Adjusting for endometrial cancer risk factors, the A allele of rs4775936
in CYP19 was significantly associated (OR(per allele)=1.22, 95% CI=1.01-1.47,
p(trend)=0.04), while the T allele of rs10046 was marginally associated with
increased risk of endometrial cancer (OR(per allele)=1.20, 95% CI=0.99-1.45,
p(trend)=0.06). PGR rs1042838 was also marginally associated with risk (OR(per
allele)=1.25, 95% CI=0.96-1.61, p(trend)=0.09). No significant association was
found for the other polymorphisms, i.e. CYP1B1 rs1800440 and rs1056836, UGT1A1
rs8175347, SHBG rs6259 and ESR1 rs2234693. Rs8175347 was significantly associated
with postmenopausal levels of estradiol, free estradiol and estrone and rs6259
with SHBG and estradiol.
CONCLUSION: Our findings support an association between genetic variants in
CYP19, and possibly PGR, and risk of endometrial cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3663487
PMID: 22633539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Oncol. 2012 Aug;6(4):428-36. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2012.04.003. Epub 2012 May
8.

ESR1 gene status correlates with estrogen receptor protein levels measured by
ligand binding assay and immunohistochemistry.

Laenkholm AV(1), Knoop A, Ejlertsen B, Rudbeck T, Jensen MB, Müller S,
Lykkesfeldt AE, Rasmussen BB, Nielsen KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Slagelse Hospital, Slagelse, Denmark.
anlae@regionsjaelland.dk

The Estrogen Receptor (ER) is an established predictive marker for the selection 
of adjuvant endocrine treatment in early breast cancer. During the 1990s
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) replaced cytosol based assays for determination of ER 
status. This study examined the association between ER protein level determined
by two different methods and ESR1 gene copy number. From 289 primary high-risk
breast cancer patients, randomized in the Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group 
(DBCG) 77C trial, results from cytosolic ER levels were available from ligand
binding assays. Archival tumor tissue was retrieved from 257 patients. ESR1/CEN-6
ratio was analyzed successfully by Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) in
220 (86%) patients. ESR1 amplification (ESR1/CEN-6 = 2.00) was observed in 23% of
the patients and ESR1 deletion (ESR1/CEN-6 < 0.80) was observed in 32%. Further, 
we identified ESR1 gain (ratio ESR1/CEN-6 from 1.30 to 1.99) in 19% of the
patients. A positive correlation of ESR1 FISH with both ER-cytosol and ER IHC was
found (p < 0.0001). Amplification and gain of the ESR1 gene are associated with
higher ER protein content measured by ligand binding assay and a more intense
nuclear staining by IHC compared to tumors with normal ESR1 gene status. Major
variations in ER measured by ligand binding assay and IHC are observed within all
ESR1 copy number subgroups and other mechanisms than gene copy number seem to
contribute to the ER protein content in the tumors.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22626971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Hum Genet. 2012 Jul;57(7):449-52. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.53. Epub 2012 May 24.

Haplotype analysis of ESR2 in Japanese patients with spermatogenic failure.

Ogata T(1), Fukami M, Yoshida R, Nagata E, Fujisawa Y, Yoshida A, Yoshimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, 
Japan. tomogata@hama-med.ac.jp

The prevalence of spermatogenic failure (SF) has gradually increased during the
past few decades at least in several countries. Although multiple factors would
be involved in this phenomenon, one important factor would be excessive estrogen 
effects via estrogen receptors (ERs). Thus, we performed haplotype analysis of
ESR2 encoding ERß in 125 Japanese SF patients and 119 age-matched control males, 
using single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 1-9 that are widely distributed on
the ~120-kb genomic sequence of ESR2. Consequently, a linkage disequilibrium (LD)
block was detected in an ~60-kb region encompassing SNPs 2-7 in both groups, and 
four major estimated haplotypes were identified within the LD block. Furthermore,
the most prevalent 'TGTAGA' haplotype was found to be significantly associated
with SF, with the P-value obtained by the Cochran-Armitage trend test (0.0029)
being lower than that obtained by a 100<U+2009>000-times permutation test (0.0038) to
cope with the problem of multiple comparisons. The results, in conjunction with
our previous data indicating lack of a susceptibility factor on ESR1 encoding
ERa, imply that the specific 'TGTAGA' haplotype of ESR2 raises the susceptibility
to the development of SF.

PMID: 22622360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Clin Bioinforma. 2012 May 22;2(1):13. doi: 10.1186/2043-9113-2-13.

Splitting random forest (SRF) for determining compact sets of genes that
distinguish between cancer subtypes.

Guan X(1), Chance MR, Barnholtz-Sloan JS.

Author information: 
(1)Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, 11100 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH, USA.
jsb42@case.edu.

BACKGROUND: The identification of very small subsets of predictive variables is
an important topc that has not often been considered in the literature. In order 
to discover highly predictive yet compact gene set classifiers from whole genome 
expression data, a non-parametric, iterative algorithm, Splitting Random Forest
(SRF), was developed to robustly identify genes that distinguish between
molecular subtypes. The goal is to improve the prediction accuracy while
considering sparsity.
RESULTS: The optimal SRF 50 run (SRF50) gene classifiers for glioblastoma (GB),
breast (BC) and ovarian cancer (OC) subtypes had overall prediction rates
comparable to those from published datasets upon validation (80.1%-91.7%). The
SRF50 sets outperformed other methods by identifying compact gene sets needed for
distinguishing between tested cancer subtypes (10-200 fold fewer genes than ANOVA
or published gene sets). The SRF50 sets achieved superior and robust overall and 
subtype prediction accuracies when compared with single random forest (RF) and
the Top 50 ANOVA results (80.1% vs 77.8% for GB; 84.0% vs 74.1% for BC; 89.8% vs 
88.9% for OC in SRF50 vs single RF comparison; 80.1% vs 77.2% for GB; 84.0% vs
82.7% for BC; 89.8% vs 87.0% for OC in SRF50 vs Top 50 ANOVA comparison). There
was significant overlap between SRF50 and published gene sets, showing that SRF
identifies the relevant sub-sets of important gene lists. Through Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA), the overlap in "hub" genes between the SRF50 and
published genes sets were RB1, pK3R1, PDGFBB and ERK1/2 for GB; ESR1, MYC, NFkB
and ERK1/2 for BC; and Akt, FN1, NFkB, PDGFBB and ERK1/2 for OC.
CONCLUSIONS: The SRF approach is an effective driver of biomarker discovery
research that reduces the number of genes needed for robust classification,
dissects complex, high dimensional "omic" data and provides novel insights into
the cellular mechanisms that define cancer subtypes.

PMCID: PMC3444418
PMID: 22616791  [PubMed]


272. BMC Res Notes. 2012 May 22;5:248. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-5-248.

Differential expression of breast cancer-associated genes between stage- and
age-matched tumor specimens from African- and Caucasian-American Women diagnosed 
with breast cancer.

Grunda JM(1), Steg AD, He Q, Steciuk MR, Byan-Parker S, Johnson MR, Grizzle WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies suggest that the poorer breast cancer outcome observed
in African-American women (AAW) may, in part, result from underlying molecular
factors. The purpose of this study was to investigate gene expression differences
between Caucasian-American women (CAW) and AAW that may contribute to this poorer
prognosis.
METHODS: The expression of 84 genes involved in breast carcinoma prognosis,
response to therapy, estrogen signaling, and tumor aggressiveness was assessed in
age- and stage-matched CAW and AAW paraffin-embedded breast cancer specimens. The
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney Test was used to identify genes with a significant
difference in expression between CAW and AAW. To determine if the differentially 
expressed genes could segregate between the CAW and AAW, we performed
semi-supervised principal component analysis (SSPCA).
RESULTS: Twenty genes were differentially expressed between AAW and CAW. SSPCA
incorporating these 20 genes segregated AAW and CAW into two distinct groups. AAW
were significantly (p < 0.05) more likely to display aberrations in G(1)/S
cell-cycle regulatory genes, decreased expression of cell-adhesion genes, and low
to no expression of ESR1, PGR, ERBB2 and estrogen pathway targets.
CONCLUSIONS: The gene expression differences identified between AAW and CAW may
contribute to more aggressive disease, resistance to therapy, enhanced metastatic
potential and poor clinical outcome. These findings support the hypothesis that
breast cancer specimens collected from AAW display distinct gene expression
differences compared to similar tissues obtained from CAW. Additional
population-based studies are necessary to determine if these gene expression
variations contribute to the highly aggressive and treatment-resistant breast
cancer phenotype frequently observed in AAW.

PMCID: PMC3476447
PMID: 22616718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Clin Sarcoma Res. 2011 Jul 25;1(1):5. doi: 10.1186/2045-3329-1-5. Epub 2011 Jul
25.

Expression of aromatase and estrogen receptor alpha in chondrosarcoma, but no
beneficial effect of inhibiting estrogen signaling both in vitro and in vivo.

Meijer D, Gelderblom H, Karperien M, Cleton-Jansen AM, Hogendoorn PC, Bovee JV.

BACKGROUND: Chondrosarcomas are malignant cartilage-forming tumors which are
highly resistant to conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Estrogen
signaling is known to play an important role in proliferation and differentiation
of chondrocytes and in growth plate regulation at puberty. Our experiments focus 
on unraveling the role of estrogen signaling in the regulation of neoplastic
cartilage growth and on interference with estrogen signaling in chondrosarcomas
in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: We investigated the protein expression of estrogen receptor alpha
(ESR1), androgen receptor (AR), and aromatase in tumor specimens of various
chondrosarcoma subtypes, and (primary) chondrosarcoma cultures. Dose-response
curves were generated of conventional central chondrosarcoma cell lines cultured 
in the presence of 17-beta-estradiol, dihydrotestosterone,
4-androstene-3,17dione, 4-hydroxytamoxifen, fulvestrant and aromatase inhibitors.
In a pilot series, the effect of anastrozole (n=4) or exemestane (n=2) treatment 
in 6 chondrosarcoma patients with progressive disease was explored.
RESULTS: We showed protein expression of ESR1 and aromatase in a large majority
of all subtypes. Only a minority of the tumors showed few AR positive cells. The 
dose-response assays showed no effect of any of the compounds on proliferation of
conventional chondrosarcoma in vitro. The median progression-free survival of the
patients treated with aromatase inhibitors did not significantly deviate from
untreated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of ESR1 and aromatase in chondrosarcoma tumors and
primary cultures supports a possible role of estrogen signaling in chondrosarcoma
proliferation. However, our in vitro and pilot in vivo studies have shown no
effect of estrogen-signaling inhibition on tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC3372281
PMID: 22613849  [PubMed]


274. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36559. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036559. Epub 2012 May 11.

Quantitative in situ measurement of estrogen receptor mRNA predicts response to
tamoxifen.

Bordeaux JM(1), Cheng H, Welsh AW, Haffty BG, Lannin DR, Wu X, Su N, Ma XJ, Luo
Y, Rimm DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, United States of America.

PURPOSE: Quantification of mRNA has historically been done by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Recently, a robust method of
detection of mRNA utilizing in situ hybridization has been described that is
linear and shows high specificity with low background. Here we describe the use
of the AQUA method of quantitative immunofluorescence (QIF) for measuring mRNA in
situ using ESR1 (the estrogen receptor alpha gene) in breast cancer to determine 
its predictive value compared to Estrogen Receptor a (ER) protein.
METHODS: Messenger RNA for ER (ESR1) and Ubiquitin C (UbC) were visualized using 
RNAscope probes and levels were quantified by quantitative in situ hybridization 
(qISH) on two Yale breast cancer cohorts on tissue microarrays. ESR1 levels were 
compared to ER protein levels measured by QIF using the SP1 antibody.
RESULTS: ESR1 mRNA is reproducibly and specifically measurable by qISH on tissue 
collected from 1993 or later. ESR1 levels were correlated to ER protein levels in
a non-linear manner on two Yale cohorts. High levels of ESR1 were found to be
predictive of response to tamoxifin.
CONCLUSION: Quantification of mRNA using qISH may allow assessment of large
cohorts with minimal formalin fixed, paraffin embedded tissue. Exploratory data
using this method suggests that measurement of ESR1 mRNA levels may be predictive
of response to endocrine therapy in a manner that is different from the
predictive value of ER.

PMCID: PMC3350519
PMID: 22606272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Front Neurosci. 2012 May 11;6:63. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2012.00063. eCollection
2012.

Sex-specific modulation of gene expression networks in murine hypothalamus.

Mozhui K(1), Lu L, Armstrong WE, Williams RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center Memphis, TN, USA.

The hypothalamus contains nuclei and cell populations that are critical in
reproduction and that differ significantly between the sexes in structure and
function. To examine the molecular and genetic basis for these differences, we
quantified gene expression in the hypothalamus of 39 pairs of adult male and
female mice belonging to the BXD strains. This experimental design enabled us to 
define hypothalamic gene coexpression networks and provided robust estimates of
absolute expression differences. As expected, sex has the strongest effect on the
expression of genes on the X and Y chromosomes (e.g., Uty, Xist, Kdm6a).
Transcripts associated with the endocrine system and neuropeptide signaling also 
differ significantly. Sex-differentiated transcripts often have well delimited
expression within specific hypothalamic nuclei that have roles in reproduction.
For instance, the estrogen receptor (Esr1) and neurokinin B (Tac2) genes have
intense expression in the medial preoptic and arcuate nuclei and comparatively
high expression in females. Despite the strong effect of sex on single
transcripts, the global pattern of covariance among transcripts is well
preserved, and consequently, males and females have well matched coexpression
modules. However, there are sex-specific hub genes in functionally equivalent
modules. For example, only in males is the Y-linked gene, Uty, a highly connected
transcript in a network that regulates chromatin modification and gene
transcription. In females, the X chromosome paralog, Kdm6a, takes the place of
Uty in the same network. We also find significant effect of sex on genetic
regulation and the same network in males and females can be associated with
markedly different regulatory loci. With the exception of a few sex-specific
modules, our analysis reveals a system in which sets of functionally related
transcripts are organized into stable sex-independent networks that are
controlled at a higher level by sex-specific modulators.

PMCID: PMC3350311
PMID: 22593731  [PubMed]


276. Asian J Androl. 2012 Sep;14(5):766-72. doi: 10.1038/aja.2012.27. Epub 2012 May
14.

A pilot study of the association between genetic polymorphisms involved in
estrogen signaling and infant male genital phenotypes.

Sathyanarayana S(1), Swan SH, Farin FM, Wilkerson HW, Bamshad M, Grady R, Zhou C,
Schwartz SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
sheela.sathyanarayana@seattlechildrens.org

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes that influence development of the
male reproductive tract have been associated with male genitourinary
abnormalities. However, no studies have tested the relationship between SNPs and 
intermediate phenotypes such as anogenital distance (AGD), anoscrotal distance
(ASD) and penile width (PW). We tested whether 24 common SNPs in eight genes that
influence male genital development were associated with intermediate phenotypes
in 106 healthy male infants from the Study for Future Families. We used DNA from 
buccal smears and linear regression models to assess the relationship between
anogenital measurements and SNP genotypes with adjustment for covariates. We
found that the rs2077647 G allele, located in the coding region of estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1), was associated with a shorter AGD (P=0.02; -7.3 mm, 95%
confidence interval (CI): -11.6 to -3.1), and the rs10475 T allele, located in
the 3' untranslated region of activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3), was
associated with a shorter ASD (-4.3 mm, 95% CI: -7.2 to -1.4), although this
result was not significant (P=0.07) after controlling for multiple comparisons.
We observed no association between PW and the SNPs tested. Minor alleles for two 
SNPs in genes that regulate estrogen signaling during male genital development
were associated with AGD and ASD, although the significance of the association
was marginal. Our findings suggest that AGD and ASD are influenced by heritable
factors in genes known to be associated with frank male genital abnormalities
such as hypospadias and cryptorchidism.

PMCID: PMC3734991
PMID: 22580635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Pharmacol Rep. 2012;64(1):185-90.

Effect of ESR1 and ESR2 gene polymorphisms on rheumatoid arthritis treatment with
methotrexate.

Pawlik A(1), Dziedziejko V, Kurzawski M, Safranow K, Kotrych D, Bohatyrewicz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacokinetics and Therapeutic Drug Monitoring, Pomeranian
Medical University, Powstanców Wlkp. 72, PL 70-111 Szczecin, Poland.
pawand@poczta.onet.pl

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a complex autoimmune disease with clinical
prevalence in women. Moreover, women have poorer response to treatment than men. 
Possible reasons for gender differences in response to treatment could be
explained on the basis of sex hormones and their receptors. The optimal strategy 
in treatment of RA is to use effective disease modifying antirheumatic drugs
(DMARDs) such as methotrexate (MTX). The aim of the present study was to examine 
the association between polymorphisms in the ESR1 and ESR2 genes and the response
to treatment of RA patients with methotrexate. The study was carried out on 156
women diagnosed with active rheumatoid arthritis, treated with MTX. Good
responders were defined as patients who were receiving MTX and had a DAS28 of =
2.4 after 6 months of therapy (patients with remission of disease symptoms).
Poor-responders were defined as patients who were receiving MTX and had a DAS28
of > 2.4. There were no statistically significant associations of ESR1 and ESR2
gene polymorphisms with response to treatment. The results of the present study
suggest that the polymorphisms rs9340799:A>G and rs2234693:T>C in ESR1 gene and
rs4986938:G>A and 1256049:G>A in ESR2 gene are not associated with response to RA
treatment with MTX.

PMID: 22580535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Proteomics. 2012 Jul 19;75(14):4555-69. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.04.032. Epub 
2012 May 2.

Identification and quantification of concentration-dependent biomarkers in
MCF-7/BOS cells exposed to 17ß-estradiol by 2-D DIGE and label-free proteomics.

Collodoro M(1), Lemaire P, Eppe G, Bertrand V, Dobson R, Mazzucchelli G, Widart
J, De Pauw E, De Pauw-Gillet MC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Histology-Cytology, GIGA-R and CART, University of Liège, Allée 
de la Chimie 3, Sart-Tilman, B 4000 Liège, Belgium.

This paper reports the identification of biomarkers resulting from the exposure
of MCF-7/BOS cells to 17ß-estradiol (E(2)). The biomarkers were identified using 
2 independent and complementary techniques, 2-D DIGE/MALDI-TOF peptide mass
fingerprint, and 2-D UPLC-ESI MS/MS. They were identified from the cytosolic
fractions of cells treated for 24h with mitogenic concentrations of 1, 30 and 500
pM of 17ß-estradiol. Five biomarkers were up-regulated proteins, namely HSP 74,
EF2, FKBP4, EF1 and GDIB and one was a down-regulated protein, namely K2C8. Three
of these proteins, EF2, FKBP4 and K2C8 are implicated in a network centered on
the estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2 as well as on AKT1. After the discovery
phase, three biomarkers were selected to test the presence of estrogens using
selected reaction monitoring (SRM). They were monitored using SRM after
incubation of MCF-7/BOS in the presence of E(2) for confirmation or selected
xenoestrogens. Daidzein, coumestrol and enterolactone induced an up-regulation of
EF2 and FKPB4 proteins, while tamoxifen and resveratrol induced a
down-regulation. The exposure of all phytoestrogens induced the down-regulation
of K2C8. These markers form a preliminary molecular signature that can be used
when testing the estrogenic activity of xenobiotics, either pure or in mixtures.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22580036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Prostate. 2013 Jan;73(1):1-10. doi: 10.1002/pros.22534. Epub 2012 May 1.

Association of variants in estrogen-related pathway genes with prostate cancer
risk.

Holt SK(1), Kwon EM, Fu R, Kolb S, Feng Z, Ostrander EA, Stanford JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. skholt@fhcrc.org

BACKGROUND: Through mediation of estrogen receptors, estradiol has been shown to 
have both carcinogenic and anti-carcinogenic effects on the prostate. We
performed a population-based case-control study to investigate variants in
estrogen-related genes ESR1, ESR2, CYP19A1, CYP1A1, and CYP1B1 and the potential 
association with risk of prostate cancer (PCa).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We evaluated PCa risk conferred by 73 single nucleotide
polymorphisms in 1,304 incident PCa cases and 1,266 age-matched controls.
Analysis included stratification by clinical features and assessment of
environmental modifiers.
RESULTS: There was evidence of altered risk of developing PCa for variants in
ESR1, CYP1A1, and CYP1B1, however, only CYP1B1 rs1056836 retained significance
after adjustment for multiple comparisons. An association with risk for more
aggressive PCa was observed for variants in ESR1, ESR2, and CYP19A1, but none was
significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons. There was no effect
modification by obesity.
CONCLUSIONS: Germline genetic variation of these estrogen pathway genes may
contribute to risk of PCa. Additional studies to validate these results and
examine the functional consequence of validated variants are warranted.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3544476
PMID: 22549291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Jun 20;211(3):246-56. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2012.04.001. Epub 
2012 Apr 11.

Zearalenone exposure modulates the expression of ABC transporters and nuclear
receptors in pregnant rats and fetal liver.

Koraichi F(1), Videmann B, Mazallon M, Benahmed M, Prouillac C, Lecoeur S.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, VetAgro Sup, USC 1233 INRA-VetAgro Sup, Métabolisme et
Toxicologie Comparée des Xénobiotiques, F-69280 MARCY L'ETOILE, France.

The mycotoxin zearalenone (ZEN) is produced by a variety of Fusarium fungi and
contaminates numerous cereals, fruits and vegetables. Interacting with the
estrogen receptors, ZEN and reduced metabolites zearalenols cause hormonal
effects in animals. Few data are available on the effects of repeated exposure to
ZEN, particularly during pregnancy. The aim of our work was to assess the impact 
of this toxin on the expression of ABC transporters and nuclear receptors in
fetal liver and pregnant rats that were exposed daily (gestation day 7-20) to 1
mg/kg ZEN. Significant variations were observed, depending on the tissue type,
the tissue origin (maternal or fetal), and the time of analysis after the last
exposure to ZEN (4 h or 24 h). The modulations of expression were independent of 
the magnitude of tissue impregnation by ZEN and its metabolites. The maternal
uterus was the most sensitive tissue: Abcb1a, Abcb1b and Abcg2 mRNA and protein
expressions were induced at both times, while Abcc1, Abcc3 and Esr1 mRNA and
protein expressions were inhibited then induced 4 h and 24 h after exposure,
respectively. In the fetal liver, Abcb1a and Esr1 protein expression was
inhibited at both times, while mRNA expression was induced 24 h after the last
exposure to ZEN. These results suggested that ZEN exposure could impact maternal 
and fetal exposure to ABC transporters substrates, and influence fetus
development through nuclear receptor modulation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22521637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 1;287(23):19622-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.297663. Epub 2012
Apr 18.

Estrogen-induced expression of Fos-related antigen 1 (FRA-1) regulates uterine
stromal differentiation and remodeling.

Das A(1), Li Q, Laws MJ, Kaya H, Bagchi MK, Bagchi IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illlinois 61802, USA.

Concerted actions of estrogen and progesterone via their cognate receptors
orchestrate changes in the uterine tissue, regulating implantation during early
pregnancy. The uterine stromal cells undergo steroid-dependent differentiation
into morphologically and functionally distinct decidual cells, which support
embryonic growth and survival. The hormone-regulated pathways underlying this
unique cellular transformation are not fully understood. Previous studies in the 
mouse revealed that, following embryo attachment, de novo synthesis of estrogen
by the decidual cells is critical for stromal differentiation. In this study we
report that Fos-related antigen 1 (FRA-1), a member of the Fos family of
transcription factors, is a downstream target of regulation by intrauterine
estrogen. FRA-1 expression was localized in the differentiating uterine stromal
cells surrounding the implanted embryo. Attenuation of estrogen receptor a (Esr1)
expression by siRNA mediated silencing in primary uterine stromal cells
suppressed FRA-1 expression. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation
demonstrated direct recruitment of ESR1 to an estrogen response element in the
Fra-1 promoter. Down-regulation of Fra-1 expression during in vitro
decidualization blocked stromal differentiation and resulted in a marked decrease
in stromal cell migration. Interestingly, FRA-1 controls the expression of matrix
metalloproteinases MMP9 and MMP13, which are critical modulators of stromal
extracellular matrix remodeling. Collectively, these results suggest that FRA-1, 
induced in response to estrogen signaling via ESR1, is a key regulator of stromal
differentiation and remodeling during early pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3365997
PMID: 22514284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34828. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034828. Epub 2012 Apr 12.

Potential role of aromatase over estrogen receptor gene polymorphisms in migraine
susceptibility: a case control study from North India.

Ghosh J(1), Joshi G, Pradhan S, Mittal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences (SGPGIMS), Lucknow, India.

BACKGROUND: The present study was undertaken to find out the role of estrogen
pathway related gene polymorphisms in susceptibility to migraine in Northern
Indian population. Aromatase, CYP19A1 (rs10046 and rs4646); estrogen receptors,
ESR1 (rs2234693, rs1801132, rs2228480 and rs9340799) and ESR2 (rs1271572 and
rs1256049) polymorphisms were selected for the present study.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The patients were recruited in two cohorts -
primary (207) and replicative (127) along with 200 healthy controls and genotyped
for various polymorphisms. Logistic regression analysis was applied for
statistical analyses. The results were validated in the replicative cohort and
pooled by meta analysis using Fisher's and Mantel-Haenszel test. Furthermore,
Benjamini - Hochberg false discovery rate test was used to correct for multiple
comparisons. CYP19A1 rs10046 and CYP19A1 rs4646 polymorphisms were found to
confer risk and protective effect, respectively. Out of four ESR1 polymorphisms, 
only rs2234693 variant allele was significantly associated in migraine with aura.
No significant associations were observed for ESR2 polymorphisms. Significant
haplotypes were identified for CYP19A1 and ESR1 polymorphisms. Gene- gene
interactions of genotypes as well as haplotypes were observed for CYP19A1- ESR1
showing both risk and protective combinations.
CONCLUSION: We strongly suggest CYP19A1 polymorphisms to be the major
contributing factors in migraine susceptibility instead of genetic variants of
estrogen receptors.

PMCID: PMC3325278
PMID: 22511967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Exp Dermatol. 2012 May;21(5):390-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2012.01469.x.

Selected variants of the steroid-5-alpha-reductase isoforms SRD5A1 and SRD5A2 and
the sex steroid hormone receptors ESR1, ESR2 and PGR: no association with female 
pattern hair loss identified.

Redler S, Tazi-Ahnini R, Drichel D, Birch MP, Brockschmidt FF, Dobson K, Giehl
KA, Refke M, Kluck N, Kruse R, Lutz G, Wolff H, Böhm M, Becker T, Nöthen MM, Betz
RC, Messenger A.

Female pattern hair loss (FPHL) is a common disorder with a complex mode of
inheritance. Although understanding of its etiopathogenesis is incomplete, an
interaction between genetic and hormonal factors is assumed to be important. The 
involvement of an androgen-dependent pathway and sex steroid hormones is the most
likely hypothesis. We therefore selected a total of 21 variants from the
steroid-5-alpha-reductase isoforms SRD5A1 and SRD5A2, the sex steroid hormone
receptors ESR1, ESR2 (oestrogen receptor) and PGR (progesterone receptor) and
genotyped these in a case-control sample of 198 patients (145 UK; 53 German
patients) and 329 controls (179 UK; 150 German). None of these variants showed
any significant association, either in the overall UK and German samples or in
the subgroup analyses. In summary, the present results, while based on a limited 
selection of gene variants, do not point to the involvement of SRD5A1, SRD5A2,
ESR1, ESR2 or PGR in FPHL.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22509838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Genome Res. 2012 Jun;22(6):1015-25. doi: 10.1101/gr.133280.111. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Differential DNase I hypersensitivity reveals factor-dependent chromatin
dynamics.

He HH(1), Meyer CA, Chen MW, Jordan VC, Brown M, Liu XS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA;

Transcription factor cistromes are highly cell-type specific. Chromatin
accessibility, histone modifications, and nucleosome occupancy have all been
found to play a role in defining these binding locations. Here, we show that
hormone-induced DNase I hypersensitivity changes (<U+0394>DHS) are highly predictive of 
androgen receptor (AR) and estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) binding in prostate cancer 
and breast cancer cells, respectively. While chromatin structure prior to
receptor binding and nucleosome occupancy after binding are strikingly different 
for ESR1 and AR, <U+0394>DHS is highly predictive for both. AR binding is associated
with changes in both local nucleosome occupancy and DNase I hypersensitivity. In 
contrast, while global ESR1 binding is unrelated to changes in nucleosome
occupancy, DNase I hypersensitivity dynamics are also predictive of the ESR1
cistrome. These findings suggest that AR and ESR1 have distinct modes of
interaction with chromatin and that DNase I hypersensitivity dynamics provides a 
general approach for predicting cell-type specific cistromes.

PMCID: PMC3371710
PMID: 22508765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(4):e1002464. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002464. Epub
2012 Apr 5.

RNA-Seq mapping and detection of gene fusions with a suffix array algorithm.

Sakarya O(1), Breu H, Radovich M, Chen Y, Wang YN, Barbacioru C, Utiramerur S,
Whitley PP, Brockman JP, Vatta P, Zhang Z, Popescu L, Muller MW, Kudlingar V,
Garg N, Li CY, Kong BS, Bodeau JP, Nutter RC, Gu J, Bramlett KS, Ichikawa JK,
Hyland FC, Siddiqui AS.

Author information: 
(1)Life Technologies, Foster City, California, United States of America.
osakarya@yahoo.com

High-throughput RNA sequencing enables quantification of transcripts (both known 
and novel), exon/exon junctions and fusions of exons from different genes.
Discovery of gene fusions-particularly those expressed with low abundance- is a
challenge with short- and medium-length sequencing reads. To address this
challenge, we implemented an RNA-Seq mapping pipeline within the LifeScope
software. We introduced new features including filter and junction mapping,
annotation-aided pairing rescue and accurate mapping quality values. We combined 
this pipeline with a Suffix Array Spliced Read (SASR) aligner to detect chimeric 
transcripts. Performing paired-end RNA-Seq of the breast cancer cell line MCF-7
using the SOLiD system, we called 40 gene fusions among over 120,000 splicing
junctions. We validated 36 of these 40 fusions with TaqMan assays, of which 25
were expressed in MCF-7 but not the Human Brain Reference. An intra-chromosomal
gene fusion involving the estrogen receptor alpha gene ESR1, and another
involving the RPS6KB1 (Ribosomal protein S6 kinase beta-1) were recurrently
expressed in a number of breast tumor cell lines and a clinical tumor sample.

PMCID: PMC3320572
PMID: 22496636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Front Pharmacol. 2012 Mar 30;3:54. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2012.00054. eCollection
2012.

Whole genome amplification of DNA for genotyping pharmacogenetics candidate
genes.

Philips S(1), Rae JM, Oesterreich S, Hayes DF, Stearns V, Henry NL, Storniolo AM,
Flockhart DA, Skaar TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Indiana University 
School of Medicine Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Whole genome amplification (WGA) technologies can be used to amplify genomic DNA 
when only small amounts of DNA are available. The Multiple Displacement
Amplification Phi polymerase based amplification has been shown to accurately
amplify DNA for a variety of genotyping assays; however, it has not been tested
for genotyping many of the clinically relevant genes important for
pharmacogenetic studies, such as the cytochrome P450 genes, that are typically
difficult to genotype due to multiple pseudogenes, copy number variations, and
high similarity to other related genes. We evaluated whole genome amplified
samples for Taqman() genotyping of SNPs in a variety of pharmacogenetic genes.
In 24 DNA samples from the Coriell human diversity panel, the call rates, and
concordance between amplified (~200-fold amplification) and unamplified samples
was 100% for two SNPs in CYP2D6 and one in ESR1. In samples from a breast cancer 
clinical trial (Trial 1), we compared the genotyping results in samples before
and after WGA for three SNPs in CYP2D6, one SNP in CYP2C19, one SNP in CYP19A1,
two SNPs in ESR1, and two SNPs in ESR2. The concordance rates were all >97%.
Finally, we compared the allele frequencies of 143 SNPs determined in Trial 1
(whole genome amplified DNA) to the allele frequencies determined in unamplified 
DNA samples from a separate trial (Trial 2) that enrolled a similar population.
The call rates and allele frequencies between the two trials were 98 and 99.7%,
respectively. We conclude that the whole genome amplified DNA is suitable for
Taqman() genotyping for a wide variety of pharmacogenetically relevant SNPs.

PMCID: PMC3315790
PMID: 22479249  [PubMed]


287. Environ Sci Technol. 2012 May 1;46(9):5183-92. doi: 10.1021/es300231y. Epub 2012 
Apr 16.

Progestins and antiprogestins affect gene expression in early development in
zebrafish (Danio rerio) at environmental concentrations.

Zucchi S(1), Castiglioni S, Fent K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences Northwestern Switzerland, School of Life
Sciences, Gründenstrasse 40, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland.

Progesterone (P4) and synthetic progestins (gestagens) from contraceptives and
hormone therapy occur in treated wastewater and surface water, and they may have 
adverse effects on aquatic organisms. Little is known about the molecular and
reproductive effects of P4 and synthetic progestins in fish, and effects of the
antiprogestin mifepristone (RU486, an abortive) are unknown. We aimed at
elucidating effects on the hormone system by quantitative determination of
transcriptional changes of target genes induced by 2, 20, and 200 ng/L P4, RU486,
norethindrone (NET), and levonorgestrel (LNG). We exposed zebrafish embryos for
144 h post fertilization (hpf) to these compounds and analyzed expressional
changes of ar, esr1, vtg1, hsd17ß3, and progesterone (pgr), mineralo- (mr), and
glucocorticoid (gr) receptors, each at 48, 96, and 144 hpf. Concentrations of NET
and LNG were constant during exposure, while P4 and RU486 decreased. P4 and RU486
were the most potent steroids. Significant up to 4-fold induction of pgr, ar, mr,
and hsd17b3 occurred at 2 ng/L P4 and higher, while RU484 inhibited pgr
expression. NET and LNG modulated some transcripts mainly above 2 ng/L. The
expressional chances occurring at environmental levels may translate to negative 
interference with differentiation of brain and gonads, and consequently
reproduction.

© 2012 American Chemical Society

PMID: 22475373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Rheumatol Int. 2013 Mar;33(3):575-82. doi: 10.1007/s00296-012-2386-4. Epub 2012
Mar 31.

Hormonal parameters and sex hormone receptor gene polymorphisms in men with
autoimmune diseases.

Doukas C(1), Saltiki K, Mantzou A, Cimponeriu A, Terzidis K, Sarika L, Mavrikakis
M, Sfikakis P, Alevizaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Therapeutics, Athens University School of Medicine,
Athens, Greece.

Autoimmune diseases (ADs) are more common in women than in men. Sex hormones may 
play a role. Sex hormone receptors (SHR) are expressed in cells of the immune
system. We investigated the possible role of hormonal parameters and of common
polymorphisms of the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1), beta (ESR2), and androgen
receptor (AR) genes in the appearance of AD in men. 277 men were studied; 125
with =1 AD: Hashimoto's autoimmune thyroiditis (n = 65), Graves' disease (n =
12), SLE (n = 10), and RA (n = 38). 152 were controls. Hormonal and biochemical
parameters were measured after discontinuation for =1 month of any corticosteroid
therapy. ESR1 PvuII, ESR2 AluI, and the AR (CAG)n repeats polymorphisms were
analyzed. AD patients had higher estradiol levels (31.32 ± 12.10, controls 20.37 
± 7.91 pg/ml, p < 0.001). In multivariate analysis, significant predictors for AD
were estrogen and BMI. The allele frequency of ESR1 PvuII and ESR2 AluI did not
differ between patients and controls (AD: 47.8 %, 37.6 %; controls 49.8 %, 39.9
%). The distribution of (CAG)n did not differ between groups. In AD group,
shorter (CAG)n alleles were associated with younger age of AD onset (short: 38.52
± 14.8, long: 47.14 ± 17.34 years, p = 0.048). Carriers of ESR1 PvuII presented
less frequently =2 AD (carriers 6.5 %, non-carriers 25.1 %, p = 0.019); carriers 
of AluI had lower SHBG levels and higher <U+0392><U+039C><U+0399> compared to non-carriers (p < 0.04).
Higher estradiol may play a role in AD in men. Distribution of SHR gene
polymorphisms is similar between patients and controls. Shorter AR (CAG)n repeats
may predispose for younger AD onset. Coexistence of =2 AD is less frequent in
carriers of ESR1 PvuII. ESR2 AluI may adversely affect obesity parameters.

PMID: 22466402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34112. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034112. Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Hormone treatment, estrogen receptor polymorphisms and mortality: a prospective
cohort study.

Ryan J(1), Canonico M, Carcaillon L, Carrière I, Scali J, Dartigues JF, Dufouil
C, Ritchie K, Scarabin PY, Ancelin ML.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1061, Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France.
joanne.ryan@inserm.fr

BACKGROUND: The association between hormone treatment (HT) and mortality remains 
controversial. This study aimed to determine whether the risk of mortality
associated with HT use varies depending on the specific characteristics of
treatment and genetic variability in terms of the estrogen receptor.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A prospective, population-based study of 5135
women aged 65 years and older who were recruited from three cities in France and 
followed over six years. Detailed information related to HT use was obtained and 
five estrogen receptor polymorphisms were genotyped. The total follow-up was
25,436 person-years and during this time 352 women died. Cancer (36.4%) and
cardiovascular disease (19.3%) were the major causes of death. Cox proportional
hazards models adjusted for age, education, centre, living situation,
comorbidity, depression, physical and mental incapacities, indicated no
significant association between HT and mortality, regardless of the type or
duration of treatment, or the age at initiation. However, the association between
HT and all-cause or cancer-related mortality varied across women, with
significant interactions identified with three estrogen receptor polymorphisms
(p-values<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.004 to 0.03) in adjusted analyses. Women carrying the C allele of
ESR1 rs2234693 had a decreased risk of all-cause mortality with HT (HR: 0.42, 95%
CI: 0.18-0.97), while in stark contrast, those homozygous for the T allele had a 
significantly increased risk of cancer-related mortality (HR: 3.18, 95% CI:
1.23-8.20). The findings were similar for ESR1 rs9340799 and ESR2 rs1271572.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The risk of mortality was not associated with HT
duration, type or age at initiation. It was however not equal across all women,
with some women appearing genetically more vulnerable to the effects of HT in
terms of their estrogen receptor genotype. These findings, if confirmed in
another independent study, may help explain the differential susceptibility of
women to the beneficial or adverse effects of HT.

PMCID: PMC3311587
PMID: 22457817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8(4):522-32. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.4164. Epub 2012 Mar 22.

TWIST represses estrogen receptor-alpha expression by recruiting the NuRD protein
complex in breast cancer cells.

Fu J(1), Zhang L, He T, Xiao X, Liu X, Wang L, Yang L, Yang M, Zhang T, Chen R,
Xu J.

Author information: 
(1)The Research Center for Preclinical Medicine, Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou
City, Sichuan, China. fujunjiang@hotmail.com

Loss of estrogen receptor a (ERa) expression and gain of TWIST (TWIST1)
expression in breast tumors correlate with increased disease recurrence and
metastasis and poor disease-free survival. However, the molecular and functional 
regulatory relationship between TWIST and ERa are unclear. In this study, we
found TWIST was associated with a chromatin region in intron 7 of the human ESR1 
gene coding for ERa. This association of TWIST efficiently recruited the
nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) repressor complex to this region,
which subsequently decreased histone H3K9 acetylation, increased histone H3K9
methylation and repressed ESR1 expression in breast cancer cells. In agreement
with these molecular events, TWIST expression was inversely correlated with ERa
expression in both breast cancer cell lines and human breast ductal carcinomas.
Forced expression of TWIST in TWIST-negative and ERa-positive breast cancer cells
such as T47D and MCF-7 cells reduced ERa expression, while knockdown of TWIST in 
TWIST-positive and ERa-negative breast cancer cells such as MDA-MB-435 and 4T1
cells increased ERa expression. Furthermore, inhibition of histone deacetylase
(HDAC) activity including the one in NuRD complex significantly increased ERa
expression in MDA-MB-435 and 4T1 cells. HDAC inhibition together with TWIST
knockdown did not further increase ERa expression in 4T1 and MDA-MB-435 cells.
These results demonstrate that TWIST/NuRD represses ERa expression in breast
cancer cells. Therefore, TWIST may serve as a potential molecular target for
converting ERa-negative breast cancers to ERa-positive breast cancers, allowing
these cancers to restore their sensitivity to endocrine therapy with selective
ERa antagonists such as tamoxifen and raloxifene.

PMCID: PMC3314193
PMID: 22457607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 27;14(2):R56.

A genome-wide association study identifies a breast cancer risk variant in ERBB4 
at 2q34: results from the Seoul Breast Cancer Study.

Kim HC(1), Lee JY, Sung H, Choi JY, Park SK, Lee KM, Kim YJ, Go MJ, Li L, Cho YS,
Park M, Kim DJ, Oh JH, Kim JW, Jeon JP, Jeon SY, Min H, Kim HM, Park J, Yoo KY,
Noh DY, Ahn SH, Lee MH, Kim SW, Lee JW, Park BW, Park WY, Kim EH, Kim MK, Han W, 
Lee SA, Matsuo K, Shen CY, Wu PE, Hsiung CN, Lee JY, Kim HL, Han BG, Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genome Science, National Institute of Health, Osong Health
Technology Administration Complex, Chungcheongbuk-do, 363-951, Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Although approximately 25 common genetic susceptibility loci have
been identified to be independently associated with breast cancer risk through
genome-wide association studies (GWAS), the genetic risk variants reported to
date only explain a small fraction of the heritability of breast cancer.
Furthermore, GWAS-identified loci were primarily identified in women of European 
descent.
METHODS: To evaluate previously identified loci in Korean women and to identify
additional novel breast cancer susceptibility variants, we conducted a
three-stage GWAS that included 6,322 cases and 5,897 controls.
RESULTS: In the validation study using Stage I of the 2,273 cases and 2,052
controls, seven GWAS-identified loci [5q11.2/MAP3K1 (rs889312 and rs16886165),
5p15.2/ROPN1L (rs1092913), 5q12/MRPS30 (rs7716600), 6q25.1/ESR1 (rs2046210 and
rs3734802), 8q24.21 (rs1562430), 10q26.13/FGFR2 (rs10736303), and 16q12.1/TOX3
(rs4784227 and rs3803662)] were significantly associated with breast cancer risk 
in Korean women (Ptrend < 0.05). To identify additional genetic risk variants, we
selected the most promising 17 SNPs in Stage I and replicated these SNPs in 2,052
cases and 2,169 controls (Stage II). Four SNPs were further evaluated in 1,997
cases and 1,676 controls (Stage III). SNP rs13393577 at chromosome 2q34, located 
in the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 4 (ERBB4) gene, showed a consistent
association with breast cancer risk with combined odds ratios (95% CI) of 1.53
(1.37-1.70) (combined P for trend = 8.8 × 10-14).
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that seven breast cancer susceptibility loci, which
were previously identified in European and/or Chinese populations, could be
directly replicated in Korean women. Furthermore, this study provides strong
evidence implicating rs13393577 at 2q34 as a new risk variant for breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3446390
PMID: 22452962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Cancer Causes Control. 2012 May;23(5):671-81. doi: 10.1007/s10552-012-9925-x.
Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Estrogen-related genes and their contribution to racial differences in breast
cancer risk.

Reding KW(1), Chen C, Lowe K, Doody DR, Carlson CS, Chen CT, Houck J, Weiss LK,
Marchbanks PA, Bernstein L, Spirtas R, McDonald JA, Strom BL, Burkman RT, Simon
MS, Liff JM, Daling JR, Malone KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA. kreding@u.washington.edu

Racial differences in breast cancer risk, including the risks of hormone receptor
subtypes of breast cancer, have been previously reported. We evaluated whether
variation in genes related to estrogen metabolism (COMT, CYP1A1, CYP1B1, CYP17A1,
CYP19A1, ESR1, GSTM1, GSTP1, GSTT1, HSD17B1, SULT1A1, and UGT1A1) contributes to 
breast cancer risk and/or racial differences in risk within the CARE study, a
multi-centered, population-based case-control study of breast cancer. Genetic
variation was assessed as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), haplotypes, and
SNP-hormone therapy (HT) interactions within a subset of 1,644 cases and 1,451
controls, including 949 Black women (493 cases and 456 controls), sampled from
the CARE study population. No appreciable associations with breast cancer risk
were detected for single SNPs or haplotypes in women overall. We detected SNP-HT 
interactions in women overall within CYP1B1 (rs1800440; p (het) = 0.003) and
within CYP17A1 (rs743572; p (het) = 0.009) in which never users of HT were at a
decreased risk of breast cancer, while ever users were at a non-significant
increased risk. When investigated among racial groups, we detected evidence of an
SNP-HT interaction with CYP1B1 in White women (p value = 0.02) and with CYP17A1
in Black women (p value = 0.04). This analysis suggests that HT use may modify
the effect of variation in estrogen-related genes on breast cancer risk, which
may affect Black and White women to a different extent.

PMCID: PMC3356164
PMID: 22418777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Oncologist. 2012;17(4):492-8. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2012-0007. Epub 2012 Mar
14.

Agreement in risk prediction between the 21-gene recurrence score assay (Oncotype
DX®) and the PAM50 breast cancer intrinsic Classifier in early-stage estrogen
receptor-positive breast cancer.

Kelly CM(1), Bernard PS, Krishnamurthy S, Wang B, Ebbert MT, Bastien RR, Boucher 
KM, Young E, Iwamoto T, Pusztai L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland.

PURPOSE: To compare risk assignment by PAM50 Breast Cancer Intrinsic Classifier 
and Oncotype DX_Recurrence Score (RS) in the same population.
METHODS: RNA was extracted from 151 estrogen receptor (ER)+ stage I-II breast
cancers and gene expression profiled using PAM50 "intrinsic" subtyping test.
RESULTS: One hundred eight cases had complete molecular information; 103 (95%)
were classified as luminal A (n = 76) or luminal B (n = 27). Ninety-two percent
(n = 98) had a low (n = 59) or intermediate (n = 39) RS. Among luminal A cancers,
70% had low (n = 53) and the remainder (n = 23) had an intermediate RS. Among
luminal B cancers, nine were high (33%) and 13 were intermediate (48%) by the RS.
Almost all cancers with a high RS were classified as luminal B (90%, n = 9). One 
high RS cancer was identified as basal-like and had low ER/ESR1 and low human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) expression by quantitative polymerase
chain reaction in both assays. The majority of low RS cases were luminal A (83%, 
n = 53). Importantly, half of the intermediate RS cancers were re-categorized as 
low risk luminal A subtype by PAM50.
CONCLUSION: There is good agreement between the two assays for high (i.e.,
luminal B or RS > 31) and low (i.e., luminal B or RS < 18) prognostic risk
assignment but PAM50 assigns more patients to the low risk category. About half
of the intermediate RS group was reclassified as luminal A by PAM50.

PMCID: PMC3336833
PMID: 22418568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2012 Aug;91(8):911-6. doi:
10.1111/j.1600-0412.2012.01393.x. Epub 2012 May 1.

Genetic polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor-a gene and the risk of endometrial
cancer: a meta-analysis.

Wang Y(1), Cui M, Zheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Hospice Ward Library, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, China. wangym1@sj-hospital.org

Estrogen receptor-a is a key mediator of the estrogen response in endometrial
tissue. The most-studied gene variants are the PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms,
which may be associated with altered sensitivity to estrogen. However, studies
evaluating the associations between these polymorphisms and endometrial cancer
risk have produced controversial conclusions. To explore a more robust estimate
of the role of estrogen receptor-a polymorphisms in endometrial carcinogenesis,
we searched all published articles indexed in PubMed, Web of Science, EBSCO,
Highwire and the CNKI database from 1995 to 2010. Data were independently
extracted by two reviewers using a standardized data extraction form. Overall,
the meta-analysis included 1944 cases and 3075 controls for PvuII polymorphisms, 
and 1831 cases and 2875 controls for XbaI polymorphisms. Our results did not show
any statistically significant association between endometrial cancer risk and
either PvuII or XbaI polymorphisms. However, PvuII polymorphisms, both the CT and
the CC genotypes, significantly increased the risk of endometrial cancer in an
Asian-Australian population (pooled OR = 1.50, 95%CI 1.09-2.08 and pooled OR =
1.55, 95%CI 1.08-2.22, respectively). The CC genotype significantly decreased the
risk of endometrial cancer (pooled odds ratio 0.77, 95% confidence interval
0.64-0.94) in a European population. In contrast, the stratified analysis
suggested that the XbaI polymorphism was not significantly associated with
endometrial cancer between different populations. This meta-analysis provides
evidence that PvuII polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene, which encodes for estrogen
receptor-a, could modify the susceptibility to endometrial cancer. However, the
genetic effect varied between different geographical regions for unknown reasons.

© 2012 The Authors Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica© 2012 Nordic
Federation of Societies of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

PMID: 22404101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(2):e1002532. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002532. Epub 2012 Feb 
23.

Genome-wide association study in east Asians identifies novel susceptibility loci
for breast cancer.

Long J(1), Cai Q, Sung H, Shi J, Zhang B, Choi JY, Wen W, Delahanty RJ, Lu W, Gao
YT, Shen H, Park SK, Chen K, Shen CY, Ren Z, Haiman CA, Matsuo K, Kim MK, Khoo
US, Iwasaki M, Zheng Y, Xiang YB, Gu K, Rothman N, Wang W, Hu Z, Liu Y, Yoo KY,
Noh DY, Han BG, Lee MH, Zheng H, Zhang L, Wu PE, Shieh YL, Chan SY, Wang S, Xie
X, Kim SW, Henderson BE, Le Marchand L, Ito H, Kasuga Y, Ahn SH, Kang HS, Chan
KY, Iwata H, Tsugane S, Li C, Shu XO, Kang DH, Zheng W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology
Center, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

Genetic factors play an important role in the etiology of both sporadic and
familial breast cancer. We aimed to discover novel genetic susceptibility loci
for breast cancer. We conducted a four-stage genome-wide association study (GWAS)
in 19,091 cases and 20,606 controls of East-Asian descent including Chinese,
Korean, and Japanese women. After analyzing 690,947 SNPs in 2,918 cases and 2,324
controls, we evaluated 5,365 SNPs for replication in 3,972 cases and 3,852
controls. Ninety-four SNPs were further evaluated in 5,203 cases and 5,138
controls, and finally the top 22 SNPs were investigated in up to 17,423
additional subjects (7,489 cases and 9,934 controls). SNP rs9485372, near the
TGF-ß activated kinase (TAB2) gene in chromosome 6q25.1, showed a consistent
association with breast cancer risk across all four stages, with a P-value of
3.8×10(-12) in the combined analysis of all samples. Adjusted odds ratios (95%
confidence intervals) were 0.89 (0.85-0.94) and 0.80 (0.75-0.86) for the A/G and 
A/A genotypes, respectively, compared with the genotype G/G. SNP rs9383951
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.9×10(-6) from the combined analysis of all samples), located in intron 5
of the ESR1 gene, and SNP rs7107217 (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.6×10(-7)), located at 11q24.3, also
showed a consistent association in each of the four stages. This study provides
strong evidence for a novel breast cancer susceptibility locus represented by
rs9485372, near the TAB2 gene (6q25.1), and identifies two possible
susceptibility loci located in the ESR1 gene and 11q24.3, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3285588
PMID: 22383897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Apr;26(4):630-42. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1263. Epub 2012 Mar
1.

TEX11 modulates germ cell proliferation by competing with estrogen receptor ß for
the binding to HPIP.

Yu YH(1), Siao FP, Hsu LC, Yen PH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Academia
Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

Klinefelter syndrome (KS), characterized by the presence of more than one
X-chromosome in men, is a major genetic cause of male infertility. Germ cell
degeneration in KS patients is thought to be the consequences of overexpression
of some genes on the X-chromosome. However, the identity of these genes and the
underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Testis-expressed 11 (TEX11) is an
X-chromosome-encoded germ-cell-specific protein that is expressed most abundantly
in spermatogonia and early spermatocytes in the testes. In our search for
TEX11-interacting partners using the yeast two-hybrid system, we identified
hematopoietic pre-B cell leukemia transcription factor-interacting protein
(HPIP), which anchors estrogen receptors (ER) to the cytoskeleton and modulates
their functions. We found that mouse spermatogonial stem cells expressed Tex11,
Hpip, and Esr2 but not Esr1. In cultured cells, TEX11 competed with ERß for
binding to HPIP. Upon treatment with 17ß-estradiol or an ERß agonist
diarylpropionitrile, TEX11 promoted the nuclear translocation of ERß and enhanced
its transcriptional activities. On the other hand, TEX11 suppressed the
nongenomic activities of ERß in the cytoplasm, as indicated by reduced
phosphorylation of AKT and ERK signaling molecules. Overexpression of TEX11 in
mouse germ-cell-derived GC-1 and GC-2 cells suppressed the cell proliferation and
the expression of cFos, Ccnd1, and Ccnb1 that were stimulated by 17ß-estradiol or
diarylpropionitrile and elevated the expression level of the proapoptotic Bax
gene. The negative effect of TEX11 on cell proliferation suggests that increased 
expression of TEX11 in the germ cells may partially contribute to the
spermatogenic defect observed in KS patients.

PMID: 22383461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Reprod Sci. 2012 Jul;19(7):684-93. doi: 10.1177/1933719111431000. Epub 2012 Feb
28.

G protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) expression in normal and abnormal
endometrium.

Plante BJ(1), Lessey BA, Taylor RN, Wang W, Bagchi MK, Yuan L, Scotchie J, Fritz 
MA, Young SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The University of North Carolina
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. bethplante@gmail.com

Rapid estrogen effects are mediated by membrane receptors, and evidence suggests 
a role for both a membrane-associated form of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1; ERa)
and G-protein coupled receptor 30 (GPER; GPR30). Considering estrogen's
importance in endometrial physiology and endometriosis pathophysiology, we
hypothesized that GPER could be involved in both cyclic changes in endometrial
estrogen action and that aberrant expression might be seen in the eutopic
endometrium of women with endometriosis. Using real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemical analysis
of normal endometrium, endometrial samples demonstrated cycle-regulated
expression of GPER, with maximal expression in the proliferative phase. Eutopic
and ectopic endometrium from women with endometriosis overexpressed GPER as
compared to eutopic endometrium of normal participants. Ishikawa cells, an
adenocarcinoma cell line, expressed GPER, with increased expression upon
treatment with estrogen or an ESR1 agonist, but not with a GPER-specific agonist.
Decreased expression was seen in Ishikawa cells stably transfected with
progesterone receptor A. Together, these data suggest that normal endometrial
GPER expression is cyclic and regulated by nuclear estrogen and progesterone
receptors, while expression is dysregulated in endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC3438071
PMID: 22378861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Endocrinology. 2012 Apr;153(4):1925-35. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1900. Epub 2012 Feb 
28.

Hematopoetic prostaglandin D synthase: an ESR1-dependent oviductal epithelial
cell synthase.

Bridges PJ(1), Jeoung M, Shim S, Park JY, Lee JE, Sapsford LA, Trudgen K, Ko C,
Gye MC, Jo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Food Sciences, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
Kentucky 40546, USA. pbrid2@email.uky.edu

Oviductal disease is a primary cause of infertility, a problem that largely stems
from excessive inflammation of this key reproductive organ. Our poor
understanding of the mechanisms regulating oviductal inflammation restricts our
ability to diagnose, treat, and/or prevent oviductal disease. Using mice, our
objective was to determine the spatial localization, regulatory mechanism, and
functional attributes of a hypothesized regulator of oviductal inflammation, the 
hematopoietic form of prostaglandin D synthase (HPGDS). Immunohistochemistry
revealed specific localization of HPGDS to the oviduct's epithelium. In the
isthmus, expression of HPGDS was consistent. In the ampulla, expression of HPGDS 
appeared dependent upon stage of the estrous cycle. HPGDS was expressed in the
epithelium of immature and cycling mice but not in the oviducts of estrogen
receptor a knockouts. Two receptor subtypes bind PGD2: PGD2 receptor and G
protein-coupled receptor 44. Expression of mRNA for Ptgdr was higher in the
epithelial cells (EPI) than in the stroma (P < 0.05), whereas mRNA for Gpr44 was 
higher in the stroma than epithelium (P < 0.05). Treatment of human oviductal EPI
with HQL-79, an inhibitor of HPGDS, decreased cell viability (P < 0.05).
Treatment of mice with HQL-79 increased mRNA for chemokine (C-C motif) ligands 3,
4, and 19; chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligands 11 and 12; IL-13 and IL-17B; and TNF
receptor superfamily, member 1b (P < 0.02 for each mRNA). Overall, these results 
suggest that HPGDS may play a role in the regulation of inflammation and EPI
health within the oviduct.

PMCID: PMC3320253
PMID: 22374975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Hum Reprod Update. 2012 May-Jun;18(3):260-83. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dms002. Epub
2012 Feb 26.

Aetiology of hypospadias: a systematic review of genes and environment.

van der Zanden LF(1), van Rooij IA, Feitz WF, Franke B, Knoers NV, Roeleveld N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and HTA, Radboud University Nijmegen
Medical Centre, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. l.vanderzanden@ebh.umcn.nl

BACKGROUND: Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male external 
genitalia. Most cases have an unknown aetiology, which is probably a mix of
monogenic and multifactorial forms, implicating both genes and environmental
factors. This review summarizes current knowledge about the aetiology of
hypospadias.
METHODS: Pubmed was used to identify studies on hypospadias aetiology published
between January 1995 and February 2011. Reference lists of the selected
manuscripts were also searched to identify additional studies, including those
published before 1995.
RESULTS: The search provided 922 articles and 169 articles were selected for this
review. Studies screening groups of patients with hypospadias for single gene
defects found mutations in WT1, SF1, BMP4, BMP7, HOXA4, HOXB6, FGF8, FGFR2, AR,
HSD3B2, SRD5A2, ATF3, MAMLD1, MID1 and BNC2. However, most investigators are
convinced that single mutations do not cause the majority of isolated hypospadias
cases. Indeed, associations were found with polymorphisms in FGF8, FGFR2, AR,
HSD17B3, SRD5A2, ESR1, ESR2, ATF3, MAMLD1, DGKK, MID1, CYP1A1, GSTM1 and GSTT1.
In addition, gene expression studies indentified CTGF, CYR61 and EGF as candidate
genes. Environmental factors consistently implicated in hypospadias are low
birthweight, maternal hypertension and pre-eclampsia, suggesting that placental
insufficiency may play an important role in hypospadias aetiology. Exogenous
endocrine-disrupting chemicals have the potential to induce hypospadias but it is
unclear whether human exposure is high enough to exert this effect. Other
environmental factors have also been associated with hypospadias but, for most,
the results are inconsistent.
CONCLUSIONS: Although a number of contributors to the aetiology of hypospadias
have been identified, the majority of risk factors remain unknown.

PMID: 22371315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Reproduction. 2012 Apr;143(4):549-58. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0214. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

Estrogen receptor (ESR) 2 partially offsets the absence of ESR1 in gonadotropes
of pituitary-specific Esr1 knockout female mice.

Sánchez-Criado JE(1), Trudgen K, Millán Y, Blanco A, Monterde J, Garrido-Gracia
JC, Gordon A, Aguilar R, de Las Mulas JM, Ko C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University of Córdoba,
14004 Córdoba, Spain. fi1sacrj@uco.es

Estrogen receptor 1 and 2 (ESR1 and 2) mediate estrogen (E) action on gonadotrope
function. While much is known about the effects of ESR1 on the gonadotrope, there
is still some controversy regarding the effects of ESR2. To investigate the role 
of ESR2 in the gonadotrope, 45-day-old female mice of two different genotypes
were used: wild type (WT) and pituitary (gonadotropes and thyrotropes)-specific
Esr1 knockout (KO). All mice were ovariectomized (OVX) and 15 days later injected
over 3 days with 2.5 µg 17ß-estradiol (E(2)), 0.2 mg of the selective ESR1 or 2
agonists, propylpyrazole triol and diarylpropionitrile, respectively, or 0.1 ml
oil. The day after treatment, anterior pituitary glands were dissected out for
evaluation of gonadotrope ultrastructural morphology and pituitary
immunohistochemical expression of progesterone receptor (Pgr (Pr)). Blood was
collected and serum LH levels were assessed. Activation of ESR1 in WT mice
resulted in the following: i) uterine ballooning and vaginal cornification, ii)
negative feedback on LH secretion, iii) increased number of homogeneous
(functional) gonadotropes, and iv) pituitary Pgr expression (35.9±2.0% of
pituitary cells). Activation of ESR1 in KO mice induced normal uterine, vaginal, 
and LH secretion responses, but failed to increase the number of functional
gonadotropes, and induced significantly lower Pgr expression (21.0±3.0% of
pituitary cells) than in WT mice. Whilst activation of ESR2 had no significant
effects in WT mice, it doubled the number of functional gonadotropes exhibited by
KO mice injected with oil. It is concluded that E(2) exerted its action in KO
mouse gonadotropes via ESR2.

PMID: 22367588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Anim Sci. 2012 Aug;90(8):2450-64. doi: 10.2527/jas.2011-4797. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

Identification and association analysis of several hundred single nucleotide
polymorphisms within candidate genes for back fat thickness in Italian Large
White pigs using a selective genotyping approach.

Fontanesi L(1), Galimberti G, Calò DG, Fronza R, Martelli PL, Scotti E, Colombo
M, Schiavo G, Casadio R, Buttazzoni L, Russo V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agro-Food Science and Technology, Sezione di Allevamenti
Zootecnici, University of Bologna, Viale Fanin 46, 40127 Bologna, Italy.
luca.fontanesi@unibo.it

Combining different approaches (resequencing of portions of 54 obesity candidate 
genes, literature mining for pig markers associated with fat deposition or
related traits in 77 genes, and in silico mining of porcine expressed sequence
tags and other sequences available in databases), we identified and analyzed 736 
SNP within candidate genes to identify markers associated with back fat thickness
(BFT) in Italian Large White sows. Animals were chosen using a selective
genotyping approach according to their EBV for BFT (276 with most negative and
279 with most positive EBV) within a population of  12,000 pigs. Association
analysis between the SNP and BFT has been carried out using the MAX test proposed
for case-control studies. The designed assays were successful for 656 SNP: 370
were excluded (low call rate or minor allele frequency <5%), whereas the
remaining 286 in 212 genes were taken for subsequent analyses, among which 64
showed a P(nominal) value <0.1. To deal with the multiple testing problem in a
candidate gene approach, we applied the proportion of false positives (PFP)
method. Thirty-eight SNP were significant (P(PFP) < 0.20). The most significant
SNP was the IGF2 intron3-g.3072G>A polymorphism (P(nominal) < 1.0E-50). The
second most significant SNP was the MC4R c.1426A>G polymorphism (P(nominal) =
8.0E-05). The third top SNP (P(nominal) = 6.2E-04) was the intronic TBC1D1
g.219G>A polymorphic site, in agreement with our previous results obtained in an 
independent study. The list of significant markers also included SNP in
additional genes (ABHD16A, ABHD5, ACP2, ALMS1, APOA2, ATP1A2, CALR, COL14A1,
CTSF, DARS, DECR1, ENPP1, ESR1, GH1, GHRL, GNMT, IKBKB, JAK3, MTTP, NFKBIA, NT5E,
PLAT, PPARG, PPP2R5D, PRLR, RRAGD, RFC2, SDHD, SERPINF1, UBE2H, VCAM1, and WAT). 
Functional relationships between genes were obtained using the Ingenuity Pathway 
Analysis (IPA) Knowledge Base. The top scoring pathway included 19 genes with a
P(nominal) < 0.1, 2 of which (IKBKB and NFKBIA) are involved in the hypothalamic 
IKKß/NF<U+03BA>B program that could represent a key axis to affect fat deposition traits
in pigs. These results represent a starting point to plan marker-assisted
selection in Italian Large White nuclei for BFT. Because of similarities between 
humans and pigs, this study might also provide useful clues to investigate
genetic factors affecting human obesity.

PMID: 22367074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Tumour Biol. 2012 Apr;33(2):315-23. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0343-1. Epub 2012 Feb
24.

The epigenetic silencing of the estrogen receptor (ER) by hypermethylation of the
ESR1 promoter is seen predominantly in triple-negative breast cancers in Indian
women.

Prabhu JS(1), Wahi K, Korlimarla A, Correa M, Manjunath S, Raman N, Srinath BS,
Sridhar TS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, St. John's Research Institute, Koramangala,
Bangalore, India. jyothisprabhu@gmail.com

The proportion of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative and triple-negative (TN) breast
cancer in Indian women is higher than that reported in the West, and this
difference persists even after their migration to the West. The causes for this
significant difference are not entirely clear. Hypermethylation of the ER
promoter, an epigenetic alteration, is known to be one of the mechanisms by which
the expression of ER is suppressed. Two thirds of breast cancer specimens from an
Indian center tested, using the highly sensitive, methylation-specific polymerase
chain reaction (MSP) technique, were reported positive. We have used a
quantitative assay, the MethyLight, to better assess the extent of methylation in
the ESR1 promoter region in 98 breast cancer tumor specimens from Indian women.
In addition, the amount of ER transcripts was determined by quantitative reverse 
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Using the stringent cutoff of at least
4% of the target sequence being methylated, 27% of TN tumors were methylated. In 
addition they demonstrated the highest levels of methylation. In contrast less
than 2% ER-positive tumors were hypermethylated. While the proportion of
hypermethylated tumors are lower in this study than that estimated using MSP, our
results support the notion of increased epigenetic deregulations in ER-negative
tumors in general and TN tumors in particular. The development of this assay also
permits a rational approach to the selection of patients for clinical trials
examining the efficacy of demethylating agents in the treatment of ER-negative
breast cancer.

PMID: 22362381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2012 May;130(1-2):96-104. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2012.01.009. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

A differentially methylated single CpG-site is correlated with estrogen receptor 
alpha transcription.

Fürst RW(1), Kliem H, Meyer HH, Ulbrich SE.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology Weihenstephan, Technische Universität München, 85354
Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.

DNA methylation of the promoter region of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) is
recognized as an epigenetic mechanism that regulates its mRNA abundance. We
questioned whether tissues in male growing piglets were influenced in terms of
DNA methylation by the developmentally occurring distinct plasma estradiol-17ß
(E2) concentrations. Additionally, we aimed at broadening the currently limited
understanding of the epigenetic regulation of ESR1 in physiological settings.
Three distinct genetic regions of ESR1 were analyzed using a combination of
methylation-sensitive high resolution melting (MS-HRM) and pyrosequencing.
Unexpectedly, major E2 concentration differences were only marginally associated 
with minor variations in DNA methylation and mRNA abundance. However, by
analyzing two tissues showing the greatest differences in transcript abundance,
we were able to find one single CpG site in the +1kb intragenic region of ESR1
strikingly differently methylated between heart vs. epididymis. Interestingly,
this single CpG-site was identified as a putative binding site for the
transcriptional repressor TG-interacting factor 1 (TGIF) which can recruit
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) leading to chromatin condensation. Indeed,
chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed a reduced histone H3 presence at the
specific ESR1 location in case of higher DNA methylation. We therefore
hypothesize that ESR1 expression may be manifested by a single-CpG-site based
methylation difference impairing transcription factor binding.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22342840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Biol Reprod. 2012 May 31;86(5):163, 1-10. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.096248.
Print 2012 May.

Insulin-like growth factor 3 regulates expression of genes encoding steroidogenic
enzymes and key transcription factors in the Nile tilapia gonad.

Li M(1), Wu F, Gu Y, Wang T, Wang H, Yang S, Sun Y, Zhou L, Huang X, Jiao B,
Cheng CH, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.

Insulin-like growth factors (Igfs) are implicated in a wide variety of
physiological roles in teleost gonadal development and reproduction. In the
present study, igf3 mRNA expression in the tilapia ovary was found to be higher
than in the testis from 5 to 40 days after hatching (dah) but was lower than that
in testis from 50 to 70 dah. Consistently, Igf3 protein signal was detected in
the somatic cells of XX and XY gonads from 10 dah until adulthood by
immunohistochemistry, using a specific Igf3 polyclonal antibody. Incubation of
ovarian and testicular cells in primary culture with recombinant Igf3
significantly increased nr5a1, foxl2, dmrt1, cyp19a1a, cyp11a1, cyp11b2, hsd3b2 ,
and cyp17a1 expression in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Promoter analysis
using luciferase assays in HEK293 cells revealed that igf3 promoter activity was 
directly activated by Nr5a1 (Sf1) and further enhanced by Foxl2, Nr0b1a (Dax1),
and Nr0b1b (Dax2) but repressed by Dmrt1 and estrogen receptor (Esr1, Esr2a, or
Esr2b) along with 17beta-estradiol treatment. In addition, igf3 promoter activity
was increased slightly by forskolin treatment alone but synergistically
up-regulated by transfection with nr5a1. These in vitro results correlated well
with the expression profile of igf3 during early gonad differentiation. Our
results indicated that igf3 is involved in fish gonad steroidogenesis because of 
its ability to regulate the expression of foxl2, dmrt1, and nr5a1 and
steroidogenic enzymes. The expression of igf3 is in turn regulated by
transcription factors Foxl2, Dmrt1, and Nr5a1, as well as by 17beta-estradiol
treatment.

PMID: 22337331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Spermatogenesis. 2011 Oct;1(4):318-324. Epub 2011 Oct 1.

17ß-estradiol signaling and regulation of Sertoli cell function.

Lucas TF(1), Pimenta MT, Pisolato R, Lazari MF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology; Department of Pharmacology; Escola
Paulista de Medicina; Universidade Federal de São Paulo; São Paulo, Brazil.

In this review, we will present an overview of estrogen actions in the testis
from immature and adult animals, with special emphasis on signaling mechanisms
involved in the 17ß-estradiol regulation of Sertoli cell function in immature
rats. 17ß-estradiol activates Sertoli cell proliferation in immature rats by a
mechanism that involves the translocation of the estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2
to the plasma membrane, phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor and
activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase 3/1. Activation of the G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) also induces phosphorylation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase 3/1 via epidermal growth factor receptor
transactivation, which in turn increases expression of the antiapoptotic protein 
BCL2 and decreases the expression of proapoptotic protein BAX, indicating an
antiapoptotic role of E2-GPER in immature rat Sertoli cells. In conclusion, ESRs 
and GPER can mediate rapid 17ß-estradiol signaling in Sertoli cells, and modulate
transcriptional events important for Sertoli cell function and maintenance of
normal testis development and homeostasis. Our findings are important to clarify 
the role of estrogen in a critical period of testicular development and to direct
further studies, which may contribute to better understand the causes of male
infertility.

PMCID: PMC3271643
PMID: 22332115  [PubMed]


306. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2012 Aug;28(8):644-8. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2011.650767. Epub
2012 Feb 10.

Are polymorphisms in oestrogen receptors genes associated with lipid levels in
response to hormone therapy?

Smiderle L(1), Mattevi VS, Giovenardi M, Wender MC, Hutz MH, Almeida S.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre  UFCSPA, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms in the oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and oestrogen
receptor 2 (ESR2) genes are associated with intermediate or endpoint markers of
cardiovascular disease and with the efficacy of postmenopausal hormone therapy
(HT). Contradictory findings have been described in the past and the role of
these genetics variants remains unclear.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was carried out with 266 postmenopausal women,
of whom 115 received oral HT (HT+) and 151 did not receive any HT (HT-). We
analysed three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ESR1 (rs1801132,
rs7757956 and rs2813544) and two in ESR2 (rs3020450 and rs7154455) and derived
haplotypes with three additional polymorphisms that had been previously
investigated by our group (ESR1 rs2234693 and ESR2 rs1256049 and rs4986938).
RESULTS: The ESR1 rs2813544 polymorphism was associated with low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) in HT+ postmenopausal women (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.044;
pC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.388), while one ESR2 gene haplotype was associated with total cholesterol 
(T-chol) (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.015; pC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.090) and LDL-C in HT+ postmenopausal women
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.021; pC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.126).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that, in HT+ postmenopausal women, the rs2813544
polymorphism may influence LDL-C levels and, as previously described, ESR2
rs1256049 is associated with T-chol and LDL-C. No previous study has investigated
the association of this SNP set with lipoprotein levels in women while taking
into account the hormonal status of the patients.

PMID: 22324545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Pathol. 2012 May;227(1):1-3. doi: 10.1002/path.3999. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

ESR1 amplification in breast cancer: controversy resolved?

Albertson DG.

Comment on
    J Pathol. 2012 May;227(1):8-16.

The determination of oestrogen receptor a (ERa) expression in breast cancers has 
been for many years the standard of care for guiding patient management. In 2007,
Holst and colleagues published the previously unappreciated observation that the 
ERa gene, ESR1, was amplified in 21% of breast cancers, and that ESR1 gene
amplification identified those individuals with high ERa expression in their
tumours and who were likely to respond to hormonal manipulation. This has been a 
controversial area. Others have tried to reproduce these findings but the results
have been mixed with respect to amplification frequency, and even contradictory
with respect to prognostic and predictive value. The controversy may have now
been resolved. Ooi et al, in this issue of the journal, show that the large
clustered FISH signals that have been interpreted as ESR1 amplification are
sensitive to RNase treatment, indicating that FISH is detecting accumulation of
ESR1 transcripts in the nucleus of breast cancer cells expressing high levels of 
ERa, rather than gene amplification events. This story has important lessons for 
translational cancer research, and in particular FISH studies of gene copy
number.

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22322671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2011;32(5):332-41. doi: 10.1159/000335541. Epub 2012 
Feb 3.

Progression from amnesic mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease: ESR1
and ESR2 polymorphisms and APOE gene.

Elcoroaristizabal Martín X(1), Fernández Martínez M, Galdos Alcelay L, Molano
Salazar A, Bereincua Gandarias R, Inglés Borda S, Gómez Busto F, Uterga Valiente 
JM, Indakoetxea Juanbeltz B, Gómez Beldarraín MA, de Pancorbo MM.

Author information: 
(1)BIOMICS Research Group, Department of Zoology and Cellular Biology A, Centro
de Investigación y Estudios Avanzados Lucio Lascaray (CIEA), University of the
Basque Country UPV/EHU, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Many genes have been studied to determine how they might be involved 
in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Estrogens have a protective effect in the central
nervous system. The mechanisms of action of estrogens are mediated by two
estrogen receptors (ERs), ERa and ERß. Thus, these genes could also play a role
in the progression of amnesic mild cognitive impairment (MCIa) to AD. The aim of 
this study was to examine the role of ER single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
as a risk factor for MCIa, as well as the interaction with apolipoprotein E
(APOE) e4 in the progression to AD.
METHODS: 79 MCIa patients and 138 healthy controls were analyzed. SNPs were
genotyped via restriction fragment length polymorphisms and real-time PCR, RT-PCR
or RT-PCR (TaqMan) assays.
RESULTS: There is a lack of association between MCIa patients who converted to AD
and ER SNPs. APOE e4 allele is an independent risk factor of MCIa (OR=1.86; 95%
CI=1.02-3.38, p=0.042) with a high prevalence in converted subjects. APOE e4 is
able to predict the progression from MCIa patients to AD (OR=2.55; 95%
CI=1.20-5.42, p=0.015).
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of the APOE e4 allele, and not the alleles of ER SNPs, 
is a risk factor for MCIa. Furthermore, APOE genotype seems to predict the
conversion from MCIa to AD.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22311091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Reprod Toxicol. 2012 Jun;33(3):353-60. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2012.01.007. Epub 
2012 Jan 28.

Estrogen receptor alpha overexpressing mouse antral follicles are sensitive to
atresia induced by methoxychlor and its metabolites.

Paulose T(1), Hannon PR, Peretz J, Craig ZR, Flaws JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61802, USA. tessiepaulose@gmail.com

Methoxychlor (MXC) and its metabolites bind to estrogen receptors (ESRs) and
increase ovarian atresia. To test whether ESR alpha (ESR1) overexpressing (ESR1
OE) antral follicles are more sensitive to atresia compared to controls, we
cultured antral follicles with vehicle, MXC (1-100 µg/ml) or metabolites (0.1-10 
µg/ml). Results indicate that MXC and its metabolites significantly increase
atresia in ESR1 OE antral follicles at lower doses compared to controls. Activity
of pro-apoptotic factor caspase-3/7 was significantly higher in ESR1 OE treated
antral follicles compared to controls. ESR1 OE mice dosed with MXC 64 mg/kg/day
had an increased percentage of atretic antral follicles compared to controls.
Furthermore, pro-caspase-3 levels were found to be significantly lower in ESR1 OE
ovaries than controls dosed with MXC 64 mg/kg/day. These data suggest that ESR1
OE ovaries are more sensitive to atresia induced by MXC and its metabolites in
vitro and in vivo compared to controls.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3327814
PMID: 22306526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 May 15;355(1):49-59. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.01.017.
Epub 2012 Jan 27.

17ß-Estradiol activates GPER- and ESR1-dependent pathways inducing apoptosis in
GC-2 cells, a mouse spermatocyte-derived cell line.

Chimento A(1), Sirianni R, Casaburi I, Ruggiero C, Maggiolini M, Andò S, Pezzi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaco-Biology, University of Calabria, 87036 Arcavacata di
Rende, Cosenza, Italy.

In mammals, spontaneous apoptosis is observed particularly in differentiating
spermatogonia and in spermatocytes. 17ß-Estradiol (E2) in primary rat pachytene
spermatocytes (PS) binds estrogen receptor a (ESR1) and GPER to activate
EGFR/ERK/c-Jun pathway leading to up regulation of proapoptotic factor bax. Aim
of this study was to clarify the effector pathway(s) controlling spermatocytes
apoptosis using as model GC-2 cells, an immortalized mouse pachytene
spermatocyte-derived cell line, which reproduces primary cells responses to E2.
In fact, in GC-2 cells we observed that ESR1 and GPER activation caused rapid ERK
and c-Jun phosphorylation, bax up-regulation, events associated with apoptosis.
We further investigated the apoptotic mechanism demonstrating that E2, as well as
ESR1 and GPER specific agonists, induced sustained ERK, c-Jun and p38
phosphorylation, Cytochrome c release, caspase 3 and endogenous substrate Poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) activation and increased expression of cell cycle 
inhibitor p21. When ESR1 or GPER expression was silenced, E2 was still able to
decrease cell proliferation, only the concomitant silencing abolished E2 effect. 
These results indicate that GC-2 cells are a valid cell model to study
E2-dependent apoptosis in spermatocytes and show that E2, activating both ESR1
and GPER, is able to induce an ERK1/2, c-Jun and p38-dependent mitochondrion
apoptotic pathway in this cell type.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22306083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Neurol Sci. 2012 May 15;316(1-2):126-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.01.007. Epub
2012 Feb 2.

Associations of ESR2 AluI (G/A) polymorphism with ischemic stroke in Caucasians.

Markoula S(1), Milionis H, Lazaros L, Spengos K, Vassilopoulou S,
Chatzistefanidis D, Kargiotis O, Georgiou I, Kyritsis AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ioannina, School of Medicine, Greece.
smarkoula@grads.uoi.gr

Raising interest towards genes implicates the effect of estrogen receptor-alpha
(ESR1) gene on cerebrovascular disease, but data are lacking regarding the effect
of estrogen receptor-beta (ESR2) gene. We assessed the hypothesis that AluI (G/A)
polymorphism of the ESR2 gene (rs 4986938) is associated with ischemic stroke in 
a Caucasian population. Four hundred twenty four consecutive stroke patients and 
430 age and gender-matched controls were enrolled in three stroke centers in
Greece over one-year period. Patients and controls were compared in regard to the
prevalence of the aforementioned polymorphism. No association was found between
variations in the ESR2 gene and risk of stroke or stroke subtype in men and
women. Of note, a gender-specific association of G allele with the onset of
stroke at a younger age in male patients was found (63.68 ± 12.687 years in G
allele (GG+AG) carriers vs. 68.95 ± 10.757 years in non-carriers (AA), p=0.008). 
Further population independent studies are needed to establish the role of ESR2
gene polymorphisms in relation to ischemic stroke in both genders. Such studies
could lead to ERß agonists being validated in individuals with certain genotypes 
and/or alleles towards the development of efficient strategies to preventing
ischemic stroke in both men and women.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22305517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Maturitas. 2012 Apr;71(4):376-84. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2011.12.020. Epub 2012
Jan 31.

Impact of testosterone on the expression of organic anion transporting
polypeptides (OATP-1A2, OATP-2B1, OATP-3A1) in malignant and non-malignant human 
breast cells in vitro.

Stute P(1), Reichenbach A, Szuwart T, Kiesel L, Götte M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine, University 
Women's Hospital, Berne, Switzerland. petra.stute@insel.ch

OBJECTIVES: Postmenopausal hormone therapy (HT) increases local estrogen
formation in breast tissue. The enzymatic substrates depend on transmembrane
anion transporting polypeptides (OATPs) to reach intracellular enzymes. The aim
of this study was to investigate the effect of testosterone (T) on the expression
of OATP-1A2, OATP-2B1, and OATP-3A1 in malignant (MCF-7, BT-474) and
non-malignant (HBL-100) breast cells in vitro.
STUDY DESIGN: Cells were incubated in RPMI 1640 medium containing 5%
steroid-depleted fetal calf serum for 3d, and subsequently incubated in the
absence or presence of T, anastrozole (A), and T+A (10(-6)M) for 24h at 37°C.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: OATP expression was determined by immunocytochemical
staining. Expression intensity was graded as low, moderate, or strong. Hormone
receptor (AR, PR, ESR1, ESR2) expression was investigated by qPCR and Western
blotting. Rank variance analysis was performed for statistical analysis (p=0.05).
RESULTS: OATP-1A2, OATP-2B1, and OATP-3A1 expression was present in all untreated
breast cell lines examined, with OATP-1A2 and OATP-3A1 being the predominant
ones. There was a trend for a higher baseline expression in untreated HBL-100 and
BT-474 in comparison to MCF-7 cells, which was significant for OATP-2B1. T
treatment led to decreased OATP-1A2, -2B1, and -3A1 expression in BT-474 and
HBL-100 cells, respectively. In contrast, in MCF-7 cells, OATP-2B1 expression was
significantly increased. T-induced upregulation of AR and PR protein expression
in BT-474 and MCF-7 cells was reduced by A treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: T may constitute a signal for differential regulation of mammary
OATP expression. In non-malignant breast cells T seems to have a beneficial
effect by reducing the availability of substrates for the intracellular formation
of potent estrogens.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22300683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Mar 1;30(7):729-34. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.36.2574. Epub 2012
Jan 30.

Estrogen receptor (ER) mRNA and ER-related gene expression in breast cancers that
are 1% to 10% ER-positive by immunohistochemistry.

Iwamoto T(1), Booser D, Valero V, Murray JL, Koenig K, Esteva FJ, Ueno NT, Zhang 
J, Shi W, Qi Y, Matsuoka J, Yang EJ, Hortobagyi GN, Hatzis C, Symmans WF, Pusztai
L.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77230-1439,
USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2012 Aug 10;30(23):2929-30; author reply 2931.
    J Clin Oncol. 2012 Mar 1;30(7):686-9.

PURPOSE: We examined borderline estrogen receptor (ER) -positive cancers, defined
as having 1% to 10% positivity by immunohistochemistry (IHC), to determine
whether they show the same global gene-expression pattern and high ESR1 mRNA
expression as ER-positive cancers or if they are more similar to ER-negative
cancers.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: ER status was determined by IHC in 465 primary breast
cancers and with the Affymetrix U133A gene chip. We compared expressions of ESR1 
mRNA and a 106 probe set ER-associated gene signature score between ER-negative
(n = 183), 1% to 9% (n = 25), 10% (n = 6), and more than 10% (n = 251)
ER-positive cancers. We also assessed the molecular class by using the PAM50
classifier and plotted survival by ER status.
RESULTS: Among the 1% to 9%, 10%, and more than 10% ER IHC-positive patients,
24%, 67%, and 92% were also positive by ESR1 mRNA expression. The average ESR1
expression was significantly higher in the = 10% ER-positive cohorts compared
with the 1% to 9% or ER-negative cohort. The average ER gene signature scores
were similar for the ER-negative and 1% to 9% IHC-positive patients and were
significantly lower than in = 10% ER-positive patients. Among the 1% to 9%
ER-positive patients, 8% were luminal B and 48% were basal-like; among the 10%
ER-positive patients, 50% were luminal. The overall survival rate of 1% to 9%
ER-positive patients with cancer was between those of patients in the = 10%
ER-positive and ER-negative groups.
CONCLUSION: A minority of the 1% to 9% IHC ER-positive tumors show molecular
features similar to those of ER-positive, potentially endocrine-sensitive tumors,
whereas most show ER-negative, basal-like molecular characteristics. The safest
clinical approach may be to use both adjuvant endocrine therapy and chemotherapy 
in this rare subset of patients.

PMID: 22291085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2012 Jun;16(6):636-9. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2011.0316.
Epub 2012 Jan 27.

Association of estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms and risk of fracture.

Wei G(1), Yao M, Wang Y, Zhou C, Wan D, Lei H, Dong D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, China.

The association between estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene polymorphisms and
risk of fracture is still controversial and ambiguous. The objective of this
study was to evaluate the effect of PvuII polymorphisms of the ESR1 gene on
fracture risk in Chinese patients. A population-based control study of elderly
subjects was conducted in 120 fracture patients and 120 controls. The PvuII pp
genotype of the ESR1 gene was determined by using a polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism assay. There was no
relationship between ESR1 gene PvuII polymorphism and fracture risk. When
stratifying by fracture type, it was found that vertebral fracture cases had a
significantly higher frequency of the PvuII pp genotype (odds ratio=2.00, 95%
confidence interval=1.03, 3.88; p=0.04) than controls. This study suggested that 
there was a modest but statistically significant association between the PvuII pp
genotype of the ESR1 gene and vertebral fracture in Chinese patients. The
molecular mechanism underlying this association needs further study.

PMID: 22283119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Jan 24;12(2):149. doi: 10.1038/nrc3093-c3.

On the evidence for ESR1 amplification in breast cancer.

Holst F, Moelans CB, Filipits M, Singer CF, Simon R, van Diest PJ.

Comment on
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Nov;11(11):823; author reply 823.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Aug;11(8):597-608.

PMID: 22270954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012 Apr 10;19(2):181-95. doi: 10.1530/ERC-11-0326. Print
2012 Apr.

Oncostatin M suppresses oestrogen receptor-a expression and is associated with
poor outcome in human breast cancer.

West NR(1), Murphy LC, Watson PH.

Author information: 
(1)Deeley Research Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada.

The most important clinical biomarker for breast cancer management is oestrogen
receptor alpha (ERa). Tumours that express ER are candidates for endocrine
therapy and are biologically less aggressive, while ER-negative tumours are
largely treated with conventional chemotherapy and have a poor prognosis. Despite
its significance, the mechanisms regulating ER expression are poorly understood. 
We hypothesised that the inflammatory cytokine oncostatin M (OSM) can
downregulate ER expression in breast cancer. Recombinant OSM potently suppressed 
ER protein and mRNA expression in vitro in a dose- and time-dependent manner in
two human ER+ breast cancer cell lines, MCF7 and T47D. This was dependent on the 
expression of OSM receptor beta (OSMRß) and could be blocked by inhibition of the
MEKK1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinases. ER loss was also necessary for maximal
OSM-induced signal transduction and migratory activity. In vivo, high expression 
of OSM and OSMR mRNA (determined by RT-PCR) was associated with reduced ER
(P<0.01) and progesterone receptor (P<0.05) protein levels in a cohort of 70
invasive breast cancers. High OSM and OSMR mRNA expression was also associated
with low expression of ESR1 (ER, P<0.0001) and ER-regulated genes in a previously
published breast cancer gene expression dataset (n=321 cases). In the latter
cohort, high OSMR expression was associated with shorter recurrence-free and
overall survival in univariate (P<0.0001) and multivariate (P=0.022) analyses.
OSM signalling may be a novel factor causing suppression of ER and disease
progression in breast cancer.

PMID: 22267707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Nutr Res Pract. 2011 Dec;5(6):527-32. doi: 10.4162/nrp.2011.5.6.527. Epub 2011
Dec 31.

Association between ESR1 rs1884051 polymorphism and dietary total energy and
plant protein intake on obesity in Korean men.

Doo M(1), Kim Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Science and Food Management, Ewha Womans University,
11-1 Daehyun-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-750, Korea.

ESR1 has been listed in the Human Obesity Gene Map as candidate gene associated
with obesity. Thus, in this study, we investigated the effect of the ESR1
rs1884051 polymorphism on obesity-related variables, together with their
modulations by dietary intake in Korean men. The obesity-related variables and
dietary intake of 3,039 Korean men aged 40-59 years from KoGES database were
analyzed. Body weight (P = 0.007), BMI (P = 0.003), waist-hip ratio (= 0.011),
fat body mass (P = 0.010), and body fat percentage (P = 0.040) were significantly
lower in subjects with the minor T allele of ESR1 rs1884051 than in subjects
carrying the C allele. Moreover, the rs1884051 T allele was associated with a
decreased risk of obesity prevalence (P = 0.040). Among the subjects whose total 
energy intake was below the median, carrier of the minor T allele of ESR1
rs1884051 had a lower BMI (P = 0.003) when compared with subjects carrying the C 
allele. In addition, among subjects whose plant protein intake was above the
median, carrier of the minor T allele of ESR1 rs1884051 had a lower BMI (P =
0.044) compared with subjects carrying the C allele. Our findings demonstrate
that there is a significant association between the ESR1 rs1884051 variant and
obesity-related variables and this association can be potentially modified by
dietary energy and plant protein intake.

PMCID: PMC3259295
PMID: 22259677  [PubMed]


318. Endocrinology. 2012 Mar;153(3):1444-52. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1962. Epub 2012 Jan 
17.

Activation of southern white rhinoceros (Ceratotherium simum simum) estrogen
receptors by phytoestrogens: potential role in the reproductive failure of
captive-born females?

Tubbs C(1), Hartig P, Cardon M, Varga N, Milnes M.

Author information: 
(1)San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research, 15600 San Pasqual Valley
Road, Escondido, California 92027, USA. ctubbs@sandiegozoo.org

Comment in
    Endocrinology. 2012 Apr;153(4):1568-71.

The captive southern white rhinoceros (SWR; Ceratotherium simum simum) population
serves as an important genetic reservoir critical to the conservation of this
vulnerable species. Unfortunately, captive populations are declining due to the
poor reproductive success of captive-born females. Captive female SWR exhibit
reproductive problems suggested to result from continual ovarian follicular
activity and prolonged exposure to endogenous estrogen. However, we investigated 
the potential role of exogenous dietary phytoestrogens in the reproductive
failure of SWR by cloning and characterizing in vitro phytoestrogen binding and
activation of recombinant SWR estrogen receptors (ESR). We compared those
characteristics with recombinant greater one-horned rhinoceros (GOHR; Rhinoceros 
unicornis) ESR, a species that receives similar captive diets yet reproduces
relatively well. Our results indicate that phytoestrogens bind rhino ESR in a
manner similar to other vertebrate species, but there are no differences found in
phytoestrogen binding affinity of SWR ESR compared with GOHR ESR. However,
species-specific differences in ESR activation by phytoestrogens were detected.
The phytoestrogen coumestrol stimulated greater maximal activation of SWR ESR1
than GOHR ESR1. SWR ESR2 were also more sensitive to phytoestrogens and were
activated to a greater extent by both coumestrol and daidzein. The concentrations
in which significant differences in ESR activation occurred (10(-7) to 10(-5) m) 
are consistent with circulating concentrations measured in other vertebrate
species. Taken together, these findings suggest that phytoestrogens potentially
pose a risk to the reproductive health of captive SWR. However, additional
studies are needed to further clarify the physiological role of dietary
phytoestrogens in the reduced fertility of this species.

PMCID: PMC3281539
PMID: 22253418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 Jan 17;7:5. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-5.

ESR1, HK3 and BRSK1 gene variants are associated with both age at natural
menopause and premature ovarian failure.

Qin Y(1), Sun M, You L, Wei D, Sun J, Liang X, Zhang B, Jiang H, Xu J, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, National Research Center for Assisted Reproductive Technology and
Reproductive Genetics, The Key laboratory for Reproductive Endocrinology of
Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Reproductive
Medicine, Jinan, China.

BACKGROUND: Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a complex and heterogeneous
disorder that is influenced by multiple genetic components. Numerous candidate
gene studies designed to identify POF susceptibility loci have been published,
but most positive findings have not been confirmed in follow up studies. We
sought to determine if sequence variants previously associated with age at
natural menopause (AANM) or early menopause (EM) contribute as well to genetic
susceptibility to POF.
METHODS: Our study was performed on 371 unrelated idiopathic women with POF and
800 women controls, all Chinese Han. Thirty six SNPs from previous genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) responsible for AANM or EM and 3 additional SNPs in
ESR1, and 2 additional SNPs in PTHB1 were tested using the Sequenom MassARRAY
iPLEX platform for genotyping.
RESULTS: Three SNPs - rs2278493 in HK3, rs2234693 in ESR1 and rs12611091 in BRSK1
- showed nominally significant association with POF. Thus, a plausible
relationship could exist between ESR1, BRSK1, HK3 and POF.
CONCLUSIONS: This largest association study undertaken to determine correlation
between POF and AANM/EM revealed three significant SNPs (rs2278493, rs2234693,
and rs12611091). All are associated with not only AAWM and EM but also POF.
Insights into shared genetic susceptibility between POF and AANM/EM will provide 
novel entry points for unraveling genetic mechanism involved in ovarian reserve
and oocyte aging processes.

PMCID: PMC3275465
PMID: 22248077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Apr 4;351(2):279-85. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.12.018.
Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Association of polymorphisms in genes encoding hormone receptors ESR1, ESR2 and
LHCGR with the risk and clinical features of testicular germ cell cancer.

Brokken LJ(1), Lundberg-Giwercman Y, Rajpert De-Meyts E, Eberhard J, Ståhl O,
Cohn-Cedermark G, Daugaard G, Arver S, Giwercman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Molecular Reproductive Medicine, Lund
University, Sweden. leon.brokken@med.lu.se

Testicular germ cell cancer (TGCC) is the most common malignancy in young men.
Genetic variants known to be associated with risk of TGCC only partially account 
for the observed familial risks. We aimed to identify additional polymorphisms
associated with risk as well as histological and clinical features of TGCC in 367
patients and 214 controls. Polymorphisms in ESR2 (rs1256063; OR=0.53, 95% CI:
0.35-0.79) and LHCGR (rs4597581; OR=0.68, 95% CI: 0.51-0.89, and rs4953617;
OR=1.88, 95% CI: 1.21-2.94) associated with risk of TGCC. Polymorphisms in ESR1
(rs9397080; OR=1.85, 95% CI: 1.18-2.91) and LHCGR (rs7371084; OR=2.37, 95% CI:
1.26-4.49) associated with risk of seminoma and metastasis, respectively. SNPs in
ESR1 (rs9397080) and LHCGR (rs7371084) were predictors of higher LH levels and
higher androgen sensitivity index in healthy subjects. The results suggest that
polymorphisms in ESR1, ESR2 and LHCGR contribute to the risk of developing TGCC, 
histological subtype, and risk to metastasis.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22245602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Apr 15;21(8):1907-17. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr617. Epub 2012 Jan 
6.

Admixture mapping identifies a locus on 6q25 associated with breast cancer risk
in US Latinas.

Fejerman L(1), Chen GK, Eng C, Huntsman S, Hu D, Williams A, Pasaniuc B, John EM,
Via M, Gignoux C, Ingles S, Monroe KR, Kolonel LN, Torres-Mejía G, Pérez-Stable
EJ, Burchard EG, Henderson BE, Haiman CA, Ziv E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, Institute for
Human Genetics and Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Among US Latinas and Mexican women, those with higher European ancestry have
increased risk of breast cancer. We combined an admixture mapping and genome-wide
association mapping approach to search for genomic regions that may explain this 
observation. Latina women with breast cancer (n= 1497) and Latina controls (n=
1272) were genotyped using Affymetrix and Illumina arrays. We inferred
locus-specific genetic ancestry and compared the ancestry between cases and
controls. We also performed single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) association
analyses in regions of interest. Correction for multiple-hypothesis testing was
conducted using permutations (P(corrected)). We identified one region where
genetic ancestry was significantly associated with breast cancer risk: 6q25 [odds
ratio (OR) per Indigenous American chromosome 0.75, 95% confidence interval (CI):
0.65-0.85, P= 1.1 × 10(-5), P(corrected)= 0.02]. A second region on 11p15 showed 
a trend towards association (OR per Indigenous American chromosome 0.77, 95% CI: 
0.68-0.87, P= 4.3 × 10(-5), P(corrected)= 0.08). In both regions, breast cancer
risk decreased with higher Indigenous American ancestry in concordance with
observations made on global ancestry. The peak of the 6q25 signal includes the
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene and 5' region, a locus previously implicated in
breast cancer. Genome-wide association analysis found that a multi-SNP model
explained the admixture signal in both regions. Our results confirm that the
association between genetic ancestry and breast cancer risk in US Latinas is
partly due to genetic differences between populations of European and Indigenous 
Americans origin. Fine-mapping within the 6q25 and possibly the 11p15 loci will
lead to the discovery of the biologically functional variant/s behind this
association.

PMCID: PMC3313799
PMID: 22228098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Environ Health Prev Med. 2012 Sep;17(5):423-8. doi: 10.1007/s12199-011-0259-1.
Epub 2012 Jan 6.

Failure to detect significant association between estrogen receptor-alpha gene
polymorphisms and endometriosis in Japanese women.

Matsuzaka Y(1), Kikuti YY, Izumi S, Goya K, Suzuki T, Cai LY, Oka A, Inoko H,
Kulski JK, Kimura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Molecular Science and Molecular Medicine, School of
Medicine, Tokai University, Bohseidai, Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan.
yasunari.matsuzaka@helmholtz-muenchen.de

OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to test whether estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)
gene polymorphisms are correlated with the risk of the development of
endometriosis in Japanese women, as a preliminary study.
METHODS: To compare allelic frequencies and genotype distributions, a
case-control study of 100 affected women and 143 women with no evidence of
disease was performed using 10 microsatellite repeat markers and 66
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ESR1 gene region.
RESULTS: Although our results might be insufficient to detect genetic
susceptibility, owing to the small sample size and low genetic power, statistical
analysis of the differences in allelic frequency between the cases and controls
at each microsatellite locus demonstrated that no microsatellite locus in the
ESR1 gene displayed a significant association with the disease when multiple
testing was taken into account. Also, there were no statistically significant
differences in the SNP allele frequencies and genotypes between the cases and
controls when multiple testing was taken into account.
CONCLUSION: The findings in our pilot study suggest that ESR1 polymorphisms do
not contribute to endometriosis susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3437353
PMID: 22222969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29461. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029461. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Epigenetic changes of CXCR4 and its ligand CXCL12 as prognostic factors for
sporadic breast cancer.

Ramos EA(1), Grochoski M, Braun-Prado K, Seniski GG, Cavalli IJ, Ribeiro EM,
Camargo AA, Costa FF, Klassen G.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetic and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Department of Basic Pathology,
Federal University of Parana, Parana, Brazil.

Chemokines and their receptors are involved in the development and cancer
progression. The chemokine CXCL12 interacts with its receptor, CXCR4, to promote 
cellular adhesion, survival, proliferation and migration. The CXCR4 gene is
upregulated in several types of cancers, including skin, lung, pancreas, brain
and breast tumors. In pancreatic cancer and melanoma, CXCR4 expression is
regulated by DNA methylation within its promoter region. In this study we
examined the role of cytosine methylation in the regulation of CXCR4 expression
in breast cancer cell lines and also correlated the methylation pattern with the 
clinicopathological aspects of sixty-nine primary breast tumors from a cohort of 
Brazilian women. RT-PCR showed that the PMC-42, MCF7 and MDA-MB-436 breast tumor 
cell lines expressed high levels of CXCR4. Conversely, the MDA-MB-435 cell line
only expressed CXCR4 after treatment with 5-Aza-CdR, which suggests that CXCR4
expression is regulated by DNA methylation. To confirm this hypothesis, a 184 bp 
fragment of the CXCR4 gene promoter region was cloned after sodium bisulfite DNA 
treatment. Sequencing data showed that cell lines that expressed CXCR4 had only
15% of methylated CpG dinucleotides, while the cell line that not have CXCR4
expression, had a high density of methylation (91%). Loss of DNA methylation in
the CXCR4 promoter was detected in 67% of the breast cancer analyzed. The absence
of CXCR4 methylation was associated with the tumor stage, size, histological
grade, lymph node status, ESR1 methylation and CXCL12 methylation, metastasis and
patient death. Kaplan-Meier curves demonstrated that patients with an
unmethylated CXCR4 promoter had a poorer overall survival and disease-free
survival. Furthermore, patients with both CXCL12 methylation and unmethylated
CXCR4 had a shorter overall survival and disease-free survival. These findings
suggest that the DNA methylation status of both CXCR4 and CXCL12 genes could be
used as a biomarker for prognosis in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3248418
PMID: 22220212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Biol Reprod. 2012 Apr 12;86(4):108. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.096891. Print
2012 Apr.

17Beta-estradiol signaling and regulation of proliferation and apoptosis of rat
Sertoli cells.

Royer C(1), Lucas TF, Lazari MF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology, Escola
Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, INFAR, Vila Clementino, 
São Paulo, Brazil.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the intracellular signaling
events downstream of the classical estrogen receptors (ESRs) and G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) involved in regulation of
proliferation and apoptosis of rat Sertoli cells, in which we have previously
described ESR1, ESR2, and GPER. ESRs play a role in Sertoli cell proliferation,
and GPER, but not ESRs, plays a role modulating gene expression involved with
apoptosis. The present study shows that 17beta-estradiol (E2) and the
GPER-selective agonist G-1 rapidly activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PIK3)/serine threonine protein kinase (AKT) and cyclic AMP response
element-binding (CREB) phosphorylation. E2 and the ESR1-selective agonist
4,4',4<U+2033>-(4-propyl-(1H)-pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl)trisphenol (PPT) increase the
expression of cyclin D1 (CCND1), whereas the ESR2-selective agonist
2,3-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)-propionitrile (DPN) and G-1 do not change the expression
of this protein, suggesting that ESR1 is the upstream receptor regulating Sertoli
cell proliferation. E2- or PPT-ESR1, through activation of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR)/mitogen-activated protein kinase 3/1 (MAPK3/1) and PIK3
pathways, induces upregulation of CCND1. KG-501, the compound that disrupts the
phospho-CREB/CREB binding protein (CBP) complex, does not change E2- or
PPT-ESR1-mediated CCND1 expression, suggesting that phospho-CREB/cyclic AMP
response element/CBP is not involved in the expression of this protein. E2- or
G-1-GPER, through activation of EGFR/MAPK3/1 and PIK3 pathways, may be involved
in the upregulation of antiapoptotic proteins BCL2 and BCL2L2. E2- or
G-1-GPER/EGFR/MAPK3/1/phospho-CREB decreases BAX expression. Taken together,
these results show a differential effect of E2-GPER on the CREB-mediated
transcription of proapoptotic and antiapoptotic genes of the same BCL2 gene
family. ESR1 and GPER can mediate the rapid E2 actions in the Sertoli cells,
which in turn can modulate nuclear transcriptional events important for Sertoli
cell function and maintenance of normal testis development and homeostasis. Our
findings are important to clarify the role of estrogen in a critical period of
testicular development, and to direct further studies, which may contribute to
better understanding of the causes of male infertility.

PMID: 22219213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Anticancer Res. 2011 Dec;31(12):4647-52.

Clinical significance of hypermethylation status in NSCLC: evaluation of a
30-gene panel in patients with advanced disease.

Pesek M(1), Kopeckova M, Benesova L, Meszarosova A, Mukensnabl P, Bruha F,
Minarik M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumology, Faculty Hospital Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is one of major factors in cancer progression. We
observed multiple genes involved in cancer-related signaling and focused on
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and evaluated
methylation in relation to various clinical parameters.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty genes were examined in 121 NSCLC patients using the 
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA)
method. Correlations to gender, smoking status, tumor subtype, disease stage and 
EGFR/KRAS mutation status were performed by chi-square test.
RESULTS: 90% of tumors exhibited methylation of at least one gene. Most
frequently methylated were cadherin-13 (CDH13), Ras associated domain-containing 
protein (RASSF1A), Wilms' tumor protein (WT1), adenomatous polyposis coli protein
(APC), paired box protein Pax-5 (PAX5), estrogen receptor (ESR1), an inhibitor of
cyclin-dependent kinase p15 (CDKN2B), paired box protein Pax-6 (PAX6),
transcription factor GATA-5 (GATA5) and cell adhesion molecule 4 (IGSF4). Overall
methylation (any gene) was increased in adenocarcinomas (p=0.0329), unrelated to 
gender or disease stage. Several genes exhibited variable methylation with gender
(CDH13, p<0.001; GATA5, p=0.02; PAX6, p=0.01 and ESR1, p=0.03), smoking (CDH13,
p=0.002), or epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation status [Von
Hippel-Lindau disease tumor supresor (VHL), p=0.001; CDKN2B, p=0.02; CDH13,
p=0.02; APC, p=0.04 and ESR1, p=0.04].
CONCLUSION: Differences in gene methylation associated with gender, smoking and
EGFR mutation suggest potential for prediction in relation to management of
tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy.

PMID: 22199344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Anticancer Res. 2011 Dec;31(12):4369-86.

Estrogen pathway polymorphisms and mammographic density.

Dumas I(1), Diorio C.

Author information: 
(1)Population Health Research Unit, FRSQ Research Center of the Quebec University
Affiliated Hospital Center, Quebec City, QC, Canada.

Elevated mammographic density (MD) is strongly associated with breast cancer risk
and the estrogen pathway has been proposed as a potential mechanism for this
association. It has been repeatedly observed that several established
estrogen-related factors associated with breast cancer risk, such as parity and
hormone replacement therapy, are also associated with MD. However, the
association of circulating estrogen levels (known to be strongly positively
associated with breast cancer risk) with MD has so far been inconsistent. Since
MD is highly heritable, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved 
in the estrogen pathway and their relation with MD could provide information that
would help understand the link between MD and breast cancer risk. This review of 
18 studies describes the relation of SNPs located in genes of the estrogen
pathway (genes coding for hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases (HSD3B1, HSD17B1),
cytochrome P450 (CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP17A1, CYP19A1 and CYP1B1),
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), uridine diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase
(UGT1A1), sulfotransferases (SULT1A1, SULT1E1) and for estrogen receptors alpha
and beta (ESR1, ESR2)) with MD. Most of the SNPs evaluated showed no association 
with MD when analyses were performed on overall study population. However, when
this relation was assessed within strata based on estrogen-related factors, a few
SNPs (HSD17B1 (rs2010750, rs598126 and rs676387), COMT (rs4680), UGT1A1
(rs8175347) and ESR1 (rs9340799)) seemed to be related to MD in the same
direction of their associations with breast cancer risk. Since such data are very
limited, additional research including stratified analyses by factors related to 
estrogen are needed to validate these findings.

PMID: 22199302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Biol Reprod. 2012 Mar 22;86(3):86. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.095927. Print 2012
Mar.

Generation of mice expressing only the long form of the prolactin receptor
reveals that both isoforms of the receptor are required for normal ovarian
function.

Le JA(1), Wilson HM, Shehu A, Mao J, Devi YS, Halperin J, Aguilar T, Seibold A,
Maizels E, Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2012 Mar;86(3):85.

Prolactin (PRL), a pleiotropic hormone essential for maintenance of corpus luteum
(CL) function and pregnancy, transduces its signal through two types of
receptors, a short form (PRLR-S) and a long form (PRLR-L). Both types of
receptors are expressed in the CL, yet their individual roles are not well
defined. We have shown previously that female transgenic mice expressing only
PRLR-S display total infertility characterized by defective follicular
development and early degeneration of CL, suggesting that expression of PRLR-L is
a prerequisite for normal follicular development and maintenance of CL. To
determine whether PRLR-L alone is the sole receptor required to maintain normal
CL formation, differentiation, and progesterone secretion, we generated two
transgenic mice which express only PRLR-L, either ubiquitously (Tg-RL) or in a
CL-specific manner (CL-RL). To generate CL-specific expression, we used the
HSD17B7 promoter. We found both transgenic mice models cycled normally, displayed
no apparent defect in follicular development, and had normal ovulation rates. The
STAT5 signaling pathway, considered essential for luteinization and progesterone 
production, was activated by PRL in both transgenic mice models. However, soon
after mating, Tg-RL and CL-RL mice showed early regression of CL, lack of
progesterone production, and implantation failure that rendered them totally
infertile. Embryo transfer studies demonstrated no embryo abnormalities, and
supplementation with progesterone rescued implantation failure in these mice.
Close observation revealed lack of luteinization and reduced expression of
proteins involved in progesterone biosynthesis despite normal levels of LHCGR
(LH-R), ESR1 (ER-alpha), CEBPB (C/EBP-beta) and CDKN1B (p27), proteins essential 
for luteinization. However, we found VEGFA, a key regulator of angiogenesis and
vascularization, to be dramatically reduced in both Tg-RL and CL-RL mice. We also
found collagen IV, a marker for the basal lamina of endothelial cells, aberrantly
expressed and a discordant organization of endothelial cells in CL. Although
luteinization did not occur in vivo, granulosa cells isolated from these mice
luteinized in culture. Taken together, these results suggest that a
vascularization defect in the CL may be responsible for lack of luteinization,
progesterone production, and infertility in mice expressing only PRLR-L. This
investigation therefore demonstrates that in contrast to earlier presumptions
that PRLR-L alone is able to support normal CL formation and function, both
isoforms of the PRL receptor are required in the CL for normal female fertility.

PMCID: PMC3316271
PMID: 22190699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. EMBO Mol Med. 2012 Jan;4(1):52-67. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201100187. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Reconstruction of nuclear receptor network reveals that NR2E3 is a novel upstream
regulator of ESR1 in breast cancer.

Park YY(1), Kim K, Kim SB, Hennessy BT, Kim SM, Park ES, Lim JY, Li J, Lu Y,
Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Jeong W, Mills GB, Safe S, Lee JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

ESR1 is one of the most important transcription factors and therapeutic targets
in breast cancer. By applying systems-level re-analysis of publicly available
gene expression data, we uncovered a potential regulator of ESR1. We demonstrated
that orphan nuclear receptor NR2E3 regulates ESR1 via direct binding to the ESR1 
promoter with concomitant recruitment of PIAS3 to the promoter in breast cancer
cells, and is essential for physiological cellular activity of ESR1 in estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer cells. Moreover, expression of NR2E3 was
significantly associated with recurrence-free survival and a favourable response 
to tamoxifen treatment in women with ER-positive breast cancer. Our results
provide mechanistic insights on the regulation of ESR1 by NR2E3 and the clinical 
relevance of NR2E3 in breast cancer.

Copyright © 2012 EMBO Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3376834
PMID: 22174013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Dig Dis Sci. 2012 May;57(5):1261-70. doi: 10.1007/s10620-011-2008-0. Epub 2011
Dec 16.

Externalization of saw-tooth architecture in small serrated polyps implies the
presence of methylation of IGFBP7.

Kaji E(1), Uraoka T, Kato J, Hiraoka S, Suzuki H, Akita M, Saito S, Tanaka T,
Ohara N, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-Cho,
Kita-Ku, Okayama 700-8558, Japan. eisukekaji@yahoo.co.jp

INTRODUCTION: Serrated polyps have been considered to be precursors of colorectal
cancer with microsatellite instability. However, the biological and/or
morphological changes which occur during the course of serrated polyp to cancer
remain to be elucidated.
METHODS: Twenty-eight colorectal serrated polyps including five mixed polyps (MP)
from 20 patients were observed by chromoendoscopy with magnification, and
subsequently resected endoscopically. The presence of mutations in two genes
(K-ras and BRAF) and the methylation status of six genes (MLH1-A, MLH1-C, ESR1,
P16, SOCS1, and IGFBP7) were examined.
RESULTS: The 28 polyps included 32 histological serrated lesions (22 sessile
serrated adenomas [SSA], six hyperplastic polyps [HP], and four traditional
serrated adenoma [TSA]-like lesions). BRAF mutation was frequently observed in
SSAs (19/22), while K-ras mutation was dominant in HPs (5/6). The externalization
of saw-tooth architecture in serrated polyps was endoscopically observed more
frequently in those with high levels of IGFBP7 methylation (P = 0.03). Moreover, 
the endoscopic finding was observed in five of six small serrated lesions
(<10 mm) which contained both BRAF mutation and high levels of IGFBP7
methylation. TSA-like lesions in small MPs demonstrated the endoscopic finding
with no or little MLH1 methylation, while the counterparts in the mixed polyps
had high levels of MLH1 methylation with relatively low levels of IGFBP7
methylation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggests two distinct pathways may be involved in the early
stages of the serrated pathway: one where MLH1 is primarily methylated, and a
second where methylated IGFBP7 is associated with an externalization of saw-tooth
architecture.

PMID: 22173745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Gen Virol. 2012 Apr;93(Pt 4):780-5. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.039396-0. Epub 2011 Dec 
14.

Characterization of the interaction between hepatitis C virus NS5B and the human 
oestrogen receptor alpha.

Hillung J(1), Ruiz-López E, Bellón-Echeverría I, Clemente-Casares P, Mas A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Regional de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad de Castilla La
Mancha, 02006 Albacete, Spain.

The RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (NS5B) of hepatitis C virus (HCV) is part of the
viral replicative complex and plays a crucial role in HCV replication. It has
been described that NS5B interacts with cellular proteins, and that interactions 
between NS5B and host proteins are crucial for viral replication. Some of the
host factors involved in the HCV replication cycle include the oestrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1), protein kinases (c-Src) and chaperones (Hsp70). In this report, we 
determine the requirements for the interplay between NS5B and the domain C of
ESR1 (ESR1C) by using Förster Resonance Energy Transfer. NS5B-ESR1C and
ESR1C-ESR1C interactions are dependent on ionic strength, indicating that
contacts are mainly electrostatic. Additionally, NS5B residues involved in NS5B
oligomerization were also essential for NS5B-ESR1C interaction. The study of the 
interactions among viral and host factors will provide data to establish
innovative therapeutic strategies and the development of new antiviral drugs.

PMID: 22170636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Pathol. 2012 May;227(1):8-16. doi: 10.1002/path.3974. Epub 2012 Feb 2.

Gene amplification of ESR1 in breast cancers--fact or fiction? A fluorescence in 
situ hybridization and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification study.

Ooi A(1), Inokuchi M, Harada S, Inazawa J, Tajiri R, Kitamura SS, Ikeda H,
Kawashima H, Dobashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kanazawa University, Ishikawa 920-8641, Japan. aooi@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    J Pathol. 2012 May;227(1):1-3.

Oestrogen receptor-alpha (ERa), encoded by the ESR1 gene located on 6q25, is a
nuclear transcription factor. Since it was reported in 2007 that more than 20% of
breast cancers show ESR1 gene amplification, there has been considerable
controversy about its frequency and clinical significance. We set out to assess
the frequency and levels of ESR1 amplification in breast cancers. In a total of
106 breast needle biopsy specimens examined by immunohistochemistry, 78 tumours
contained more than 10% ERa-positive cancer cells. In fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis with an ESR1-specific probe, variously extended
ESR1 signals were found in ERa-expressing cells. Some of these were
indistinguishable from large clustered signals generally accepted to mean
high-level gene amplification in homogeneously staining regions (HSRs), and could
be considered to represent gene amplification. However, with RNase treatment, the
'HSR-like' signals changed to small compact signals, and are thus thought to
represent concentrated RNA. FISH using two differently labelled probes
corresponding to the non-overlapping 5'- and 3'-end portions of the ESR1 gene on 
touch smears showed a preserved spatial relationship of the 3' to 5' sequence of 
ESR1, therefore strongly suggesting that the RNA consisted of primary
transcripts. Using touch smears obtained from 51 fresh tumours, precise
enumeration of ESR1 signals with a correction by the number of centromere 6 on
FISH after RNase A treatment revealed that three tumours (5.9%) had tumour cells 
with one to three additional copies of ESR1 as predominant subpopulations. This
infrequent and low level of gene amplification of ESR1 was also detected as a
'gain' of the gene by analysis with multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA). The consistent results from immunohistochemistry, FISH, and
MLPA in the present study settle the long-standing debate concerning gene
amplification of ESR1 in breast carcinoma.

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22170254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Clin Lung Cancer. 2012 Jul;13(4):297-303. doi: 10.1016/j.cllc.2011.11.003. Epub
2011 Dec 13.

Aberrant promoter methylation of CDH13 and MGMT genes is associated with
clinicopathologic characteristics of primary non-small-cell lung carcinoma.

Kontic M(1), Stojsic J, Jovanovic D, Bunjevacki V, Ognjanovic S, Kuriger J,
Puumala S, Nelson HH.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonology Clinic, Clinical Centre of Serbia, Medical Faculty, University in 
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.

Nonsmall-cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) (n = 65) were analyzed for promoter
methylation of RASSF1A, CDH13, MGMT, ESR1, and DAPK genes in matching lung
tumors, normal lung tissue, and blood samples. Aberrant methylation in CDH13 and 
MGMT was associated with clinicopathologic features of NSCLC. Hypermethylation
detected in primary tumors was not observed in corresponding blood samples, which
rendered this an unsuitable blood-based test for NSCLC detection.INTRODUCTION:
Systemic methylation changes may be a diagnostic marker for tumor development or 
prognosis. Here, we investigate the relationship between gene methylation in lung
tumors relative to normal lung tissue and whether DNA methylation changes can be 
detected in paired blood samples.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Sixty-five patients were enrolled in a surgical case series
of non-small-cell lung carcinoma at a single institution. By using bisulfite
pyrosequencing, CpG methylation was quantified at 5 genes (RASSF1A, CDH13, MGMT, 
ESR1, and DAPK) in lung tumor, pathologically normal lung tissue, and circulating
blood from enrolled cases.
RESULTS: The analyses of methylation in tumors compared with normal lung tissue
identified higher methylation of CDH13, RASSF1A, and DAPK genes, whereas ESR1 and
MGMT methylation did not differ significantly between these tissue types. We then
examined whether the 3 aberrantly methylated genes could be detected in blood.
The difference in methylation observed in tumors was not reflected in methylation
status of matching blood samples, which indicated a low feasibility of detecting 
lung cancer by analyzing these genes in a blood-based test. Lastly, we probed
whether tumor methylation was associated with clinical and demographic
characteristics. Histology and sex were associated with methylation at the CDH13 
gene, whereas, stage was associated with methylation at MGMT.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed higher methylation of RASSF1A, CDH13, and DAPK
genes in lung tumors compared with normal lung. The lack of reflection of these
methylation changes in blood samples from patients with non-small-cell lung
carcinoma indicates their poor suitability for a screening test.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3346856
PMID: 22169480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Calcif Tissue Int. 2012 Feb;90(2):137-43. doi: 10.1007/s00223-011-9557-2. Epub
2011 Dec 14.

Genetic polymorphisms of the Wnt receptor LRP5 are differentially associated with
trochanteric and cervical hip fractures.

Riancho J(1), García-Ibarbia C, Pérez-Núñez MI, Alonso MA, Díaz T,
Pérez-Castrillón JL, Riancho JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital U.M. Valdecilla-IFIMAV, Universidad 
de Cantabria, RETICEF, Santander, Spain.

Epidemiological studies suggest that cervical and trochanteric hip fractures have
different pathogenesis. We tested the hypothesis that genetic factors have
different influences on both types of fractures. Ten polymorphisms of genes known
to play an important role in skeletal homeostasis [estrogen receptor alpha
(ESR1), aromatase (CYP19A1), type I collagen (COL1A1), and lipoprotein
receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5)] were analyzed in 471 Spanish patients with
fragility hip fractures. Two polymorphisms of the LRP5 gene (rs7116604 and
rs3781600) were associated with the type of fracture (P = 0.0085 and 0.0047,
respectively). The presence of rare alleles at each locus was associated with
trochanteric fractures over cervical fractures (OR = 1.7 in individuals with at
least one rare allele at rs7116604 or rs3781600 loci in comparison with the
common homozygotes). Considering individuals bearing the four common alleles as
reference, the OR for trochanteric fractures was 1.6 in those with one or two
rare alleles and 7.5 in those with three or four rare alleles (P for
trend = 0.0074), which is consistent with an allele-dosage effect. There were no 
significant differences in the frequency distributions of the ESR1, CYP19A1, and 
COL1A1 genotypes between trochanteric and cervical fractures in either the
original group or an extended group of 818 patients. These results suggest that
LRP5 alleles influence the type of hip fractures. They support the view that
different genetic factors are involved in cervical and trochanteric fractures,
which should be taken into consideration in future genetic association studies.

PMID: 22167346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Breast Cancer. 2013 Apr;20(2):159-66. doi: 10.1007/s12282-011-0318-x. Epub 2011
Dec 3.

Establishment of a standardized gene-expression analysis system using
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded, breast cancer specimens.

Ibusuki M(1), Fu P, Yamamoto S, Fujiwara S, Yamamoto Y, Honda Y, Iyama K, Iwase
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Kumamoto, Kumamoto, 860-8556, Japan. 
mibusuki@kumamoto-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: It has recently being emphasized that gene-expression profiles are
important clinical decision-making tools, and as such must be standardized across
hospital laboratories in the same way as pathological investigations. In this
study our objective was to independently establish a standardized gene-expression
assay system using routinely processed, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) 
tissues.
METHODS: To verify gene expression by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction, the most stably expressed reference genes were explored using 30
matched FFPE and fresh frozen (FF) tissues. FFPE specimens from 290 female breast
cancer patients were used for further RNA extraction; ESR1 and PGR were measured 
using 203 matched FFPE and FF specimens and normalized to these reference genes.
RESULTS: RNA extracted from FFPE specimens was highly degraded, but almost the
same selection of genes was identified-TAF, PUM1, and ACTB, and, for FFPE
specimens only, FKBP15. Eventually 88.6% of all the FFPE samples were identified 
as quantitatively and qualitatively adequate for downstream analysis. The results
revealed good correlation and excellent concordance with ERa and PgR protein
expression evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Moreover, the distribution of ESR1 
and PGR gene expression values was quite reasonable, reflecting differences
between the transcriptional mechanisms of the respective genes.
CONCLUSIONS: We successfully confirmed that our gene-expression analysis system
provides good quality control for larger scale assays; it may therefore be
suitable for development, in the near future, of a multiple gene assay as a
routine clinical judgment tool.

PMID: 22139726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Epigenetics. 2011 Dec;6(12):1498-504. doi: 10.4161/epi.6.12.18296.

Neonatal DNA methylation patterns associate with gestational age.

Schroeder JW(1), Conneely KN, Cubells JC, Kilaru V, Newport DJ, Knight BT, Stowe 
ZN, Brennan PA, Krushkal J, Tylavsky FA, Taylor RN, Adkins RM, Smith AK.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Program, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Risk for adverse neonatal outcome increases with declining gestational age (GA), 
and changes in DNA methylation may contribute to the relationship between GA and 
adverse health outcomes in offspring. To test this hypothesis, we evaluated the
association between GA and more than 27,000 CpG sites in neonatal DNA extracted
from umbilical cord blood from two prospectively-characterized cohorts: (1) a
discovery cohort consisting of 259 neonates from women with a history of
neuropsychiatric disorders and (2) a replication cohort consisting of 194
neonates of uncomplicated mothers. GA was determined by obstetrician report and
maternal last menstrual period. The associations between proportion of DNA
methylated and GA were evaluated by fitting a separate linear mixed effects model
for each CpG site, adjusting for relevant covariates including neonatal sex,
race, parity, birth weight percentile and chip effects. CpG sites in 39 genes
were associated with GA (false discovery rate < 0.05) in the discovery cohort.
The same CpG sites in 25 of these genes replicated in the replication cohort,
with each association replicating in the same direction. Notably, these CpG sites
were located in genes previously implicated in labor and delivery (e.g., AVP,
OXT, CRHBP and ESR1) or that may influence the risk for adverse health outcomes
later in life (e.g., DUOX2, TMEM176A and CASP8). All associations were
independent of method of delivery or induction of labor. These results suggest
neonatal DNA methylation varies with GA even in term deliveries. The potential
contribution of these changes to clinically significant postnatal outcomes
warrants further investigation.

PMCID: PMC3256334
PMID: 22139580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Lipids. 2012;2012:547643. doi: 10.1155/2012/547643. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Molecular Mechanisms Underlying the Link between Nuclear Receptor Function and
Cholesterol Gallstone Formation.

Vázquez MC(1), Rigotti A, Zanlungo S.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Gastroenterología, Escuela de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad
Católica, Marcoleta No. 367, 8330024 Santiago, Chile.

Cholesterol gallstone disease is highly prevalent in western countries,
particularly in women and some specific ethnic groups. The formation of
water-insoluble cholesterol crystals is due to a misbalance between the three
major lipids present in the bile: cholesterol, bile salts, and phospholipids.
Many proteins implicated in biliary lipid secretion in the liver are regulated by
several transcription factors, including nuclear receptors LXR and FXR. Human and
murine genetic, physiological, pathophysiological, and pharmacological evidence
is consistent with the relevance of these nuclear receptors in gallstone
formation. In addition, there is emerging data that also suggests a role for
estrogen receptor ESR1 in abnormal cholesterol metabolism leading to gallstone
disease. A better comprehension of the role of nuclear receptor function in
gallstone formation may help to design new and more effective therapeutic
strategies for this highly prevalent disease condition.

PMCID: PMC3206498
PMID: 22132343  [PubMed]


337. Sci Total Environ. 2012 Jan 1;414:81-9. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.10.044.
Epub 2011 Nov 25.

Common classification schemes for PCB congeners and the gene expression of CYP17,
CYP19, ESR1 and ESR2.

Warner J(1), Osuch JR, Karmaus W, Landgraf JR, Taffe B, O'Keefe M, Mikucki D,
Haan P.

Author information: 
(1)Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, United States.

BACKGROUND: Reliable techniques to measure polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)
congeners make the clearer definition of their effects on human health possible. 
Given that PCBs are classified as endocrine disrupters, we sought to explore the 
expression of some key genes involved in sex steroid metabolism.
OBJECTIVES: To examine common classification schemes of PCB congeners and
determine whether exposure to groups classified by mechanism of action alter the 
gene expression (GE) of CYP17, CYP19, and ESR1 and ESR2.
METHODS: GE and exposure to various classifications of lipid-adjusted PCB
congeners were examined in 139 daughters of the Michigan Fisheaters' Cohort.
Using mixed models analyses and adjusting for age, menopausal status, and current
use of oral contraceptives and hormone replacement therapy, GE data were
regressed on exposure to PCB congener groupings based on mechanism of action.
RESULTS: Three novel findings are elucidated: first, that up-regulation of CYP19 
expression is associated with exposure to PCB groupings containing dioxin-like,
potentially anti-estrogenic, immunotoxic congeners, including PCB IUPAC #74,
#105, #118, #138, #156, #157, #158, #167, and #170 from this cohort. Second, that
exposure to similar congeners (PCB IUPAC #105, #156, #157, #158, and #167 in this
cohort) but using a classification based solely on hormonal mechanisms of action 
is associated with increased expression of ESR2. Third, that increased expression
of CYP17 is of borderline significance when associated with exposure to PCB IUPAC
#118, #138, and #156.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings are both counter-intuitive and intriguing. Rather
than exhibiting anti-estrogenic effects alone, they suggest that these congeners 
up-regulate the major enzyme involved in estrogen synthesis and tend to confirm
previous findings of links between AhR and ER signaling pathways. Replication of 
these findings, expansion of the number of genes examined, exploration of
mixtures of environmental chemicals, and subsequent study of health outcomes in a
larger cohort are future priorities.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22119029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Histopathology. 2011 Nov;59(5):918-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.04028.x.

Evaluation of a hormone receptor-positive ovarian carcinoma subtype with a
favourable prognosis by determination of progesterone receptor and oestrogen
receptor 1 mRNA expression in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue.

Sinn BV(1), Darb-Esfahani S, Wirtz RM, Budczies J, Sehouli J, Chekerov R, Dietel 
M, Denkert C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany.
bruno.sinn@charite.de

AIMS: In vitro and epidemiological studies indicate an essential role for
progesterone in the aetiology and progression of ovarian carcinoma. The aim of
this study was to examine the prognostic role of progesterone receptor (PR)
protein and mRNA expression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: PR expression was examined by immunohistochemistry (n=143)
and kinetic reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) from
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue (n=55). PR mRNA and protein
expression correlated (P<0.0001). PR mRNA was a positive predictor for overall
and progression-free survival (P=0.0005 and P<0.0001, respectively). Protein
expression was also prognostic (P=0.015 and P=0.0011, respectively), whereas only
PR mRNA retained its prognostic value on multivariate analysis (P=0.04). PR mRNA 
was still a positive prognostic marker among oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)
mRNA-positive tumours (P=0.0007) and survival was best in patients with PR- and
ESR1-positive phenotypes (P=0.0155 and P=0.0016, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Expression of PR and ESR1 defines a subgroup of ovarian carcinomas
with a favourable prognosis. PR and ESR1 mRNA expression analysis is a sensitive,
quantitative and easy-to-perform high-throughput analytical tool for the
identification of this subgroup and could be predictive in clinical trials
focused on patients with potential benefit from hormonal treatment.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 22092403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Biol Reprod. 2012 Mar 19;86(3):68. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.095844. Print 2012
Mar.

Protein restriction to pregnant rats increases the plasma levels of angiotensin
II and expression of angiotensin II receptors in uterine arteries.

Gao H(1), Yallampalli U, Yallampalli C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, The University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas 77555-1062, USA.

Whether gestational protein restriction affects the renin-angiotensin system
(RAS) in uterine artery remains unknown. In this study, we hypothesized that
gestational protein restriction alters the expression of RAS components in
uterine artery. In study one, time-scheduled pregnant Sprague Dawley rats were
fed a normal or low-protein (LP) diet from Day 3 of pregnancy until they were
killed at Days 19 and 22. The uterine arteries were collected and used for gene
expression of Ace, Ace2, Agtr1a, Agtr1b, Agtr2, Esr1, and Esr2 by quantitative
real-time PCR and/or Western blotting. LP increased plasma levels of angiotensin 
II in pregnant rats. In the uterine artery, the expressions of Agtr1a, Agtr1b,
and Esr1 were increased by LP at Days 19 and 22 of pregnancy, whereas the
abundance of AGTR1 and AGTR2 was increased by LP at Day 19 of pregnancy. The
expression of Ace2 was not detectable in rat uterine artery. In study two, virgin
female rats were ovariectomized and implanted with either 17beta-estradiol (E2), 
progesterone (P4), both E2 and P4, or placebo pellets until they were killed 7
days later. In rat uterine artery, E2 and P4 reduced the expression of Agtr1a,
and E2 increased the expression of Agtr1b and Agtr2, but neither E2 nor P4
regulated the expression of Ace. These results indicate that gestational protein 
restriction induces an increase in Agtr1 expression in uterine artery, and thus
may exacerbate the vasoconstriction to elevated angiotensin II present in
maternal circulation, and that female sex hormones also play a role in this
process.

PMCID: PMC3316266
PMID: 22088913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Fam Cancer. 2012 Mar;11(1):19-26. doi: 10.1007/s10689-011-9489-z.

Mutation and association analyses of the candidate genes ESR1, ESR2, MAX, PCNA,
and KAT2A in patients with unexplained MSH2-deficient tumors.

Rahner N(1), Brockschmidt FF, Steinke V, Kahl P, Becker T, Vasen HF, Wijnen JT,
Tops CJ, Holinski-Feder E, Ligtenberg MJ, Spruijt L, Görgens H, Stemmler S, Kloor
M, Dietmaier W; Dutch Cancer Genetics Group, Schumacher J, Nöthen MM, Propping P.

Collaborators: Wagner A, Sijmons R, Aalfs C, Kluijt I, Hoogerbrugge N, Gomez
Garcia E, Menko F, Letteboer T, Hes F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, BMZ, University of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse
25, 53127, Bonn, Germany. nils.rahner@uni-duesseldorf.de

Lynch syndrome (Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer/HNPCC) is a cancer
susceptibility syndrome which is caused by germline mutations in DNA mismatch
repair (MMR) genes, in particular MLH1 and MSH2. A pathogenic germline mutation
in the respective MMR gene is suggested by the finding of a loss of a mismatch
repair protein in tumor tissue on immunohistochemical staining combined with an
early age of onset and/or the familial occurrence of colorectal cancer.
Pathogenic germline mutations are identifiable in around 60% of patients
suspected of Lynch syndrome, depending on the familial occurrence. The aim of the
present study was to identify novel susceptibility genes for Lynch syndrome. 64
Healthy controls and 64 Lynch syndrome patients with no pathogenic MSH2 mutation 
but a loss of MSH2 expression in their tumor tissue were screened for rare and
disease causing germline mutations in the functional candidate genes ESR1, ESR2, 
MAX, PCNA, and KAT2A. Thirty variants were identified, and these were then
genotyped in an independent sample of 36 mutation negative Lynch syndrome
patients and 234 controls. Since a trend towards association was observed for
KAT2A, an additional set of 21 tagging SNPs was analyzed at this locus in a final
case-control sample of 142 mutation negative Lynch syndrome patients and 298
controls. The mutation analysis failed to reveal any rare disease-causing
mutations. No association was found at the single-marker or haplotypic level for 
any common disease-modifying variant. The present results suggest that neither
rare nor common genetic variants in ESR1, ESR2, MAX, PCNA, or KAT2A contribute to
the development of Lynch syndrome.

PMID: 22086303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Chronobiol Int. 2011 Dec;28(10):852-61. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2011.618896.

Epigenetic impact of long-term shiftwork: pilot evidence from circadian genes and
whole-genome methylation analysis.

Zhu Y(1), Stevens RG, Hoffman AE, Tjonneland A, Vogel UB, Zheng T, Hansen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. yong.zhu@yale.edu

Epigenetic association studies have demonstrated differential promoter
methylation in the core circadian genes in breast cancer cases relative to
cancer-free controls. The current pilot study aims to investigate whether
epigenetic changes affecting breast cancer risk could be caused by circadian
disruption through exposure to light at night. Archived DNA samples extracted
from whole blood of 117 female subjects from a prospective cohort conducted in
Denmark were included in this study. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based
method was used for detection of gene-promoter methylation, whereas genome-wide
methylation analysis was performed using the Illumina Infinium Methylation Chip. 
Long-term shiftwork resulted in the same promoter hypomethylation of CLOCK and
hypermethylation of CRY2, as was previously observed in breast cancer
case-control studies. Genome-wide methylation analysis further discovered
widespread methylation alterations in shiftworkers, including changes in many
methylation- and cancer-relevant genes. Pathway analysis of the genes with
altered methylation patterns revealed several cancer-related pathways. One of the
top three networks generated was designated as "DNA replication, recombination,
and repair, gene expression, behavior" with ESR1 (estrogen receptor a) featured
most prominently in the network, underscoring the potential breast cancer
relevance of the genes differentially methylated in long-term shiftworkers. These
results, although exploratory, demonstrate the first evidence of the
cancer-relevant epigenetic effects of night shiftwork, which warrant further
investigation. Considering there are millions of shiftworkers worldwide,
understanding the effects of this exposure may lead to novel strategies for
cancer prevention and new policies regulating shiftwork.

PMCID: PMC3631105
PMID: 22080730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Vet Comp Oncol. 2011 Dec;9(4):241-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5829.2010.00250.x. Epub
2011 Jan 17.

Identification of genetic variation in 11 candidate genes of canine mammary
tumour.

Borge KS(1), Børresen-Dale AL, Lingaas F.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Genetics, Department of Basic Sciences and Aquatic Medicine,
Norwegian School of Veterinary Science, Oslo, Norway. KajaSverdrup.Borge@nvh.no

The incidence of canine mammary tumours (CMTs) differs significantly between
breeds, strongly supporting an influence of genetic risk factors. We aimed at
identifying germline genetic variations in mammary tumour-associated genes in
dogs and survey whether these might alter the encoded proteins. We sequenced 11
genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, BRIP1, CDH1, CHEK2, EGFR, ESR1, HER2, PTEN, STK11 and TP53) 
and screened for genetic variations. Sixty-four single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) were identified. Nine of the coding SNPs were non-synonymous, of which
four were located in gene regions conserved across four species. Three of the
non-synonymous SNPs might be damaging according to PolyPhen predictions. One of
the indels identified has previously been associated with CMTs. Because of the
founder effects, genetic drift and inbreeding in many dog breeds the allele
frequencies of the genes studied are likely to vary significantly between breeds 
and contribute to the considerable difference in genetic risk associated with
cancer.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22077404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Endocrinol. 2012 Feb;212(2):227-38. doi: 10.1530/JOE-11-0358. Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Estrogen receptor (ER) expression and function in the pregnant human myometrium: 
estradiol via ERa activates ERK1/2 signaling in term myometrium.

Welsh T(1), Johnson M, Yi L, Tan H, Rahman R, Merlino A, Zakar T, Mesiano S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Case Western Reserve University, 11100
Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Estrogens are thought to promote labor by increasing the expression of
pro-contraction genes in myometrial cells. The specific estrogen receptors ((ERs:
ERa and ERß (also known as ESR1 and ESR2)) and G protein-coupled receptor 30
(GPR30; also known as G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1)) and signaling
pathways that mediate these actions are not clearly understood. In this study, we
identified the ERs expressed in the pregnant human myometrium and determined a
key extranuclear signaling pathway through which estradiol (E(2)) modulates
expression of the gene encoding the oxytocin receptor (OXTR), a major
pro-contraction protein. Using quantitative RT-PCR, we found that ERa and GPR30
mRNAs were expressed in the human pregnant myometrium while ERß mRNA was
virtually undetectable. While mRNA encoding ERa was the predominant ER transcript
in the pregnant myometrium, ERa protein was largely undetectable in myometrial
tissue by immunoblotting. Pharmacological inhibition of 26S proteasome activity
increased ERa protein abundance to detectable levels in term myometrial explants,
however, indicating rapid turnover of ERa protein by proteasomal processing in
the pregnant myometrium. E(2) stimulated rapid extranuclear signaling in
myometrial explants, as evidenced by increased extracellularly regulated kinase
(ERK1/2) phosphorylation within 10<U+200A>min. This effect was inhibited by
pre-treatment with an ER antagonist, ICI 182<U+200A>780, indicating the involvement of
ERa. Inhibition of ERK signaling abrogated the ability of E(2) to stimulate OXTR 
gene expression in myometrial explants. We conclude that estrogenic actions in
the human myometrium during pregnancy, including the stimulation of
contraction-associated gene expression, can be mediated by extranuclear signaling
through ERa via activation of the ERK/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway.

PMID: 22068927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Br J Cancer. 2011 Nov 8;105(10):1574-81. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.355.

Molecular characterisation of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) breast
tumour specimens using a custom 512-gene breast cancer bead array-based platform.

Abramovitz M(1), Barwick BG, Willis S, Young B, Catzavelos C, Li Z, Kodani M,
Tang W, Bouzyk M, Moreno CS, Leyland-Jones B.

Author information: 
(1)VM Institute of Research, 2020 University Street, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2A5,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumour tissue represents an 
immense but mainly untapped resource with respect to molecular profiling. The
DASL (cDNA-mediated Annealing, Selection, extension, and Ligation) assay is a
recently described, RT-PCR-based, highly multiplexed high-throughput gene
expression platform developed by Illumina specifically for fragmented RNA
typically obtained from FFPE specimens, which enables expression profiling. In
order to extend the utility of the DASL assay for breast cancer, we have custom
designed and validated a 512-gene human breast cancer panel.
METHODS: The RNA from FFPE breast tumour specimens were analysed using the DASL
assay. Breast cancer subtype was defined from pathology immunohistochemical (IHC)
staining. Differentially expressed genes between the IHC-defined subtypes were
assessed by prediction analysis of microarrays (PAM) and then used in the
analysis of two published data sets with clinical outcome data.
RESULTS: Gene expression signatures on our custom breast cancer panel were very
reproducible between replicates (average Pearson's R²=0.962) and the 152 genes
common to both the standard cancer DASL panel (Illumina) and our breast cancer
DASL panel were similarly expressed for samples run on both panels (average
R²=0.877). Moreover, expression of ESR1, PGR and ERBB2 corresponded well with
their respective pathology-defined IHC status. A 30-gene set indicative of
IHC-defined breast cancer subtypes was found to segregate samples based on their 
subtype in our data sets and published data sets. Furthermore, several of these
genes were significantly associated with overall survival (OS) and relapse-free
survival (RFS) in these previously published data sets, indicating that they are 
biomarkers of the different breast cancer subtypes and the prognostic outcomes
associated with these subtypes.
CONCLUSION: We have demonstrated the ability to expression profile degraded RNA
transcripts derived from FFPE tissues on the DASL platform. Importantly, we have 
identified a 30-biomarker gene set that can classify breast cancer into subtypes 
and have shown that a subset of these markers is prognostic of OS and RFS.

2011 Cancer Research UK

PMCID: PMC3242517
PMID: 22067903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Reproduction. 2012 Feb;143(2):211-9. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0171. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Comparison of 7a-methyl-19-nortestosterone effectiveness alone or combined with
progestins on androgen receptor mediated-transactivation.

García-Becerra R(1), Ordaz-Rosado D, Noé G, Chávez B, Cooney AJ, Larrea F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y
Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico.
fernando.larreag@quetzal.innsz.mx

7a-methyl-19-nortestosterone (MENT) is an androgen with potent gonadotropin
inhibitory activity and prostate-sparing effects. These attributes give MENT
advantages over testosterone as a male contraceptive, but, as in the case of
testosterone, a partial dose-dependent suppression of spermatogenesis has been
observed. Combination of testosterone or MENT with synthetic progestins improves 
the rate of azoospermia; however, it is unknown whether these combinations affect
hormone androgenicity or exert synergistic effects via progestational or
androgenic interaction. Herein, using transactivation assays, we examined the
ability of MENT alone or combined with several 19-nor-derived synthetic
progestins to activate androgen receptor (AR)-dependent gene transcription. In
addition, the capability of 7a-methyl-estradiol (7a-methyl-E(2)), an aromatized
metabolite of MENT, to transactivate gene transcription via estrogen receptor a
(ERa; ESR1) or ERß (ESR2) was also investigated. As expected, MENT induced gene
transactivation through either the progesterone receptor (PGR) or the AR. MENT
was as efficient as progesterone in activating PGR-mediated reporter gene
expression, but it was ten times more potent than testosterone and
dihydrotestoterone in activating of AR-driven gene expression. The addition of
increasing concentrations of other 19-nortestosterone derivatives (norethisterone
or levonorgestrel) did not affect, in a significant manner, the ability of MENT
to activate AR-dependent reporter gene transcription. The same results were
obtained with different cell lines. 7a-Methyl-E(2) resulted in potent estrogen
activity via both ER subtypes with efficiency similar to natural E(2). These
results suggest that the addition of 19-nortestosterone-derived progestins, as a 
hormonal adjuvant in male fertility strategies for effective spermatogenic
suppression, does not display any detrimental effect that would interfere with
MENT androgenic transcriptional activity.

PMID: 22065861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Reprod Sci. 2012 Jan;19(1):102-14. doi: 10.1177/1933719111414207. Epub 2011 Nov
7.

Role of label-retaining cells in estrogen-induced endometrial regeneration.

Chan RW(1), Kaitu'u-Lino T, Gargett CE.

Author information: 
(1)Monash University Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Clayton, Victoria,
Australia.

Candidate stem/progenitor cells have been identified in mouse endometrium as
label-retaining cells (LRCs). The role of endometrial stem/progenitor cells in
initiating estrogen-stimulated endometrial growth in prepubertal and cycling mice
was investigated following a single 17ß-estradiol (E2) injection in
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)-labeled and -chased (LRC), ovariectomised mice.
Proliferating (BrdU(+)/Ki-67(+)) and mitotic (BrdU(+)/PH3(+)) epithelial LRCs
were first detected in prepubertal mice 8 hours following E2 treatment,
initiating the proliferative response. In contrast, all epithelial LRCs and 16%
of epithelial cells in cycling mice proliferated within 2 hours. In cycling mice,
12% of stromal LRCs initiated a proliferative response 8 hours after E2.
Proliferating epithelial LRCs and most stromal LRCs (85%) lacked estrogen
receptor-a (ESR1). These findings suggest that endometrial epithelial LRCs
function as stem/progenitor cells by receiving proliferative signals from
neighboring ESR1(+) niche cells to initiate the growth of the epithelium during
development, while mature epithelial cells may undergo self-replication in
cycling endometrium.

PMID: 22064386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Clin Chim Acta. 2012 Jan 18;413(1-2):81-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.10.028. Epub
2011 Oct 26.

ESR1 in myocardial infarction.

Puzianowska-Kuznicka M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Epigenetics, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Warsaw, 
Poland. mpuzianowska@wum.edu.pl

Women live longer than men; this can be attributed in part to the function of
estrogens. In premenopausal women 17ß-estradiol (E2) is produced mainly by the
ovaries. Extra-ovarian sources of this hormone comprise adipose tissue, breast
tissue, bone, leukocytes, heart, testes, prostate, adrenal tissues, and some
brain structures. E2 exerts the majority of its biological functions by
interacting with the nuclear receptors ERa and ERß, encoded by the ESR1 and ESR2 
genes, respectively. The genomic mechanism of ER action is the regulation of the 
activity of target genes. In addition, E2 induces rapid cellular effects in
transcription-independent, non-genomic mechanisms, acting via receptors localized
in the plasma membrane, in the cytoplasm, and in the mitochondria. Notably, ERa
commonly serves as an extra-nuclear receptor of E2. In wild type animal models of
cardiac ischemia ERa activation reduces infarct size, apoptosis of
cardiomyocytes, inflammation, and oxidative stress, induces vasodilatation and
increases neovascularization. The cardioprotective role of ERa in human is not
fully elucidated. An individual with disruptive ESR1 mutation had dysfunctional
epithelium and suffered from early cardiovascular disease. An association of the 
common ESR1 -397T>C and -351A>G polymorphisms and of other polymorphisms with
cardiovascular disease and with myocardial infarction is still not firmly
established.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22061094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Breast Cancer Res. 2011;13(6):R110. doi: 10.1186/bcr3052. Epub 2011 Nov 2.

Common breast cancer susceptibility alleles are associated with tumour subtypes
in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers: results from the Consortium of
Investigators of Modifiers of BRCA1/2.

Mulligan AM, Couch FJ, Barrowdale D, Domchek SM, Eccles D, Nevanlinna H, Ramus
SJ, Robson M, Sherman M, Spurdle AB, Wappenschmidt B, Lee A, McGuffog L, Healey
S, Sinilnikova OM, Janavicius R, Hansen Tv, Nielsen FC, Ejlertsen B, Osorio A,
Muñoz-Repeto I, Durán M, Godino J, Pertesi M, Benítez J, Peterlongo P, Manoukian 
S, Peissel B, Zaffaroni D, Cattaneo E, Bonanni B, Viel A, Pasini B, Papi L,
Ottini L, Savarese A, Bernard L, Radice P, Hamann U, Verheus M, Meijers-Heijboer 
HE, Wijnen J, Gómez García EB, Nelen MR, Kets CM, Seynaeve C, Tilanus-Linthorst
MM, van der Luijt RB, van Os T, Rookus M, Frost D, Jones JL, Evans DG, Lalloo F, 
Eeles R, Izatt L, Adlard J, Davidson R, Cook J, Donaldson A, Dorkins H, Gregory
H, Eason J, Houghton C, Barwell J, Side LE, McCann E, Murray A, Peock S, Godwin
AK, Schmutzler RK, Rhiem K, Engel C, Meindl A, Ruehl I, Arnold N, Niederacher D, 
Sutter C, Deissler H, Gadzicki D, Kast K, Preisler-Adams S, Varon-Mateeva R,
Schoenbuchner I, Fiebig B, Heinritz W, Schäfer D, Gevensleben H, Caux-Moncoutier 
V, Fassy-Colcombet M, Cornelis F, Mazoyer S, Léoné M, Boutry-Kryza N, Hardouin A,
Berthet P, Muller D, Fricker JP, Mortemousque I, Pujol P, Coupier I, Lebrun M,
Kientz C, Longy M, Sevenet N, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Isaacs C, Caldes T, de la Hoya M,
Heikkinen T, Aittomäki K, Blanco I, Lazaro C, Barkardottir RB, Soucy P, Dumont M,
Simard J, Montagna M, Tognazzo S, D'Andrea E, Fox S, Yan M, Rebbeck T, Olopade O,
Weitzel JN, Lynch HT, Ganz PA, Tomlinson GE, Wang X, Fredericksen Z, Pankratz VS,
Lindor NM, Szabo C, Offit K, Sakr R, Gaudet M, Bhatia J, Kauff N, Singer CF, Tea 
MK, Gschwantler-Kaulich D, Fink-Retter A, Mai PL, Greene MH, Imyanitov E,
O'Malley FP, Ozcelik H, Glendon G, Toland AE, Gerdes AM, Thomassen M, Kruse TA,
Jensen UB, Skytte AB, Caligo MA, Soller M, Henriksson K, Wachenfeldt vA, Arver B,
Stenmark-Askmalm M, Karlsson P, Ding YC, Neuhausen SL, Beattie M, Pharoah PD,
Moysich KB, Nathanson KL, Karlan BY, Gross J, John EM, Daly MB, Buys SM, Southey 
MC, Hopper JL, Terry MB, Chung W, Miron AF, Goldgar D, Chenevix-Trench G, Easton 
DF, Andrulis IL, Antoniou AC; Breast Cancer Family Registry; EMBRACE; GEMO Study 
Collaborators; HEBON; kConFab Investigators; Ontario Cancer Genetics Network;
SWE-BRCA; CIMBA.

Collaborators: Ellis S, Fineberg E, Platte R, Miedzybrodzka Z, Morrison P,
Jeffers L, Cole T, Ong KR, Hoffman J, James M, Paterson J, Downing S, Taylor A,
Rogers T, Kennedy J, Barton D, Porteous M, Drummond S, Brewer C, Kivuva E, Searle
A, Goodman S, Hill K, Murday V, Bradshaw N, Snadden L, Longmuir M, Watt C, Gibson
S, Haque E, Tobias E, Duncan A, Jacobs C, Langman C, Whaite A, Chu C, Miller J,
Ellis I, Taylor J, Male A, Berlin C, Collier R, Douglas F, Claber O, Jobson I,
Walker L, McLeod D, Halliday D, Durell S, Stayner B, Shanley S, Rahman N,
Houlston R, Bancroft E, D'Mello L, Page E, Ardern-Jones A, Kohut K, Wiggins J,
Castro E, Mitra A, Robertson L, Quarrell O, Bardsley C, Hodgson S, Goff S, Brice 
G, Winchester L, Eddy C, Tripathi V, Attard V, Lucassen A, Crawford G, McBride D,
Smalley S, Barjhoux L, Verny-Pierre C, Giraud S, Gauthier-Villars M, Buecher B,
Houdayer C, Belotti M, Tirapo C, de Pauw A, Roussy G, Bressac-de-Paillerets B,
Remenieras A, Byrde V, Caron O, Lenoir G, Bignon YJ, Uhrhammer N, Bérard L,
Lasset C, Bonadona V, Baclesse F, Sobol H, Bourdon V, Noguchi T, Eisinger F,
Coulet F, Colas C, Soubrier F, Peyrat JP, Fournier J, Révillion F, Vennin P,
Adenis C, Rouleau E, Lidereau R, Demange L, Nogues C, Barouk-Simonet E, Bonnet F,
Bubien V, Toulas C, Guimbaud R, Gladieff L, Feillel V, Leroux D, Dreyfus H,
Rebischung C, Peysselon M, Coron F, Faivre L, Prieur F, Ferrer SF, Lacassagne A, 
Frénay M, Vénat-Bouvet L, Delnatte C, Lynch HT, Snyder CL, Hogervorst FB, Verhoef
S, Verheus M, van 't Veer LJ, van Leeuwen FE, Collée M, van den Ouweland AM,
Jager A, Hooning MJ, van Asperen CJ, Wijnen JT, Vreeswijk MP, Tollenaar RA,
Devilee P, Ligtenberg MJ, Hoogerbrugge N, Ausems MG, Aalfs CM, Gille JJ, Waisfisz
Q, Meijers-Heijboer HE, Gomez-Garcia EB, van Roozendaal CE, Blok MJ, Caanen B,
Oosterwijk JC, van der Hout AH, Mourits MJ, Vasen HF, Nordling M, Bergman A,
Einbeigi Z, Liedgren S, Borg Å, Loman N, Olsson H, Kristoffersson U, Jernström H,
Harbst K, Lindblom A, Liljegren A, Barbany-Bustinza G, Rantala J, Melin B,
Grönberg H, Stattin EL, Emanuelsson M, Ehrencrona H, Rosenquist R, Dahl N.

INTRODUCTION: Previous studies have demonstrated that common breast cancer
susceptibility alleles are differentially associated with breast cancer risk for 
BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 mutation carriers. It is currently unknown how these alleles
are associated with different breast cancer subtypes in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation 
carriers defined by estrogen (ER) or progesterone receptor (PR) status of the
tumour.
METHODS: We used genotype data on up to 11,421 BRCA1 and 7,080 BRCA2 carriers, of
whom 4,310 had been affected with breast cancer and had information on either ER 
or PR status of the tumour, to assess the associations of 12 loci with breast
cancer tumour characteristics. Associations were evaluated using a retrospective 
cohort approach.
RESULTS: The results suggested stronger associations with ER-positive breast
cancer than ER-negative for 11 loci in both BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers. Among BRCA1
carriers, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs2981582 (FGFR2) exhibited the
biggest difference based on ER status (per-allele hazard ratio (HR) for
ER-positive = 1.35, 95% CI: 1.17 to 1.56 vs HR = 0.91, 95% CI: 0.85 to 0.98 for
ER-negative, P-heterogeneity = 6.5 × 10-6). In contrast, SNP rs2046210 at 6q25.1 
near ESR1 was primarily associated with ER-negative breast cancer risk for both
BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers. In BRCA2 carriers, SNPs in FGFR2, TOX3, LSP1,
SLC4A7/NEK10, 5p12, 2q35, and 1p11.2 were significantly associated with
ER-positive but not ER-negative disease. Similar results were observed when
differentiating breast cancer cases by PR status.
CONCLUSIONS: The associations of the 12 SNPs with risk for BRCA1 and BRCA2
carriers differ by ER-positive or ER-negative breast cancer status. The apparent 
differences in SNP associations between BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers, and
non-carriers, may be explicable by differences in the prevalence of tumour
subtypes. As more risk modifying variants are identified, incorporating these
associations into breast cancer subtype-specific risk models may improve clinical
management for mutation carriers.

PMCID: PMC3326552
PMID: 22053997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Affect Disord. 2012 Feb;136(3):1222-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2011.10.010. Epub
2011 Nov 3.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene variants and major depressive episodes.

Ryan J(1), Scali J, Carrière I, Peres K, Rouaud O, Scarabin PY, Ritchie K,
Ancelin ML.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U 1061, Hopital La Colombiere, and University Montpellier 1,
Montpellier, F-34000 France. joanne.ryan@inserm.fr

BACKGROUND: Despite evidence of estrogen's mood-enhancing effects, the
association between estrogen receptor (ER) gene variants and lifetime major
depression has been insufficiently studied.
METHODS: 3987 community-dwelling women aged 65years and over were recruited in
France as part of the Three City Study. Current and past major depressive
disorders (MDD) were diagnosed using the Mini-International Neuropsychiatry
Interview, according to DSM-IV criteria. The association between two common
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) polymorphisms with lifetime MDD was examined using
adjusted logistic regression models, taking into account the age at first
depressive episode and the recurrence of depression.
RESULTS: Women homozygous for the variant G allele of ESR1 rs9340799 had a
1.6-fold increased risk of MDD across their lifetime compared with women who were
homozygous for the A allele (p=0.009). There was a similar non-significant trend 
for the C allele of rs2234693 being associated with an increased risk (p=0.09).
Polytomous regression analysis further indicated that the GG genotype of
rs9340799 was specifically associated with an increased risk of recurrent
depressive episodes, regardless of the age at first onset of depression relative 
to the menopause.
LIMITATIONS: The duration and severity of depressive episodes was not considered 
in the analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to examine the association between ESR1 gene
variants and lifetime MDD. Our findings indicate a significant association
between common variants and the risk of recurrent depressive episodes. This
suggests that certain depressed women could be most responsive to hormone-based
treatment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22051074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Feb;51(2):174-85. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20941. Epub
2011 Nov 1.

GSTP1 hypermethylation is associated with reduced protein expression, aggressive 
disease and prognosis in neuroblastoma.

Gumy-Pause F(1), Pardo B, Khoshbeen-Boudal M, Ansari M, Gayet-Ageron A, Sappino
AP, Attiyeh EF, Ozsahin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland.
fabienne.gumypause@unige.ch

Epigenetic modifications such as methylation of CpG islands in tumor-suppressor
gene promoter regions have been associated with tumor development in many human
cancers. Using methylation specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification method, we analyzed the methylation status of 35 different genes in
16 neuroblastoma (NB) cell lines and 50 NB tumor samples (NBs), and investigated 
whether specific hypermethylation was associated with biological and/or clinical 
parameters. Among the genes found hypermethylated, the effect of GSTP1
hypermethylation on mRNA and protein expression was also explored. The median
number of hypermethylated genes was higher in cell lines compared to NBs (5.5 vs.
2). For eight genes, aberrant methylation of CpG-islands in NB was not (ESR1,
PAX5, WT1, CADM1, MSH6, and CDKN2B) or very rarely (CDH13 and GSTP1) reported in 
literature. GSTP1 was found hypermethylated in 44% of the NB cell lines and in
33% of the stage 4-11qLOH -non MYCN-amplified high risk NBs. Hypermethylation was
correlated with reduced mRNA and protein expression. In the whole NBs cohort,
GSTP1 hypermethylation was less frequently detected (8%), but found to be
associated with lower event-free (EFS) and overall survival. Hypermethylation of 
GSTP1 showed also association with lower EFS in high risk subgroups as stage 4
and older patients (=547 days). Our results suggest that, as in several adult
cancers, aberrant methylation of GSTP1 may contribute to the carcinogenetic
process in NB and could be potentially used as a new marker leading to define an 
ultra-high risk subgroup.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 22045684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jun;133(2):617-34. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1811-9. 
Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Life stage differences in mammary gland gene expression profile in non-human
primates.

Stute P(1), Sielker S, Wood CE, Register TC, Lees CJ, Dewi FN, Williams JK,
Wagner JD, Stefenelli U, Cline JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine, University 
Women's Hospital, Berne, Switzerland. petra.stute@insel.ch

Breast cancer (BC) is the most common malignancy of women in the developed world.
To better understand its pathogenesis, knowledge of normal breast development is 
crucial, as BC is the result of disregulation of physiologic processes. The aim
of this study was to investigate the impact of reproductive life stages on the
transcriptional profile of the mammary gland in a primate model. Comparative
transcriptomic analyses were carried out using breast tissues from 28 female
cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis) at the following life stages:
prepubertal (n = 5), adolescent (n = 4), adult luteal (n = 5), pregnant (n = 6), 
lactating (n = 3), and postmenopausal (n = 5). Mammary gland RNA was hybridized
to Affymetrix GeneChip(®) Rhesus Macaque Genome Arrays. Differential gene
expression was analyzed using ANOVA and cluster analysis. Hierarchical cluster
analysis revealed distinct separation of life stage groups. More than 2,225
differentially expressed mRNAs were identified. Gene families or pathways that
changed across life stages included those related to estrogen and androgen (ESR1,
PGR, TFF1, GREB1, AR, 17HSDB2, 17HSDB7, STS, HSD11B1, AKR1C4), prolactin (PRLR,
ELF5, STAT5, CSN1S1), insulin-like growth factor signaling (IGF1, IGFBP1,
IGFBP5), extracellular matrix (POSTN, TGFB1, COL5A2, COL12A1, FOXC1, LAMC1,
PDGFRA, TGFB2), and differentiation (CD24, CD29, CD44, CD61, ALDH1, BRCA1, FOXA1,
POSTN, DICER1, LIG4, KLF4, NOTCH2, RIF1, BMPR1A, TGFB2). Pregnancy and lactation 
displayed distinct patterns of gene expression. ESR1 and IGF1 were significantly 
higher in the adolescent compared to the adult animals, whereas differentiation
pathways were overrepresented in adult animals and pregnancy-associated life
stages. Few individual genes were distinctly different in postmenopausal animals.
Our data demonstrate characteristic patterns of gene expression during breast
development. Several of the pathways activated during pubertal development have
been implicated in cancer development and metastasis, supporting the idea that
other developmental markers may have application as biomarkers for BC.

PMCID: PMC3822905
PMID: 22037779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25940. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025940. Epub 2011 Oct 14.

Common genetic variants are associated with accelerated bone mineral density loss
after hematopoietic cell transplantation.

Yao S(1), Sucheston LE, Smiley SL, Davis W, Conroy JM, Nowak NJ, Ambrosone CB,
McCarthy PL Jr, Hahn T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention and Control, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Bone mineral density (BMD) loss commonly occurs after hematopoietic
cell transplantation (HCT). Hypothesizing that genetic variants may influence
post-HCT BMD loss, we conducted a prospective study to examine the associations
of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in bone metabolism pathways and acute
BMD loss after HCT.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We genotyped 122 SNPs in 45 genes in bone metabolism
pathways among 121 autologous and allogeneic HCT patients. BMD changes from
pre-HCT to day +100 post-HCT were analyzed in relation to these SNPs in linear
regression models. After controlling for clinical risk factors, we identified 16 
SNPs associated with spinal or femoral BMD loss following HCT, three of which
have been previously implicated in genome-wide association studies of bone
phenotypes, including rs2075555 in COL1A1, rs9594738 in RANKL, and rs4870044 in
ESR1. When multiple SNPs were considered simultaneously, they explained 5-35% of 
the variance in post-HCT BMD loss. There was a significant trend between the
number of risk alleles and the magnitude of BMD loss, with patients carrying the 
most risk alleles having the greatest loss.
CONCLUSION: Our data provide the first evidence that common genetic variants play
an important role in BMD loss among HCT patients similar to age-related BMD loss 
in the general population. This infers that the mechanism for post-HCT bone loss 
is a normal aging process that is accelerated during HCT. A limitation of our
study comes from its small patient population; hence future larger studies are
warranted to validate our findings.

PMCID: PMC3195081
PMID: 22022476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Oct 24;11(11):823; author reply 823. doi:
10.1038/nrc3093-c1.

ESR1 gene amplification: another mechanism regulating the cellular levels of ERa.

Yu KD, Shao ZM.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Feb;12(2):149.

Comment on
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Aug;11(8):597-608.

PMID: 22020208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2012 Jan;128(1-2):29-37. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2011.09.009. Epub 2011 Oct 13.

Age dependency of estrogen responsiveness in the uterus and adipose tissue of
aromatase-knockout (ArKO) mice.

Bader MI(1), Reitmayer C, Arndt C, Wober J, Kretzschmar G, Zierau O, Vollmer G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Zoology, Molecular Cell Physiology and Endocrinology, Technische
Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

Aging is often associated with weight gain caused by metabolic changes including 
an increase of body fat. In this study we assessed the impact of age on estrogen 
responsiveness in the uterus and adipose tissue (AT) in aromatase-knockout (ArKO)
mice. ArKO mice at the age of three or twelve months respectively were treated
s.c. with vehicle, E(2) (10 µg/kg BW/d) or genistein (15 mg/kg BW/d) for three
days. In the ArKO mouse model we were able to demonstrate that estrogen treatment
resulted in an age specific response pattern both on a physiological and
molecular level. Assessment of basal gene expression levels revealed significant 
age dependent differences only for elevated Esr1 levels in the uterus and leptin 
levels in infrarenal fat as well as lower levels of Pparg in the gonadal fat
tissue. Investigating age dependency of estrogen responsiveness we were able to
show that the E(2) and genistein resulted in age related pattern of regulation of
expression of Esr1 and Lep in infrarenal and gonadal AT as well as the uterine
expression of Pgr, Ltf and Pparg. In conclusion, evidence is provided that aging 
has an impact on the effectiveness of estrogen regulated processes in uterus and 
AT of ArKO mice. It remains to be elucidated whether or not this is associated
with weight gain caused by an increase in body fat mass.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22019577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Dec;25(12):2157-68. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1210. Epub 2011 Oct
20.

Early life exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals causes lifelong molecular
reprogramming of the hypothalamus and premature reproductive aging.

Gore AC(1), Walker DM, Zama AM, Armenti AE, Uzumcu M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas
78712, USA. andrea.gore@austin.utexas.edu

Gestational exposure to the estrogenic endocrine disruptor methoxychlor (MXC)
disrupts the female reproductive system at the molecular, physiological, and
behavioral levels in adulthood. The current study addressed whether perinatal
exposure to endocrine disruptors re-programs expression of a suite of genes
expressed in the hypothalamus that control reproductive function and related
these molecular changes to premature reproductive aging. Fischer rats were
exposed daily for 12 consecutive days to vehicle (dimethylsulfoxide), estradiol
benzoate (EB) (1 mg/kg), and MXC (low dose, 20 µg/kg or high dose, 100 mg/kg),
beginning on embryonic d 19 through postnatal d 7. The perinatally exposed
females were aged to 16-17 months and monitored for reproductive senescence.
After euthanasia, hypothalamic regions [preoptic area (POA) and medial basal
hypothalamus] were dissected for real-time PCR of gene expression or
pyrosequencing to assess DNA methylation of the Esr1 gene. Using a 48-gene PCR
platform, two genes (Kiss1 and Esr1) were significantly different in the POA of
endocrine-disrupting chemical-exposed rats compared with vehicle-exposed rats
after Bonferroni correction. Fifteen POA genes were up-regulated by at least 50% 
in EB or high-dose MXC compared with vehicle. To understand the epigenetic basis 
of the increased Esr1 gene expression, we performed bisulfite conversion and
pyrosequencing of the Esr1 promoter. EB-treated rats had significantly higher
percentage of methylation at three CpG sites in the Esr1 promoter compared with
control rats. Together with these molecular effects, perinatal MXC and EB altered
estrous cyclicity and advanced reproductive senescence. Thus, early life exposure
to endocrine disruptors has lifelong effects on neuroendocrine gene expression
and DNA methylation, together with causing the advancement of reproductive
senescence.

PMCID: PMC3231835
PMID: 22016562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. AIDS. 2012 Jan 2;26(1):19-26. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e32834db3ac.

Genetic polymorphisms in estrogen receptors and sexual dimorphism in fat
redistribution in HIV-infected patients on HAART.

Gasparotto AS(1), Sprinz E, Lazzaretti RK, Kuhmmer R, Silveira JM, Basso RP,
Pinheiro CA, Silveira MF, Ribeiro JP, Mattevi VS.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate genetic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
estrogen receptor-a (ERa) (ESR1, rs2234693, rs1801132, rs7757956 and rs2813544)
and ERß (ESR2, rs3020450, rs7154455 and rs4986938) genes and relate them to the
adverse effects lipodystrophy, dyslipidemia and metabolic syndrome as well as to 
differences in their prevalence between sexes in HIV-infected individuals on
HAART.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
METHODS: Blood samples and anthropometric measurements were collected from 614
patients at reference services in the cities of Porto Alegre, Pelotas and Rio
Grande in Brazil. The SNPs were genotyped by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: The lipodystrophy subtype frequencies in patients of different sexes
showed statistically significant differences; the atrophic pattern was more
prevalent in men, and the hypertrophic pattern was more prevalent in women.
Furthermore, metabolic syndrome prevalence was higher in women than in men. The
ESR1 rs2813544 G-allele was associated with higher measurements of several
anthropometric variables in women: BMI, total subcutaneous fat and subcutaneous
fat of limbs. Additionally, patients who were AA homozygous for ESR2 rs3020450
presented an increased risk for developing lipoatrophy (prevalence ratio 1.37,
95% confidence interval 1.09-1.73, P = 0.007).
CONCLUSION: Significant differences in lipodystrophy and metabolic syndrome
prevalence were detected between sexes. Moreover, the ESR1 gene (rs2813544)
presented significant sex-specific associations with anthropometric variables,
and the ESR2 gene (rs3020450) was associated with an increased risk of developing
lipoatrophy. Our results suggest that these genes are in part responsible for the
sexual dimorphism in fat tissue redistribution and patterns of lipodystrophy.

PMID: 22011627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Med Case Rep. 2011 Oct 18;5:516. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-5-516.

Aberrant DNA methylation of cancer-related genes in giant breast fibroadenoma: a 
case report.

Marzese DM(1), Gago FE, Orozco JI, Tello OM, Roqué M, Vargas-Roig LM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, National University of Cuyo, Parque General San
Martín s/n, CP 5500, Mendoza, Argentina. vargasl@mendoza-conicet.gob.ar.

INTRODUCTION: Giant fibroadenoma is an uncommon variant of benign breast lesions.
Aberrant methylation of CpG islands in promoter regions is known to be involved
in the silencing of genes (for example, tumor-suppressor genes) and appears to be
an early event in the etiology of breast carcinogenesis. Only hypermethylation of
p16INK4a has been reported in non-giant breast fibroadenoma. In this particular
case, there are no previously published data on epigenetic alterations in giant
fibroadenomas. Our previous results, based on the analysis of 49 cancer-related
CpG islands have confirmed that the aberrant methylation is specific to malignant
breast tumors and that it is completely absent in normal breast tissue and breast
fibroadenomas.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 13-year-old Hispanic girl was referred after she had noted a
progressive development of a mass in her left breast. On physical examination, a 
10 × 10 cm lump was detected and axillary lymph nodes were not enlarged. After
surgical removal the lump was diagnosed as a giant fibroadenoma. Because of the
high growth rate of this benign tumor, we decided to analyze the methylation
status of 49 CpG islands related to cell growth control. We have identified the
methylation of five cancer-related CpG islands in the giant fibroadenoma tissue: 
ESR1, MGMT, WT-1, BRCA2 and CD44.
CONCLUSION: In this case report we show for the first time the methylation
analysis of a giant fibroadenoma. The detection of methylation of these five
cancer-related regions indicates substantial epigenomic differences with
non-giant fibroadenomas. Epigenetic alterations could explain the higher growth
rate of this tumor. Our data contribute to the growing knowledge of aberrant
methylation in breast diseases. In this particular case, there exist no previous 
data regarding the role of methylation in giant fibroadenomas, considered by
definition as a benign breast lesion.

PMCID: PMC3206866
PMID: 22011321  [PubMed]


358. Steroids. 2011 Dec 20;76(14):1582-9. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2011.09.013. Epub
2011 Oct 8.

Estrogen receptors mediate rapid activation of phospholipase C pathway in the rat
endometrium.

Konigame VC(1), Siu ER, Royer C, Lucas TF, Porto CS, Abdalla FM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Instituto Butantan, Brazil.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the activation of rapid signaling
events by 17ß-estradiol in the rat uterus. 17ß-Estradiol induced a rapid increase
of total [3H]-inositol phosphate accumulation in the whole uterus and
endometrium, but not in the myometrium. The effect of 17ß-estradiol in the
endometrium was blocked by phospholipase C (PLC) inhibitor (U73122), estrogen
receptors antagonist (ICI 182,780), exportin CRM1 inhibitor (leptomycin B) and
selective inhibitor of the SRC family of protein tyrosine kinases (PP2).
Furthermore, a selective agonist of ESR1 (PPT) and a selective agonist of GPER
(G-1) also induced a rapid increase of total [(3)H]-inositol phosphate
accumulation in the endometrium. The G-1 effects were blocked by GPER antagonist 
(G-15). 17ß-Estradiol and G-1 promoted an additive effect on total [3H]-inositol 
phosphate accumulation. In conclusion, the present results indicate that a rapid 
activation of the PLC-mediated phosphoinositide hydrolysis occurred in the rat
endometrium after 17ß-estradiol stimulation, and this effect was mediated by ESR1
that underwent nuclear export after hormone stimulation, and that GPER activation
may play an additive role for this response. These rapid actions might be one of 
the key steps that mediate the estrogen-dependent activation of cellular events
in the endometrium.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22005199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Int Orthop. 2012 Mar;36(3):671-7. doi: 10.1007/s00264-011-1374-8. Epub 2011 Oct
16.

Genomic polymorphisms of G-protein estrogen receptor 1 are associated with
severity of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.

Peng Y(1), Liang G, Pei Y, Ye W, Liang A, Su P.

Author information: 
(1)Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, #107 West Yan Jiang
Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510120, China.

PURPOSE: Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is reported to be associated with 
the two traditional estrogen receptor genes, ESR1 and ESR2. Yet, the novel
estrogen receptor G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) has not been
studied. To investigate the association of GPER gene polymorphisms with the onset
and deterioration of AIS, we performed a case-control study.
METHODS: Clinical information was recorded, blood samples were taken and genomic 
DNA was extracted. After resequencing the gene in 45 cases and 45 controls who
were randomly selected, 16 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
selected. Then the association study was extended by an additional 344 patients
and 293 controls with direct sequencing and a TaqMan-based genotyping assay. The 
chi-square test and logistic regression were used to analyse the genotypic and
allelic association. One-way analysis of variance was used to compare the mean
maximum Cobb angles and ages with different genotypes in the case-only data set.
RESULTS: No association was observed between the polymorphisms of the GPER gene
and susceptibility to AIS. However, heterozygotes in three SNPs of the gene
(rs3808351, rs10269151 and rs426655s3) were related significantly with the curve 
severity in AIS patients (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004, 0.048 and 0.028, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that GPER gene polymorphisms are associated 
with the severity of curvature in AIS; deficits of GPER may contribute to the
deterioration of spine deformity.

PMCID: PMC3291774
PMID: 22002330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Ann Oncol. 2012 May;23(5):1138-44. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdr438. Epub 2011 Oct 10.

Prognostic and predictive role of ESR1 status for postmenopausal patients with
endocrine-responsive early breast cancer in the Danish cohort of the BIG 1-98
trial.

Ejlertsen B(1), Aldridge J, Nielsen KV, Regan MM, Henriksen KL, Lykkesfeldt AE,
Müller S, Gelber RD, Price KN, Rasmussen BB, Viale G, Mouridsen H; Danish Breast 
Cancer Cooperative Group; BIG 1-98 Collaborative Group; International Breast
Cancer Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group Statistical Center; Department of
Oncology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
ejlertsen@rh.dk

BACKGROUND: Estrogen Receptor 1 (ESR1) aberrations may be associated with
expression of estrogen receptor (ER) or progesterone receptor (PgR), human
epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) or Ki-67 labeling index and prognosis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: ESR1 was assessed in 1129 (81%) of 1396 postmenopausal
Danish women with early breast cancer randomly assigned to receive 5 years of
letrozole, tamoxifen or a sequence of these agents in the Breast International
Group 1-98 trial and who had ER = 1% after central review.
RESULTS: By FISH, 13.6% of patients had an ESR1-to-Centromere-6 (CEN-6) ratio = 2
(amplified), and 4.2% had ESR1-to-CEN-6 ratio <0.8 (deleted). Deletion of ESR1
was associated with significantly lower levels of ER (P < 0.0001) and PgR (P =
0.02) and more frequent HER2 amplification. ESR1 deletion or amplification was
associated with higher-Ki-67 than ESR1-normal tumors. Overall, there was no
evidence of heterogeneity of disease-free survival (DFS) or in treatment effect
according to ESR1 status. However, significant differences in DFS were observed
for subsets based on a combination of ESR1 and HER2 status (P = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 aberrations were associated with HER2 status, Ki-67 labeling
index and ER and PgR levels. When combined with HER2, ESR1 may be prognostic but 
should not be used for endocrine treatment selection in postmenopausal women with
endocrine-responsive early breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3335246
PMID: 21986093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2011 Dec;4(6):647-54. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.960583. Epub 2011 Oct 9.

Post-genomic update on a classical candidate gene for coronary artery disease:
ESR1.

Lucas G(1), Lluís-Ganella C, Subirana I, Sentí M, Willenborg C, Musameh MD,
Schwartz SM, O'Donnell CJ, Melander O, Salomaa V, Elosua R; CARDIoGRAM
Consortium.

Collaborators: Kathiresan S, Reilly MP, Samani NJ, Schunkert H, Erdmann J,
Assimes TL, Boerwinkle E, Erdmann J, Hall A, Hengstenberg C, Kathiresan S, Konig 
IR, Laaksonen R, McPherson R, Reilly MP, Samani NJ, Schunkert H, Thompson JR,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Ziegler A, Absher D, Assimes TL, Fortmann S, Go A, Hlatky M, 
Iribarren C, Knowles J, Myers R, Quertermous T, Sidney S, Risch N, Tang H,
Blankenberg S, Zeller T, Schillert A, Wild P, Ziegler A, Schnabel R, Sinning C,
Lackner K, Tiret L, Nicaud V, Cambien F, Bickel C, Rupprecht HJ, Perret C, Proust
C, Munzel T, Barbalic M, Bis J, Boerwinkle E, Der IY, Cupples LA, Dehghan A,
Demissie-Banjaw S, Folsom A, Glazer N, Gudnason V, Harris T, Heckbert S, Levy D, 
Lumley T, Marciante K, Morrison A, O'Donnell CJ, Psaty BM, Rice K, Rotter JI,
Siscovick DS, Smith N, Smith A, Taylor KD, van Duijn C, Volcik K, Whitteman J,
Ramachandran V, Hofman A, Uitterlinden A, Gretarsdottir S, Gulcher JR, Holm H,
Kong A, Stefansson K, Thorgeirsson G, Andersen K, Thorleifsson G,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Erdmann J, Fischer M, Grosshennig A, Hengstenberg C, Konig
IR, Lieb W, Linsel Nitschke P, Preuss M, Stark K, Schreiber S, Wichmann HE,
Ziegler A, Schunkert H, Aherrahrou Z, Bruse P, Doering A, Erdmann J, Hengstenberg
C, Illig T, Klopp N, Konig IR, Linsel-Nitschke P, Loley C, Medack A, Meisinger C,
Meitinger T, Nahrstedt J, Peters A, Preuss M, Stark K, Wagner AK, Wichmann HE,
Willenborg C, Ziegler A, Schunkert H, Bohm BO, Dobnig H, Grammer TB, Halperin E, 
Hoffmann MM, Kleber M, Laaksonen R, Marz W, Meinitzer A, Winkelmann BR, Pilz S,
Renner W, Scharnagl H, Stojakovic T, Tomaschitz A, Winkler K, Voight BF, Musunuru
K, Guiducci C, Burtt N, Gabriel SB, Siscovick DS, O'Donnell CJ, Elosua R,
Peltonen L, Salomaa V, Schwartz SM, Melander O, Altshuler D, Kathiresan S,
Stewart AF, Chen L, Dandona S, Wells GA, Jarinova O, McPherson R, Roberts R,
Reilly MP, Li M, Qu L, Wilensky R, Matthai W, Hakonarson HH, Devaney J, Burnett
MS, Pichard AD, Kent KM, Satler L, Lindsay JM, Waksman R, Knouff CW, Waterworth
DM, Walker MC, Mooser V, Epstein SE, Rader DJ, Samani NJ, Thompson JR, Braund PS,
Nelson CP, Wright BJ, Balmforth AJ, Ball SG, Hall AS.

BACKGROUND: After age, sex is the most important risk factor for coronary artery 
disease (CAD). The mechanism through which women are protected from CAD is still 
largely unknown, but the observed sex difference suggests the involvement of the 
reproductive steroid hormone signaling system. Genetic association studies of the
gene-encoding Estrogen Receptor a (ESR1) have shown conflicting results, although
only a limited range of variation in the gene has been investigated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We exploited information made available by advanced new
methods and resources in complex disease genetics to revisit the question of
ESR1's role in risk of CAD. We performed a meta-analysis of 14 genome-wide
association studies (CARDIoGRAM discovery analysis, N=87,000) to search for
population-wide and sex-specific associations between CAD risk and common genetic
variants throughout the coding, noncoding, and flanking regions of ESR1. In
addition to samples from the MIGen (N=6000), WTCCC (N=7400), and Framingham
(N=3700) studies, we extended this search to a larger number of common and
uncommon variants by imputation into a panel of haplotypes constructed using data
from the 1000 Genomes Project. Despite the widespread expression of ERa in
vascular tissues, we found no evidence for involvement of common or low-frequency
genetic variation throughout the ESR1 gene in modifying risk of CAD, either in
the general population or as a function of sex.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that future research on the genetic basis of sex-related 
differences in CAD risk should initially prioritize other genes in the
reproductive steroid hormone biosynthesis system.

PMCID: PMC3260440
PMID: 21984528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Biol Direct. 2011 Oct 5;6:49. doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-6-49.

Structural analysis of hubs in human NR-RTK network.

Choura M(1), Rebaï A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Diagnosis Processes, Centre of Biotechnology of Sfax,
University of Sfax, Route Sidi Mansour, Po Box 1177, 3018 Sfax, Tunisia.

BACKGROUND: Currently a huge amount of protein-protein interaction data is
available therefore extracting meaningful ones are a challenging task. In a
protein-protein interaction network, hubs are considered as key proteins
maintaining function and stability of the network. Therefore, studying
protein-protein complexes from a structural perspective provides valuable
information for predicted interactions.
RESULTS: In this study, we have predicted by comparative modelling and docking
methods protein-protein complexes of hubs of human NR-RTK network inferred from
our earlier study. We found that some interactions are mutually excluded while
others could occur simultaneously. This study revealed by structural analysis the
key role played by Estrogen receptor (ESR1) in mediating the signal transduction 
between human Receptor Tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and nuclear receptors (NRs).
CONCLUSIONS: Although the methods require human intervention and judgment, they
can identify the interactions that could occur together or ones that are mutually
exclusive. This adds a fourth dimension to interaction network, that of time, and
can assist in obtaining concrete predictions consistent with experiments.

PMCID: PMC3220635
PMID: 21974810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Apr;41(5):619-41. doi:
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2011.07.005. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

Paget's disease of bone: evidence for complex pathogenetic interactions.

Chung PY(1), Van Hul W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

OBJECTIVES: Paget's disease of bone (PDB), with a prevalence of 2 to 5% in
Caucasians >55 years, is the second most frequent metabolic bone disease, after
osteoporosis. PDB characteristics are bone lesions with an imbalanced bone
remodeling, resulting in disorganized and nonfully fledged new bone. PDB etiology
is not completely understood. In this review, current views on the etiology,
clinical aspects, and PDB treatment are summarized and discussed.
METHODS: The PubMed database was searched using the keywords PDB, sequestosome1
(SQSTM1), valosin-containing protein (VCP), receptor activator of nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (RANK), osteoprotegerin (OPG), RANK ligand (RANKL), mutation, genetic
variants, virus, osteosarcoma, bisphosphonates, and denosumab.
RESULTS: Environmental evidence (e.g. viruses) and also genetic risk factors have
been found for PDB. Until now, SQSTM1 was the only PDB-causing gene identified.
However, PDB patients without SQSTM1 mutations seem to have susceptibility
genetic polymorphisms in regions containing the CaSR, ESR1, TNFRSF11B (OPG),
TNFRSF11A (RANK), CSF1 (M-CSF), OPTN, TM7SF4 (DC-STAMP), VCP, NUP205, RIN3, PML, 
and GOLGA6A genes, resulting in an increased risk of developing PDB. The nature
of these genes indicates that the regulation of osteoclastogenesis is a key
process in PDB pathogenesis. Furthermore, with the involvement of SQSTM1 and VCP 
in autophagy and in forming protein aggregates, this might also indicate that a
disturbance of these processes might be a risk factor.
CONCLUSIONS: Unraveling the PDB genetic background is instrumental to
understanding the PDB pathogenesis and the role of slow viruses. Furthermore, it 
might make early detection and subsequently treatment of risk individuals
possible.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21959292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Fertil Steril. 2011 Dec;96(6):1401-1406.e3. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.09.004. Epub 2011 Sep 28.

Genetic variation in the sex hormone metabolic pathway and endometriosis risk: an
evaluation of candidate genes.

Trabert B(1), Schwartz SM, Peters U, De Roos AJ, Chen C, Scholes D, Holt VL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. britton.trabert@nih.gov

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relationship between common genetic variation in genes
involved in the biosynthesis and signaling of estrogen and progesterone and
endometriosis risk.
DESIGN: Genetic polymorphism analysis.
SETTING: Population-based case-control study conducted in Group Health
Cooperative enrollees in western Washington.
PATIENT(S): Women with newly diagnosed, surgically confirmed endometriosis
between 1996 and 2001 (n = 256) and age- and reference year-matched female
control subjects without a history of endometriosis (n = 567).
INTERVENTIONS(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): We evaluated the relationship between common genetic
variation and endometriosis risk, using gene-based tests and single-variant
analysis of genetic polymorphisms in ESR1, ESR2, PGR, CYP17A1, CYP19A1, HSD17B1, 
HSD17B2, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, COMT, and GSTM1.
RESULT(S): The most consistent gene-based association with endometriosis risk was
for CYP19A1. We did not find evidence for consistent significant associations
between previously reported candidate SNPs in sex hormone-related genes and
endometriosis risk.
CONCLUSION(S): In summary, we report increased endometriosis risk with CYP19A1
gene-based tests; replication of the association between endometriosis and this
gene or gene region is necessary in a larger study population.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3228888
PMID: 21958689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mol Oncol. 2011 Dec;5(6):504-16. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2011.09.003. Epub 2011 Sep
16.

Hormone replacement therapy dependent changes in breast cancer-related gene
expression in breast tissue of healthy postmenopausal women.

Sieuwerts AM(1), De Napoli G, van Galen A, Kloosterboer HJ, de Weerd V, Zhang H, 
Martens JW, Foekens JA, De Geyter C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Cancer Genomics
Centre, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Risk assessment of future breast cancer risk through exposure to sex steroids
currently relies on clinical scorings such as mammographic density. Knowledge
about the gene expression patterns in existing breast cancer tumors may be used
to identify risk factors in the breast tissue of women still free of cancer. The 
differential effects of estradiol, estradiol together with gestagens, or tibolone
on breast cancer-related gene expression in normal breast tissue samples taken
from postmenopausal women may be used to identify gene expression profiles
associated with a higher breast cancer risk. Breast tissue samples were taken
from 33 healthy postmenopausal women both before and after a six month treatment 
with either 2mg micronized estradiol [E2], 2mg micronized estradiol and 1mg
norethisterone acetate [E2+NETA], 2.5mg tibolone [T] or [no HRT]. Except for
[E2], which was only given to women after hysterectomy, the allocation to each of
the three groups was randomized. The expression of 102 mRNAs and 46 microRNAs
putatively involved in breast cancer was prospectively determined in the biopsies
of 6 women receiving [no HRT], 5 women receiving [E2], 5 women receiving
[E2+NETA], and 6 receiving [T]. Using epithelial and endothelial markers genes,
non-representative biopsies from 11 women were eliminated. Treatment of
postmenopausal women with [E2+NETA] resulted in the highest number of
differentially (p<0.05) regulated genes (16.2%) compared to baseline, followed by
[E2] (10.1%) and [T] (4.7%). Among genes that were significantly down-regulated
by [E2+NETA] ranked estrogen-receptor-1 (ESR1, p=0.019) and androgen receptor
(AR, p=0.019), whereas CYP1B1, a gene encoding an estrogen-metabolizing enzyme,
was significantly up-regulated (p=0.016). Mammary cells triggered by [E2+NETA]
and [E2] adjust for steroidogenic up-regulation through down-regulation of the
estrogen-receptor pathway. In this prospective study, prolonged administration of
[E2+NETA] and to a lesser extent of [E2] but not [T] were associated in otherwise
healthy breast tissue with a change in the expression of genes putatively
involved in breast cancer. Our data suggest that normal mammary cells triggered
by [E2+NETA] adjust for steroidogenic up-regulation through down-regulation of
the estrogen-receptor pathway. This feasibility study provides the basis for
whole genome analyses to identify novel markers involved in increased breast
cancer risk.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21956102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Nov 1;29(31):4160-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.32.9615. Epub 2011 
Sep 26.

Estrogen receptor (ESR1) mRNA expression and benefit from tamoxifen in the
treatment and prevention of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.

Kim C(1), Tang G, Pogue-Geile KL, Costantino JP, Baehner FL, Baker J, Cronin MT, 
Watson D, Shak S, Bohn OL, Fumagalli D, Taniyama Y, Lee A, Reilly ML, Vogel VG,
McCaskill-Stevens W, Ford LG, Geyer CE Jr, Wickerham DL, Wolmark N, Paik S.

Author information: 
(1)National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project, Division of Pathology,
1307 Federal St, Pittsburgh, PA 15212, USA.

PURPOSE: Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain tamoxifen resistance of
estrogen receptor (ER) -positive tumors, but a clinically useful explanation for 
such resistance has not been described. Because the ER is the treatment target
for tamoxifen, a linear association between ER expression levels and the degree
of benefit from tamoxifen might be expected. However, such an association has
never been demonstrated with conventional clinical ER assays, and the ER is
currently used clinically as a dichotomous marker. We used gene expression
profiling and ER protein assays to help elucidate molecular mechanism(s)
responsible for tamoxifen resistance in breast tumors.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed gene expression profiling of paraffin-embedded
tumors from National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) trials
that tested the worth of tamoxifen as an adjuvant systemic therapy (B-14) and as 
a preventive agent (P-1). This was a retrospective subset analysis based on
available materials.
RESULTS: In B-14, ESR1 was the strongest linear predictor of tamoxifen benefit
among 16 genes examined, including PGR and ERBB2. On the basis of these data, we 
hypothesized that, in the P-1 trial, a lower level of ESR1 mRNA in the tamoxifen 
arm was the main difference between the two study arms. Only ESR1 was
downregulated by more than two-fold in ER-positive cancer events in the tamoxifen
arm (P < .001). Tamoxifen did not prevent ER-positive tumors with low levels of
ESR1 expression.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that low-level expression of ESR1 is a determinant
of tamoxifen resistance in ER-positive breast cancer. Strategies should be
developed to identify, treat, and prevent such tumors.

PMCID: PMC3208536
PMID: 21947828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Anim Reprod Sci. 2011 Oct;128(1-4):11-21. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2011.08.008.
Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Association study and expression analysis of porcine ESR1 as a candidate gene for
boar fertility and sperm quality.

Gunawan A(1), Kaewmala K, Uddin MJ, Cinar MU, Tesfaye D, Phatsara C, Tholen E,
Looft C, Schellander K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University
of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. agun@itw.uni-bonn.de

Male fertility is impaired through the lack of ESR1 (Estrogen Receptor 1) but
little is known about the ESR1 roles in boar spermatogenesis and fertility.
Therefore, this research was aimed at investigating the association with sperm
quality and boar fertility traits in a total of 300 boars both from purebred
Pietrain and Pietrain × Hampshire crosses. A SNP in coding region of ESR1g.672C>T
in exon 1 was associated with sperm motility (P<0.05) and plasma droplet rate
(P<0.01) while the polymorphism in non-coding region of ESR1g.35756T>C in inton 1
was associated with non-return rate (P<0.05). Furthermore, to analyse the mRNA
and protein expression of ESR1 in boar reproductive tissues, a total of six boars
were divided into two groups [Group I (G-I) and Group II (G-II)], where G-I had
relatively better sperm quality. ESR1 expression was higher in tissues collected 
from G-I boars than those of collected from G-II boars, and the difference in
mRNA expression was significant (P<0.01) in head of epididymis. The ESR1 protein 
expression results from western blot coincided with the results of qRT-PCR. The
ESR1 protein localization observed a strong staining in the cytoplasm of Sertoli 
cell in the testis, in the epithelial cells in head and tail of epididymis, in
smooth muscle in tail of epididymis, and in the post acrosomal region and tail of
the spermatozoa. These results will improve the understanding of the functions of
the ESR1 in spermatogenesis within the reproductive tract and will shed light on 
ESR1 as a candidate in the selection of boar with good sperm quality and
fertility.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21944540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 15;71(22):6940-7. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2091. Epub
2011 Sep 22.

A comprehensive view of nuclear receptor cancer cistromes.

Tang Q(1), Chen Y, Meyer C, Geistlinger T, Lupien M, Wang Q, Liu T, Zhang Y,
Brown M, Liu XS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China.

Nuclear receptors comprise a superfamily of ligand-activated transcription
factors that play important roles in both physiology and diseases including
cancer. The technologies of chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by array
hybridization (ChIP-chip) or massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) has been
used to map, at an unprecedented rate, the in vivo genome-wide binding (cistrome)
of nuclear receptors in both normal and cancer cells. We developed a curated
database of 88 nuclear receptor cistrome data sets and other associated
high-throughput data sets including 121 collaborating factor cistromes, 94
epigenomes, and 319 transcriptomes. Through integrative analysis of the curated
nuclear receptor ChIP-chip/seq data sets, we discovered novel factor-specific
noncanonical motifs that may have important regulatory roles. We also revealed a 
common feature of nuclear receptor pioneering factors to recognize relatively
short and AT-rich motifs. Most nuclear receptors bind predominantly to introns
and distal intergenetic regions, and binding sites closer to transcription start 
sites were found to be neither stronger nor more evolutionarily conserved.
Interestingly, while most nuclear receptors appear to be predominantly
transcriptional activators, our analysis suggests that the binding of ESR1, RARA,
and RARG has both activating and repressive effects. Through meta-analysis of
different omic data of the same cancer cell line model from multiple studies, we 
generated consensus cistrome and expression profiles. We further made
probabilistic predictions of the nuclear receptor target genes by integrating
cistrome and transcriptome data and validated the predictions using expression
data from tumor samples. The final database, with comprehensive cistrome,
epigenome, and transcriptome data sets and downstream analysis results,
constitutes a valuable resource for the nuclear receptor and cancer community.

©2011 AACR

PMCID: PMC3610570
PMID: 21940749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Urol Int. 2011;87(3):359-62. doi: 10.1159/000330902. Epub 2011 Sep 17.

Molecular analysis of SNP12 in estrogen receptor a gene in hypospadiac or
cryptorchid patients from Northwestern China.

Tang KF(1), Zheng JZ, Xing JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the single nucleotide polymorphism 12 (SNP12) in the
estrogen receptor a (ESR1) gene in hypospadiac or cryptorchid patients from
Northwestern China.
METHODS: 103 patients and 40 controls were analyzed for SNP12 to verify whether
this genetic variant was associated with hypospadias or cryptorchidism.
RESULTS: The frequencies of the A allele and homozygote individuals for the A
allele of SNP12 in the hypospadiac group were higher than in the control group,
respectively (p = 0.011, p = 0.005). The frequency of the A allele of SNP12 in
the cryptorchid group was higher than in the control group (p = 0.038). However, 
no significant difference was observed between the cryptorchid group and control 
group of homozygote individuals for the A allele of SNP12 (p = 0.070).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggested that the A allele of SNP12 may increase the
risk of hypospadias or cryptorchidism.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21934279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Proteomics. 2011 Nov 18;74(12):2745-59. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2011.08.009. Epub 
2011 Aug 22.

Proteomic analysis of early response lymph node proteins in mice treated with
titanium dioxide nanoparticles.

Gao Y(1), Gopee NV, Howard PC, Yu LR.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence for Proteomics, Division of Systems Biology, National
Center for Toxicological Research, FDA, Jefferson, AR 72079, USA.

Human exposure to nanoparticles is inevitable from natural and anthropogenic
sources. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles are increasingly being used in
pharmaceutical and cosmetic products. Previous studies revealed that TiO2 levels 
were significantly increased in tissues (e.g., lymph nodes) after mice were
injected with nanosized TiO2. To identify early response lymph node proteins to
TiO2 nanoparticles, groups of mice were intradermally injected with a low dose of
DeGussa P25 TiO2 nanoparticles or vehicle alone. The proteomes of lymph nodes at 
24 h were quantitatively analyzed using trypsin-catalyzed 16O/18O labeling in
conjunction with two-dimensional liquid chromatography separation and tandem mass
spectrometry (2DLC-MS/MS). A total of 33 proteins were significantly changed
(over 1.3-fold, p<0.05) in the mice treated with TiO2 nanoparticles, which
accounted for approximately 1% of the total proteins identified. The
differentially expressed proteins mainly involve the immune response (e.g.,
inflammation), lipid and fatty acid metabolism, mRNA processing, and nucleosome
assembly. Regulation of functionally distinct classes of proteins could be
mediated by estrogen receptor (ESR1), PPAR<U+03B3>, and c-Myc signalings, etc. The
differentially expressed proteins identified in this experiment could represent
early response proteins to TiO2 nanoparticle treatment in mouse lymph nodes.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3215788
PMID: 21884834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Jul 25;358(2):146-54. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.08.022.
Epub 2011 Aug 22.

Estrogen biosynthesis and signaling in endometriosis.

Huhtinen K(1), Ståhle M, Perheentupa A, Poutanen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, 20014
Turku, Finland. kaisa.huhtinen@utu.fi

Endometriosis is an estrogen-dependent gynecological disease where
endometrium-like tissue grows outside uterine cavity. Endometriotic cell
proliferation is stimulated by estrogens acting predominantly via their nuclear
receptors. Estrogen receptors (ESR1, ESR2) are ligand activated transcription
factors whose activation is dependent on the cell-specific dynamic expression of 
the receptors, on the interacting proteins and on the ligand availability. The
different types of endometriotic lesions, peritoneal, deep, and ovarian
endometriosis, may respond to estrogens differentially due to differences in the 
expression of the receptors and interacting proteins, and due to potential
differences in the ligand availability regulated by the local estrogen synthesis.
This review summarizes the current knowledge of estrogen synthesizing enzymes and
estrogen receptors in different types of endometriosis lesions. Further studies
are still needed to define the possible differences in steroid metabolism in
different types of endometriotic lesions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21875644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2011 Oct 1;174(1):51-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2011.08.009.
Epub 2011 Aug 19.

Influence of temperature regime on endocrine parameters and vitellogenesis during
experimental maturation of European eel (Anguilla anguilla) females.

Pérez L(1), Peñaranda DS, Dufour S, Baloche S, Palstra AP, Van Den Thillart GE,
Asturiano JF.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Acuicultura y Biodiversidad, Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología
Animal, Universitat Politècnica de València, Camino de Vera s/n, 46022 Valencia, 
Spain. mlpereig@dca.upv.es

We examined the effect of temperature in European silver eels during their
maturation induced by injections of carp pituitary extract on endocrine
parameters: pituitary fshß and lhß expression, plasma 17ß-estradiol (E2) and
vitellogenin, estrogen receptor 1 (esr1), and vitellogenin 2 (vtg2) expression in
liver. A variable thermal regime (T10) that increased from 10° to 14° and 17°C
was compared with a constant 20°C regime (T20) during 12 weeks. T10 caused a
faster development until week 8, higher fshß, lhß, esr1 expression, and higher E2
levels. The results strongly suggest that T10 is inducing a higher endogenous FSH
level which increases the E2 circulating level during vitellogenesis. A variable 
thermal regime induced an fshß expression and E2 profile in vitellogenic
hormonally matured eel females that were more similar to the profile observed in 
other naturally maturing fish.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21871894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2011;23(7):899-911. doi: 10.1071/RD11013.

Restricted feed intake in lactating primiparous sows. II. Effects on subsequent
litter sex ratio and embryonic gene expression.

Oliver G(1), Novak S, Patterson JL, Pasternak JA, Paradis F, Norrby M, Oxtoby K, 
Dyck MK, Dixon WT, Foxcroft GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. goliver@ualberta.ca

Expression of panels of candidate genes controlling myogenesis, angiogenesis and 
gender-specific imprinting of development were analysed in embryonic, placental
and endometrial tissues recovered at Day 30 of gestation from a subset of
primiparous sows that were either feed restricted (Restrict; n=17) or fed to
appetite (Control; n=15) during the last week of the previous lactation. Embryos 
were also sex typed to investigate gender bias in response to treatments. Average
embryonic weight was lower in the subset of Restrict compared with Control
litters (1.38±0.07vs 1.59±0.08g, respectively) and the male:female sex ratio was 
higher (P<0.05) in embryos (litters) recovered from Restrict sows. Treatment
affected (P=0.05) the expression of embryonic and placental genes involved in
insulin-like growth factor (IGF) 2 signalling, including IGF2, INSR and IGF2R.
Embryonic expression of ESR1 was also affected by treatment (P<0.03) and
sex×treatment interactions were observed for the expression of embryonic ESR1
(P<0.05) and placental ANGPT2 (P<0.03). At the molecular level, these results
support the suggestion that changes in placental function are not the primary
mechanism mediating detrimental effects of previous sow catabolism on early
embryonic development in the feed-restricted lactational sow model. However,
perturbations in the IGF2 system are implicated as mediators of these effects.

PMID: 21871209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Anticancer Res. 2011 Sep;31(9):2975-81.

RASSF1A methylation is predictive of poor prognosis in female breast cancer in a 
background of overall low methylation frequency.

Buhmeida A(1), Merdad A, Al-Maghrabi J, Al-Thobaiti F, Ata M, Bugis A, Syrjänen
K, Abuzenadah A, Chaudhary A, Gari M, Al-Qahtani M, Dallol A.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Erratum in
    Anticancer Res. 2011 Oct;31(10):3637. El-Maghrabi, Joudah [corrected to
Al-Maghrabi, Judah].

Breast cancer (BC) is the most common cancer worldwide. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia is no exception, with ever increasing incidence rates. An interesting
feature of this disease is the relatively young age of the affected women. The
average age in the present cohort of 100 sporadic cases of invasive ductal
carcinomas was 45 years, with a median of 46 years (range between 19-81 years).
In an effort to understand the molecular signature of BC in the Saudi population,
we undertook this study to profile the methylation events in a series of key
genes including Ras association (RalGDS/AF-6) domain family member 1 isoform a
(RASSF1A), hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 
2A (CDKN2A), retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB2), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1),
progesterone receptor (PGR), paired-like homeodomain 2 (PITX2), secreted
frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), myogenic differentiation 1 (MYOD1), and slit 
homolog 2 (SLIT2), using MethyLight analysis in archival tumour samples.
Interestingly, the overall methylation levels were low in this cohort, with only 
84% of the cases displaying methylation in one or more of the analysed genes. The
frequency of RASSF1A methylation was the highest (65%), while there was almost
complete absence of methylation of the ESR1 and the CDH1 genes (1% and 3%,
respectively). Several statistically significant correlations were identified
between specific methylation events and clinical parameters which gained more
significance when analysis was limited to the estrogen receptor positive samples.
Although there was no significant correlations between any methylation event and 
disease-specific survival, methylation of MYOD1 or RASSF1A was associated with
lower disease-free survival and increased chance of disease recurrence.
Furthermore, multivariate (Cox) regression analysis identified RASSF1A as an
independent predictor of poor prognosis in terms of disease-free survival in this
cohort. Our findings provide further evidence on the usefulness of RASSF1A
methylation status as an informative prognostic biomarker in BC in a Saudi
population.

PMID: 21868547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Transgenic Res. 2012 Apr;21(2):393-406. doi: 10.1007/s11248-011-9529-3. Epub 2011
Aug 24.

Molecular characterizations of Nop16 in murine mammary tumors with varying levels
of c-Myc.

Kundel DW(1), Stromquist E, Greene AL, Zhdankin O, Regal RR, Rose-Hellekant TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Minnesota Medical School-Duluth Campus,
1035 University Drive, Duluth, MN 55812, USA.

NOP16, also known as HSPC111, has been identified as a MYC and estrogen regulated
gene in in vitro studies, hence coexpression levels were strongly correlated.
Importantly, high expression of NOP16 was associated with poor clinical outcome
in breast cancer patients. However, coexpression of NOP16, MYC and estrogen
receptor (ESR1) varied widely in tumors and cell lines suggesting that
transcriptional regulation differed according to pathological environments. The
goal of this study was to determine the expression patterns of Nop16, Myc and
Esr1 in murine mammary tumors with disparate histopathological and molecular
features. We hypothesized that tumor environments with relatively high Myc levels
would have different coexpression patterns than tumor environments with
relatively low Myc levels. We measured levels of Myc and Nop16 mRNA and protein
in tumors from WAP-c-myc mice that were of high grade and metastasized
frequently. In contrast, Myc and Nop16 mRNA and proteins levels were
significantly lower in the less aggressive tumors that developed in NRL-TGFa
mice. Tumors from both mouse lines express ESR1 protein and we found that Esr1
mRNA levels correlated positively with Myc levels in both models. However, Myc
and Nop16 transcript levels correlated positively only in tumors from NRL-TGFa
mice. We identified prominent NOP16 protein in nuclei and less prominent staining
in the cytoplasm of luminal cells of ducts and lobules from normal mammary glands
as well as in hyperplasias and tumors obtained from NRL-TGFa mice. This staining 
pattern was reversed in tumors from WAP-c-Myc mice as nuclear staining was faint 
or absent and cytoplasmic staining more pronounced. In summary, the regulation of
expression and localization of NOP16 varies in tumor environments with high
versus low MYC levels and demonstrate the importance of stratifying clinical
breast cancers based on MYC levels.

PMCID: PMC4043839
PMID: 21863248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Hum Reprod Update. 2011 Nov-Dec;17(6):813-28. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmr034. Epub
2011 Aug 23.

Genetic predictors of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation: where do we stand
today?

Altmäe S(1), Hovatta O, Stavreus-Evers A, Salumets A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Department of Clinical Science,
Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University
Hospital Huddinge, 14186 Stockholm, Sweden. signe.altmae@ut.ee

BACKGROUND: Nowadays, the use of IVF has improved the prospects of infertility
treatment. The expected outcome of IVF depends greatly on the effectiveness of
controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH), where exogenous gonadotrophins are
used to induce folliculogenesis. The response to stimulation varies substantially
among women and is difficult to predict. Several predictive markers of COH
outcome have been proposed (e.g. maternal age and ovarian reserve), but the
search for optimal predictors is ongoing. Pharmacogenetic studies demonstrate the
effects of individual genetic variability on COH outcome and the potential for
customizing therapy based on the patient's genome.
METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, DARE, CINAHL and the Cochrane Library, and references
from relevant articles were investigated up to February 2011 regarding any common
genetic variation and COH/IVF outcome.
RESULTS: Several polymorphisms in genes involved in FSH signalling, estrogen
biosynthesis, folliculogenesis, folate metabolism and other aspects influence the
response to exogenous gonadotrophin administration, resulting in differences in
COH and IVF outcomes. Nevertheless, the most studied polymorphism FSHR Asn680Ser 
is practically the only genetic marker, together with ESR1 PvuII T/C, that could 
be applied in clinical tests.
CONCLUSIONS: Although data are accumulating with evidence suggesting that the
ovarian response to COH is mediated by various polymorphisms, the optimal
biomarkers and the efficacy of the tests still remain to be evaluated.

PMID: 21862569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Oncogene. 2012 Apr 5;31(14):1825-34. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.370. Epub 2011 Aug 22.

Macrophage-elicited loss of estrogen receptor-a in breast cancer cells via
involvement of MAPK and c-Jun at the ESR1 genomic locus.

Stossi F(1), Madak-Erdogan Z, Katzenellenbogen BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, 61801-3704, USA.

Estrogen receptor-a (ERa, ESR1) is a pivotal transcriptional regulator of breast 
cancer physiology and is targeted by endocrine therapies. Loss of ERa activity or
expression is an indication of endocrine resistance and is associated with
increased risk of tumor recurrence and worse prognosis. In this study, we sought 
to investigate whether elements of the tumor microenvironment, namely
macrophages, would impact on ERa and we found that macrophage-derived factors
caused loss of ERa expression in breast cancer cells. Conditioned media from
macrophages caused activation of several intracellular pathways in breast cancer 
cells of which c-Src, protein kinase c and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) were essential for loss of ERa expression. Moreover, a prolonged
hyperactivation of MAPK was observed. The activation of this kinase cascade
resulted in recruitment of extracellular signal regulated kinase 2 (ERK2)
directly to chromatin at the ESR1 gene locus in a process that was dependent upon
activation and recruitment of the c-Jun transcription factor. Thus, we identify a
novel mechanism for loss of ERa expression in breast cancer cells via macrophage 
activation of kinase cascades in the cancer cells causing transcriptional
repression of the ESR1 gene by a direct chromatin action of a c-Jun/ERK2 complex.
The findings in this study support an alternative mechanism, not intrinsic to the
tumor cell but derived from the cross-talk with the tumor microenvironment, that 
could lead to endocrine resistance and might be targeted therapeutically to
prevent loss of ERa expression in breast tumors.

PMCID: PMC3223561
PMID: 21860415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Endocrine. 2011 Oct;40(2):212-21. doi: 10.1007/s12020-011-9522-x. Epub 2011 Aug
21.

Relationships of ESR1 and XBP1 expression in human breast carcinoma and stromal
cells isolated by laser capture microdissection compared to intact breast cancer 
tissue.

Andres SA(1), Wittliff JL.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Receptor Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology,
Brown Cancer Center and the Institute for Molecular Diversity & Drug Design,
University of Louisville, Health Sciences Center A Bldg.-Room 604, Louisville, KY
40292, USA.

Results from investigations of human genomics which utilize intact tissue biopsy 
specimens maybe compromised due to a host of uncontrolled variables including
cellular heterogeneity of a sample collected under diverse conditions, then
processed and stored using different protocols. To determine the cellular origin 
and assess relationships of mRNA expression of two genes reported to be
co-expressed in human breast carcinoma (estrogen receptor-a, ESR1 and X-box
binding protein 1, XBP1), gene expression analyses were performed with intact
tissue sections and compared with those of laser capture microdissection
(LCM)-procured carcinoma and stromal cells from serial sections of the same
tissue. Frozen sections of human breast carcinomas were first evaluated for
structural integrity and pathology after hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining.
Total RNA preparations from intact tissue sections and LCM-procured carcinoma and
stromal cells were reverse transcribed for measurements of ESR1 and XBP1
expression by quantitative PCR (qPCR). These results were compared with those
obtained from microarray analyses of LCM-procured carcinoma cells. Levels of ESR1
and XBP1 were detected in the intact breast cancer tissue sections suggesting
coordinate gene expression. Although coordinate expression of these genes was
observed in the LCM-procured carcinoma cells, it was not discerned in
LCM-procured stromal cells. The origin of coordinate expression of ESR1 and XBP1 
observed in whole tissue sections of human breast cancer biopsies is due
principally to their co-expression in carcinoma cells and not in the surrounding 
stromal cells as substantiated using LCM-procured cells. Collectively, a
microgenomic process was established from human tissue preparation to RNA
characterization and analysis to identify molecular signatures of specific cell
types predicting clinical behavior.

PMID: 21858728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2011 Oct;137(10):1571-80. doi:
10.1007/s00432-011-1036-7. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Genome-wide identification of possible methylation markers chemosensitive to
targeted regimens in colorectal cancers.

Kim JC(1), Lee HC, Cho DH, Choi EY, Cho YK, Ha YJ, Choi PW, Roh SA, Kim SY, Kim
YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. 
jckim@amc.seoul.kr

PURPOSE: Few efficient methylation markers of chemosensitivity have been
discovered. The genome-wide analysis of methylation markers is needed to identify
chemosensitive candidates to targeted therapy.
METHODS: This study describes a two-step process to select chemosensitive
candidates of methylation genes. A genome-wide screening of methylation genes was
performed using a Beadarray and an in vitro chemosensitivity assay of 119
colorectal cancers (CRCs). Ten candidate genes identified during the initial
screening were verified by biological utility assessment using cell viability
assays of transfected CRC cells.
RESULTS: Five methylation genes related to sensitivity to bevacizumab regimens
(RASSF1, MMP25, KCNQ1, ESR1, and GALR2) or cetuximab regimens (SCL18A2, GPX7,
NID2, IGFBP3, and ALX4) were chosen during the first step. A viability assay
revealed that GALR2-overexpressing HCT116 cells were significantly more
chemosensitive to bevacizumab regimens than control cells (P = 0.022 and 0.019
for bevacizumab with FOLFIRI and FOLFOX, respectively), concurrently verified on 
a caspase-3 activity assay. GPX7- or ALX4-overexpressed RKO cells were
significantly less viable to cetuximab regimens compared to control cells (GPX7: 
P = 0.027 each for cetuximab with FOLFIRI and FOLFOX; ALX4: P = 0.049 and 0.003
for cetuximab with FOLFIRI and FOLFOX, respectively), but caspase-3 activity was 
not prominent in GPX7-overexpressed RKO cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Two novel genes, GALR2 and ALX4, have been identified as
chemosensitive methylation candidates to bevacizumab and cetuximab regimens,
respectively. As our study did not include a clinical association study, the two 
candidates should be validated in large clinical cohorts, hopefully predicting
responsive patients to targeted regimens.

PMID: 21850381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 1;71(19):6240-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1266. Epub
2011 Aug 15.

Common breast cancer susceptibility loci are associated with triple-negative
breast cancer.

Stevens KN(1), Vachon CM, Lee AM, Slager S, Lesnick T, Olswold C, Fasching PA,
Miron P, Eccles D, Carpenter JE, Godwin AK, Ambrosone C, Winqvist R, Brauch H;
GENICA consortium, Schmidt MK, Cox A, Cross SS, Sawyer E, Hartmann A, Beckmann
MW, Schulz-Wendtland R, Ekici AB, Tapper WJ, Gerty SM, Durcan L, Graham N, Hein
R, Nickels S, Flesch-Janys D, Heinz J, Sinn HP, Konstantopoulou I, Fostira F,
Pectasides D, Dimopoulos AM, Fountzilas G, Clarke CL, Balleine R, Olson JE,
Fredericksen Z, Diasio RB, Pathak H, Ross E, Weaver J, Rüdiger T, Försti A,
Dünnebier T, Ademuyiwa F, Kulkarni S, Pylkäs K, Jukkola-Vuorinen A, Ko YD, Van
Limbergen E, Janssen H, Peto J, Fletcher O, Giles GG, Baglietto L, Verhoef S,
Tomlinson I, Kosma VM, Beesley J, Greco D, Blomqvist C, Irwanto A, Liu J, Blows
FM, Dawson SJ, Margolin S, Mannermaa A, Martin NG, Montgomery GW, Lambrechts D,
dos Santos Silva I, Severi G, Hamann U, Pharoah P, Easton DF, Chang-Claude J,
Yannoukakos D, Nevanlinna H, Wang X, Couch FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
55905, USA.

Triple-negative breast cancers are an aggressive subtype of breast cancer with
poor survival, but there remains little known about the etiologic factors that
promote its initiation and development. Commonly inherited breast cancer risk
factors identified through genome-wide association studies display heterogeneity 
of effect among breast cancer subtypes as defined by the status of estrogen and
progesterone receptors. In the Triple Negative Breast Cancer Consortium (TNBCC), 
22 common breast cancer susceptibility variants were investigated in 2,980
Caucasian women with triple-negative breast cancer and 4,978 healthy controls. We
identified six single-nucleotide polymorphisms, including rs2046210 (ESR1),
rs12662670 (ESR1), rs3803662 (TOX3), rs999737 (RAD51L1), rs8170 (19p13.1), and
rs8100241 (19p13.1), significantly associated with the risk of triple-negative
breast cancer. Together, our results provide convincing evidence of genetic
susceptibility for triple-negative breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3327299
PMID: 21844186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Hum Mutat. 2011 Oct;32(10):1128-36. doi: 10.1002/humu.21544. Epub 2011 Sep 9.

A cis-acting regulatory variation of the estrogen receptor a (ESR1) gene is
associated with hepatitis B virus-related liver cirrhosis.

Yan Z(1), Tan W, Xu B, Dan Y, Zhao W, Deng C, Chen W, Tan S, Mao Q, Wang Y, Deng 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, the Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, P R China.

The hepatic fibrogenesis and sexual dimorphism of hepatitis B virus-related liver
cirrhosis (HBV-LC) are related to estrogen and its receptors. Abnormal expression
of estrogen receptor a (ESR1) is implicated in the development of cirrhosis in
both animal models and humans. Here, we examine whether the ESR1 polymorphisms
are related to HBV-LC risk among chronic HBV carriers, and we investigate the
functional significance of positively associated polymorphisms. A total of 2,404 
unrelated Chinese HBV carriers were recruited to conduct the two-stage designed
case-control study. Two ESR1 haplotype tagging polymorphisms, c.30T>C (rs2077647)
and c.453-397T>C (rs2234693), were genotyped in 1,285 patients with HBV-LC and in
1,119 asymptomatic HBV carriers. We observed a significantly increased
susceptibility to HBV-LC associated with the c.30C allele (P = 4.2 × 10(-8) ),
c.453-397C allele (P = 2.0 × 10(-8) ), and [c.30C; c.453-397C] haplotype
(Dominant model, P = 8.85 × 10(-10) , odds ratio = 1.50, 95% CI 1.32~1.71)
compared with the T alleles and (c.30T; c.453-397T) haplotype of c.30T>C and
c.453-397T>C polymorphisms, respectively. Functional analyses were conducted to
verify the biological functions of the associated genetic variations and showed
that the c.453-397T>C polymorphism is a novel c.453-397C allele-specific and
c-myb-dependent enhancer-like cis-acting regulatory variation and could be part
of the genetic variations underlying the susceptibility of individuals to HBV-LC.

© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21837769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011 Sep;17(9):1955-65. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21573. Epub 2011 Jan 
6.

DNA methylation of colon mucosa in ulcerative colitis patients: correlation with 
inflammatory status.

Saito S(1), Kato J, Hiraoka S, Horii J, Suzuki H, Higashi R, Kaji E, Kondo Y,
Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama Japan.

BACKGROUND: Although DNA methylation of colonic mucosa in ulcerative colitis (UC)
has been suggested, the majority of published reports indicate the correlation
between methylation of colon mucosa and occurrence of UC-related dysplasia or
cancer without considering the mucosal inflammatory status. The aim of this study
was to verify whether mucosal inflammation-specific DNA methylation occurs in the
colon of UC.
METHODS: Of 15 gene loci initially screened, six loci (ABCB1, CDH1, ESR1, GDNF,
HPP1, and MYOD1) methylated in colon mucosa of UC were analyzed according to
inflammatory status using samples from 28 surgically resected UC patients.
RESULTS: Four of six regions (CDH1, GDNF, HPP1, and MYOD1) were more highly
methylated in the active inflamed mucosa than in the quiescent mucosa in each UC 
patient (P = 0.003, 0.0002, 0.02, and 0.048, respectively). In addition, when the
methylation status of all samples taken from examined patients was stratified
according to inflammatory status, methylation of CDH1 and GDNF loci was
significantly higher in active inflamed mucosa than in quiescent mucosa (P =
0.045 and 0.002, respectively). Multiple linear regression analysis revealed that
active inflammation was an independent factor of methylation for CDH1 and GDNF.
DNA methyltransferase 1 and 3b were highly expressed in colon epithelial cells
with active mucosal inflammation, suggesting their involvement in
inflammation-dependent methylation.
CONCLUSIONS: Methylation in colonic mucosa of UC was correlated with mucosal
inflammatory status, suggesting the involvement of methylation due to chronic
active inflammation in UC carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

PMID: 21830274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Horm Cancer. 2011 Oct;2(5):261-71. doi: 10.1007/s12672-011-0080-8.

A five-gene model predicts clinical outcome in ER+/PR+, early-stage breast
cancers treated with adjuvant tamoxifen.

Kerr DA 2nd(1), Wittliff JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Brown Cancer Center and
Institute for Molecular Diversity & Drug Design, University of Louisville, KY
40292, USA.

Primary breast carcinomas expressing both estrogen and progesterone receptors are
most likely to respond to tamoxifen therapy, especially in patients with
early-stage lesions. However, certain patients exhibit clinicopathologic features
suggesting good prognosis relapse within 10 years, justifying a search for
biomarkers identifying patients at risk for recurrence. Nine candidate genes
associated with estrogen signaling were selected from microarray studies and
combined with those for conventional biomarkers (ESR1, PGR, ERBB2). Expression of
this 12-gene subset was analyzed by RT-qPCR in frozen tissue specimens from 60
early-stage, estrogen receptor (ER)+/progestin receptor (PR)+ breast cancers from
patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen. A multivariate model was created by Cox
regression using a training data set and applied to an independent validation
set. A five-gene model was developed from the training set (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>36) that
exhibited significant correlations with both relapse-free and overall survival.
Applying this model to Kaplan-Meier regression, patients were separated into
low-risk (100% relapse-free at 150 months) and high-risk (60% relapse-free at
150 months) groups (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03). When this model was applied to the validation set 
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>24), similar risk stratification was achieved for both relapse-free and
overall survival (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01 and 0.04, respectively). We developed a five-gene
model composed of PgR, BCL2, ERBB4 JM-a, RERG, and CD34 that identified
early-stage, ER+/PR+ breast cancers in patients treated with tamoxifen that
relapsed, although they exhibited clinicopathologic features suggesting good
prognosis. Within this multivariate model, increased expression of PgR, ERBB4
JM-a, RERG, and CD34 was associated with increased survival, while increased
expression of BCL2 was associated with decreased survival.

PMID: 21826535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2012 Mar;28(3):190-4. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2011.593661. Epub
2011 Aug 9.

Genetic polymorphisms associated with steroids metabolism and insulin action in
polycystic ovary syndrome.

Ramos Cirilo PD(1), Rosa FE, Moreira Ferraz MF, Rainho CA, Pontes A, Rogatto SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Biosciences, UNESP - São Paulo State
University, Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is an endocrinopathy associated with
infertility, diabetes and cardiovascular events. This study aimed to correlate
polymorphisms of genes involved in the biosynthesis and metabolism of steroids
and insulin action (CYP17A1, CYP19A1, AR, ESR1, ESR2, INSR, IGF2 and PAI1) with
clinical and biochemical parameters of PCOS. DNA was extracted from peripheral
blood samples obtained from 117 PCOS and 105 healthy women. The PAI1
insertion/deletion (-675 ins/delG) polymorphism (rs1799768) was genotyped by
PCR-SSCP. CYP19A1 [TTTA](n), AR [CAG](n), ESR1 [TA](n), and ESR2 [CA](n) genes
were evaluated by PCR-based GeneScan analysis, while CYP17A1 5'UTR (rs743572),
INSR 1058 CT (rs1799817), and IGF2 3'UTR GA (rs680) polymorphisms were evaluated 
by PCR-RFLP. The results showed a prevalence of PAI1 4G5G+4G4G genotypes in PCOS 
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025). Younger PCOS women showed a predominance of CT+TT, GA+AA and
4G5G+4G4G genotypes of INSR, IGF2, and PAI1 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0499, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0300, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0350, 
respectively). AR shorter alleles (= 20 repeats) were significantly associated
with higher serum levels of total testosterone (TT, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0086). In conclusion,
PAI1 polymorphism seems to be associated with the risk of PCOS development.
Younger PCOS women had specific genotypes of INSR, IGF2 and PAI1 genes. AR
shorter alleles can be associated with higher serum levels of TT in PCOS
patients.

PMID: 21824047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Hum Reprod. 2011 Oct;26(10):2902-11. doi: 10.1093/humrep/der222. Epub 2011 Jul
28.

Genetic polymorphisms of the glucocorticoid receptor may affect the phenotype of 
women with anovulatory polycystic ovary syndrome.

Valkenburg O(1), Uitterlinden AG, Themmen AP, de Jong FH, Hofman A, Fauser BC,
Laven JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics,
Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Room HS508, Erasmus MC, PO Box 2040, 3000
CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. o.valkenburg@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is characterized by ovarian
dysfunction. The association with obesity and insulin resistance is well
established. Steroid hormones play a central role in the regulation of both
ovarian function and body composition. This study aims to assess the influence of
known functional polymorphisms in genes that are responsible for the production, 
metabolism and signal transduction of steroid hormones on the susceptibility to
and phenotype of PCOS.
METHODS: We included 518 Caucasian women with anovulatory PCOS (2003 Rotterdam
criteria) and 2996 population-based controls. Functional polymorphic variants
were selected in genes that affect the production of estradiol and cortisol
[aromatase (CYP19), 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I (HSD11B1) and
hexose-6-phosphate dehydogenase (H6PD)] and in genes for signal transduction
proteins [estrogen receptor (ESR1 and ESR2) and glucocorticoid receptor (GCR)].
RESULTS: Genotype-frequencies were similar in PCOS cases and population-based
controls. We observed possible associations between GCR genotype and LH levels
that suggest an inhibitory influence of GCR, i.e., lower LH levels in association
with GCR alleles that are known to increase receptor sensitivity (rs6195 and
rs41423247) and higher LH levels in GCR variants that may inhibit receptor
sensitivity (rs6190 and rs6198).
CONCLUSIONS: The present study did not identify risk alleles for PCOS, although
the study was limited by an absence of endocrine data for the population-based
controls. However, GCR variants may influence gonadotrophin levels in women with 
anovulatory PCOS. We hypothesize that glucocorticoids can affect the function of 
the hypothalomo-pituitary-gonadal axis in humans.

PMID: 21803757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Jan 2;348(1):67-77. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.07.032.
Epub 2011 Jul 23.

Is DNA methylation an epigenetic contribution to transcriptional regulation of
the bovine endometrium during the estrous cycle and early pregnancy?

Fürst RW(1), Meyer HH, Schweizer G, Ulbrich SE.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology Weihenstephan, Technische Universität München, 85354
Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.

Epigenetic events controlling the transcriptional regulation of genes involved in
endometrial function during the estrous cycle and early pregnancy have only
sparsely been investigated. We analyzed the gene expression of DNA
methyltransferases and the most prominent endocrine transcriptional mediator
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) in the bovine endometrium of heifers at 0, 12 and 
18 days following estrous and at day 18 after insemination. The luminometric
methylation assay for the investigation of global DNA methylation and an elegant 
combination of methylation-sensitive high resolution melting and pyrosequencing
for local methylation levels of ESR1 were deployed. In spite of differential gene
expression of ESR1 among groups, no differences in endometrial ESR1 DNA
methylation during neither estrous cycle nor early pregnancy were determined.
Global DNA methylation prevailed at similar low levels in endometrium, likely
controlled by the observed moderate DNMT3b expression. Thus, the epigenetic
contribution of DNA methylation influencing endometrial function seems rather
limited. However, because a control tissue expressing only minute amounts of ESR1
transcripts was locally significantly higher methylated, DNA methylation might
contribute to an appropriate tissue-specific expression status underlying further
specific control mechanisms of gene transcription.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21802491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2011 Jul 29;9:103. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-9-103.

Effect of estradiol on proliferation and differentiation of side population
stem/progenitor cells from murine endometrium.

Xu J(1), Hu FF, Cui YG, Luo J, Jiang CY, Gao L, Qian XQ, Mao YD, Liu JY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Center of Clinical Reproductive
Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, 
China.

BACKGROUND: In our previous study, endometrium side population cells (SP cells)
were isolated from postpartum murine uterus, and characterized by a heterogeneous
population of stem/progenitor cells. In this study, we investigated the effect of
estrogen on the proliferation and differentiation of SP cells.
METHODS: SP and non-SP cells of postpartum murine endometrium were isolated by
DNA dye Hoechst 33342. The expression of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) was measured 
by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Real-time PCR,
Western blot, immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry. The proliferation and 
differentiation of SP cells treated with different concentrations [10(-8)
M-10(-6) M] of estradiol (E2) and E2+ ICI182780 (Faslodex, inhibitor of ESR1)
were measured by 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazoly1-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide(MTT) and clonogenic assays.
RESULTS: (1) SP cells expressed ESR1 at a higher level than non-SP cells. (2) The
level of E2 in the serum and the expression of ESR1 in the uterus of postpartum
murine changed in the same manner with the ratio of SP cells to total uterus
cells at a different postpartum time point. ESR1, as ABCG2 is also predominantly 
located in the stroma and the glandular epithelium of the uterus. (3) 10(-6) M E2
notably promoted the proliferation of SP cells after treatment for 24 h. This
effect could be inhibited by ICI182780. E2 at the concentration of 10(-7) M or
10(-8) M was sent to impair the large cloning efficiency (CE) of SP cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The effect of estrogen on the proliferation and differentiation of
endometrium SP cells via ESR1 was observed and it was in a concentration
dependent fashion. Clearly, more work is needed to understand the in vivo effect 
of E2 at the physiological concentration on the differentiation of SP cells.

PMCID: PMC3164598
PMID: 21801373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Jul 28;12:310. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-310.

Consistent metagenes from cancer expression profiles yield agent specific
predictors of chemotherapy response.

Li Q(1), Eklund AC, Birkbak NJ, Desmedt C, Haibe-Kains B, Sotiriou C, Symmans WF,
Pusztai L, Brunak S, Richardson AL, Szallasi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Department of Systems Biolology,
Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Genome scale expression profiling of human tumor samples is likely to
yield improved cancer treatment decisions. However, identification of clinically 
predictive or prognostic classifiers can be challenging when a large number of
genes are measured in a small number of tumors.
RESULTS: We describe an unsupervised method to extract robust, consistent
metagenes from multiple analogous data sets. We applied this method to expression
profiles from five "double negative breast cancer" (DNBC) (not expressing ESR1 or
HER2) cohorts and derived four metagenes. We assessed these metagenes in four
similar but independent cohorts and found strong associations between three of
the metagenes and agent-specific response to neoadjuvant therapy. Furthermore, we
applied the method to ovarian and early stage lung cancer, two tumor types that
lack reliable predictors of outcome, and found that the metagenes yield
predictors of survival for both.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the use of multiple data sets to derive
potential biomarkers can filter out data set-specific noise and can increase the 
efficiency in identifying clinically accurate biomarkers.

PMCID: PMC3155975
PMID: 21798043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Nov;4(11):1852-62. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0186. Epub 2011 Jul 21.

Tamoxifen downregulates ets oncogene family members ETV4 and ETV5 in benign
breast tissue: implications for durable risk reduction.

Euhus D(1), Bu D, Xie XJ, Sarode V, Ashfaq R, Hunt K, Xia W, O'Shaughnessy J,
Grant M, Arun B, Dooley W, Miller A, Flockhart D, Lewis C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323
Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390, USA. david.euhus@utsouthwestern.edu

Five years of tamoxifen reduces breast cancer risk by nearly 50% but is
associated with significant side effects and toxicities. A better understanding
of the direct and indirect effects of tamoxifen in benign breast tissue could
elucidate new mechanisms of breast carcinogenesis, suggest novel chemoprevention 
targets, and provide relevant early response biomarkers for phase II prevention
trials. Seventy-three women at increased risk for breast cancer were randomized
to tamoxifen (20 mg daily) or placebo for 3 months. Blood and breast tissue
samples were collected at baseline and posttreatment. Sixty-nine women completed 
all study activities (37 tamoxifen and 32 placebo). The selected biomarkers
focused on estradiol and IGFs in the blood; DNA methylation and cytology in
random periareolar fine-needle aspirates; and tissue morphometry, proliferation, 
apoptosis, and gene expression (microarray and reverse transcriptase PCR) in the 
tissue core samples. Tamoxifen downregulated Ets oncogene transcription factor
family members ETV4 and ETV5 and reduced breast epithelial cell proliferation
independent of CYP2D6 genotypes or effects on estradiol, ESR1, or IGFs. Reduction
in proliferation was correlated with downregulation of ETV4 and DNAJC12.
Tamoxifen reduced the expression of ETV4- and ETV5-regulated genes implicated in 
epithelial-stromal interaction and tissue remodeling. Three months of tamoxifen
did not affect breast tissue composition, cytologic atypia, preneoplasia, or
apoptosis. A plausible mechanism for the chemopreventive effects of tamoxifen is 
restriction of lobular expansion into stroma through downregulation of ETV4 and
ETV5. The human equivalent of murine multipotential progenitor cap cells of
terminal end buds may be the primary target.

PMCID: PMC3208724
PMID: 21778330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Cancers (Basel). 2011 Jun;3(2):1580-92. doi: 10.3390/cancers3021580.

Delineating an epigenetic continuum for initiation, transformation and
progression to breast cancer.

Chen KM(1), Stephen JK, Raju U, Worsham MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Henry Ford Hospital, 1
Ford Place, 1D, Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

Aberrant methylation of promoter CpG islands is a hallmark of human cancers and
is an early event in carcinogenesis. We examined whether promoter
hypermethylation contributes to the pathogenesis of benign breast lesions along a
progression continuum to invasive breast cancer. The exploratory study cohort
comprised 17 breast cancer patients with multiple benign and/or in situ lesions
concurrently present with invasive carcinoma within a tumor biopsy. DNA from
tumor tissue, normal breast epithelium when present, benign lesions
(fibroadenoma, hyperplasia, papilloma, sclerosing adenosis, apocrine metaplasia, 
atypical lobular hyperplasia or atypical ductal hyperplasia), and in situ lesions
of lobular carcinoma and ductal carcinoma were interrogated for promoter
methylation status in 22 tumor suppressor genes using the multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification assay (MS-MLPA). Methylation specific PCR 
was performed to confirm hypermethylation detected by MS-MLPA. Promoter
methylation was detected in 11/22 tumor suppressor genes in 16/17 cases.
Hypermethylation of RASSF1 was most frequent, present in 14/17 cases, followed by
APC in 12/17, and GSTP1 in 9/17 cases with establishment of an epigenetic
monocloncal progression continuum to invasive breast cancer. Hypermethylated
promoter regions in normal breast epithelium, benign, and premalignant lesions
within the same tumor biopsy implicate RASSF1, APC, GSTP1, TIMP3, CDKN2B, CDKN2A,
ESR1, CDH13, RARB, CASP8, and TP73 as early events. DNA hypermethylation
underlies thepathogenesis of step-wise transformation along a monoclonal
continuum from normal to preneoplasia to invasive breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3138135
PMID: 21776373  [PubMed]


391. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 Jul 20;8:82. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-82.

Estrogens regulate neuroinflammatory genes via estrogen receptors a and ß in the 
frontal cortex of middle-aged female rats.

Sárvári M(1), Hrabovszky E, Kalló I, Solymosi N, Tóth K, Likó I, Széles J, Mahó
S, Molnár B, Liposits Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrine Neurobiology, Institute of Experimental Medicine,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szigony utca 43, Budapest, 1083, Hungary.

BACKGROUND: Estrogens exert anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects in the 
brain mainly via estrogen receptors a (ERa) and ß (ERß). These receptors are
members of the nuclear receptor superfamily of ligand-dependent transcription
factors. This study was aimed at the elucidation of the effects of ERa and ERß
agonists on the expression of neuroinflammatory genes in the frontal cortex of
aging female rats.
METHODS: To identify estrogen-responsive immunity/inflammation genes, we treated 
middle-aged, ovariectomized rats with 17ß-estradiol (E2), ERa agonist
16a-lactone-estradiol (16a-LE2) and ERß agonist diarylpropionitrile (DPN), or
vehicle by Alzet minipump delivery for 29 days. Then we compared the
transcriptomes of the frontal cortex of estrogen-deprived versus ER
agonist-treated animals using Affymetrix Rat230 2.0 expression arrays and
TaqMan-based quantitative real-time PCR. Microarray and PCR data were evaluated
by using Bioconductor packages and the RealTime StatMiner software, respectively.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed the transcriptional regulation of 21
immunity/inflammation genes by 16a-LE2. The subsequent comparative real-time PCR 
study analyzed the isotype specific effects of ER agonists on neuroinflammatory
genes of primarily glial origin. E2 regulated the expression of sixteen genes,
including down-regulation of complement C3 and C4b, Ccl2, Tgfb1, macrophage
expressed gene Mpeg1, RT1-Aw2, Cx3cr1, Fcgr2b, Cd11b, Tlr4 and Tlr9, and
up-regulation of defensin Np4 and RatNP-3b, IgG-2a, Il6 and ER gene Esr1. Similar
to E2, both 16a-LE2 and DPN evoked up-regulation of defensins, IgG-2a and Il6,
and down-regulation of C3 and its receptor Cd11b, Ccl2, RT1-Aw2 and Fcgr2b.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide evidence that E2, 16a-LE2 and DPN modulate
the expression of neuroinflammatory genes in the frontal cortex of middle-aged
female rats via both ERa and ERß. We propose that ERß is a promising target to
suppress regulatory functions of glial cells in the E2-deprived female brain and 
in various neuroinflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC3161870
PMID: 21774811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Nihon Rinsho. 2011 Jul;69(7):1315-21.

[Genetics of osteoporosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Urano T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo.

Osteoporosis is characterized by low bone mineral density (BMD) and
microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue, with a consequent increase in
the fragility of bones and susceptibility to fractures. Over the last five years,
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified the single-nucleotide
polymorphisms(SNPs) associated with osteoporosis, BMD and other determinants of
fracture risk. These SNPs were mapped close to or within the genes, such as LRP5,
RANKL, SOST and ESR1. In the future, the novel important bone loss susceptibility
genes may be uncovered by the GWAS.

PMID: 21774378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Toxicol Lett. 2011 Oct 10;206(2):152-7. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.07.007. Epub
2011 Jul 12.

Xenoestrogens down-regulate aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 mRNA
expression in human breast cancer cells via an estrogen receptor alpha-dependent 
mechanism.

Qin XY(1), Zaha H, Nagano R, Yoshinaga J, Yonemoto J, Sone H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environmental Risk, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Japan.

Environmental chemicals with estrogenic activity, known as xenoestrogens, may
cause impaired reproductive development and endocrine-related cancers in humans
by disrupting endocrine functions. Aryl-hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
2 (ARNT2) is believed to play important roles in a variety of physiological
processes, including estrogen signaling pathways, that may be involved in the
pathogenesis and therapeutic responses of endocrine-related cancers. However,
much of the underlying mechanism remains unknown. In this study, we investigated 
whether ARNT2 expression is regulated by a range of representative xenoestrogens 
in human cancer cell lines. Bisphenol A (BPA), benzyl butyl phthalate (BBP), and 
1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(2-chlorophenyl-4-chlorophenyl)ethane (o,p'-DDT) were
found to be estrogenic toward BG1Luc4E2 cells by an E-CALUX bioassay. ARNT2
expression was downregulated by BPA, BBP, and o,p'-DDT in a dose-dependent manner
in estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)-positive MCF-7 and BG1Luc4E2 cells, but not in
estrogen receptor-negative LNCaP cells. The reduction in ARNT2 expression in
cells treated with the xenoestrogens was fully recovered by the addition of a
specific ESR1 antagonist, MPP. In conclusion, we have shown for the first time
that ARNT2 expression is modulated by xenoestrogens by an ESR1-dependent
mechanism in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21771643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2011 Nov;55(11):1717-23. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201100150. Epub
2011 Jul 19.

Maternal folate supply and sex influence gene-specific DNA methylation in the
fetal gut.

McKay JA(1), Wong YK, Relton CL, Ford D, Mathers JC.

Author information: 
(1)Human Nutrition Research Centre, Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. jill.mckay@ncl.ac.uk

SCOPE: Epidemiological evidence supports the developmental origins of health and 
disease hypothesis that developmental under/over-nutrition increases adulthood
disease risk. Epigenetic markings are one potential mechanism mediating these
effects. Altered folate supply may influence methyl group availability for DNA
methylation. We reported low folate supply in utero was associated with reduced
global DNA methylation in the murine small intestine of adult offspring. We
hypothesised that aberrant methylation would be observed during early
development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Female C57BL/6J mice were fed diets containing 2<U+2009>mg folic
acid/kg or 0.4<U+2009>mg folic acid/kg 4<U+2009>wk before mating and during pregnancy. At 17.5 
day gestation, gene methylation in fetal gut was analysed by Pyrosequencing(®) . 
Low folate reduced overall methylation of Slc394a by 3.4% (p=0.038) but did not
affect Esr1 or Igf2 differentially methylated region (DMR) 1. There were
sex-specific differences in Slc394a and Esr1 methylation (2.4% higher in females 
(p=0.002); 4% higher in males (p=0.0014), respectively).
CONCLUSION: This is the first study reporting causal effects of maternal folate
depletion on gene-specific methylation in fetal gut. These observations support
reports that altered methyl donor intake during development affects DNA
methylation in the offspring. The consequences of epigenetic changes for health
throughout the life course remain to be investigated.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21770049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Scand J Rheumatol. 2011;40(5):329-33. doi: 10.3109/03009742.2011.563752. Epub
2011 Jul 18.

Oestrogen receptor polymorphisms in female patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Dziedziejko V(1), Kurzawski M, Safranow K, Drozdzik M, Chlubek D, Pawlik A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Chemistry, Pomeranian Medical
University, Szczecin, Poland.

OBJECTIVES: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a complex autoimmune disease with a
strong genetic contribution in its pathogenesis. There is compelling evidence
that autoimmunity is under genetic control and that oestrogens and their
receptors (ESRs) can play a role in the high prevalence of RA in females.
METHODS: A total of 318 female patients with RA and 250 controls were examined.
Common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ESR1 (rs9340799:A>G,
rs2234693:T>C) and ESR2 (rs4986938:G>A, rs1256049:G>A) genes encoding oestrogen
receptors, previously associated with altered receptor expression, were selected 
for the purpose of this study.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in the distributions of studied
genotypes and alleles between RA patients and a control group. The age at disease
diagnosis was lower in carriers of the ESR1 rs9340799 A allele compared with GG
homozygotes as well as in patients with ESR1 rs2234693 TT and CT genotypes
compared with CC homozygotes. There was no significant association of the
genotypes with rheumatoid factor (RF), erosive disease, extra-articular
manifestations, or anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the study suggest that polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene
may be associated with the age of onset of RA.

PMID: 21762042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Horm Cancer. 2010 Dec;1(6):306-19. doi: 10.1007/s12672-010-0043-5.

MicroRNAs link estrogen receptor alpha status and Dicer levels in breast cancer.

Cochrane DR(1), Cittelly DM, Howe EN, Spoelstra NS, McKinsey EL, LaPara K, Elias 
A, Yee D, Richer JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Mail Stop 8104, P.O.
Box 6511, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

To identify microRNAs (miRNAs) associated with estrogen receptor (ESR1) status,
we profiled luminal A, ESR1+ breast cancer cell lines versus triple negative
(TN), which lack ERa, progesterone receptor and Her2/neu. Although two thirds of 
the differentially expressed miRNAs are higher in ESR1+ breast cancer cells, some
miRNAs, such as miR-222/221 and miR-29a, are dramatically higher in ESR1- cells
(~100- and 16-fold higher, respectively). MiR-222/221 (which target ESR1 itself) 
and miR-29a are predicted to target the 3' UTR of Dicer1. Addition of these
miRNAs to ESR1+ cells reduces Dicer protein, whereas antagonizing miR-222 in
ESR1- cells increases Dicer protein. We demonstrate via luciferase reporter
assays that these miRNAs directly target the Dicer1 3' UTR. In contrast,
miR-200c, which promotes an epithelial phenotype, is 58-fold higher in the more
well-differentiated ERa+ cells, and restoration of miR-200c to ERa- cells causes 
increased Dicer protein, resulting in increased levels of other mature miRNAs
typically low in ESR1- cells. Together, our findings explain why Dicer is low in 
ERa negative breast cancers, since such cells express high miR-221/222 and
miR-29a levels (which repress Dicer) and low miR-200c (which positively affect
Dicer levels). Furthermore, we find that miR-7, which is more abundant in ERa+
cells and is estrogen regulated, targets growth factor receptors and signaling
intermediates such as EGFR, IGF1R, and IRS-2. In summary, miRNAs differentially
expressed in ERa+ versus ERa- breast cancers actively control some of the most
distinguishing characteristics of the luminal A and TN subtypes, such as ERa
itself, Dicer, and growth factor receptor levels.

© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

PMCID: PMC4561556
PMID: 21761362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22037. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022037. Epub 2011 Jul 7.

The ESR1 (6q25) locus is associated with calcaneal ultrasound parameters and
radial volumetric bone mineral density in European men.

Holliday KL(1), Pye SR, Thomson W, Boonen S, Borghs H, Vanderschueren D, Gielen
E, Huhtaniemi IT, Adams JE, Ward KA, Bartfai G, Casanueva F, Finn JD, Forti G,
Giwercman A, Han TS, Kula K, Labrie F, Lean ME, Pendleton N, Punab M, Wu FC,
O'Neill TW; EMAS study group.

Collaborators: Forti G, Petrone L, Corona G, Vanderschueren D, Boonen S, Borghs
H, Kula K, Slowikowska-Hilczer J, Walczak-Jedrzejowska R, Huhtaniemi I, Giwercman
A, Wu F, Silman A, O'Neill T, Finn J, Steer P, Tajar A, Lee D, Pye S, Casanueva
F, Lage M, Bartfai G, Földesi I, Fejes I, Punab M, Korrovitz P, Jiang M.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit, The University of Manchester,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom.
kata.holliday@manchester.ac.uk

PURPOSE: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified 6q25, which
incorporates the oestrogen receptor a gene (ESR1), as a quantitative trait locus 
for areal bone mineral density (BMD(a)) of the hip and lumbar spine. The aim of
this study was to determine the influence of this locus on other bone health
outcomes; calcaneal ultrasound (QUS) parameters, radial peripheral quantitative
computed tomography (pQCT) parameters and markers of bone turnover in a
population sample of European men.
METHODS: Eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in the 6q25 locus were
genotyped in men aged 40-79 years from 7 European countries, participating in the
European Male Ageing Study (EMAS). The associations between SNPs and measured
bone parameters were tested under an additive genetic model adjusting for centre 
using linear regression.
RESULTS: 2468 men, mean (SD) aged 59.9 (11.1) years had QUS measurements
performed and bone turnover marker levels measured. A subset of 628 men had DXA
and pQCT measurements. Multiple independent SNPs showed significant associations 
with BMD using all three measurement techniques. Most notably, rs1999805 was
associated with a 0.10 SD (95%CI 0.05, 0.16; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0001) lower estimated BMD at
the calcaneus, a 0.14 SD (95%CI 0.05, 0.24; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.004) lower total hip BMD(a), a 
0.12 SD (95%CI 0.02, 0.23; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.026) lower lumbar spine BMD(a) and a 0.18 SD
(95%CI 0.06, 0.29; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.003) lower trabecular BMD at the distal radius for each 
copy of the minor allele. There was no association with serum levels of bone
turnover markers and a single SNP which was associated with cortical density was 
also associated with cortical BMC and thickness.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data replicate previous associations found between SNPs in the
6q25 locus and BMD(a) at the hip and extend these data to include associations
with calcaneal ultrasound parameters and radial volumetric BMD.

PMCID: PMC3131390
PMID: 21760950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 Sep;128(3):479-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.05.036. 
Epub 2011 Jul 12.

Evidence of a genetic contribution to lung function decline in asthma.

Koppelman GH(1), Sayers I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology and Pediatric Allergology, Beatrix
Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

There has been great progress in identifying new asthma susceptibility genes. In 
asthmatic subjects there is variable airway remodeling that includes features
such as smooth muscle hypertrophy/hyperplasia, basement membrane thickening, and 
increased extracellular matrix deposition. Does airway remodeling have a genetic 
contribution in asthma? Data from different murine strains suggest there is a
genetic contribution to the development and progression of airway remodeling. In 
human subjects it is important to consider what surrogate markers of remodeling
have been used in genetic studies. Baseline FEV(1) and airway hyperresponsiveness
are determined by a complex interplay of factors, including nonremodeling
mechanisms; however, we consider a decline in FEV(1) as a robust marker of
remodeling. To date, single nucleotide polymorphisms spanning ADAM33, ESR1,
PLAUR, and VEGF have been associated with an excess decline in lung function in
asthmatic subjects carrying the rare alleles (FEV(1), -13.0 to 55.2 mL/y excess).
Interestingly these genes have overlapping functions in proteolytic pathways in
the airways. There is accumulating evidence that genetic factors are important in
the development of airway remodeling in asthmatic subjects, and further
longitudinal studies with additional remodeling phenotypes and genome-wide
association studies will identify novel susceptibility genes, leading to new
approaches to target remodeling in asthmatic subjects.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21752436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Front Psychiatry. 2011 Jul 1;2:40. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2011.00040. eCollection
2011.

Changes in maternal gene expression in olfactory circuits in the immediate
postpartum period.

Canavan SV(1), Mayes LC, Treloar HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine New Haven, CT, 
USA.

Regulation of maternal behavior in the immediate postpartum period involves
neural circuits in reward and homeostasis systems responding to cues from the
newborn. Our aim was to assess one specific regulatory mechanism: the role that
olfaction plays in the onset and modulation of parenting behavior. We focused on 
changes in gene expression in olfactory brain regions, examining nine genes found
in previous knockout studies to be necessary for maternal behavior. Using a
quantitative PCR (qPCR)-based approach, we assessed changes in gene expression in
response to exposure to pups in 11 microdissected olfactory brain regions. Over
the first postpartum days, all nine genes were detected in all 11 regions (at
differing levels) and their expression changed in response to pup exposure. As a 
general trend, five genes (Dbh, Esr1, FosB, Foxb1, and Oxtr) were found to
decrease their expression in most of the olfactory regions examined, while two
genes (Mest and Prlr) were found to increase expression. Nos1 and Peg3 levels
remained relatively stable except in the accessory olfactory bulb (AOB), where
greater than fourfold increases in expression were observed. The largest
magnitude expression changes in this study were found in the AOB, which mediates 
a variety of olfactory cues that elicit stereotypic behaviors such as mating and 
aggression as well as some non-pheromone odors. Previous analyses of null mice
for the nine genes assessed here have rarely examined olfactory function. Our
data suggest that there may be olfactory effects in these null mice which
contribute to the observed maternal behavioral phenotypes. Collectively, these
data support the hypothesis that olfactory processing is an important sensory
regulator of maternal behavior.

PMCID: PMC3130163
PMID: 21747772  [PubMed]


400. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Oct 1;20(19):3746-56. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr291. Epub 2011 Jul 
7.

Steroid hormone modulation of RET through two estrogen responsive enhancers in
breast cancer.

Stine ZE(1), McGaughey DM, Bessling SL, Li S, McCallion AS.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 733 N. Broadway, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

RET, a gene causatively mutated in Hirschsprung disease and cancer, has recently 
been implicated in breast cancer estrogen (E2) independence and tamoxifen
resistance. RET displays both E2 and retinoic acid (RA)-dependent transcriptional
modulation in E2-responsive breast cancers. However, the regulatory elements
through which the steroid hormone transcriptional regulation of RET is mediated
are poorly defined. Recent genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation-based
studies have identified 10 putative E2 receptor-alpha (ESR1) and RA receptor
alpha-binding sites at the RET locus, of which we demonstrate only two (RET -49.8
and RET +32.8) display significant E2 regulatory response when assayed
independently in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. We demonstrate that endogenous RET
expression and RET -49.8 regulatory activity are cooperatively regulated by E2
and RA in breast cancer cells. We identify key sequences that are required for
RET -49.8 and RET +32.8 E2 responsiveness, including motifs known to be bound by 
ESR1, FOXA1 and TFAP2C. We also report that both RET -49.8 regulatory activity
and endogenous RET expression are completely dependent on ESR1 for their
(E2)-induction and that ESR1 is sufficient to mediate the E2-induced enhancer
activity of RET -49.8 and RET +32.8. Finally, using zebrafish transgenesis, we
also demonstrate that RET -49.8 directs reporter expression in the central
nervous system and peripheral nervous system consistent with the endogenous ret
expression. Taken collectively, these data suggest that RET transcription in
breast cancer cells is modulated by E2 via ESR1 acting on multiple elements
collectively.

PMCID: PMC3168285
PMID: 21737465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Biol Reprod. 2011 Oct;85(4):770-8. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.091926. Epub 2011 
Jul 6.

Does a nonclassical signaling mechanism underlie an increase of
estradiol-mediated gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor binding in ovine
pituitary cells?

Davis TL(1), Whitesell JD, Cantlon JD, Clay CM, Nett TM.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction and Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.

Estradiol-17beta (E2) is the major regulator of GnRH receptor (GnRHR) gene
expression and number during the periovulatory period; however, the mechanisms
underlying E2 regulation of the GNRHR gene remain undefined. Herein, we find that
E2 conjugated to BSA (E2-BSA) mimics the stimulatory effect of E2 on GnRH binding
in primary cultures of ovine pituitary cells. The time course for maximal GnRH
analog binding was similar for both E2 and E2-BSA. The ability of E2 and E2-BSA
to increase GnRH analog binding was blocked by the estrogen receptor (ER)
antagonist ICI 182,780. Also, increased GnRH analog binding in response to E2 and
the selective ESR1 agonist propylpyrazole triol was blocked by expression of a
dominant-negative form of ESR1 (L540Q). Thus, membrane-associated ESR1 is the
likely candidate for mediating E2 activation of the GNRHR gene. As cAMP response 
element binding protein (CREB) is an established target for E2 activation in
gonadotrophs, we next explored a potential role for this protein as an
intracellular mediator of the E2 signal. Consistent with this possibility,
adenoviral-mediated expression of a dominant-negative form of CREB (A-CREB)
completely abolished the ability of E2 to increase GnRH analog binding in primary
cultures of ovine pituitary cells. Finally, the presence of membrane-associated
E2 binding sites on ovine pituitary cells was demonstrated using a fluorescein
isothiocyanate conjugate of E2-BSA. We suggest that E2 regulation of GnRHR number
during the preovulatory period reflects a membrane site of action and may proceed
through a nonclassical signaling mechanism, specifically a CREB-dependent
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3184292
PMID: 21734267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Biol Reprod. 2011 Nov;85(5):954-64. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.091470. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Uterine gland formation in mice is a continuous process, requiring the ovary
after puberty, but not after parturition.

Stewart CA(1), Fisher SJ, Wang Y, Stewart MD, Hewitt SC, Rodriguez KF, Korach KS,
Behringer RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Uterine gland formation occurs postnatally in an ovary- and steroid-independent
manner in many species, including humans. Uterine glands secrete substances that 
are essential for embryo survival. Disruption of gland development during the
postnatal period prevents gland formation, resulting in infertility.
Interestingly, stabilization of beta-catenin (CTNNB1) in the uterine stroma
causes a delay in gland formation rather than a complete absence of uterine
glands. Thus, to determine if a critical postnatal window for gland development
exists in mice, we tested the effects of extending the endocrine environment of
pregnancy on uterine gland formation by treating neonatal mice with estradiol,
progesterone, or oil for 5 days. One uterine horn was removed before puberty, and
the other was collected at maturity. Some mice were also ovariectomized before
puberty. The hormone-treated mice exhibited a delay in uterine gland formation.
Hormone-treatment increased the abundance of uterine CTNNB1 and estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) before puberty, indicating possible mechanisms for delayed gland
formation. Despite having fewer glands, progesterone-treated mice were fertile,
suggesting that a threshold number of glands is required for pregnancy. Mice that
were ovariectomized before puberty did not undergo further uterine growth or
gland development. Finally, to establish the role of the ovary in postpartum
uterine gland regeneration, mice were either ovariectomized or given a sham
surgery after parturition, and uteri were evaluated 1 wk later. We found that the
ovary is not required for uterine growth or gland development following
parturition. Thus, uterine gland development occurs continuously in mice and
requires the ovary after puberty, but not after parturition.

PMCID: PMC3197914
PMID: 21734259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Hum Reprod. 2011 Dec;17(12):758-61. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gar049. Epub 2011 Jun
30.

Oncogenic events associated with endometrial and ovarian cancers are rare in
endometriosis.

Vestergaard AL(1), Thorup K, Knudsen UB, Munk T, Rosbach H, Poulsen JB, Guldberg 
P, Martensen PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2011 Dec;3(6):689-90.

Endometriosis displays some features that resemble malignant processes, including
invasive growth, resistance to apoptosis and distant implantation. The objective 
of this study was to investigate whether gene alterations that are frequent in
endometrial and/or ovarian cancers contribute to the pathogenesis of
endometriosis. Biopsies were obtained from ectopic endometriosis lesions from 23 
patients with revised American Fertility Score stage 1 (n= 1), 2 (n= 10), 3 (n=
11) or 4 (n= 1) endometriosis. Six genes (APC, CDKN2A, PYCARD, RARB, RASSF1 and
ESR1) were analyzed for promoter hypermethylation using methylation-specific
melting curve analysis, and 9 genes (BRAF, HRAS, NRAS, CTNNB1, CDK4, FGFR3,
PIK3CA, TP53 and PTEN) were analyzed for mutations using denaturing gradient gel 
electrophoresis and direct sequencing. An oncogenic mutation in KRAS (c.34G > T; 
p.G12C) was detected in a single lesion. No gene alterations were found in the
remaining samples. Our data suggest that genetic and epigenetic events
contributing to endometrial and ovarian cancers are rare in endometriosis.
However, other proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes should be tested for
alterations in order to identify the molecular basis of the susceptibility of
endometriosis to malignant transformation.

PMID: 21724579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Obes Surg. 2011 Nov;21(11):1758-65. doi: 10.1007/s11695-011-0457-3.

ESR1, FTO, and UCP2 genes interact with bariatric surgery affecting weight loss
and glycemic control in severely obese patients.

Liou TH(1), Chen HH, Wang W, Wu SF, Lee YC, Yang WS, Lee WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Obes Surg. 2012 Jan;22(1):194.

BACKGROUND: Significant variability in weight loss and glycemic control has been 
observed in obese patients receiving bariatric surgery. Genetic factors may play 
a role in the different outcomes.
METHODS: Five hundred and twenty severely obese patients with body mass index
(BMI) =35 were recruited. Among them, 149 and 371 subjects received laparoscopic 
adjustable gastric banding (LAGB) and laparoscopic mini-gastric bypass (LMGB),
respectively. All individuals were genotyped for five obesity-related single
nucleotide polymorphisms on ESR1, FTO, PPAR<U+03B3>, and UCP2 genes to explore how these
genes affect weight loss and glycemic control after bariatric surgery at the 6th 
month.
RESULTS: Obese patients with risk genotypes on rs660339-UCP2 had greater decrease
in BMI after LAGB compared to patients with non-risk genotypes (-7.5 vs. -6 U,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02). In contrast, after LMGB, obese patients with risk genotypes on either 
rs712221-ESR1 or rs9939609-FTO had significant decreases in BMI (risk vs.
non-risk genotype, -12.5 vs. -10.0 U on rs712221, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02 and -12.1 vs. -10.6 U 
on rs9939609, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04) and a significant amelioration in HbA1c levels (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.038
for rs712221 and p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001 for rs9939609). The synergic effect of ESR1 and FTO
genes on HbA1c amelioration was greater (-1.54%, p for trend <0.001) than any of 
these genes alone in obese patients receiving LMGB.
CONCLUSIONS: The genetic variants in the ESR, FTO, and UCP2 genes may be
considered as a screening tool prior to bariatric surgery to help clinicians
predict weight loss or glycemic control outcomes for severely obese patients.

PMID: 21720911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Biol Reprod. 2011 Oct;85(4):798-807. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.092023. Epub
2011 Jun 29.

Characterization and application of oviductal epithelial cells in vitro in Gallus
domesticus.

Jung JG(1), Park TS, Kim JN, Han BK, Lee SD, Song G, Han JY.

Author information: 
(1)Avicore Biotechnology Institute, Optifarm Solution Inc., Gyeonggi-Do, Republic
of Korea.

Chicken oviductal epithelium produces large quantities of egg white protein in
daily cycles. In this study, we cultured and characterized oviductal epithelial
cells (OECs) from juvenile (10-wk-old) chickens and from actively laying
(30-wk-old) hens. The juvenile OECs were maintained over passage 25 and were
positive for toluidine blue, lectin-ConA, HPA, UEA-1, WFA, WGA, anti-OVA,
anti-ESR1, and anti-PGR, whereas the adult OECs were cultured over passage 6 and 
were positive for toluidine blue, periodic acid-Schiff, lectin-ConA, WFA, WGA,
anti-OVA, anti-ESR1, and anti-PGR. To investigate the optimal concentration of
steroid hormones for inducing egg white protein genes in vitro, we examined the
effects of estrogen, diethylstilbestrol, progesterone, and corticosterone on
OECs. Results showed that oviduct-specific levels of avidin, ovalbumin, ovomucin,
lysozyme, ESR1, and PGR gene expression were significantly elevated in steroid
hormone-treated OECs compared with those of untreated cells (P < 0.05). Ovalbumin
protein was also secreted into culture medium from hormone-treated OECs. In
addition, to examine the application of OECs for avian transgenesis, we
introduced human thrombopoietin (THPO)-expressing lentiviral vector controlled by
a 3.5-kb ovalbumin promoter into cultured OECs, and THPO expression was
significantly induced with diethylstilbestrol or progesterone in juvenile OECs (P
< 0.05) and in adult OECs (P < 0.05). In conclusion, these data demonstrate the
potential of cultured OECs as a model system for providing a better understanding
of the regulation of gene expression and for the production of an avian
transgenic bioreactor.

PMID: 21715713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Int J Health Sci (Qassim). 2011 Jul;5(2):167-79.

Update on the genetics characterization of vitiligo.

Al-Shobaili HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, College of Medicine, Qassim University, Saudi
Arabia.

Vitiligo is an autoimmune skin disorder in which autoimmune-mediated destruction 
of melanocytes caused depigmentation of skin patches. The complex genetics of
vitiligo involves multiple susceptibility loci, genetic heterogeneity and
incomplete penetrance with gene-gene and gene-environment interactions. In order 
to clarify the genetic factors, two different principal approaches have applied
for the identification of genomic regions or candidate genes that mediate
susceptibility to vitiligo. First approach is the genome-wide linkage analyses,
which is conducted by scanning of entire human genome for genomic regions that
are linked to the development of vitiligo. The other approach is functional
candidate gene association (FCGA) analyses that detect specific candidate genes, 
which are expected to involve in disease on the basis of their priori biological 
functions. Genomic-wide scans have provided a strong support for vitiligo
susceptibility genes on chromosomes 4q13-q21, 1p31, 7q22, 8p12 and 17p13, while
loci of interest at 6p, 6q, 14q, 9q, 13q, 19p and 22q required further follow-up.
Whereas, FCGA studies have identified some candidate genes which are associated
with vitiligo, such as HLA, AIRE, VIT1, CAT, FOXD3, ESR1, COMT, PTPN22, NALP1,
PDGFRA, MYG1, MITF, CD117, XBP1, FAS, COX2, EDN1 and ACE, but few of them reports
now appear to be false-positive. This review will provides an update on genetics 
of vitiligo based on the identification of novel candidate genes that represent, 
in my opinion as optimal utility for future therapeutic targets in the
pathogenesis of vitiligo.

PMCID: PMC3521835
PMID: 23267294  [PubMed]


407. Dis Markers. 2011;30(4):151-61. doi: 10.3233/DMA-2011-0790.

Absolute quantitation of DNA methylation of 28 candidate genes in prostate cancer
using pyrosequencing.

Vasiljevic N(1), Wu K, Brentnall AR, Kim DC, Thorat MA, Kudahetti SC, Mao X, Xue 
L, Yu Y, Shaw GL, Beltran L, Lu YJ, Berney DM, Cuzick J, Lorincz AT.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Centre for Epidemiology, Mathematics and Statistics,
Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine, Barts & the London School of Dentistry 
and Medicine, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.

Aberrant DNA methylation plays a pivotal role in carcinogenesis and its mapping
is likely to provide biomarkers for improved diagnostic and risk assessment in
prostate cancer (PCa). We quantified and compared absolute methylation levels
among 28 candidate genes in 48 PCa and 29 benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH)
samples using the pyrosequencing (PSQ) method to identify genes with diagnostic
and prognostic potential. RARB, HIN1, BCL2, GSTP1, CCND2, EGFR5, APC, RASSF1A,
MDR1, NKX2-5, CDH13, DPYS, PTGS2, EDNRB, MAL, PDLIM4, HLAa, ESR1 and TIG1 were
highly methylated in PCa compared to BPH (p < 0.001), while SERPINB5, CDH1,
TWIST1, DAPK1, THRB, MCAM, SLIT2, CDKN2a and SFN were not. RARB methylation above
21% completely distinguished PCa Separation based on methylation level of SFN,
SLIT2 and SERPINB5 distinguished low and high Gleason score cancers, e.g. SFN and
SERPINB5 together correctly classified 81% and 77% of high and low Gleason score 
cancers respectively. Several genes including CDH1 previously reported as
methylation markers in PCa were not confirmed in our study. Increasing age was
positively associated with gene methylation (p < 0.0001).Accurate quantitative
measurement of gene methylation in PCa appears promising and further validation
of genes like RARB, HIN1, BCL2, APC and GSTP1 is warranted for diagnostic
potential and SFN, SLIT2 and SERPINB5 for prognostic potential.

PMCID: PMC3825083
PMID: 21694441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Horm Res Paediatr. 2011;76(2):86-92. doi: 10.1159/000326064. Epub 2011 Jun 17.

Estrogen receptor-alpha gene polymorphisms and body composition in children and
adolescents.

Voorhoeve PG(1), van Mechelen W, Uitterlinden AG, Delemarre-van de Waal HA,
Lamberts SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Canisius-Wilhelmina Hospital, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands. p.voorhoeve@cwz.nl

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Gender differences in body composition are largely explained by 
differences in sex hormones, such as estrogens. Associations between 2
polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor-a gene (ESR1) and body composition in
children and adolescents were investigated.
METHODS: Two comparable Dutch cohorts with a generational difference of about 20 
years were investigated. The first consisted of 350 subjects (184 girls) and the 
second of 316 subjects (155 girls). Associations between height, weight, BMI, fat
mass (FM) and fat-free mass and two polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene were
investigated.
RESULTS: In girls in the recent cohort, the PvuII-XbaI haplotype 2 polymorphism
in the ESR1 gene was associated with a lower body weight, BMI, and FM. These
associations were not observed in the older cohort. The younger cohort had a
significantly higher total FM, body weight and BMI compared to the older cohort.
CONCLUSION: Because the associations between the PvuII-XbaI haplotype 2
polymorphism and body FM in girls were only found in the recent cohort, but not
in a comparable, generally leaner cohort from an older generation, it is
suggested that non-carriers of this polymorphism are likely to be more vulnerable
to fat accumulation in today's obesity promoting environment, than carriers.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21691043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Genet. 2011 Apr;90(1):1-9.

Correlations between genetic variance and adiposity measures, and gene x gene
interactions for obesity in postmenopausal Vietnamese women.

Binh TQ(1), Nakahori Y, Hien VT, Khan NC, Lam NT, Mai le B, Yamamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology, 1 Yersin, Hanoi 112800,
Vietnam. binhtq@nihe.org.vn

Although environmental factors are important, there is considerable evidence that
genes also have a significant role in the pathogenesis of obesity. We conducted a
population-based study to investigate the relationship between candidate genes
for obesity (UCP1, UCP2, ADRA2B, ADRB3, LEPR, VDR and ESR1) and adiposity
measures (body mass index, body fat percentage, weight, waist circumference and
waist-hip ratio) in terms of individual gene and gene x gene interaction in
models unadjusted and adjusted for covariates (age, years since menopause,
educational level and total energy intake). Postmenopausal women with TC genotype
of ESR1 gene had higher body fat percentage than those with TT genotype in the
models unadjusted and adjusted for the covariates (P = 0.006 in adjusted model). 
In multiple logistic regression analysis, BsmI and ApaI SNPs of VDR genes were
significantly associated with overweight and obesity. The UCP2-VDR ApaI
interaction to susceptibility of overweight and obesity was first observed from
logistic regression analysis, and then confirmed in the multifactor
dimensionality reduction method unadjusted and adjusted for the covariates. This 
interaction had 69.09% prediction accuracy for overweight and obesity (P = 0.001,
sign test). In conclusion, the study suggests the significant association of ESR1
and VDR genes with adiposity measures and the UCP2-VDR ApaI interaction to
susceptibility to being overweight and obesity in postmenopausal Vietnamese
women.

PMID: 21677383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011;26(3):431-9. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110362.

Study of estrogen receptor-a and receptor-ß gene polymorphisms on Alzheimer's
disease.

Goumidi L(1), Dahlman-Wright K, Tapia-Paez I, Matsson H, Pasquier F, Amouyel P,
Kere J, Lambert JC, Meirhaeghe A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U744; Institut Pasteur de Lille; Univ Lille Nord de France; UDSL,
Lille, France.

Estrogen treatment can modulate the risk for developing dementia in women.
Therefore, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the estrogen receptor genes 
may constitute genetic susceptibility factors to Alzheimer's disease (AD). Thus, 
we investigated the impact of the genetic variability of the estrogen receptor a 
1 (ESR1) and estrogen receptor a 2 (ESR2) genes on late onset AD risk. We
analyzed 39 SNPs in ESR1 and 5 SNPs in ESR2 in a French case-control study of
sporadic AD (1007 cases/647 controls). Individuals carrying the minor allele of
rs7450824 had a lower risk of AD than homozygous subjects for the major allele
(age, gender, and APOE e4 allele adjusted odds ratio = 0.71 [0.57-0.89], p =
0.003). However, this association did not resist Bonferroni correction for
multiple testing (p-threshold < 0.001). Consistently, no significant association 
could be detected when considering age of onset. We also tested for possible
interactions between the ESR SNPs and APOE status (e4 allele) or gender but no
significant interaction could be observed. Even after stratifying the sample on
APOE status or gender, no significant association with AD risk could be detected.
Finally, we searched for potential gene-gene interactions between ESR1 and ESR2
SNPs but no significant interaction could be detected. Our results reinforce the 
notion that SNPs in the ESR1 or ESR2 genes do not seem to play a major role in
the genetic susceptibility of AD.

PMID: 21673408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Reproduction. 2011 Sep;142(3):439-46. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0131. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Roosters affected by epididymal lithiasis present local alteration in vitamin D3,
testosterone and estradiol levels as well as estrogen receptor 2 (beta)
expression.

Oliveira AG(1), Dornas RA, Praes LC, Hess RA, Mahecha GA, Oliveira CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Avenida
Antônio Carlos 6627, Caixa Postal 486, CEP 31.270-901 Belo Horizonte, Minas
Gerais, Brazil. cleida@icb.ufmg.br

Epididymal lithiasis is a reproductive dysfunction of roosters that is associated
with loss of fertility and is characterized by the formation of calcium stones in
the lumen of the efferent ductules of the epididymal region. The efferent
ductules of birds are responsible for the reabsorption of the fluid coming from
the testis as well as luminal calcium. It has been hypothesized that the
epididymal stone formation may be related to the impairment of local fluid or
calcium homeostasis, which depends on hormones such as estradiol (E(2)).
Therefore, this study aimed to investigate possible alterations in the expression
of ERa (ESR1) and ERß (ESR2) in the epididymal region of roosters affected by
epididymal lithiasis. The study was performed by immunohistochemistry and western
blotting assays. In addition, the concentrations of E(2), vitamin D3, and
testosterone, which are also key hormones in maintenance of calcium homeostasis, 
were determined in the plasma and epididymal region, by ELISA. It was observed
that ESR2 expression is increased in all segments of the epididymal region of
affected roosters, whereas ESR1 levels are not altered. Moreover, the hormone
concentration profiles were changed, as in the epididymal region of roosters with
lithiasis the E(2) levels were increased and vitamin D3 as well as testosterone
concentrations were significantly decreased. These results suggest that a
hormonal imbalance may be involved with the origin and progression of the
epididymal lithiasis, possibly by affecting the local fluid or calcium
homeostasis.

PMID: 21670126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2011 Jun 10;11:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-2261-11-29.

GWAS for discovery and replication of genetic loci associated with sudden cardiac
arrest in patients with coronary artery disease.

Aouizerat BE(1), Vittinghoff E, Musone SL, Pawlikowska L, Kwok PY, Olgin JE,
Tseng ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Nursing, Institute for Human Genetics, University 
of California, San Francisco, 94143, USA.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiologic evidence suggests a heritable component to risk for
sudden cardiac arrest independent of risk for myocardial infarction. Recent
candidate gene association studies for community sudden cardiac arrests have
focused on a limited number of biological pathways and yielded conflicting
results. We sought to identify novel gene associations for sudden cardiac arrest 
in patients with coronary artery disease by performing a genome-wide association 
study.
METHODS: Tagging SNPs (n = 338,328) spanning the genome were typed in a
case-control study comparing 89 patients with coronary artery disease and sudden 
cardiac arrest due to ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation to 520 
healthy controls.
RESULTS: Fourteen SNPs including 7 SNPs among 7 genes (ACYP2, AP1G2, ESR1, DGES2,
GRIA1, KCTD1, ZNF385B) were associated with sudden cardiac arrest (all p < 1.30 ×
10(-7)), following Bonferroni correction and adjustment for population
substructure, age, and sex; genetic variation in ESR1 (p = 2.62 × 10(-8); Odds
Ratio [OR] = 1.43, 95% confidence interval [CI]:1.277, 1.596) has previously been
established as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. In tandem, the role of 9
genes for monogenic long QT syndrome (LQT1-9) was assessed, yielding evidence of 
association with CACNA1C (LQT8; p = 3.09 × 10(-4); OR = 1.18, 95% CI:1.079,
1.290). We also assessed 4 recently published gene associations for sudden
cardiac arrest, validating NOS1AP (p = 4.50 × 10(-2), OR = 1.15, 95% CI:1.003,
1.326), CSMD2 (p = 6.6 × 10(-3), OR = 2.27, 95% CI:1.681, 2.859), and AGTR1 (p = 
3.00 × 10(-3), OR = 1.13, 95% CI:1.042, 1.215).
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate 11 gene associations for sudden cardiac arrest due to 
ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation in patients with coronary artery
disease. Validation studies in independent cohorts and functional studies are
required to confirm these associations.

PMCID: PMC3141757
PMID: 21658281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2012 Mar;13(3):426-34.

ESR1, ESR2 and FSH receptor gene polymorphisms in combination: a useful genetic
tool for the prediction of poor responders.

Anagnostou E(1), Mavrogianni D, Theofanakis Ch, Drakakis P, Bletsa R, Demirol A, 
Gurgan T, Antsaklis A, Loutradis D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Reproduction, IVF Unit, 1st Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Alexandra Hospital, Athens University Medical School, Athens, Greece.
elli.anagnostou@gmail.com

PURPOSE: Previous studies in humans concluded that a multigenic model including
specific FSHR, ESR1 and ESR2 genotype patterns may partially explain the poor
response to FSH. The aim of our study is to analyse three different loci
-polymorphisms in ESR1 Pvu II, ESR2 Rsa I and Ser680Asn FSH receptor gene- in a
Greek population and their involvement in stimulation outcome and pregnancy
rates.
METHODS: Each locus was studied alone, and in combination with the others. We
performed both restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and real-time
polymerase chain reaction. A total of 109 normally ovulating female patients
underwent IVF or ICSI.
RESULTS: Studying each locus alone, no significant results were drawn for ESR1
and ESR2 genes. Concerning the FSHR polymorphism, the women carrying the AA
variant presented higher total amount of gonadotrophins used (P=0,048) and tended
to have higher number of stimulation days (P=0,057). Considering the ESR1 and
FSHR gene polymorphisms in combination, the TC/SA combination presents the
highest number of pregnancies in poor responders group (3/4 pregnancies carried
this genotype), in good responders group (4/12 pregnancies carried this genotype)
and in the total population (10/26 pregnancies carried this genotype). Except the
CC/AA combination, all other genotype combinations presented incidence of
pregnancy, with TC/SA having the highest incidence. The CC/AA genotype presents
the worst profile of ovulation induction, confirming a poor responder profile:
the total amount of gonadotrophins used was highest in CC/AA group (P < 0,05).
The peak E2, the number of follicles and of retrieved oocytes and the pregnancy
rate were significantly lower (P < 0,05). This genotype combination seems to be
over-presented in the poor responders group in a statistically significant way
(P=0,038). Women with CC/AA combination have 1,5-2,4 times more risk to be poor
responders in comparison with women that do not carry that combination.
CONCLUSION: This study supports the hypothesis that a multigenic model, including
the well studied ESR1 and FSHR genes is involved in the controlled ovarian
stimulation outcome indicating that the CC/AA genotype presents the worst
ovulation induction profile, while the TC/SA genotype presents the higher number 
of pregnancies in our population.

PMID: 21658000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2012 Mar;13(3):417-25.

Genetic profile of SNP(s) and ovulation induction.

Loutradis D(1), Theofanakis Ch, Anagnostou E, Mavrogianni D, Partsinevelos GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Reproduction, IVF Unit, 1st Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Alexandra Hospital, Athens University Medical School, Athens, Greece.
loutradi@otenet.gr

Obtaining an adequate number of good quality oocytes while minimizing adverse
drug reactions (ADRs) and cycle cancellation rates is considered the gold
standard in controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) for fertility treatment.
Patients who undergo IVF/ICSI cycles tend to present with different responses to 
exogenous gonadotrophin administration. Research has shown that the secret
probably lies in the various single nucleotide polymorhisms (SNPs) in their
receptor genes. The decryption of human genome provided specialists with
additional information in assessing and even predicting ovarian response to COH. 
In this context, the study of Pharmacogenomics, Pharmacogenetics and SNPs
unravels as a promising field in optimizing fertility treatment. Several SNPs in 
FSH and estrogen receptor genes have been detected so far, but only three of
them, one in FSH receptor and two in estrogen receptor genes have been associated
with ovarian response to COH. It seems that the Asn/Ser variant of the FSH
receptor functions more efficiently, while the Ser/Ser and Asn/Asn variants have 
a tendency to resist to FSH stimulation. With regards to estrogen receptor 1
(ESR1), the Pvull and the Xbal polymorphisms seem to be associated with
differences in the response to ovarian stimulation, while the Rsal polymorphism
in estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2) is currently under investigation. There exists
evidence supporting the hypothesis that a set of genes, all related to the FSH
hormone mechanism of action, may participate along with other factors to the
control of ovarian response to FSH, thus a cautious interpretation of
polymorphism detection results is considered mandatory. However, identifying
potential genetic markers that could predict ovarian response and implementing
them in routine screening tests for every woman entering an IVF/ICSI cycle, would
be able to tailor fertility treatment to each patients needs thus maximizing the 
success rate and eliminating potential side-effects of fertility drugs.

PMID: 21657995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Pathol Oncol Res. 2012 Apr;18(2):169-75. doi: 10.1007/s12253-011-9423-6. Epub
2011 Jun 8.

p53 Binds to estrogen receptor 1 promoter in human breast cancer cells.

Rasti M(1), Arabsolghar R, Khatooni Z, Mostafavi-Pour Z.

Author information: 
(1)Recombinant protein lab, Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine,
Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran. rasti31@yahoo.com

p53 is a tumor suppressor protein that regulates estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)
expression. To investigate the mechanism of ESR1 gene regulation by p53,
chromatin immunoprecipitation was applied to assess the binding of p53, DNMT1,
HDAC1 and MeCP2 to both silenced ESR1 promoter in MDA-MB-468 cells and active
ESR1 promoter in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. The results of chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments showed that p53 protein binds to both
unmethylated CpG island of the ESR1 promoter in the ER-positive MCF-7 and the
hypermethylated ESR1 promoter in the ER-negative MDA-MB-468 cells. However,
repression complex including DNMT1, HDAC1 and MeCP2 is only associated with
silenced ESR1 in ER-negative MDA-MB-468 human breast cancer cells. In addition,
ectopically expressed wild type p53 failed to reactivate the ESR1 gene in these
cells. These results suggest that specific p53 mutations may contribute to loss
of estrogen receptor a expression in breast tumors and also support the
hypothesis that mutant p53 is likely to impact DNA methylation.

PMID: 21655924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Menopause. 2011 Sep;18(9):1018-25. doi: 10.1097/gme.0b013e318213545a.

Interactions of osteoporosis candidate genes for age at menarche, age at natural 
menopause, and maximal height in Han Chinese women.

Zhao L(1), Cui B, Liu JM, Zhang MJ, Zhao HY, Sun LH, Tao B, Zhang LZ, Ning G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Rui-jin Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao-tong University School of Medicine, 197 Rui-jin Er Road, Shanghai, People's 
Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: Age at menarche (AAM), age at natural menopause (ANM), and maximal
height are closely related to bone mineral densities and osteoporosis. It is
still unclear whether osteoporosis susceptibility genes are also associated with 
AAM, ANM, and maximal height in Chinese women.
METHODS: In this relatively large cross-sectional sample of 722 Han Chinese
postmenopausal women, 22 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within 12
osteoporosis candidate genes that were identified from genome-wide association
studies and replicated in our previous study were studied. The effects of a
single gene on the AAM, ANM, and maximal height were investigated by linear
regression analysis, whereas the gene-gene interactions were determined by a
generalized multifactor dimensionality reduction method.
RESULTS: It was revealed that the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) gene
(rs3130340) was associated with ANM even after Bonferroni correction (P = 0.001).
A significant gene-gene interaction for ANM involving rs3130340 in MHC, rs1038304
and rs4870044 in estrogen receptor-a gene (ESR1), and a significant three-SNP
interaction model (SNP rs2273061 in jagged1, SNP rs6929137 in ESR1, and SNP
rs2306033 in low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4) for maximal
height were identified. No single or combined effect of tested SNPs on AAM was
discovered.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates that osteoporosis susceptibility SNPs, such as
ESR1 (rs1038304, rs4870044, rs6929137), MHC (rs3130340), low-density lipoprotein 
receptor-related protein 4 (rs2306033), and jagged1 (rs2273061), might
independently and/or in an interactive manner influence ANM and maximal height.
All the SNPs tested had no association with AAM.

PMID: 21646926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2011 Aug 1;173(1):183-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2011.05.008.
Epub 2011 May 27.

Efficacy of pharmacological estrogen receptor antagonists in blocking activation 
of zebrafish estrogen receptors.

Notch EG(1), Mayer GD.

Author information: 
(1)Dartmouth Medical School, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Hanover, 
NH 03755, USA.

A variety of pharmacological agonists, antagonists and selective estrogen
receptor modulators (SERM) have been used to better understand the role of
specific receptors in various physiological processes. Despite similar structure 
and function, less is known about the effect of agonists and antagonists on
teleost estrogen receptors and the results of these studies have indicated wide
variation among species. The goal of this study was to determine the ability of
two human SERMs to modulate activation of three zebrafish estrogen receptor
isoforms. Full length cDNA of zebrafish estrogen receptor 1 (esr1), estrogen
receptor 2a (esr2a) and estrogen receptor 2b (esr2b) were cloned into expression 
vectors and transfected into cells that do not endogenously express any estrogen 
receptor along with an estrogen responsive luciferase vector. Cells transfected
with any of the zebrafish estrogen receptors individually and then exposed to
17ß-estradiol (E2) or 17a-ethinylestradiol (EE2) exhibited a dose dependent
increase in luciferase activity. None of the pharmacological antagonists, ICI
182, 780, methyl-piperidino-pyrazole (MPP) or pyrazolo [1,5-a] pyrimidine
(PHTPP), were able to independently transactivate luciferase expression with any 
of the zebrafish estrogen receptors. Of the three ER antagonists, only ICI 182,
780 was able to block EE2 induced luciferase activity, although a 10 to 100-fold 
excess of ICI 182, 780 was necessary with all receptors. Neither MPP nor PHTPP
were able to block EE2 induced luciferase activity with any isoform of zebrafish 
estrogen receptor. These results indicate that the difference between human ER
and zebrafish ER ligand binding is not conserved enough for the SERMs MPP or
PHTPP to elicit similar effects in zebrafish as those manifested in humans.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21641908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Jul 18;47(1):69-80. doi: 10.1530/JME-10-0149. Print 2011
Aug.

Aromatase promoter I.f is regulated by progesterone receptor in mouse
hypothalamic neuronal cell lines.

Yilmaz MB(1), Wolfe A, Zhao H, Brooks DC, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

Aromatase catalyzes the conversion of C(19) steroids to estrogens. Aromatase and 
progesterone, both of which function at different steps of steroidogenesis, are
crucial for the sexually dimorphic development of the fetal brain and the
regulation of gonadotropin secretion and sexual interest in adults. The aromatase
gene (Cyp19a1) is selectively expressed in distinct neurons of the mouse
hypothalamus through a distal brain-specific promoter, I.f, located ~40 kb
upstream of the coding region. However, the regulation of aromatase expression in
the brain is not well understood. In this study, we investigated a short feedback
effect of progesterone analogues on aromatase mRNA expression and enzyme activity
in estrogen receptor a (Esr1)-positive or -negative mouse embryonic hypothalamic 
neuronal cell lines that express aromatase via promoter I.f. In a hypothalamic
neuronal cell line that highly expresses aromatase, progesterone receptor (Pgr), 
and Esr1, a progesterone agonist, R5020, inhibited aromatase mRNA level and
enzyme activity. The inhibitory effect of R5020 was reversed by its antagonist,
RU486. Deletion mutants of promoter I.f suggested that inhibition of aromatase
expression by progesterone is conferred by the nt -1000/-500 region, and R5020
enhanced binding of Pgr to the nt -800/-600 region of promoter I.f. Small
interfering RNA knockdown of Pgr eliminated progesterone-dependent inhibition of 
aromatase mRNA and enzyme activity. Taken together, progesterone enhances
recruitment of Pgr to specific regions of the promoter I.f of Cyp19a1 and
regulates aromatase expression in hypothalamic neurons.

PMCID: PMC4130222
PMID: 21628418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. BMC Med Genet. 2011 May 31;12:78. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-78.

Estrogen and progesterone-related gene variants and colorectal cancer risk in
women.

Lin JH(1), Manson JE, Kraft P, Cochrane BB, Gunter MJ, Chlebowski RT, Zhang SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. jhlin@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Observational studies and randomized trials have suggested that
estrogens and/or progesterone may lower the risk for colorectal cancer. Inherited
variation in the sex-hormone genes may be one mechanism by which sex hormones
affect colorectal cancer, although data are limited.
METHOD: We conducted a comprehensive evaluation of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes encoding 3 hormone receptors (ESR1, ESR2, PGR) and 
5 hormone synthesizers (CYP19A1 and CYP17A1, HSD17B1, HSD17B2, HSD17B4) among 427
women with incident colorectal cancer and 871 matched controls who were
Caucasians of European ancestry from 93676 postmenopausal women enrolled in the
Women's Health Initiative Observational cohort. A total of 242 haplotype-tagging 
and functional SNPs in the 8 genes were included for analysis. Unconditional
logistic regression with adjustment for age and hysterectomy status was used to
estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: We observed a weak association between the CYP17A1 rs17724534 SNP and
colorectal cancer risk (OR per risk allele (A) = 1.39, 95% CI = 1.09-1.78,
corrected p-value = 0.07). In addition, a suggestive interaction between
rs17724534 and rs10883782 in 2 discrete LD blocks of CYP17A1 was observed in
relation to colorectal cancer (empirical p value = 0.04). Moreover, one haplotype
block of CYP19A1 was associated with colorectal cancer (corrected global p value 
= 0.02), which likely reflected the association with the tagging SNP, rs1902584, 
in the block.
CONCLUSION: Our findings offer some support for a suggestive association of
CYP17A1 and CYP19A1 variants with colorectal cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3125237
PMID: 21627810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019382. Epub 2011 May 20.

A comprehensive evaluation of potential lung function associated genes in the
SpiroMeta general population sample.

Obeidat M(1), Wain LV, Shrine N, Kalsheker N, Soler Artigas M, Repapi E, Burton
PR, Johnson T, Ramasamy A, Zhao JH, Zhai G, Huffman JE, Vitart V, Albrecht E, Igl
W, Hartikainen AL, Pouta A, Cadby G, Hui J, Palmer LJ, Hadley D, McArdle WL,
Rudnicka AR, Barroso I, Loos RJ, Wareham NJ, Mangino M, Soranzo N, Spector TD,
Gläser S, Homuth G, Völzke H, Deloukas P, Granell R, Henderson J, Grkovic I,
Jankovic S, Zgaga L, Polaek O, Rudan I, Wright AF, Campbell H, Wild SH, Wilson
JF, Heinrich J, Imboden M, Probst-Hensch NM, Gyllensten U, Johansson Å, Zaboli G,
Mustelin L, Rantanen T, Surakka I, Kaprio J, Jarvelin MR, Hayward C, Evans DM,
Koch B, Musk AW, Elliott P, Strachan DP, Tobin MD, Sayers I, Hall IP; SpiroMeta
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Nottingham Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit, Division of Therapeutics and 
Molecular Medicine, University Hospital of Nottingham, Nottingham, United
Kingdom.

RATIONALE: Lung function measures are heritable traits that predict population
morbidity and mortality and are essential for the diagnosis of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Variations in many genes have been reported
to affect these traits, but attempts at replication have provided conflicting
results. Recently, we undertook a meta-analysis of Genome Wide Association Study 
(GWAS) results for lung function measures in 20,288 individuals from the general 
population (the SpiroMeta consortium).
OBJECTIVES: To comprehensively analyse previously reported genetic associations
with lung function measures, and to investigate whether single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in these genomic regions are associated with lung function
in a large population sample.
METHODS: We analysed association for SNPs tagging 130 genes and 48 intergenic
regions (+/-10 kb), after conducting a systematic review of the literature in the
PubMed database for genetic association studies reporting lung function
associations.
RESULTS: The analysis included 16,936 genotyped and imputed SNPs. No loci showed 
overall significant association for FEV(1) or FEV(1)/FVC traits using a carefully
defined significance threshold of 1.3×10(-5). The most significant loci
associated with FEV(1) include SNPs tagging MACROD2 (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.81×10(-5)), CNTN5
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.37×10(-4)), and TRPV4 (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.58×10(-3)). Among ever-smokers, SERPINA1
showed the most significant association with FEV(1) (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>8.41×10(-5)), followed
by PDE4D (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.22×10(-4)). The strongest association with FEV(1)/FVC ratio was
observed with ABCC1 (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.38×10(-4)), and ESR1 (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>5.42×10(-4)) among
ever-smokers.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms spanning previously associated lung function genes did
not show strong evidence for association with lung function measures in the
SpiroMeta consortium population. Common SERPINA1 polymorphisms may affect FEV(1) 
among smokers in the general population.

PMCID: PMC3098839
PMID: 21625484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Anim Sci J. 2011 Jun;82(3):390-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1740-0929.2010.00864.x. Epub
2011 Apr 20.

Homozygosity of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the 3' region of the canine
estrogen receptor 1 gene is greater in Toy Poodles than in Miniature Dachshunds
and Chihuahuas.

Pathirana IN(1), Tanaka K, Kawate N, Tsuji M, Hatoya S, Inaba T, Tamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Pathobiology, Graduate School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Osaka Prefecture University, Izumisano, Japan.

Differences in the distribution of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
haplotypes in the estrogen receptor a gene (ESR1) were examined in Miniature
Dachshunds (n = 48), Chihuahuas (n = 20) and Toy Poodles (n = 18). Five DNA
fragments located in the 40-kb region at the 3' end of ESR1 were amplified by
polymerase chain reaction and were directly sequenced. We compared allele,
genotype and estimated haplotype frequencies at each SNP in the 3' end of ESR1
for these three breeds of small dog. The frequency of the major allele and the
genotype frequency of the major allele homozygotes, were significantly higher in 
Toy Poodles for five SNPs (SNP #5, #14-17) than in Miniature Dachshunds, and
significantly higher in Toy Poodles than Chihuahuas for three SNPs (SNP #15-17). 
A common haplotype block was identified in an approximately 20-kb region
encompassing four SNPs (SNPs # 14-17). The frequencies of the most abundant
estimated haplotype (GTTG) and GTTG homozygotes were significantly higher in Toy 
Poodles than in the other two breeds. These results imply that homozygosity for
the allele, genotype and haplotype distribution within the block at the 3' end of
ESR1 is greater in Toy Poodles than in Miniature Dachshunds and Chihuahuas.

© 2011 The Authors; Animal Science Journal © 2011 Japanese Society of Animal
Science.

PMID: 21615831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Nat Med. 2011 Jun;17(6):715-9. doi: 10.1038/nm.2351. Epub 2011 May 22.

Kinome screening for regulators of the estrogen receptor identifies LMTK3 as a
new therapeutic target in breast cancer.

Giamas G(1), Filipovic A, Jacob J, Messier W, Zhang H, Yang D, Zhang W, Shifa BA,
Photiou A, Tralau-Stewart C, Castellano L, Green AR, Coombes RC, Ellis IO, Ali S,
Lenz HJ, Stebbing J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, London, UK. g.giamas@imperial.ac.uk

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2011 Jun;17(6):660-1.
    Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2011 Dec;15(12):1419-22.

Therapies targeting estrogen receptor a (ERa, encoded by ESR1) have transformed
the treatment of breast cancer. However, large numbers of women relapse,
highlighting the need for the discovery of new regulatory targets modulating ERa 
pathways. An siRNA screen identified kinases whose silencing alters the estrogen 
response including those previously implicated in regulating ERa activity (such
as mitogen-activated protein kinase and AKT). Among the most potent regulators
was lemur tyrosine kinase-3 (LMTK3), for which a role has not previously been
assigned. In contrast to other modulators of ERa activity, LMTK3 seems to have
been subject to Darwinian positive selection, a noteworthy result given the
unique susceptibility of humans to ERa+ breast cancer. LMTK3 acts by decreasing
the activity of protein kinase C (PKC) and the phosphorylation of AKT (Ser473),
thereby increasing binding of forkhead box O3 (FOXO3) to the ESR1 promoter. LMTK3
phosphorylated ERa, protecting it from proteasomal degradation in vitro.
Silencing of LMTK3 reduced tumor volume in an orthotopic mouse model and
abrogated proliferation of ERa+ but not ERa- cells, indicative of its role in ERa
activity. In human cancers, LMTK3 abundance and intronic polymorphisms were
significantly associated with disease-free and overall survival and predicted
response to endocrine therapies. These findings yield insights into the natural
history of breast cancer in humans and reveal LMTK3 as a new therapeutic target.

PMID: 21602804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Environ Pollut. 2011 Oct;159(10):3086-96. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2011.04.013. Epub
2011 May 24.

Global gene expression profile induced by the UV-filter
2-ethyl-hexyl-4-trimethoxycinnamate (EHMC) in zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Zucchi S(1), Oggier DM, Fent K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences Northwestern Switzerland, School of Life
Sciences, Gründensrasse 40, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland.

Residues of the UV-filter 2-ethyl-hexyl-4-trimethoxycinnamate (EHMC) are
ubiquitously found in aquatic biota but potential adverse effects in fish are
fairly unknown. To identify molecular effects and modes of action of EHMC we
applied a gene expression profiling in zebrafish using whole genome microarrays. 
Transcriptome analysis and validation of targeted genes were performed after 14
days of exposure of male zebrafish. Concentrations of 2.2 µg/L and 890 µg/L EHMC 
lead to alteration of 1096 and 1137 transcripts, respectively, belonging to many 
pathways. Genes involved in lipid metabolism and estrogenic pathway (vtg1), lipid
biosynthesis (ptgds), vitamin A metabolic process (rbp2a), DNA damage and
apoptosis (gadd45b), and regulation of cell growth (igfbp1a) were investigated by
qRT-PCR analysis in whole body, liver, brain and testis. The analysis showed
tissue-specific gene profiles and revealed that EHMC slightly affects the
transcription of genes involved in hormonal pathways including vtg1, esr1, esr2b,
ar, cyp19b and hsd17ß3.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21601967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Plant Sci. 2011 Jul;181(1):39-46. doi: 10.1016/j.plantsci.2011.03.007. Epub 2011 
Mar 22.

Arabidopsis ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION (ESR)1 and ESR2 regulate in vitro
shoot regeneration and their expressions are differentially regulated.

Matsuo N(1), Makino M, Banno H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate school of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Chubu University, Kasugai,
Aichi 487-8501, Japan.

The Arabidopsis ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION (ESR)1 and ESR2 genes are thought 
to play critical roles in in vitro shoot regeneration. In this study, we
investigated the functions and expression patterns of ESR1 and ESR2 during shoot 
regeneration by using their mutants and promoter-reporter systems. Shoot
regeneration efficiencies of esr1 esr2 double mutants from hypocotyl explants
decreased drastically; although the effects on shoot regeneration of the esr1
single mutation were much less marked than those of the esr2 single mutation,
especially from root explants, their effects were additive. We found that ESR1
was initially expressed 1 day after transfer onto shoot-inducing medium (SIM),
compared with 4 days for ESR2 expression. These results suggest that the
functions of ESR1 and ESR2 in shoot regeneration are not redundant, even though
they encode similar transcription factors and the ESR2 gene substituted with an
ESR1 coding region complements the esr2 mutation. We also found that ESR1
expression was localized to a small number of cells in the lateral root meristem 
(LRM)-like structures, and the ESR1-expressing cells appeared to proliferate to
form shoot apical meristem (SAM)-like structures. Thus, ESR1 may be involved in
the change of LRM to SAM in tissue culture.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21600396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Aug 15;20(16):3304-21. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr226. Epub 2011 May
18.

Common alleles at 6q25.1 and 1p11.2 are associated with breast cancer risk for
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers.

Antoniou AC, Kartsonaki C, Sinilnikova OM, Soucy P, McGuffog L, Healey S, Lee A, 
Peterlongo P, Manoukian S, Peissel B, Zaffaroni D, Cattaneo E, Barile M, Pensotti
V, Pasini B, Dolcetti R, Giannini G, Putignano AL, Varesco L, Radice P, Mai PL,
Greene MH, Andrulis IL, Glendon G, Ozcelik H, Thomassen M, Gerdes AM, Kruse TA,
Birk Jensen U, Crüger DG, Caligo MA, Laitman Y, Milgrom R, Kaufman B,
Paluch-Shimon S, Friedman E, Loman N, Harbst K, Lindblom A, Arver B, Ehrencrona
H, Melin B; SWE-BRCA, Nathanson KL, Domchek SM, Rebbeck T, Jakubowska A, Lubinski
J, Gronwald J, Huzarski T, Byrski T, Cybulski C, Gorski B, Osorio A, Ramón y
Cajal T, Fostira F, Andrés R, Benitez J, Hamann U, Hogervorst FB, Rookus MA,
Hooning MJ, Nelen MR, van der Luijt RB, van Os TA, van Asperen CJ, Devilee P,
Meijers-Heijboer HE, Gómez Garcia EB; HEBON, Peock S, Cook M, Frost D, Platte R, 
Leyland J, Evans DG, Lalloo F, Eeles R, Izatt L, Adlard J, Davidson R, Eccles D, 
Ong KR, Cook J, Douglas F, Paterson J, Kennedy MJ, Miedzybrodzka Z; EMBRACE,
Godwin A, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Buecher B, Belotti M, Tirapo C, Mazoyer S, Barjhoux
L, Lasset C, Leroux D, Faivre L, Bronner M, Prieur F, Nogues C, Rouleau E, Pujol 
P, Coupier I, Frénay M; CEMO Study Collaborators, Hopper JL, Daly MB, Terry MB,
John EM, Buys SS, Yassin Y, Miron A, Goldgar D; Breast Cancer Family Registry,
Singer CF, Tea MK, Pfeiler G, Dressler AC, Hansen Tv, Jønson L, Ejlertsen B,
Barkardottir RB, Kirchhoff T, Offit K, Piedmonte M, Rodriguez G, Small L, Boggess
J, Blank S, Basil J, Azodi M, Toland AE, Montagna M, Tognazzo S, Agata S,
Imyanitov E, Janavicius R, Lazaro C, Blanco I, Pharoah PD, Sucheston L, Karlan
BY, Walsh CS, Olah E, Bozsik A, Teo SH, Seldon JL, Beattie MS, van Rensburg EJ,
Sluiter MD, Diez O, Schmutzler RK, Wappenschmidt B, Engel C, Meindl A, Ruehl I,
Varon-Mateeva R, Kast K, Deissler H, Niederacher D, Arnold N, Gadzicki D,
Schönbuchner I, Caldes T, de la Hoya M, Nevanlinna H, Aittomäki K, Dumont M,
Chiquette J, Tischkowitz M, Chen X, Beesley J, Spurdle AB; kConFab investigators,
Neuhausen SL, Chun Ding Y, Fredericksen Z, Wang X, Pankratz VS, Couch F, Simard
J, Easton DF, Chenevix-Trench G; CIMBA.

Collaborators: Peock S, Cook M, Frost D, Platte R, Leyland J, Miedzybrodzka Z,
Gregory H, Morrison P, Jeffers L, Cole T, McKeown C, Ong KR, Hoffman J, Donaldson
A, Paterson J, Downing S, Taylor A, Murray A, Rogers MT, McCann E, John Kennedy
M, Barton D, East S, Porteous M, Drummond S, Brewer C, Kivuva E, Searle A,
Goodman S, Hill K, Davidson R, Murday V, Bradshaw N, Snadden L, Longmuir M, Watt 
C, Gibson S, Haque E, Tobias E, Duncan A, Izatt L, Jacobs C, Langman C, Whaite A,
Dorkins H, Barwell J, Adlard J, Chu C, Miller J, Ellis I, Gareth Evans D, Lalloo 
F, Taylor J, Thames NE, Side L, Male A, Berlin C, Eason J, Collier R, Douglas F, 
Claber O, Jobson I, Walker L, McLeod D, Halliday D, Durell S, Stayner B, Eeles R,
Shanley S, Rahman N, Houlston R, Bancroft E, D'Mello L, Page E, Ardern-Jones A,
Kohut K, Wiggins J, Castro E, Mitra A, Robertson L, Cook J, Quarrell O, Bardsley 
C, Hodgson S, Goff S, Brice G, Winchester L, Eddy C, Tripathi V, Attard V, Eccles
D, Lucassen A, Crawford G, McBride D, Smalley S, Sutter C, Preisler-Adams S,
Fiebig B, Heinritz W, Schäfer D, Köhler J, Bérard L, Sinilnikova O, Barjhoux L,
Verny-Pierre C, Giraud S, Léone M, Mazoyer S, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Gauthier-Villars 
M, Buecher B, Houdayer C, Moncoutier V, Belotti M, Tirapo C, de Pauw A,
Bressac-de-Paillerets B, Remenieras A, Byrde V, Caron O, Lenoir G, Bignon YJ,
Uhrhammer N, Lasset C, Bonadona V, Hardouin A, Berthet P, Sobol H, Bourdon V,
Noguchi T, Eisinger F, Coulet F, Colas C, Soubrier F, Coupier I, Pujol P, Peyrat 
JP, Fournier J, Révillion F, Vennin P, Adenis C, Rouleau E, Lidereau R, Demange
L, Nogues C, Muller D, Fricker JP, Longy M, Sevenet N, Toulas C, Guimbaud R,
Gladieff L, Feillel V, Leroux D, Dreyfus H, Rebischung C, Coron F, Faivre L,
Prieur F, Lebrun M, Ferrer SF, Frénay M, Vénat-Bouvet L, Delnatte C, Mortemousque
I, Lynch HT, Snyder CL, Hogervorst FB, Verhoef S, Verheus M, van t Veer LJ, van 
Leeuwen FE, Rookus MA, Collée M, van den Ouweland AM, Jager A, Hooning MJ,
Tilanus-LinthorsT MM, Seynaeve C, van AspereN CJ, Wijnen JT, Vreeswijk MP,
Tollenaar RA, Devilee P, Ligtenberg MJ, Hoogerbrugge N, Ausems MG, van der Luijt 
RB, Aalfs CM, van Os TA, Gille JJ, Waisfisz Q, Meijers-Heijboer HE, Gomez-Garcia 
EB, van Roozendaal CE, Blok MJ, Caanen B, Oosterwijk JC, van der HouT AH, Mourits
MJ, Vasen HF, Karlsson P, Nordling M, Bergman A, Einbeigi Z, Stenmark-Askmalm M, 
Liedgren S, Borg Å, Loman N, Olsson H, Kristoffersson U, Jernström H, Harbst K,
Henriksson K, Lindblom A, Arver B, von Wachenfeldt A, Liljegren A,
Barbany-Bustinza G, Rantala J, Melin B, Grönberg H, Stattin EL, Emanuelsson M,
Ehrencrona H, Brandell RR, Dahl N.

Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at 6q25.1, near the ESR1 gene, have
been implicated in the susceptibility to breast cancer for Asian (rs2046210) and 
European women (rs9397435). A genome-wide association study in Europeans
identified two further breast cancer susceptibility variants: rs11249433 at
1p11.2 and rs999737 in RAD51L1 at 14q24.1. Although previously identified breast 
cancer susceptibility variants have been shown to be associated with breast
cancer risk for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers, the involvement of these SNPs 
to breast cancer susceptibility in mutation carriers is currently unknown. To
address this, we genotyped these SNPs in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers from
42 studies from the Consortium of Investigators of Modifiers of BRCA1/2. In the
analysis of 14 123 BRCA1 and 8053 BRCA2 mutation carriers of European ancestry,
the 6q25.1 SNPs (r(2) = 0.14) were independently associated with the risk of
breast cancer for BRCA1 mutation carriers [hazard ratio (HR) = 1.17, 95%
confidence interval (CI): 1.11-1.23, P-trend = 4.5 × 10(-9) for rs2046210; HR =
1.28, 95% CI: 1.18-1.40, P-trend = 1.3 × 10(-8) for rs9397435], but only
rs9397435 was associated with the risk for BRCA2 carriers (HR = 1.14, 95% CI:
1.01-1.28, P-trend = 0.031). SNP rs11249433 (1p11.2) was associated with the risk
of breast cancer for BRCA2 mutation carriers (HR = 1.09, 95% CI: 1.02-1.17,
P-trend = 0.015), but was not associated with breast cancer risk for BRCA1
mutation carriers (HR = 0.97, 95% CI: 0.92-1.02, P-trend = 0.20). SNP rs999737
(RAD51L1) was not associated with breast cancer risk for either BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutation carriers (P-trend = 0.27 and 0.30, respectively). The identification of 
SNPs at 6q25.1 associated with breast cancer risk for BRCA1 mutation carriers
will lead to a better understanding of the biology of tumour development in these
women.

PMCID: PMC3652640
PMID: 21593217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2011 Nov;36(10):1582-6. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2011.04.011. Epub 2011 May 12.

Estrogen receptor gene variants are associated with anxiety disorders in older
women.

Ryan J(1), Scali J, Carrière I, Scarabin PY, Ritchie K, Ancelin ML.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1061, Nervous System Pathologies: Epidemiological and Clinical
Research, Hôpital La Colombière, Montpellier, France. joanne.ryan@inserm.fr

BACKGROUND: Estrogen is thought to play a key role in anxiety, but it remains
unknown whether genetic variants in the estrogen receptors (ERs) can influence
the risk of anxiety. This study investigated whether ESR1 and ESR2 gene variants 
were associated with specific anxiety disorders in postmenopausal women and
evaluated the potential modifying effect of hormone treatment (HT) on these
associations.
METHODS: One thousand and ninety-two community-dwelling women aged 65 years and
older were recruited as part of the ESPRIT Study in Montpellier, France. Anxiety 
was assessed using the Mini-International Neuropsychiatry Interview (MINI),
according to DSM-IV criteria. Two ESR1 and three ESR2 polymorphisms were
genotyped.
RESULTS: The most common anxiety disorders were phobia (14.2%) and generalised
anxiety disorder (GAD, 8%). The A allele of ESR2 rs1256049 was associated with an
increased risk of GAD [OR: 2.06, 95% CI: 1.09-3.87], while both ESR1
polymorphisms were specifically associated with phobia. The C allele of ESR1
rs2234693 decreased the risk of phobia by 42% [95% CI: 0.41-0.83], and this
remained significant even after Bonferroni correction. The G allele of ESR1
rs9340799 was associated with a 31% decreased phobia risk [95% CI: 0.49-0.96].
There was also evidence of a significant gene-environment interaction, where only
women who were currently using HT had a reduced risk of phobia with these ESR1
gene variants.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms earlier findings of an association between ESR1 
and global anxiety in older women, however these associations varied depending on
the anxiety syndrome and the use of HT. The results also suggest that the ESR2
may contribute to the genetic vulnerability to GAD, but these findings require
further confirmation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21570196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. PLoS Genet. 2011 Apr;7(4):e1001382. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001382. Epub 2011 
Apr 28.

ESR1 is co-expressed with closely adjacent uncharacterised genes spanning a
breast cancer susceptibility locus at 6q25.1.

Dunbier AK(1), Anderson H, Ghazoui Z, Lopez-Knowles E, Pancholi S, Ribas R, Drury
S, Sidhu K, Leary A, Martin LA, Dowsett M.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom. anita.dunbier@icr.ac.uk

Approximately 80% of human breast carcinomas present as oestrogen receptor
a-positive (ER+ve) disease, and ER status is a critical factor in treatment
decision-making. Recently, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the region
immediately upstream of the ER gene (ESR1) on 6q25.1 have been associated with
breast cancer risk. Our investigation of factors associated with the level of
expression of ESR1 in ER+ve tumours has revealed unexpected associations between 
genes in this region and ESR1 expression that are important to consider in
studies of the genetic causes of breast cancer risk. RNA from tumour biopsies
taken from 104 postmenopausal women before and after 2 weeks treatment with an
aromatase (oestrogen synthase) inhibitor was analyzed on Illumina 48K
microarrays. Multiple-testing corrected Spearman correlation revealed that three 
previously uncharacterized open reading frames (ORFs) located immediately
upstream of ESR1, C6ORF96, C6ORF97, and C6ORF211 were highly correlated with ESR1
(Rs =<U+200A> 0.67, 0.64, and 0.55 respectively, FDR<1 × 10(-7)). Publicly available
datasets confirmed this relationship in other groups of ER+ve tumours. DNA copy
number changes did not account for the correlations. The correlations were
maintained in cultured cells. An ERa antagonist did not affect the ORFs'
expression or their correlation with ESR1, suggesting their transcriptional
co-activation is not directly mediated by ERa. siRNA inhibition of C6ORF211
suppressed proliferation in MCF7 cells, and C6ORF211 positively correlated with a
proliferation metagene in tumours. In contrast, C6ORF97 expression correlated
negatively with the metagene and predicted for improved disease-free survival in 
a tamoxifen-treated published dataset, independently of ESR1. Our observations
suggest that some of the biological effects previously attributed to ER could be 
mediated and/or modified by these co-expressed genes. The co-expression and
function of these genes may be important influences on the recently identified
relationship between SNPs in this region and breast cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3084198
PMID: 21552322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2011 May 8;9:62. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-9-62.

Structural and histological characterization of oviductal magnum and
lectin-binding patterns in Gallus domesticus.

Jung JG(1), Lim W, Park TS, Kim JN, Han BK, Song G, Han JY.

Author information: 
(1)Avicore Biotechnology Institute, Optifarm Solution Inc., Gyeonggi-Do 435-050, 
Korea

BACKGROUND: Although chicken oviduct is a useful model and target tissue for
reproductive biology and transgenesis, little is known because of the highly
specific hormonal regulation and the lack of fundamental researches, including
lectin-binding activities and glycobiology. Because lectin is attached to
secreted glycoproteins, we hypothesized that lectin could be bound to secretory
egg-white proteins, and played a crucial role in the generation of egg-white
protein in the oviduct. Hence, the purpose of this study was to investigate the
structural, histological and lectin-binding characteristics of the chicken
oviductal magnum from juvenile and adult hens.
METHODS: The oviductal magnums from juvenile and adult hens were prepared for
ultrastructural analysis, qRT-PCR and immunostaining. Immunohistochemistry of
anti-ovalbumin, anti-ESR1 and anti-PGR, and mRNA expression of egg-white genes
and steroid hormone receptor genes were evaluated. Lectin histochemical staining 
was also conducted in juvenile and adult oviductal magnum tissues.
RESULTS: The ultrastructural analysis showed that ciliated cells were rarely
developed on luminal surface in juvenile magnum, but not tubular gland cells. In 
adult magnum, two types of epithelium and three types of tubular gland cells were
observed. qRT-PCR analysis showed that egg-white genes were highly expressed in
adult oviduct compared with the juvenile. However, mRNA expressions of ESR1 and
PGR were considerably higher in juvenile oviduct than adult (P < 0.05). The
immunohistochemical analysis showed that anti-ovalbumin antibody was detected in 
adult oviduct not in juvenile, unlikely anti-ESR1 and anti-PGR antibodies that
were stained in both oviducts. In histological analysis, Toluidine blue was
stained in juvenile and adult oviductal epithelia, and adult tubular glands
located in the outer layer of oviductal magnum. In contrast, PAS was positive
only in adult oviductal tubular gland. Lectins were selectively bound to
oviductal epithelium, stroma, and tubular gland cells. Particularly, lectin-ConA 
and WGA were bound to electron-dense secretory granules in tubular gland.
CONCLUSIONS: The observation of ultrastructural analysis, mRNA expression,
immunohistochemistry and lectin staining showed structural and physiological
characterization of juvenile and adult oviductal magnum. Consequently, oviduct
study could be helped to in vitro culture of chicken oviductal cells, to develop 
epithelial or tubular gland cell-specific markers, and to understand female
reproductive biology and endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC3114719
PMID: 21548987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Oct;34(5):475-82. doi: 10.1007/s13402-011-0043-7. Epub
2011 May 6.

Molecular differences between ductal carcinoma in situ and adjacent invasive
breast carcinoma: a multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification study.

Moelans CB(1), de Wegers RA, Monsuurs HN, Maess AH, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan
100, PO Box 85500, 3508 GA, Utrecht, The Netherlands. cmoelans@umcutrecht.nl

Erratum in
    Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Oct;34(5):509-10.

Republished from
    Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 2010;33(3):165-73.

BACKGROUND: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) accounts for approximately 20% of
mammographically detected breast cancers. Although DCIS is generally highly
curable, some women with DCIS will develop life-threatening invasive breast
cancer, but the determinants of progression to infiltrating ductal cancer (IDC)
are largely unknown.
METHODS: In the current study, we used multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA), a multiplex PCR-based test, to compare copy numbers of 21
breast cancer related genes between laser-microdissected DCIS and adjacent IDC
lesions in 39 patients. Genes included in this study were ESR1, EGFR, FGFR1,
ADAM9, IKBKB, PRDM14, MTDH, MYC, CCND1, EMSY, CDH1, TRAF4, CPD, MED1, HER2, CDC6,
TOP2A, MAPT, BIRC5, CCNE1 and AURKA.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in copy number for the 21 genes
between DCIS and adjacent IDC. Low/intermediate-grade DCIS showed on average 6
gains/amplifications versus 8 in high-grade DCIS (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.158). Furthermore,
alterations of AURKA and CCNE1 were exclusively found in high-grade DCIS, and
HER2, PRDM14 and EMSY amplification was more frequent in high-grade DCIS than in 
low/intermediate-grade DCIS. In contrast, the average number of alterations in
low/intermediate and high grade IDC was similar, and although EGFR alterations
were exclusively found in high grade IDC compared to low/intermediate-grade IDC, 
there were generally fewer differences between low/intermediate-grade and
high-grade IDC than between low/intermediate-grade and high-grade DCIS.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, there were no significant differences in copy number
for 21 breast cancer related genes between DCIS and adjacent IDC, indicating that
DCIS is genetically as advanced as its invasive counterpart. However, high grade 
DCIS showed more copy number changes than low/intermediate grade DCIS with
specifically involved genes, supporting a model in which different histological
grades of DCIS are associated with distinct genomic changes that progress to IDC 
in different routes. These high grade DCIS specific genes may be potential
targets for treatment and/or predict progression.

PMCID: PMC3219861
PMID: 21547576  [PubMed]


430. Biol Reprod. 2011 Aug;85(2):378-85. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.090654. Epub 2011
May 4.

Krüppel-like factor 9 loss-of-expression in human endometrial carcinoma links
altered expression of growth-regulatory genes with aberrant proliferative
response to estrogen.

Simmons CD(1), Pabona JM, Heard ME, Friedman TM, Spataro MT, Godley AL, Simmen
FA, Burnett AF, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology & Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72202, USA.

Endometrial cancer is the most commonly diagnosed female genital tract
malignancy. Krüppel-like factor 9 (KLF9), a member of the evolutionarily
conserved Sp family of transcription factors, is expressed in uterine stroma and 
glandular epithelium, where it affects cellular proliferation, differentiation,
and apoptosis. Deregulated expression of a number of Sp proteins has been
associated with multiple types of human tumors, but a role for KLF9 in
endometrial cancer development and/or progression is unknown. Here, we evaluated 
KLF9 expression in endometrial tumors and adjacent uninvolved endometrium of
women with endometrial carcinoma. KLF9 mRNA and protein levels were lower in
endometrial tumors coincident with decreased expression of family member KLF4 and
growth-regulators FBJ murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog (FOS) and
myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog (MYC) and with increased expression of
telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) and the chromatin-modifying enzymes DNA
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3). Expression of
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and the tumor-suppressor phosphatase and tensin
homolog deleted in chromosome 10 (PTEN) did not differ between tumor and normal
tissue. The functional relevance of attenuated KLF9 expression in endometrial
carcinogenesis was further evaluated in the human endometrial carcinoma cell line
Ishikawa by siRNA targeting. KLF9 depletion resulted in loss of normal cellular
response to the proliferative effects of estrogen concomitant with reductions in 
KLF4 and MYC and with enhancement of TERT and ESR1 gene expression. Silencing of 
KLF4 did not mimic the effects of silencing KLF9 in Ishikawa cells. We suggest
that KLF9 loss-of-expression accompanying endometrial carcinogenesis may
predispose endometrial epithelial cells to mechanisms of escape from
estrogen-mediated growth regulation, leading to progression of established
neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC3142261
PMID: 21543766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Oct;34(5):489-94. doi: 10.1007/s13402-011-0045-5. Epub
2011 May 4.

ESR1 amplification is rare in breast cancer and is associated with high grade and
high proliferation: a multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification study.

Moelans CB(1), Monsuur HN, de Pinth JH, Radersma RD, de Weger RA, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology (H04.312), University Medical Centre Utrecht,
Heidelberglaan 100, PO Box 85500, 3508 GA, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
cmoelans@umcutrecht.nl

Erratum in
    Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Oct;34(5):509-10.

Republished from
    Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 2010;33(1):13-8.

BACKGROUND: Expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) is predictive for
endocrine therapy response and an important prognostic factor in breast cancer.
Overexpression of ERa can be caused by estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene
amplification and was originally reported to be a frequent event associated with 
a significantly longer survival for ER-positive women treated with adjuvant
tamoxifen monotherapy, which was however questioned by subsequent studies.
METHODS: This study aimed to reanalyze the frequency of ESR1 amplification by
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and fluorescence in situ 
hybridisation (FISH), and to assess clinicopathologic correlations. MLPA was
performed in a group of 135 breast cancer patients, and gains/amplifications were
subjected to FISH.
RESULTS: True ESR1 amplification by MLPA was rare (2%) and only 6% more patients 
showed a modest gain of ESR1. All MLPA-detected ESR1 amplifications and nearly
all ESR1 gains were also FISH amplified and gained, but not all FISH
amplifications/gains were MLPA amplified/gained, leading to an overall
concordance of only 60% between both techniques. All 3 MLPA and FISH ESR1
amplified cases had high ERa expression, but there was no obvious correlation
between ESR1 gain and ER status by IHC. ESR1 gains/amplifications were not
associated with HER2 gain/amplification, but seemed to be associated with older
age. Surprisingly, ESR1 gain/amplification was not associated with low grade as
reported previously, but correlated with high grade and high proliferation.
Furthermore, ESR1 gain/amplification by MLPA was not associated with nodal status
or tumor size (pT status).
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 amplification as detected by MLPA is rare in breast cancer, and
seems to be associated with high ERa expression, high age, high grade and high
proliferation. This study confirms previous studies that showed differences in
the ESR1 amplification frequencies detected by different techniques.

PMCID: PMC3219866
PMID: 21541733  [PubMed]


432. Res Vet Sci. 2012 Jun;92(3):478-85. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2011.04.009. Epub 2011
May 4.

Steroid receptor mRNA expression in the ovarian follicles of cows with cystic
ovarian disease.

Alfaro NS(1), Salvetti NR, Velazquez MM, Stangaferro ML, Rey F, Ortega HH.

Author information: 
(1)Morphological Sciences Department, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, National
University of Litoral (FCV-UNL), Esperanza, Santa Fe, Argentina.

Steroid receptors have been demonstrated to be important intra-ovarian regulators
of follicular development and ovulatory processes. The aim of the present study
was to determine the expression of steroid receptor mRNA in ovarian follicular
structures from cows with cystic ovarian disease (COD) compared with ovarian
structures from regularly cycling cows using reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). The cystic follicles showed a higher estrogen receptor a
(ESR1) mRNA expression in the theca and granulosa and a lower estrogen receptor ß
(ESR2) expression. The cystic follicles also showed a strong expression of
androgen receptor mRNA in the granulosa. No changes were observed in total
progesterone receptor mRNA, but a very significant increase in the B isoform was 
found in the granulosa of the cystic follicles. The findings of the current study
provide evidence that an altered steroid signaling system may be present in
bovine follicular cysts, and we suggest that in conditions characterized by
altered ovulation, such as COD, changes in the expression of ovarian steroid
receptors could play a fundamental role in the pathogeny of this disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21536311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Ann Hum Genet. 2011 Jul;75(4):456-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-1809.2011.00654.x. Epub
2011 Apr 28.

Genetic variants associated with Von Willebrand factor levels in healthy men and 
women identified using the HumanCVD BeadChip.

Zabaneh D(1), Gaunt TR, Kumari M, Drenos F, Shah S, Berry D, Power C, Hypponen E,
Shah T, Palmen J, Pallas J, Talmud PJ, Casas JP, Sofat R, Lowe G, Rumley A,
Morris RW, Whincup PH, Rodriguez S, Ebrahim S, Marmot MG, Smith GD, Lawlor DA,
Kivimaki M, Whittaker J, Hingorani AD, Day IN, Humphries SE.

Author information: 
(1)University College London Genetics Institute, Department of Genetics,
Environment and Evolution, London, UK.

We have used the gene-centric Illumina HumanCVD BeadChip to identify common
genetic determinants of Von Willebrand factor (vWF) levels in healthy men and
women. The Whitehall II (WHII) study (n= 5592) and the British Women's Heart and 
Health Study (BWHHS) (n= 3445) were genotyped using the HumanCVD BeadChip.
Replication was conducted in the British Regional Heart Study (n= 3897) and 1958 
Birth Cohort (n= 5048). We identified 48 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
in four genes/regions associated with vWF at P < 10(-4) . These included 19 SNPs 
at the ABO blood group locus with the lead variant being rs657152 (P= 9.7 ×
10(-233) ). The lead variant in the 24 VWF SNPs was rs1063856 (P= 2.3 × 10(-20)
). SNPs at ESR1 (rs6909023) and NRG1(rs1685103) showed modest associations with
vWF, but these were not confirmed in a meta-analysis. Using variable selection,
five SNPs at the locus for ABO and two for VWF were found to have independent
associations with vWF levels. After adjustment for age and gender, the selected
ABO SNPs explained 15% and the VWF SNPs an additional 2% of the variance in vWF
levels. Individuals at opposite tails of the additive seven SNP allele score
exhibited substantial differences in vWF levels. These data demonstrate that
multiple common alleles with small effects make, in combination, important
contributions to individual differences in vWF levels.

© 2011 The Authors Annals of Human Genetics © 2011 Blackwell Publishing
Ltd/University College London.

PMID: 21534939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Oct;129(3):901-7. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1527-x.
Epub 2011 Apr 28.

Genetic variants of 6q25 and breast cancer susceptibility: a two-stage fine
mapping study in a Chinese population.

Han J(1), Jiang T, Bai H, Gu H, Dong J, Ma H, Hu Z, Shen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics & Ministry of Education Key Lab
for Modern Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing 210029, China.

A recent genome-wide association study identified a novel single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP), rs2046210, in the 6q25 region as a breast cancer
susceptibility locus in Chinese and subsequently replicated in a multicenter
study. Further fine-mapping of this region may help identify the potential
causative SNPs of breast cancer. We employed a block-based fine mapping analysis 
to investigate the tagging SNPs in a 41 kb block with the marker-SNP rs2046210 in
the 6q25 region, and also extended our study by including two potentially
functional SNPs (rs2234693 and rs1801132) within the ESR1 gene by a two-stage
case-control study with 1,792 breast cancer cases and 1,867 controls (878 cases
and 900 controls in the testing set and 914 cases and 967 controls in the
validation set). Significant associations with breast cancer risk were observed
for rs1038304, rs6929137, rs2046210, and rs10484919 in the 41 kb block of the
6q25 region in the testing set after controlling multiple testing. Together with 
the validation set samples, these four SNPs were all significantly associated
with increased risk of breast cancer (additive OR from 1.25 to 1.34, additive P
from 4.84 × 10(-6) to 7.17 × 10(-9)). After conditional regression and linkage
disequilibrium analyses, rs6929137 and rs10484919 tend to be susceptible markers 
of breast cancer in this region and both of them were located at sites of histone
modification according to the UCSC (http://genome.ucsc.edu/) genome database. Our
results support that the 6q25 region is an important susceptibility region for
breast cancer in Chinese women, and rs6929137 and rs10484919 are causative or
marker SNPs for this region.

PMID: 21528353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2011 Jul;55(7):1026-35. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201100008. Epub 2011
Mar 24.

Blood as a surrogate marker for tissue-specific DNA methylation and changes due
to folate depletion in post-partum female mice.

McKay JA(1), Xie L, Harris S, Wong YK, Ford D, Mathers JC.

Author information: 
(1)Human Nutrition Research Centre, Institute for Ageing and Health, Medical
School, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK. jill.mckay@ncl.ac.uk

SCOPE: DNA methylation patterns are tissue specific and may influence
tissue-specific gene regulation. Human studies investigating DNA methylation in
relation to environmental factors primarily use blood-derived DNA as a surrogate 
for DNA from target tissues. It is therefore important to know if DNA methylation
changes in blood in response to environmental changes reflect those in target
tissues. Folate intake can influence DNA methylation, via altered methyl donor
supply. Previously, manipulations of maternal folate intake during pregnancy
altered the patterns of DNA methylation in offspring but, to our knowledge, the
consequences for maternal DNA methylation are unknown. Given the increased
requirement for folate during pregnancy, mothers may be susceptible to aberrant
DNA methylation due to folate depletion.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Female mice were fed folate-adequate (2<U+2009>mg folic acid/kg
diet) or folate-deplete (0.4<U+2009>mg folic acid/kg diet) diets prior to mating and
during pregnancy and lactation. Following weaning, dams were killed and DNA
methylation was assessed by pyrosequencing® in blood, liver, and kidney at the
Esr1, Igf2 differentially methylated region (DMR)1, Igf2 DMR2, Slc39a4CGI1, and
Slc39a4CGI2 loci. We observed tissue-specific differences in methylation at all
loci. Folate depletion reduced Igf2 DMR1 and Slc39a4CGI1 methylation across all
tissues and altered Igf2 DMR2 methylation in a tissue-specific manner (p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Blood-derived DNA methylation measurements may not always reflect
methylation within other tissues. Further measurements of blood-derived and
tissue-specific methylation patterns are warranted to understand the complexity
of tissue-specific responses to altered nutritional exposure.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21520493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Orthop Res. 2011 Jun;29(6):834-7. doi: 10.1002/jor.21322. Epub 2010 Dec 23.

Replication study of the association between adolescent idiopathic scoliosis and 
two estrogen receptor genes.

Takahashi Y(1), Matsumoto M, Karasugi T, Watanabe K, Chiba K, Kawakami N, Tsuji
T, Uno K, Suzuki T, Ito M, Sudo H, Minami S, Kotani T, Kono K, Yanagida H,
Taneichi H, Takahashi A, Toyama Y, Ikegawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is a common disorder with a strong genetic 
predisposition. Associations between AIS and common single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in estrogen receptor genes have been reported. rs9340799 in 
the gene for estrogen receptor a (ESR1) is reported to be associated with curve
severity in Japanese and with AIS predisposition and curve severity in Chinese.
In addition, rs1256120 in the gene for estrogen receptor ß (ESR2) is reported to 
be associated with AIS predisposition and curve severity in Chinese. However, the
sample sizes of these previous studies were small, and the associations of these 
SNPs have not been replicated. To examine the association between AIS and
estrogen receptor genes, we investigated the association of rs9340799 and
rs1256120 with AIS predisposition and curve severity using a large Japanese
population, consisting of 798 AIS patients and 637 sex-matched controls. We found
no association of either SNP with AIS predisposition or curve severity in the
Japanese population. Considering the statistical power of the present study and
the limitations of the previous reports, we conclude that the associations of
rs9340799 and rs1256120 with AIS predisposition and curve severity are negative.

Copyright © 2010 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 21520258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Eur Urol. 2011 Jul;60(1):131-40. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2011.04.020. Epub 2011 Apr
16.

Evaluation of the methylation status of tumour suppressor genes for predicting
bacillus Calmette-Guérin response in patients with T1G3 high-risk bladder
tumours.

Agundez M(1), Grau L, Palou J, Algaba F, Villavicencio H, Sanchez-Carbayo M.

Author information: 
(1)Tumour Markers Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2011 Jul;8(7):355.

BACKGROUND: Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) is a standard treatment for reducing
tumour recurrence and delaying progression of high-risk non-muscle-invasive
bladder tumours. However, it is not clear yet which patients are more likely to
respond to BCG.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the role of the methylation of 25 tumour suppressor genes 
(TSG) as clinical outcome predictive biomarkers in T1G3 bladder tumours treated
with BCG.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A retrospective design included 91
paraffin-embedded tumours of patients with T1G3 primary non-muscle-invasive
disease undergoing nonmaintenance BCG treatment.
MEASUREMENTS: The methylation status of 25 TSGs was measured using a
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA)
assay. Recurrence, progression into muscle-invasive tumours, and disease-specific
survival (DSS) rates were analysed using univariate and multivariate tests.
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: The genes most frequently methylated included STK11
(94.5%), MSH6 (81.3%), BRCA1 (72.5%), PAX5A (68.1%), MGMT (67.0%), CDH13 (62.6%),
and IGSF4 (61.5%). Methylation was newly identified in T1G3 tumours for TP73,
MSH6, ESR1, PAX5A, WT1, CD44, ATM, IGSF4, CHFR, BRCA2, THBS1, PYCARD, STK11, and 
GATA5. Methylation for several TSGs was significantly associated with
multifocality and tumour size. Patients with different methylation statuses of
TSGs showed differential recurrence rates (PAX6: p = 0.025), progression rates
(MSH6: p = 0.040; RB1: p = 0.042; THBS1: p = 0.041; PYCARD: p = 0.048; TP73: p = 
0.048; ESR1: p = 0.036; and GATA5: p = 0.019), and DSS rates (GATA5: p = 0.037). 
Several combinations improved prediction for progression. Multivariate analyses
indicated that among the combinations remaining as independent predictors, two
genes-MSH6 and THBS1-already provided the most significant predictive assessment 
for progression (p = 0.004). The major limitation of this study is related to its
retrospective design.
CONCLUSIONS: The methylation status of TSGs was associated with the clinical
outcome of patients with T1G3 tumours undergoing BCG treatment under three
clinical end points: recurrence, progression, and DSS. The methylation status of 
TSGs distinguished patients responding to BCG from those who may require a more
aggressive therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2011 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 21514719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Jul;226(7):1741-9. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22503.

Characterization of BCAR4, a novel oncogene causing endocrine resistance in human
breast cancer cells.

Godinho M(1), Meijer D, Setyono-Han B, Dorssers LC, van Agthoven T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus MC, University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Resistance to the antiestrogen tamoxifen remains a major problem in the
management of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. Knowledge on the
resistance mechanisms is needed to develop more effective therapies. Breast
cancer antiestrogen resistance 4 (BCAR4) was identified in a functional screen
for genes involved in tamoxifen resistance. BCAR4 is expressed in 27% of primary 
breast tumors. In patients treated with tamoxifen for metastized disease high
BCAR4 mRNA levels are associated with reduced clinical benefit and
progression-free survival. Regarding tumor aggressiveness high BCAR4 mRNA levels 
are associated with a shorter metastasis free survival and overall survival. In
the present study, we investigated the role of BCAR4 in endocrine resistance.
Forced expression of BCAR4 in human ZR-75-1 and MCF7 breast cancer cells resulted
in cell proliferation in the absence of estrogen and in the presence of various
antiestrogens. Inhibition of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) expression with small
interfering RNA (siRNA), implied that the BCAR4-induced mechanism of resistance
is independent of ESR1. Highly conserved BCAR4 homologues of rhesus monkey, green
monkey, and the less conserved common marmoset gene induced tamoxifen-resistant
cell proliferation, in contrast to the distant BCAR4 homologues of bovine and
rabbit. Injection of BCAR4-expressing ZR-75-1 cells into nude mice resulted in
rapidly growing tumors. In silico analysis showed that BCAR4 mRNA is highly
expressed in human placenta and oocyte, and absent in other normal tissues. In
conclusion, BCAR4 is a strong transforming gene causing estrogen-independent
growth and antiestrogen resistance, and induces tumor formation in vivo. Due to
its restricted expression, BCAR4 may be a good target for treating
antiestrogen-resistant breast cancer.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21506106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Plant Signal Behav. 2010 Sep;5(9):1112-4. doi: 10.4161/psb.5.9.12477.

DNA uptake by Arabidopsis induces changes in the expression of CLE peptides which
control root morphology.

Paungfoo-Lonhienne C(1), Lonhienne TG, Schmidt S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD,
Australia. Chanyarat@uq.edu.au

The presence of externally supplied DNA in the growth medium enhances growth of
lateral roots and root hairs in Arabidopsis. This phenomenon cannot be attributed
to phosphorus (P) limitation because it is independent of the plants' P status.
Rather, we hypothesized that DNA triggers a currently unknown signaling pathway. 
Analyzing the transcriptional changes of genes induced by externally supplied
DNA, we show that 7 of the 17 studied CLAVATA3/ESR-related (CLEs) genes were
differentially regulated. CLEs are known peptide hormones that affect plant
development including root morphology. While previous research had shown that
over-expression of these CLE genes alters root morphology, changes in gene
expression had not been linked to environmental triggers. The differential
expression of these CLEs genes and accompanied changes of the root phenotype are 
indicative of a DNA-elicited signal pathway which affects root development. We
conclude that DNA acts as a signaling compound which induces root proliferation
in a way that would enhance the plant's ability to acquire nutrients from soil
organic matter. Our study further confirms the importance of CLEs for controlling
root morphology in response to specific environmental conditions, and draws
attention to a novel role of DNA as a signaling compound.

PMCID: PMC3115079
PMID: 21490419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2011 Jun 8;18(3):371-84. doi: 10.1530/ERC-11-0057. Print
2011 Jun.

Modification of menopausal hormone therapy-associated colorectal cancer risk by
polymorphisms in sex steroid signaling, metabolism and transport related genes.

Rudolph A(1), Sainz J, Hein R, Hoffmeister M, Frank B, Försti A, Brenner H,
Hemminki K, Chang-Claude J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer
Feld 581, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The mechanisms underlying the association of menopausal hormone therapy (MHT)
with reduced colorectal cancer (CRC) risk are unknown and the identification of
genetic modifiers may yield further insight. We explored the effect modification 
of MHT-associated CRC risk in postmenopausal women by 47 polymorphisms with known
or putative functional relevance in 16 candidate genes related to hormone
metabolism (COMT, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP3A4, CYP17A1, GSTP,
and HSD17B1), transport (ABCB1), and signaling (ESR1, ESR2, SHBG, PGR, and
NR1I2). A total of 685 CRC patients and 684 healthy controls from a German
population-based case-control study (DACHS) were genotyped. Multiplicative
statistical interaction between polymorphisms and ever MHT use as well as
duration of use was assessed using multivariate logistic regression. CRC risk
associated with ever MHT use as well as with duration was significantly modified 
by rs1202168 in the transporter gene ABCB1 (P interaction=0.04). The
MHT-associated risk reduction was not significant in homozygous non-carriers
(odds ratio (OR) ever use=0.84, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.53-1.34; OR per 5 
year duration=0.94, 95% CI 0.83-1.08), while homozygous carriers of the minor T
allele had a 57% lower risk with ever use of MHT (95% CI 0.21-0.88) and a 22%
lower risk per 5 years of MHT use (95% CI 0.62-0.97). Significant effect
modification was also observed for the ESR1_rs910416 polymorphism (P
interaction=0.03 for ever use and 0.07 for duration of use), whereby the
decreased risk was attenuated in homozygous carriers of the minor C allele (OR
ever use=0.87, 95% CI 0.48-1.60, OR per 5 year duration=0.99, 95% CI 0.83-1.18). 
Results of this exploratory study provide first evidence that polymorphisms in
genes related to estrogen transport and signaling may modify MHT-associated CRC
risk but warrant replication in an independent population.

PMID: 21490239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Mol Med Rep. 2010 May-Jun;3(3):387-92. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000269.

microRNA regulation of the expression of the estrogen receptor in endometrial
cancer.

Zhou J(1), Song T, Gong S, Zhong M, Su G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510515, P.R. China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding RNA transcripts thought to be instrumental in
controlling eukaryotic cell function. This study aimed to identify miRNAs
associated with the differential expression of estrogen receptor a (ERa) and
progesterone receptor (PR) in uterine endometrial cancer. First, the pathology of
Ishikawa and KLE cell lines was identified by transplant and biopsy. Expression
levels of ERa and PR and their response to estrogen and progesterone were
examined, and total RNA was isolated to identify differentially expressed miRNAs 
by microarray analysis. miRNAs targeting ESR1 and PGR were predicted by miRANDA
and TargetScan software, and their expression levels in cell lines and in patient
samples were validated by real-time RT-PCR. Ishikawa and KLE represent
estrogen-dependent and estrogen-independent endometrial cancers, respectively. As
identified by miRNA microarray, 126 miRNAs were differentially expressed between 
the two cell lines; hsa-miR-100 and hsa-miR-99a were predicted to target ESR1,
and hsa-miR-378 and hsa-miR-768-3p to target PGR. The differential expression of 
these miRNAs between Ishikawa and KLE was consistent in vivo and in vitro.
Hsa-miR-100 was significantly down-regulated in the estrogen-dependent
endometrial cancer samples as compared to the estrogen-independent samples and
thus has the potential to target ESR1.

PMID: 21472251  [PubMed]


442. Biol Reprod. 2011 Jul;85(1):105-12. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.089508. Epub 2011
Apr 6.

Distribution of aromatase and sex steroid receptors in the baculum during the rat
life cycle: effects of estrogen during the early development of the baculum.

Yonezawa T(1), Higashi M, Yoshioka K, Mutoh K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Veterinary Physiology and Veterinary Anatomy, Kitasato
University, Aomori, Japan.

The baculum, also called os penis, plays an important role during copulation.
However, the hormonal regulation of its development remains to be elucidated. To 
determine the direct involvement of sex steroids in the development of the
baculum of rats, the distributions of androgen receptors (ARs), aromatase, and
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) were observed immunohistochemically. On Postnatal 
Day 1, the rudiment of the baculum expressed ARs, aromatase, and ESR1. In the
proximal segment of the baculum of neonatal rats, ARs were expressed in the
parosteal layer but not in the periosteum or osteoblasts. Aromatase was expressed
from the parosteal layer to the endosteum, particularly in the inner osteogenic
layer. ESR1 was also abundantly expressed in almost all cells from the parosteal 
layer to the endosteum. ARs, aromatase, and ESR1 were all abundantly expressed
during the neonatal period in the hyaline cartilage of the proximal segment and
in fibrocartilage of the distal segment of the baculum. Expression in all the
tissues was attenuated in an age-dependent manner and became quite weak at
puberty. To determine the effect of estrogen on the growth of the baculum, the
aromatase inhibitor 1,4,6-androstatrien-3,17-dione (ATD) was subcutaneously
injected daily into pregnant rats from Days 19 to 23 of gestation and into pups
on postnatal Days 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9. On Day 10, the length of the baculum in the 
ATD-treated rats was significantly shorter than that in the controls, although
the body weight did not change. These findings suggest that not only androgen but
also locally aromatized estrogen is involved in the early growth and development 
of the baculum.

PMID: 21471296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Mov Disord. 2011 Jun;26(7):1234-42. doi: 10.1002/mds.23604. Epub 2011 Apr 5.

Variants in estrogen-related genes and risk of Parkinson's disease.

Chung SJ(1), Armasu SM, Biernacka JM, Lesnick TG, Rider DN, Cunningham JM,
Maraganore DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Incidence rates of Parkinson's disease are higher in men than in women at all
ages, and these differences may be a result of the neuroprotective effects of
estrogen on the nigrostriatal pathway. We investigated the association of common 
variants in 4 estrogen-related genes with Parkinson's disease. Tagging
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the CYP19A1, ESR1, ESR2, and PRDM2 genes were 
selected from the International Haplotype Map and genotyped in 1103 Parkinson's
disease cases from the upper Midwest of the United States and in 1103
individually matched controls (654 unaffected siblings, and 449 unrelated
controls from the same region). Of 137 informative single-nucleotide
polymorphisms, 2 PRDM2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms were significantly
associated with an increased risk of Parkinson's disease at the
Bonferroni-corrected significance level of 0.0004 (rs2744690: OR, 1.54;
SE(logOR), .109; 99.96% CI, 1.05-2.26; uncorrected P = .0001; rs2744687: OR,
1.53; SE(logOR), .113; 99.96% CI, 1.03-2.29, uncorrected P = .0002); the
association was significant in the women-only stratum but not in the men-only
stratum. An additional 6 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in PRDM2, 2 in ESR1, 1
in ESR2, and 1 in CYP19A1 had significant P values in the overall sample before
Bonferroni correction. None of the single-nucleotide polymorphisms were
significantly associated with age at onset of Parkinson's disease after
Bonferroni correction. Our results confirm the association of PRDM2 variants with
Parkinson's disease susceptibility, especially in women.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

PMCID: PMC4723424
PMID: 21469201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Apr 22;407(4):831-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.03.119. Epub 2011 Mar 31.

Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha represses the transcription of the estrogen
receptor alpha gene in human breast cancer cells.

Ryu K(1), Park C, Lee Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Institute of Biotechnology, Department of Bioscience 
and Biotechnology, Sejong University, Seoul 143-747, Republic of Korea.

The estrogen receptor is one of the most important transcription factors in
breast tumor growth and development. We, and others, have previously shown that
hypoxia induces rapid ERa protein degradation by a proteasome-mediated pathway in
breast cancer cells, which is linked with ERa activation. However, no report has 
shown the effect of hypoxia on ESR1 gene regulation at the transcriptional level.
In this report, we show that hypoxia repressed the expression of ERa mRNA in
MCF-7 and T47D human breast cancer cells, but not in human endometrial Ishikawa
cells, although ERa degradation under hypoxia was also observed in Ishikawa
cells. This indicates that ESR1 transcriptional repression and ERa protein
downregulation by hypoxia are regulated by distinct mechanisms. Repression of
ESR1 gene transcription occurred at the transcriptional level as a result of
decreased recruitment of RNA polymerase II at the proximal promoter of the ESR1
locus in response to stabilization of the HIF-1a protein under hypoxia. Our data 
show that hypoxia induces repression of the ESR1 gene, which may facilitate
hormone insensitivity in the tumor microenvironment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21458421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Am J Epidemiol. 2011 May 15;173(10):1159-70. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwr004. Epub 2011
Mar 31.

Evaluation of functional genetic variants for breast cancer risk: results from
the Shanghai breast cancer study.

Zhang B(1), Beeghly-Fadiel A, Lu W, Cai Q, Xiang YB, Zheng Y, Long J, Ye C, Gu K,
Shu XO, Gao Y, Zheng W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology
Center and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

In previous studies among 1,144 cases and 1,256 controls recruited in stage 1 of 
the Shanghai Breast Cancer Study (SBCS I; 1996-1998), 18 known or potentially
functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 16 genes were found to be
associated with breast cancer risk. The authors evaluated these associations
among 1,918 cases and 1,819 controls recruited in stage 2 of the SBCS (SBCS II;
2002-2005) using genetic effect models and subgroup analyses predetermined from
SBCS I results. Five SNPs (AHR rs2066853, ATM rs1003623, ESR1 rs2234693, GSTP1
rs1695, and SHBG rs6259) showed generally consistent results in SBCS I and SBCS
II and statistically significant associations with breast cancer risk in combined
analyses, mostly in subgroups defined by age or menopausal status. Further, the
relation between breast cancer risk and SHBG rs6259 was found to vary by body
mass index (weight (kg)/height (m)(2)) (P for interaction = 0.003). The strongest
reduction in risk associated with SHBG rs6259 was found for lean (body mass index
<23) postmenopausal minor allele carriers (odds ratio = 0.6, 95% confidence
interval: 0.5, 0.8; P = 4.6 × 10(-4)). This biologically plausible and highly
significant finding provides strong evidence for a true association among Asian
women. This study also highlights the value of gene-environment interaction
analyses in evaluating genetic factors for complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC3121323
PMID: 21454829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Androl. 2011 Nov-Dec;32(6):600-13. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.110.012872. Epub 2011
Mar 25.

Estrogen and its receptors in efferent ductules and epididymis.

Hess RA(1), Fernandes SA, Gomes GR, Oliveira CA, Lazari MF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, 2001 S Lincoln Ave., Urbana, IL 61802, USA.
rexhess@illinois.edu

Estrogens play key roles in the development and maintenance of male reproductive 
function and fertility. In this review, we briefly describe the localization and 
function of estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2 (also known as ERa and ERß,
respectively) and the expression of G protein-coupled estrogen receptor-1 (GPER, 
formerly known as GPR30) in efferent ductules and epididymis. The efferent
ductules present the highest levels of ESR1 and ESR2 in the male reproductive
system, and represent a major target of estrogen action. In efferent ductules,
ESR1 has a crucial role in the regulation of fluid reabsorption, and in the
epididymis the receptor helps to maintain fluid osmolality and pH. ESR1
expression in the epididymal epithelium shows considerable variation among
species, but differences in laboratory techniques may also contribute to this
variation. Here we report that Esr1 mRNA and protein are higher in corpus than in
other regions of the rat epididymis. The mRNA level for Gper was also higher in
corpus. Although ESR1 is expressed constitutively in efferent ductules and
down-regulated by estrogen, in the epididymis, both testosterone (T) and
estradiol (E2) may regulate its expression. T and E2 are, respectively, higher
and lower in the corpus than in the initial segment/caput and cauda regions. It
is important to determine the expression of GPER, ESR1, androgen receptor, and
their respective cofactors in specific cell types of this tissue, as well as the 
intracellular signaling pathways involved in efferent ductules and epididymis.
These studies will help to explain the consequences of exposures to environmental
endocrine disruptors and provide potential targets for the development of a male 
contraceptive.

PMID: 21441425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cancer. 2011 Apr 1;117(7):1399-408. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25630. Epub 2010 Nov 8.

Phosphorylated AKT expression is associated with PIK3CA mutation, low stage, and 
favorable outcome in 717 colorectal cancers.

Baba Y(1), Nosho K, Shima K, Hayashi M, Meyerhardt JA, Chan AT, Giovannucci E,
Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: AKT (AKT1, AKT2, and AKT3) was a downstream effector of
phosphatidylinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) and played crucial roles in protein
synthesis, cellular metabolism, survival, and proliferation. The PI3K/AKT pathway
was commonly activated in human cancers and was recognized as a potential target 
for anticancer therapy. Nonetheless, clinical, molecular, or prognostic features 
of AKT-activated colon cancer remained uncertain.
METHODS: Using a database of 717 colon and rectal cancers in the Nurses' Health
Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study, Ser473 phosphorylated AKT
(p-AKT) expression was detected in 448 (62%) tumors by immunohistochemistry. Cox 
proportional hazards model was used to compute mortality hazards ratio (HR),
adjusting for clinical and tumoral features, including PIK3CA, KRAS, BRAF,
microsatellite instability (MSI), CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), LINE-1 
methylation, TP53 (p53), and FASN (fatty acid synthase).
RESULTS: Tumor p-AKT expression was associated with PIK3CA mutation (odds ratio
[OR], 1.77; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.12-2.80; P = .015). p-AKT expression 
was significantly associated with longer colorectal cancer-specific survival in
Kaplan-Meier analysis (log-rank P = .0005), univariate Cox regression (HR, 0.62; 
95% CI, 0.47-0.82; P = .0006) and multivariate analysis (adjusted HR, 0.75; 95%
CI, 0.56-0.99; P = .048) adjusting for clinical and molecular variables including
PIK3CA, MSI, CIMP and LINE-1 hypomethylation. p-AKT expression was inversely
associated with high stage (III-IV) (adjusted OR, 0.63; 95% CI, 0.45-0.88, P =
.0071).
CONCLUSIONS: p-AKT expression in colorectal cancer is associated with low stage
and good prognosis. p-AKT may serve as a tissue biomarker to identify patients
with superior prognosis and a possible therapeutic target (analogous to estrogen 
receptor ESR1 in breast cancer).

Copyright © 2010 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3092033
PMID: 21425139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Int J Dev Biol. 2011;55(1):25-31. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.092990tk.

Antagonistic role of XESR1 and XESR5 in mesoderm formation in Xenopus laevis.

Kinoshita T(1), Haruta Y, Sakamoto C, Imaoka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin
University, Hyogo, Japan. tkinoshita@rikkyo.ac.jp

The notch signaling pathway is widely conserved from vertebrates to invertebrates
and mediates the specification of numerous cell fates during developmental
processes. In the Xenopus gastrula embryo, Xdelta1, one of the Notch ligands, is 
expressed in the prospective mesoderm prior to Xbra expression. Here, we examined
the role of Notch signaling in mesoderm formation. Embryos injected with Xdelta1 
morpholino oligo DNA showed a severe gastrulation defect and suppression of Xbra 
expression, which were completely rescued by co-injection with the active form of
Notch. In order to fully understand the role of Notch signaling, we examined the 
expression of the Notch target genes XESR1 and XESR5. RT-PCR and whole-mount in
situ hybridization analyses showed that XESR5 was highly expressed in the
marginal zone of the early gastrula embryo, whereas expression of XESR1 was not
detected. Animal cap assays indicated that expression of XESR5 was not induced by
Notch signaling but by nodal signaling. To clarify the role of XESR5 in the
gastrula embryo, a dominant negative form of XESR5 was injected into the
prospective mesoderm. The truncated form of XESR5 induced the ectopic expression 
of XESR1, which caused a decrease in Xbra expression and defective gastrulation. 
In contrast, the truncated form of XESR1 caused an upregulation of XESR5
resulting in an increase in Xbra expression. The antagonistic effect of XESR1 and
XESR5 suggests a dual regulation in which XESR5 produces a competent area for
mesoderm formation by suppressing the gene expression of XESR1, while XESR1
sharpens the boundary of Xbra expression.

PMID: 21425079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Acta Biochim Pol. 2011;58(1):101-9. Epub 2011 Mar 21.

Association between estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms and bone mineral
density in Polish female patients with Graves' disease.

Ignaszak-Szczepaniak M(1), Horst-Sikorska W, Dytfeld J, Gowin E, Slomski R,
Stajgis M.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Metabolic Bone Diseases and Department of Family Medicine, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. maszczep@ump.edu.pl

Graves' (GD) hyperthyroidism leads to reduced bone mineral density (BMD)
accompanied by accelerated bone turnover. Ample studies have identified
association between estrogen receptor (ESR1) gene polymorphism and decreased BMD 
and osteoporosis. In contrast, number of publications that link ESR1, BMD and
Graves' disease is limited. The purpose of this study was to identify the
association between ESR1 polymorphisms and BMD in premenopausal women with GD and
to determine whether ESR1 polymorphic variants can predispose to GD. The study
included 75 women aged 23-46 years with GD and 163 healthy controls. BMD was
measured at lumbar spine and femoral neck. We investigated two SNPs in the ESR1
gene and analyzed genetic variants in the form of haplotypes reconstructed by
statistical method. Three out of four possible haplotypes of the PvuII and XbaI
restriction fragment length polymorphisms were found in GD patients: px (55.3 %),
PX (33.3 %) and Px (11.4 %). Women homozygous for xx of XbaI and for pp of PvuII 
had the lowest BMD at lumbar spine. Moreover, the px haplotype predisposed to
reduced lumbar BMD. No associations were observed for femoral neck BMD. No
statistically significant relationship were found between ESR1 polymorphisms or
their haplotypes and GD. These results indicate that the PvuII and the XbaI
polymorphisms of ESR1 gene are associated with bone mineral density in
premenopausal women with GD and may help to estimate the risk of bone loss
particularly at lumbar spine. However, none of the ESR1 gene alleles predict the 
risk of GD in Polish female patients.

PMID: 21423915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Mar 18;12:80. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-80.

Network based transcription factor analysis of regenerating axolotl limbs.

Jhamb D(1), Rao N, Milner DJ, Song F, Cameron JA, Stocum DL, Palakal MJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

BACKGROUND: Studies on amphibian limb regeneration began in the early 1700's but 
we still do not completely understand the cellular and molecular events of this
unique process. Understanding a complex biological process such as limb
regeneration is more complicated than the knowledge of the individual genes or
proteins involved. Here we followed a systems biology approach in an effort to
construct the networks and pathways of protein interactions involved in formation
of the accumulation blastema in regenerating axolotl limbs.
RESULTS: We used the human orthologs of proteins previously identified by our
research team as bait to identify the transcription factor (TF) pathways and
networks that regulate blastema formation in amputated axolotl limbs. The five
most connected factors, c-Myc, SP1, HNF4A, ESR1 and p53 regulate ~50% of the
proteins in our data. Among these, c-Myc and SP1 regulate 36.2% of the proteins. 
c-Myc was the most highly connected TF (71 targets). Network analysis showed that
TGF-ß1 and fibronectin (FN) lead to the activation of these TFs. We found that
other TFs known to be involved in epigenetic reprogramming, such as Klf4, Oct4,
and Lin28 are also connected to c-Myc and SP1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides a systems biology approach to how different
molecular entities inter-connect with each other during the formation of an
accumulation blastema in regenerating axolotl limbs. This approach provides an in
silico methodology to identify proteins that are not detected by experimental
methods such as proteomics but are potentially important to blastema formation.
We found that the TFs, c-Myc and SP1 and their target genes could potentially
play a central role in limb regeneration. Systems biology has the potential to
map out numerous other pathways that are crucial to blastema formation in
regeneration-competent limbs, to compare these to the pathways that characterize 
regeneration-deficient limbs and finally, to identify stem cell markers in
regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3240668
PMID: 21418574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Jul;125(3-5):231-42. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2011.03.010. Epub 2011 Mar 21.

Novel estrogen-related genes and potential biomarkers of ovarian endometriosis
identified by differential expression analysis.

Vouk K(1), Smuc T, Guggenberger C, Ribic-Pucelj M, Sinkovec J, Husen B, Thole H, 
Houba P, Thaete C, Adamski J, Riner TL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Vrazov trg, 2, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

In the search for novel biomarkers of endometriosis, we selected 152 genes from
the GeneLogic database based on results of genome-wide expression analysis of
ovarian endometriosis, plus 20 genes related to estrogen metabolism and action.
We then performed low-density array analysis of these 172 genes on 11 ovarian
endometriosis samples and 9 control endometrium samples. Principal component
analysis of the gene expression levels showed clear separation between the
endometriosis and control groups. We identified 78 genes as differentially
expressed. Based on Ingenuity pathway analysis, these differentially expressed
genes were arranged into groups according to biological function. These analyses 
revealed that 32 differentially expressed genes are estrogen related, 23 of which
have not been reported previously in connection with endometriosis. Functional
annotation showed that 25 and 22 genes are associated with the biological terms
"secreted" and "extracellular region", respectively. Differential expression of 4
out of 5 genes related to estrogen metabolism and action (ESR1, ESR2, PGR and
BGN) was also confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Our study thus reveals
differential expression of several genes that have not previously been associated
with endometriosis and that encode potential novel biomarkers and drug targets.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21397694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Br J Surg. 2011 May;98(5):724-34. doi: 10.1002/bjs.7422. Epub 2011 Feb 24.

Methylation profiling of rectal cancer identifies novel markers of early-stage
disease.

Leong KJ(1), Wei W, Tannahill LA, Caldwell GM, Jones CE, Morton DG, Matthews GM, 
Bach SP.

Author information: 
(1)School of Cancer Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15
2TT, UK. kjleong@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Radical surgery is the de facto treatment for early rectal cancer.
Conservative surgery with transanal endoscopic microsurgery can achieve high
rates of cure but the histopathological measures of outcome used to select local 
treatment lack precision. Biomarkers associated with disease progression,
particularly mesorectal nodal metastasis, are urgently required. The aim was to
compare patterns of gene-specific hypermethylation in radically excised rectal
cancers with histopathological stage.
METHODS: Locus-specific hypermethylation of 24 tumour suppressor genes was
measured in 105 rectal specimens (51 radically excised adenocarcinomas, 35
tissues adjacent to tumour and 19 normal controls) using the methylation-specific
multiplex ligation-dependent probe assay (MS-MLPA). Methylation values were
correlated with histopathological indices of disease progression and validated
using bisulphite pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: Five sites (ESR1, CDH13, CHFR, APC and RARB) were significantly
hypermethylated in cancer compared with adjacent tissue and normal controls (P < 
0·050). Methylation at these sites was higher in Dukes' A than Dukes' 'D' cancers
(P = 0·013). Methylation at two sites (GSTP1 and RARB) was individually
associated with localized disease (N0 and M0 respectively; P = 0·006 and P =
0·008). Hypermethylation of at least two of APC, RARB, TIMP3, CASP8 and GSTP1 was
associated with early (N0 M0) disease (N0, P = 0·002; M0, P = 0·044). Methylation
levels detected by MS-MLPA and pyrosequencing were concordant.
CONCLUSION: Locus-specific hypermethylation was more prevalent in early- than
late-stage disease. Hypermethylation of two or more of a panel of five tumour
suppressor genes was associated with localized disease.

Copyright © 2011 British Journal of Surgery Society Ltd. Published by John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21360524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Aquat Toxicol. 2011 Apr;102(3-4):167-76. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2011.01.013. Epub
2011 Feb 2.

Effects of the UV-filter 2-ethyl-hexyl-4-trimethoxycinnamate (EHMC) on expression
of genes involved in hormonal pathways in fathead minnows (Pimephales promelas)
and link to vitellogenin induction and histology.

Christen V(1), Zucchi S, Fent K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences Northwestern Switzerland, School of Life
Sciences, Muttenz, Switzerland.

UV-filters are increasingly used in cosmetics and in the protection of materials 
against UV-irradiation, and ultimately they reach aquatic systems. The lipophilic
UV-filter 2-ethyl-hexyl-4-trimethoxycinnamate (EHMC) belongs to one of the most
frequently used UV-filters and accumulates in aquatic animals. Despite its
ubiquitous presence in water and biota, very little is known about its potential 
hormonal effects on aquatic organisms. In our study, we evaluated the effects of 
measured water concentration of 5.4, 37.5, 244.5 and 394 µg/L EHMC on the
expression of genes involved in hormonal pathways in the liver, testis and brain 
of male and female fathead minnows (Pimephales promelas). We compare the
transcription profile with the plasma vitellogenin (VTG) content, secondary sex
characteristics, and gonad histology. Transcripts of the androgen receptor (ar)
were significantly down-regulated in the liver of females at 37.5, 244.5 µg/L and
394 µg/L EHMC. Additionally, the 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3ß-HSD)
transcript was significantly decreased in the liver of males at 37.5, 244.5 and
394 µg/L EHMC, and at 244.5 and 394 µg/L EHMC in females. The expressional
changes were tissue-specific in most cases, being most significant in the liver. 
Vitellogenin plasma concentration was significantly increased at 244.5 µg/L EHMC 
in males. EHMC induced significant histological changes in testes and ovaries at 
394 µg/L. Testes displayed a decrease in spermatocytes, and ovaries a decrease in
previtellogenic oocytes. The induction of VTG plasma concentration and the
histological changes in gonads suggest an estrogenic and/or antiandrogenic
activity of EHMC. On the other hand, the gene expression profile shows an
antiestrogenic (e.g.: down-regulation of esr1) activity of EHMC. In conclusion,
our data demonstrate that EHMC displays low but multiple hormonal activities in
fish.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21356179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2011 Mar;20(1):1-10. doi: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e3181e3630c.

Quantitative determination of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2 
mRNA in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue--a new option for predictive
biomarker assessment in breast cancer.

Müller BM(1), Kronenwett R, Hennig G, Euting H, Weber K, Bohmann K, Weichert W,
Altmann G, Roth C, Winzer KJ, Kristiansen G, Petry C, Dietel M, Denkert C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité Hospital, Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany.
berit.mueller@charite.de

The development of optimized therapy strategies against malignant tumors is
critically dependent on the assessment of tissue-based biomarkers in routine
diagnostic tissue samples. We investigated a novel, fully automated, and
xylene-free method for RNA isolation and biomarker determination using
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. The aim was to show that this
approach is feasible and gives results that are comparable to the current gold
standards. Expression of the breast cancer biomarkers ESR1, PGR, and HER2 was
measured in a total of 501 FFPE tissue samples from 167 breast carcinomas, which 
had been stored for up to 21 years. Total RNA was extracted from tissue sections 
and biomarker expression was measured by kinetic RT-PCR (RT-kPCR). The results of
the new method were compared with immunohistochemistry as the current gold
standard.RNA was successfully isolated from all samples, with a mean yield of 1.4
µg/sample and fragment lengths of at least 150 bp in 99% of samples. RT-kPCR
analysis of ESR1, PGR, and HER2 was possible in all samples. Comparing RT-kPCR
results with standard IHC, we found a good concordance for ESR1 (agreement:
98.4%), PGR (84.4%), and HER2 (89.8%). We observed a low section-to-section
variability of kPCR results for all 3 biomarkers (root of mean squared errors:
0.2 to 0.5 Ct values). The new approach is a reliable high-throughput instrument 
for standardized testing of biomarkers in clinical routine and for research
studies on archived FFPE material up to 21 years old. For the assessment of ESR1,
PGR, and HER2 the results are comparable to the current gold-standard.

PMID: 21326033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Clin Epigenetics. 2010 Sep 1;1(1-2):61-69.

DNA hypermethylation markers of poor outcome in laryngeal cancer.

Stephen JK(1), Chen KM, Shah V, Havard S, Kapke A, Lu M, Benninger MS, Worsham
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Henry Ford Hospital,
Detroit, MI, 48202.

This study examined molecular (DNA hypermethylation), clinical,
histopathological, demographical, smoking, and alcohol variables to assess
diagnosis (early versus late stage) and prognosis (survival) outcomes in a
retrospective primary laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) cohort. The study 
cohort of 79 primary LSCC was drawn from a multi-ethnic (37% African American),
primary care patient population, diagnosed by surgical biopsies in the Henry Ford
Health System from 1991-2004, and followed from 5-18 years (through 2009). Of the
41 variables, univariate risk factors of p<0.10 were tested in multivariate
models (logistic regression {diagnosis} and Cox {survival} models {p<0.05}).
Aberrant methylation of ESR1 (p=0.01), race as African American (p=0.04), and
tumor necrosis (extensive) (p=0.02) were independent predictors of late stage
LSCC. Independent predictors of poor survival included presence of vascular
invasion (p=0.0009), late stage disease (p=0.03) and methylation of the HIC1 gene
(p=0.0002). Aberrant methylation of ESR1 and HIC1 signified independent markers
of poorer outcome. In this multi-ethnic, primary LSCC cohort, race remained a
predictor of late stage disease supporting disparate diagnosis outcomes for
African American patients with LSCC.

PMCID: PMC3037188
PMID: 21318053  [PubMed]


456. Reproduction. 2011 May;141(5):675-83. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0320. Epub 2011 Feb 11.

Milk-borne lactocrine-acting factors affect gene expression patterns in the
developing neonatal porcine uterus.

Chen JC(1), Frankshun AL, Wiley AA, Miller DJ, Welch KA, Ho TY, Bartol FF,
Bagnell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Rutgers University, 84 Lipman Drive, New
Brunswick, New Jersey 08901, USA.

Lactocrine communication of milk-borne bioactive factors (MbFs) from mother to
offspring through nursing can affect neonatal development with lasting
consequences. Relaxin (RLX), a lactocrine-active peptide found in porcine
colostrum, stimulates estrogen receptor-a (ESR1) expression required for uterine 
development shortly after birth (postnatal day=PND 0). Whether other MbFs or
cooperative lactocrine mechanisms affect the neonatal uterine developmental
program is unknown. To determine the effects of age, nursing, and exogenous RLX
on gene expression associated with uterine development, gilts (n=4-5/group) were 
assigned to nurse ad libitum or to receive milk replacer, with or without
exogenous RLX (20 µg/kg BW i.m./6 h for 48 h), from birth to PND 2 when uteri
were collected. Body weight and uterine weight increased (P<0.05) similarly from 
birth to PND 2 in all gilts. However, colostrum consumption was required for
normal uterine ESR1, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGFA), matrix
metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9), and RLX receptor (RXFP1) protein and/or transcript
expression on PND 2. Uterine ESR1, VEGFA, and MMP9 protein levels were below
(P<0.01) the assay sensitivity in replacer-fed gilts. Supplemental RLX increased 
(P<0.05) uterine ESR1 protein and mRNA in nursed gilts, as well as VEGFA protein 
in nursed and VEGFA mRNA in both nursed and replacer-fed gilts. RLX treatment did
not affect uterine MMP9 mRNA levels. When compared with replacer-fed gilts on PND
2, uterine RXFP1 mRNA was reduced (P<0.05) in nursed gilts and in
RLX-supplemented replacer-fed gilts. These results constitute the first evidence 
that establishment of the neonatal porcine uterine developmental program requires
maternal lactocrine support.

PMID: 21317299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2011 Mar 9;18(2):265-76. doi: 10.1530/ERC-10-0264. Print
2011 Apr.

Association of genetic polymorphisms in ESR2, HSD17B1, ABCB1, and SHBG genes with
colorectal cancer risk.

Sainz J(1), Rudolph A, Hein R, Hoffmeister M, Buch S, von Schönfels W, Hampe J,
Schafmayer C, Völzke H, Frank B, Brenner H, Försti A, Hemminki K, Chang-Claude J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center, Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 580, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The incidence rates and relative risks for colorectal cancer (CRC) are higher in 
men than in women. Sex steroids may play a role in this gender-associated
difference in CRC risk. This study was conducted to explore the relationship of
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in steroid hormone signaling (ESR1, ESR2, 
PGR, NR1I2, and SHBG), phase I- and II-metabolizing enzyme (COMT, HSD17B1,
CYP1A1, CYP17A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, CYP2C9, CYP3A4, CYP2C19, and GSTP1), and hormone
transporter (ABCB1) genes with the risk of CRC in German women and men,
separately. From the population-based DACHS study (South Germany), 47 putatively 
functional SNPs were genotyped in 1798 CRC cases (746 women and 1052 men) and
1810 controls (732 women and 1078 men). Significant allele dose-response
associations were observed with ESR2_rs1255998, ESR2_rs928554, HSD17B1_rs605059, 
and ABCB1_rs2229109 in women (P trend=0.004, 0.05, 0.03, and 0.05 respectively)
and with ABCB1_rs1045642, ABCB1_rs9282564, and SHBG_rs6259 in men (P trend=0.01, 
0.03, and 0.02 respectively). The ESR2_rs1255998_G allele showed the most
significant association with risk for CRC in women, with a per-allele odds ratio 
(OR) of 0.68 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.52-0.88). This finding was
replicated in an independent study from North Germany including 1076 female CRC
cases and 1151 controls (OR=0.84, 95% CI 0.71-1.04), yielding a per-allele OR of 
0.80 (95% CI 0.69-0.93, P trend=0.003) in the pooled sample. These findings
implicate a role of ESR2 in the risk for developing CRC in women and suggest that
HSD17B1, ABCB1, and SHBG genes may contribute to sex steroid-mediated effects on 
CRC development.

PMID: 21317201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Int Med Res. 2010 Sep-Oct;38(5):1575-83.

Oestrogen receptor-alpha polymorphism and risk of fracture: a meta-analysis of 13
studies including 1279 cases and 6069 controls.

Lei MM(1), Yang TF, Tu ZQ, Liu L, Fang Y, Wang GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
China.

A meta-analysis was performed to evaluate the effect of oestrogen receptor-alpha 
(ESR1) gene PvuII polymorphism on fracture risk. It included published data from 
relevant studies (up to May 2010) identified from Medline, Embase and Current
Contents. The 13 included studies contained 1279 fracture cases and 6069
controls. The combined results based on these studies showed no relationship
between ESR1 gene PvuII polymorphism and fracture risk. No significant difference
in genotype distribution was found when stratifying by race. When stratifying by 
fracture type, it was found that vertebral fracture cases had a significantly
higher frequency of the PvuII pp genotype than controls in five studies (552
cases and 2350 controls). This meta-analysis suggests a modest but statistically 
significant association between the ESR1 PvuII pp genotype and vertebral
fracture.

PMID: 21309471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Morphol. 2011 Jun;272(6):698-703. doi: 10.1002/jmor.10936. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Sex steroid and thyroid hormone receptor expressions in the thyroid of the
American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) during different life stages.

Bermudez DS(1), Skotko JP, Ohta Y, Boggs AS, Iguchi T, Guillette LJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, 220 Bartram Hall, University of Florida, Gainesville,
FL 32611, USA. dieldrich@gmail.com

The expression of estrogen receptors, ESR1 (ERa) and ESR2 (ERß), and androgen
receptors (AR) in the thyroid gland has been reported in few vertebrate species
other than a few mammals. This study reports the presence of sex steroid hormone 
receptors and thyroid receptors (ERa, ERß, AR, TRa, and TRß) in the thyroid gland
of the American alligator at several life stages. It provides a
semiquantification and distribution of ERa in the thyroid follicle cells using an
immunohistochemical approach as well as reports quantitative differences in mRNA 
expression of ERa, ERß, TRa, TRß, and AR in the same tissue using quantitative
real time-PCR (Q-PCR) with primers designed specifically for alligators. The
thyroid tissue of the American alligator expresses ERa, ERß, and AR at all of the
life stages examined here although no statistically significant differences were 
observed between male and female in thyroid mRNA expression for any of the genes 
analyzed. No sexual dimorphism was observed in ERa immunostaining. No statistical
analysis across life stages were performed due to confounding factor of season.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21308728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Korean Med Sci. 2011 Feb;26(2):207-13. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2011.26.2.207. Epub
2011 Jan 24.

DNA methylation changes following 5-azacitidine treatment in patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome.

Tran HT(1), Kim HN, Lee IK, Kim YK, Ahn JS, Yang DH, Lee JJ, Kim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Center for Hematopoietic Diseases, Chonnam National University
Hwasun Hospital, Hwasun, Korea.

DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-azacitidine (AC) is effective in
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and can induce re-expression in cancer. We
analyzed the methylation of 25 tumor suppressor genes in AC-treated MDS.
Hypermethylation of CDKN2B, FHIT, ESR1, and IGSF4 gene was detected in 9/44
patients. In concordance with the clinical response, a lack of or decreased
methylation in 4 patients with hematologic improvements and persistent
methylation in 4 others with no response was observed. The mRNA expression of
CDKN2B, IGSF4, and ESR1 was significantly reduced in MDS. Our results suggest
that methylation changes contribute to disease pathogenesis and may serve as
marker to monitor the efficacy of treatments.

PMCID: PMC3031004
PMID: 21286011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 31;13(1):R13. doi: 10.1186/bcr2821.

Genetic variation in the genome-wide predicted estrogen response element-related 
sequences is associated with breast cancer development.

Yu JC(1), Hsiung CN, Hsu HM, Bao BY, Chen ST, Hsu GC, Chou WC, Hu LY, Ding SL,
Cheng CW, Wu PE, Shen CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tri-Service General Hospital, Ming-Cheng East Road,
Taipei, 114, Taiwan.

INTRODUCTION: Estrogen forms a complex with the estrogen receptor (ER) that binds
to estrogen response elements (EREs) in the promoter region of
estrogen-responsive genes, regulates their transcription, and consequently
mediates physiological or tumorigenic effects. Thus, sequence variants in EREs
have the potential to affect the estrogen-ER-ERE interaction. In this study, we
examined the hypothesis that genetic variations of EREs are associated with
breast cancer development.
METHODS: This case-control study involved 815 patients of Asian descent with
incident breast cancer and 821 healthy female controls. A total of 13,737 ERE
sites in the whole genome predicted by a genome-wide computational algorithm were
blasted with single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) sequences. Twenty-one SNPs
located within 2,000 bp upstream or within introns 1 and 2 of putative genes and 
with a minor allele frequency greater than 5% were identified and genotyped.
Frequencies of SNPs were compared between cases and controls to identify SNPs
associated with cancer susceptibility.
RESULTS: A significant combined effect of rs12539530, an ERE SNP in intron 2 of
NRCAM which codes for a cell adhesion molecule, and SNPs of ESR1, the gene coding
for ER, on breast cancer risk was found. Interestingly, this combined effect was 
more significant in women who had experienced a longer period of lifetime
estrogen exposure, supporting a hormonal etiology of this SNP in breast
tumorigenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide support for a role of genetic variation in
ERE-ESR1 in determining susceptibility of breast cancer development.

PMCID: PMC3109581
PMID: 21281495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Aquat Toxicol. 2011 Feb;101(3-4):483-92. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2010.12.002. Epub
2010 Dec 13.

Methoxychlor affects multiple hormone signaling pathways in the largemouth bass
(Micropterus salmoides) liver.

Martyniuk CJ(1), Spade DJ, Blum JL, Kroll KJ, Denslow ND.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences and Center for Environmental and Human
Toxicology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611-0885, USA.
cmartyn@unb.ca

Methoxychlor (MXC) is an organochlorine pesticide that has been shown to have
estrogenic activity by activating estrogen receptors and inducing vitellogenin
production in male fish. Previous studies report that exposure to MXC induces
changes in mRNA abundance of reproductive genes in the liver and testes of
largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides). The objective of the present study was
to better characterize the mode of action of MXC by measuring the global
transcriptomic response in the male largemouth liver using an oligonucleotide
microarray. Microarray analysis identified highly significant changes in the
expression of 37 transcripts (p<0.001) (20 induced and 17 decreased) in the liver
after MXC injection and a total of 900 expression changes (p<0.05) in transcripts
with high homology to known genes. Largemouth bass estrogen receptor alpha (esr1)
and androgen receptor (ar) were among the transcripts that were increased in the 
liver after MXC treatment. Functional enrichment analysis identified the
molecular functions of steroid binding and androgen receptor activity as well as 
steroid hormone receptor activity as being significantly over-represented gene
ontology terms. Pathway analysis identified c-fos signaling as being putatively
affected through both estrogen and androgen signaling. This study provides
evidence that MXC elicits transcriptional effects through the estrogen receptor
as well as androgen receptor-mediated pathways in the liver.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3222593
PMID: 21276474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Chin J Cancer. 2011 Feb;30(2):138-43.

Association of a single nucleotide polymorphism at 6q25.1,rs2046210, with
endometrial cancer risk among Chinese women.

Li G(1), Xiang YB, Courtney R, Cheng JR, Huang B, Long JR, Cai H, Zheng W, Shu
XO, Cai Q.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Vanderbilt Epidemiology Center, Department of
Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine and Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

A recent genome-wide association study identified a new susceptibility locus for 
breast cancer, rs2046210, which is a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) located
upstream of the estrogen receptor a(ESR1) gene on chromosome 6q25.1. Given that
endometrial cancer shares many risk factors with breast cancer and both are
related to estrogen exposure and that rs2046210 is in close proximity to the ESR1
gene, we evaluated the association of SNP rs2046210 with endometrial cancer risk 
among 953 cases and 947 controls in a population-based, case-control study
conducted in Shanghai, China. Logistic regression models were used to derive odds
ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) after adjusting for potential
confounders. We found that the A allele of rs2046210, linked to an increased risk
of breast cancer, was associated with increased but not statistically significant
risk of endometrial cancer (OR = 1.16, 95% CI = 0.96-1.41 for the GA and AA
genotypes compared with the GG genotype); the association was stronger among
post-menopausal women (OR = 1.28, 95% CI = 1.00-1.65). The association tended to 
be stronger among women with higher or longer estrogen exposure than among women 
with relatively lower or shorter exposure to estrogen. Our study suggests that
rs2046210 may play a role in the etiology of endometrial cancer. Additional
studies are needed to confirm our findings.

PMCID: PMC3842219
PMID: 21272446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 26;13(1):R10. doi: 10.1186/bcr2817.

Genetic variation of ESR1 and its co-activator PPARGC1B is synergistic in
augmenting the risk of estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.

Li Y(1), Li Y, Wedrén S, Li G, Charn TH, Desai KV, Bonnard C, Czene K, Humphreys 
K, Darabi H, Einarsdóttir K, Heikkinen T, Aittomäki K, Blomqvist C, Chia KS,
Nevanlinna H, Hall P, Liu ET, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis Street, Singapore
138672, Singapore.

INTRODUCTION: Given the role of estrogen in breast carcinogenesis and the
modification of estrogen receptor (ER) activity by its biochemical cofactors, we 
hypothesize that genetic variation within ER cofactor genes alters cellular
response to estrogen exposure and consequently modifies the risk for ER-positive 
breast cancer.
METHODS: We genotyped 790 tagging SNPs within 60 ER cofactor genes in 1,257 cases
and 1,464 controls from Sweden and in 2,215 cases and 1,265 controls from
Finland, and tested their associations with either ER-positive or ER-negative
breast cancer.
RESULTS: Seven SNPs showed consistent association with ER-positive breast cancer 
in the two independent samples, and six of them were located within PPARGC1B,
encoding an ER co-activator, with the strongest association at rs741581 (odds
ratio = 1.41, P = 4.84 × 10<U+207B>5) that survived Bonferroni correction for multiple
testing in the combined ER-positive breast cancer sample (Pcorrected = 0.03).
Moreover, we also observed significant synergistic interaction (Pinteraction =
0.008) between the genetic polymorphisms within PPARGC1B and ESR1 in ER-positive 
breast cancer. By contrast, no consistent association was observed in ER-negative
breast cancer. Furthermore, we found that administration of estrogen in the MCF-7
cell line induced PPARGC1B expression and enhanced occupancies of ER and RNA
polymerase II within the region of SNP association, suggesting the upregulation
of PPARGC1B expression by ESR1 activation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed that DNA polymorphisms of PPARGC1B, coding a bona
fide ER co-activator, are associated with ER-positive breast cancer risk. The
feed-forward transcriptional regulatory loop between PPARGC1B and ESR1 further
augments their protein interaction, which provides a plausible mechanistic
explanation for the synergistic genetic interaction between PPARGC1B and ESR1 in 
ER-positive breast cancer. Our study also highlights that biochemically and
genomically informed candidate gene studies can enhance the discovery of
interactive disease susceptibility genes.

PMCID: PMC3109578
PMID: 21269472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Med Mol Morphol. 2010 Dec;43(4):193-6. doi: 10.1007/s00795-010-0514-3. Epub 2011 
Jan 26.

Mechanisms of estrogen receptor-a upregulation in breast cancers.

Miyoshi Y(1), Murase K, Saito M, Imamura M, Oh K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Hyogo College
of Medicine, 1-1 Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.
ymiyoshi@hyo-med.ac.jp

The most critical step for initiation and progression of estrogen receptor-a
(ERa)-positive breast cancers is thought to be upregulation of ERa expression.
There are several factors involved in this mechanism, i.e., increased promoter
activity of the ERa gene (ESR1) at the transcriptional level, ESR1 gene
amplification, and diminished degradation of ERa protein through ubiquitination
and proteasomal pathways. Mediating these factors, ERa protein levels seem to be 
controlled, although the details of the mechanism remain to be clarified. In
addition, for upregulation of estrogen signaling, functional changes in its
action in cancer cells originating from normal epithelial cells, i.e., estrogen
stimulation, which then leads to proliferation of ERa-positive cancer cells, has 
been recognized, but this action has not been observed in normal epithelial
cells. These alterations are therefore likely to contribute to the pathogenesis
of ERa-positive breast cancers.

PMID: 21267694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011 Mar 2;103(5):425-35. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djq563. Epub 2011
Jan 24.

Novel breast cancer susceptibility locus at 9q31.2: results of a genome-wide
association study.

Fletcher O(1), Johnson N, Orr N, Hosking FJ, Gibson LJ, Walker K, Zelenika D, Gut
I, Heath S, Palles C, Coupland B, Broderick P, Schoemaker M, Jones M, Williamson 
J, Chilcott-Burns S, Tomczyk K, Simpson G, Jacobs KB, Chanock SJ, Hunter DJ,
Tomlinson IP, Swerdlow A, Ashworth A, Ross G, dos Santos Silva I, Lathrop M,
Houlston RS, Peto J.

Author information: 
(1)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research,
London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies have identified several common
genetic variants associated with breast cancer risk. It is likely, however, that 
a substantial proportion of such loci have not yet been discovered.
METHODS: We compared 296,114 tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 1694
breast cancer case subjects (92% with two primary cancers or at least two
affected first-degree relatives) and 2365 control subjects, with validation in
three independent series totaling 11,880 case subjects and 12,487 control
subjects. Odds ratios (ORs) and associated 95% confidence intervals (CIs) in each
stage and all stages combined were calculated using unconditional logistic
regression. Heterogeneity was evaluated with Cochran Q and I(2) statistics. All
statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: We identified a novel risk locus for breast cancer at 9q31.2 (rs865686: 
OR = 0.89, 95% CI = 0.85 to 0.92, P = 1.75 × 10(-10)). This single-nucleotide
polymorphism maps to a gene desert, the nearest genes being Kruppel-like factor 4
(KLF4, 636 kb centromeric), RAD23 homolog B (RAD23B, 794 kb centromeric), and
actin-like 7A (ACTL7A, 736 kb telomeric). We also identified two variants
(rs3734805 and rs9383938) mapping to 6q25.1 estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), which
were associated with breast cancer in subjects of northern European ancestry
(rs3734805: OR = 1.19, 95% CI = 1.11 to 1.27, P = 1.35 × 10(-7); rs9383938: OR = 
1.18, 95% CI = 1.11 to 1.26, P = 1.41 × 10(-7)). A variant mapping to 10q26.13,
approximately 300 kb telomeric to the established risk locus within the second
intron of FGFR2, was also associated with breast cancer risk, although not at
genome-wide statistical significance (rs10510102: OR = 1.12, 95% CI = 1.07 to
1.17, P = 1.58 × 10(-6)).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide further evidence on the role of genetic
variation in the etiology of breast cancer. Fine mapping will be needed to
identify causal variants and to determine their functional effects.

PMID: 21263130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Dev Psychopathol. 2011 Feb;23(1):69-83. doi: 10.1017/S0954579410000659.

Reported early family environment covaries with menarcheal age as a function of
polymorphic variation in estrogen receptor-a.

Manuck SB(1), Craig AE, Flory JD, Halder I, Ferrell RE.

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Physiology Laboratory, University of Pittsburgh, 506 OEH, 4015
O'Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA. manuck@pitt.edu

Age at menarche, a sentinel index of pubertal maturation, was examined in
relation to early family relationships (conflict, cohesion) and polymorphic
variation in the gene encoding estrogen receptor-a (ESR1) in a midlife sample of 
455 European American women. Consistent with prior literature, women who reported
being raised in families characterized by close interpersonal relationships and
little conflict tended to reach menarche at a later age than participants reared 
in families lacking cohesion and prone to discord. Moreover, this association was
moderated by ESR1 variation, such that quality of the family environment covaried
positively with menarcheal age among participants homozygous for minor alleles of
the two ESR1 polymorphisms studied here (rs9304799, rs2234693), but not among
women of other ESR1 genotypes. In addition, (a) family relationship variables
were unrelated to ESR1 variation, and (b) genotype-dependent effects of childhood
environment on age at menarche could not be accounted for by personality traits
elsewhere shown to explain heritable variation in reported family conflict and
cohesion. These findings are consistent with theories of differential
susceptibility to environmental influence, as well as the more specific
hypothesis (by Belsky) that girls differ genetically in their sensitivity to
rearing effects on pubertal maturation.

PMCID: PMC3077552
PMID: 21262040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Apr;120(2):447-59. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr011. Epub 2011 Jan
20.

Increased sensitivity of estrogen receptor alpha overexpressing antral follicles 
to methoxychlor and its metabolites.

Paulose T(1), Hernández-Ochoa I, Basavarajappa MS, Peretz J, Flaws JA.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
Illinois 61802, USA.

Methoxychlor (MXC), an organochlorine pesticide, and its metabolites,
mono-hydroxy MXC (MOH) and bis-hydroxy MXC (HPTE) are known ovarian toxicants and
can cause inhibition of antral follicle growth. Since these chemicals bind to
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1), we hypothesized that ovaries overexpressing ESR1 
(ESR1 OE) would be more susceptible to toxicity induced by MXC and its
metabolites because the chemicals can bind to more ESR1 in the antral follicles. 
We cultured antral follicles from controls and ESR1 OE mouse ovaries with either 
the vehicle dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), MXC, MOH, or HPTE. The data show that at 96
h, the cultured antral follicles from ESR1 OE antral follicles are more
susceptible to toxicity induced by MXC, MOH, and HPTE because low doses of these 
chemicals cause follicle growth inhibition in ESR1 OE mice but not in control
mice. On comparing gene expression levels of nuclear receptors in the cultured
antral follicles of ESR1 OE and control follicles, we found differential
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of Esr1, estrogen receptor beta (Esr2), androgen 
receptor (Ar), progesterone receptor (Pr), and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr)
between the genotypes. We also analyzed mRNA levels of Cyp3a41a, the enzyme
metabolizing MOH and HPTE, in the cultured follicles and found that Cyp3a41a was 
significantly lower in DMSO-treated ESR1 OE follicles compared with controls. In 
ESR1 OE livers, we found that Cyp3a41a levels were significantly lower compared
with control livers. Collectively, these data suggest that MXC and its
metabolites cause differential gene expression in ESR1 OE mice compared with
controls. The results also suggest that the increased sensitivity of ESR1 OE
mouse ovaries to toxicity induced by MXC and its metabolites is due to low
clearance of the metabolites by the liver and ovary.

PMCID: PMC3061483
PMID: 21252393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Biol Reprod. 2011 May;84(5):1063-71. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085928. Epub
2011 Jan 19.

Ovarian steroid receptors and activated MAPK in the regional decidualization in
rats.

Vallejo G(1), Mestre-Citrinovitz AC, Mönckedieck V, Grümmer R, Winterhager E,
Saragüeta P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental, Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Though the decidua serves a critical function in implantation, the hormonal
regulated pathway in decidualization is still elusive. Here we describe in detail
the regional distribution and the effects of progesterone receptors (PGR),
estrogen receptors (ESR), and MAPK activation on decidualization. We showed an
increase in PGR A, PGR B, ESR1, and phosphorylated MAPK3-1 proteins (p-MAPK3-1), 
but not in ESR2, in the decidual tissue up to Day 8 of pregnancy. PGR was
predominantly found in the nuclei of mesometrial decidual cells and of
undifferentiated stromal cells where it colocalizes with ESR2 and ESR1. In the
antimesometrial decidua, all the receptors showed cytoplasmic localization. MAPK 
was activated exclusively in undifferentiated stromal cells of the junctional
zone between the antimesometrial and mesometrial decidua and at the border of the
antimesometrial decidua. Treatment with the progesterone antagonist onapristone
and/or the estrogen antagonist faslodex reduced the extent of decidual tissue and
downregulated the levels of PGR and ESR1. The expression level of ESR2 was
affected only by the progesterone receptor antagonist, while neither the
antiprogestin nor the antiestrogen significantly modified the p-MAPK3-1 level.
The inhibition of MAPK3-1 phosphorylation by PD98059 impaired the extent of
decidualization and the closure reaction of the implantation chamber, and
significantly downregulated ESR1. These results confirm a role of both steroid
receptors in the growth and differentiation of the different decidual regions and
suggest a new function for p-MAPK3-1 in regulating expression levels of ESR1,
thereby maintaining the proliferation capacity of stromal cells and limiting the 
differentiation process in specified regions of decidual tissues.

PMID: 21248290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Biol Reprod. 2011 May;84(5):1045-52. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.090076. Epub
2011 Jan 19.

Resveratrol modulates the expression of PTGS2 and cellular proliferation in the
normal rat endometrium in an AKT-dependent manner.

Singh M(1), Parent S, Leblanc V, Asselin E.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group in Molecular Oncology and Endocrinology, Department of
Chemistry-Biology, Université du Québec à Trois-Rivières, Trois-Rivières, Québec,
Canada.

Resveratrol (trans-3,4N-trihydroxystilbene), a phytoalexin present in grapes and 
red wine is emerging as a natural compound with anticancer properties. However,
the physiological and molecular effects of resveratrol on normal uterine cells
are poorly understood. In the present study we evaluated the effects of
resveratrol on normal uterine cells and the mechanisms involved in vivo. Healthy 
immature rats were treated s.c. with resveratrol (0, 0.5, 5, and 50 mg/kg body
weight) for 7 consecutive days and euthanized on the eighth day. Uteri were
collected and weighed, and endometrium was recovered for total protein
extraction, followed by Western blot analysis. Estrogen receptor alpha 1 (ESR1)
and beta 2 (ESR2) affinity and activation by resveratrol were also determined by 
in vitro ESR-binding assays. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) studies were performed to
visualize the proliferation marker, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA),
and immunofluorescence (IF) studies were done to study the localization of PTGS2.
The results showed that resveratrol increased uterine wet weight and uterine body
weight ratios significantly. This local cellular proliferation in terms of the
thickening of the columnar epithelial cells and an increase in the number of
glands was accompanied by an increase of AKT 16 phosphorylation and PTGS2 and
XIAP protein expression. These results were further supported by IF and IHC
analyses. Total AKT, ESR1, and ESR2 protein expression levels were not modulated 
by the treatment; however, resveratrol showed moderate estrogenicity for both ESR
isoforms. Expression of progesterone receptor A (PGR) was induced in the presence
of resveratrol. These data support the hypothesis that resveratrol can act in a
prosurvival or antiapoptotic way through AKT, XIAP, and PTGS2 regulation in the
endometrium and could positively affect the outcome of pregnancy and favor
fertility.

PMID: 21248286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Cutan Ocul Toxicol. 2011 Sep;30(3):187-97. doi: 10.3109/15569527.2010.546003.
Epub 2011 Jan 14.

Temporal effects in porcine skin following bromine vapor exposure.

Price JA(1), Rogers JV, Wendling MQ, Plahovinsak JL, Perry MR, Reid FM, Kiser RC,
Graham JS.

Author information: 
(1)Battelle Biomedical Research Center, Columbus, Ohio 43201, USA.
priceja@battelle.org

Bromine is an industrial chemical that causes severe cutaneous burns. When
selecting or developing effective treatments for bromine burns, it is important
to understand the molecular mechanisms of tissue damage and wound healing. This
study investigated the effect of cutaneous bromine vapor exposure on gene
expression using a weanling swine burn model by microarray analysis. Ventral
abdominal sites were exposed to a mean calculated bromine vapor concentration of 
0.51<U+2009>g/L for 7 or 17<U+2009>min. At 6<U+2009>h, 48<U+2009>h, and 7 days post-exposure, total RNA from 
skin samples was isolated, processed, and analyzed with Affymetrix GeneChip®
Porcine Genome Arrays (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>3 per experimental group). Differences in gene
expression were observed with respect to exposure duration and sampling time.
Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) revealed four common biological functions
(cancer, cellular movement, cell-to-cell signaling and interaction, and tissue
development) among the top ten functions of each experimental group, while
canonical pathway analysis revealed 9 genes (ARG2, CCR1, HMOX1, ATF2, IL-8,
TIMP1, ESR1, HSPAIL, and SELE) that were commonly shared among four significantly
altered signaling pathways. Among these, the transcripts encoding HMOX1 and ESR1 
were identified using IPA as common potential therapeutic targets for Phase
II/III clinical trial or FDA-approved drugs. The present study describes the
transcriptional responses to cutaneous bromine vapor exposure identifying
molecular networks and genes that could serve as targets for developing
therapeutics for bromine-induced skin injury.

PMID: 21231885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2011 Jan 11;9:2. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-9-2.

Expression of miRNAs in ovine fetal gonads: potential role in gonadal
differentiation.

Torley KJ(1), da Silveira JC, Smith P, Anthony RV, Veeramachaneni DN, Winger QA, 
Bouma GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction and Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA.

BACKGROUND: Gonadal differentiation in the mammalian fetus involves a complex
dose-dependent genetic network. Initiation and progression of fetal ovarian and
testicular pathways are accompanied by dynamic expression patterns of thousands
of genes. We postulate these expression patterns are regulated by small
non-coding RNAs called microRNAs (miRNAs). The aim of this study was to identify 
the expression of miRNAs in mammalian fetal gonads using sheep as a model.
METHODS: We determined the expression of 128 miRNAs by real time PCR in
early-gestational (gestational day (GD) 42) and mid-gestational (GD75) sheep
ovaries and testes. Expression data were further examined and validated by
bioinformatic analysis.
RESULTS: Expression analysis revealed significant differences between ovaries and
testes among 24 miRNAs at GD42, and 43 miRNAs at GD75. Bioinformatic analysis
revealed that a number of differentially expressed miRNAs are predicted to target
genes known to be important in mammalian gonadal development, including ESR1,
CYP19A1, and SOX9. In situ hybridization revealed miR-22 localization within
fetal testicular cords. As estrogen signaling is important in human and sheep
ovarian development, these data indicate that miR-22 is involved in repressing
estrogen signaling within fetal testes.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our results we postulate that gene expression networks
underlying fetal gonadal development are regulated by miRNAs.

PMCID: PMC3027096
PMID: 21223560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Cancer Lett. 2011 Mar 1;302(1):63-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.12.014. Epub 2011
Jan 8.

Estrogen receptor-related genes as an important panel of predictors for breast
cancer response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Chen Y(1), Chen C, Yang B, Xu Q, Wu F, Liu F, Ye X, Meng X, Mougin B, Liu G, Shen
Z, Shao Z, Wu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, 270
Dong An Road, 200032, Shanghai, China.

PURPOSE: Clinical data suggest that the estrogen receptor (ER) contributes to
chemotherapeutic responsiveness. However, ER status alone is not consistently
predictive. In this study, we used a microarray approach to find novel ER-related
genes that predicted chemotherapy responses, with the hope of providing a robust 
multi-variable prediction method.
METHODS: One hundred and ten patients with stages II and III breast cancer were
included. They received four preoperative cycles of a weekly PCb (paclitaxel plus
carboplatin) regimen. A total of 55 training cases were used for marker discovery
and for identification of any ER-related genes that may have been associated with
a chemotherapeutic response ("training cases"). The other 55 patients were
available as an independent validation set ("validation cases") to test, using
immunohistochemistry (IHC).
RESULTS: In the training set, 20 significantly differentially expressed genes
were identified. Among these 20 genes, TFF1, ESR1, GATA3 and TFF3 were found to
be ER-related. Among 55 independent validation cases, univariate analysis
indicated that clinical variables and ER-related genes were all significantly
associated with pCR. It was shown that the pCR rate was as high as 80% when these
five factors were all negative. In contrast, these five factors were all positive
in seven of nine chemo-resistant patients.
CONCLUSION: In conjunction with levels of ER-related genes, expression of ER
protein may provide important predictive outcomes for responses to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy and may allow for the identification of a subgroup of patients who
could significantly benefit from chemotherapy (or who may be resistant to it).

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21220187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Maturitas. 2011 Apr;68(4):362-7. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2010.12.006. Epub 2011 
Jan 8.

Estrogen receptor-1 genotype is associated with bone structure in premenopausal
obese women.

Rauhio A(1), Uusi-Rasi K, Kunnas T, Nikkari ST, Kannus P, Sievänen H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Laboratory Medicine, Pirkanmaa Hospital District, Tampere, Finland.
anne.rauhio@pshp.fi

Estrogen action in bone is mediated mainly by estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1).
Bone mineral content of the lumbar spine and left proximal femur and the femoral 
neck structure was measured with DXA, and the structure of the radius and tibia
were assessed with pQCT in 75 premenopausal obese (BMI>30) women. The number of
women in the ESR1 Pvu II genotype groups was 26 in TT, 37 in TC and 12 in CC. The
CC genotype group had 7.8% (CI 3.3% to 12.6%) and 5.4% (CI 0.8% to 10.4%)
narrower neck width than the TC and the TT groups, respectively. Cortical density
at the tibial shaft among the CC genotype carriers was 1.5% (CI 0.0% to 3.0%) and
1.4% (CI 0.0% to 2.8%) higher than among the TC or TT carriers, respectively.
Other bone traits did not show significant differences. Our results suggest that 
the less frequent CC genotype in obese premenopausal women is related to narrower
femoral neck and higher cortical density at the tibial shaft compared to the TC
and TT genotypes. Thus, this gene polymorphism seems to be associated
specifically with bone structural traits rather than bone mass.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21216543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2011 Apr 1;171(2):151-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2011.01.003.
Epub 2011 Jan 7.

Developmental expression and estrogen responses of endocrine genes in juvenile
yellow perch (Perca flavescens).

Lynn SG(1), Wallat GK, Malison JA, Shepherd BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506, USA.
scott.g.lynn@scottglynn.com

The present study examines the expression of growth-regulating genes (gh, prl,
smtl and igf1b), the estrogen receptors (esr1 and esr2a) and aromatase (cyp19a1a)
in developing yellow perch. To gain an initial understanding into the endocrine
control of growth preceding and involved with sexual size dimorphism (SSD), where
females have been reported to grow faster and larger than males, young of the
year fish were sampled for length, weight and tissues at several time points
(102-421 days post-hatch (dph)). Positive growth was seen in both sexes over the 
sampling interval, but SSD was not manifested. Using real-time quantitative PCR, 
we found that pituitary growth hormone (gh) and liver insulin-like growth
factor-1b (igf1b) mRNA levels were significantly affected by dph and levels were 
found to be correlated with growth in both sexes. Liver cyp19a1a, esr1 and esr2a 
mRNA levels were significantly influenced by dph, whereas there was a significant
dph*sex interaction on liver esr2a mRNA levels with males having higher levels
than females at 379 and 421 dph. Ovarian cyp19a1a decreased with dph, but there
were no changes in esr1 or esr2a mRNA levels. Dietary treatment of juvenile (~300
dph) females with 20 mg/kg diet 17ß-estradiol resulted in significantly higher
liver esr1 mRNA levels and a sustained hepatosomatic index (I(H)). Across all
data sets liver esr2a mRNA levels showed the most significant positive
correlation with liver igf1b mRNA levels. These findings show that growth is
accompanied by increases in pituitary gh, liver igf1b and liver esr1 and esr2a
mRNAs in juvenile yellow perch.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21216244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Jun 11;660(1):181-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.10.114.
Epub 2011 Jan 3.

The estrogen receptor a colocalizes with proopiomelanocortin in hypothalamic
neurons and binds to a conserved motif present in the neuron-specific enhancer
nPE2.

de Souza FS(1), Nasif S, López-Leal R, Levi DH, Low MJ, Rubinsten M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones en Ingeniería Genética y Biología Molecular,
CONICET and Departamento Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Celular, FCEyN,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. fsouza@dna.uba.ar

The gene encoding the prohormone proopiomelanocortin (POMC) is mainly expressed
in two regions in vertebrates, namely corticotrophs and melanotrophs in the
pituitary and a small population of neurons in the arcuate nucleus of the
hypothalamus. In this latter region, POMC-derived peptides participate in the
control of energy balance and sensitivity to pain. Neuronal expression of POMC is
conferred by two enhancers, nPE1 and nPE2, which are conserved in most mammals,
but no transcription factors are yet known to bind to these enhancers. In this
work, by means of a one-hybrid screening, we identify that nPE2 possesses an
element recognized by transcription factors of the nuclear receptor superfamily. 
This element, named NRBE, is conserved in all known nPE2 enhancers and is
necessary to confer full enhancer strength to nPE2-driven reporter gene
expression in transgenic mice assays, indicating that the phylogenetic
conservation of the element is indicative of its functional importance. In a
search for candidate nuclear receptors that might control POMC we observed that
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) - a known regulator of energy balance at the
hypothalamic level - can bind to the NRBE element in vitro. In addition we
observed by immunofluorescence that ESR1 is coexpressed with POMC in around
25-30% of hypothalamic neurons of males and females during late embryonic stages 
and adulthood. Thus, our results indicate that hypothalamic expression of POMC is
controlled by nuclear receptors and establish ESR1 as a candidate regulator of
POMC.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3097136
PMID: 21211522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(6):R110. doi: 10.1186/bcr2797. Epub 2010 Dec 31.

Assessing interactions between the associations of common genetic susceptibility 
variants, reproductive history and body mass index with breast cancer risk in the
breast cancer association consortium: a combined case-control study.

Milne RL(1), Gaudet MM, Spurdle AB, Fasching PA, Couch FJ, Benítez J, Arias Pérez
JI, Zamora MP, Malats N, Dos Santos Silva I, Gibson LJ, Fletcher O, Johnson N,
Anton-Culver H, Ziogas A, Figueroa J, Brinton L, Sherman ME, Lissowska J, Hopper 
JL, Dite GS, Apicella C, Southey MC, Sigurdson AJ, Linet MS, Schonfeld SJ,
Freedman DM, Mannermaa A, Kosma VM, Kataja V, Auvinen P, Andrulis IL, Glendon G, 
Knight JA, Weerasooriya N, Cox A, Reed MW, Cross SS, Dunning AM, Ahmed S, Shah M,
Brauch H, Ko YD, Brüning T; GENICA Network, Lambrechts D, Reumers J, Smeets A,
Wang-Gohrke S, Hall P, Czene K, Liu J, Irwanto AK, Chenevix-Trench G, Holland H; 
kConFab; AOCS, Giles GG, Baglietto L, Severi G, Bojensen SE, Nordestgaard BG,
Flyger H, John EM, West DW, Whittemore AS, Vachon C, Olson JE, Fredericksen Z,
Kosel M, Hein R, Vrieling A, Flesch-Janys D, Heinz J, Beckmann MW, Heusinger K,
Ekici AB, Haeberle L, Humphreys MK, Morrison J, Easton DF, Pharoah PD,
García-Closas M, Goode EL, Chang-Claude J.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic and Molecular Epidemiology Group, Human Cancer Genetics Programme,
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, 28029, Spain.
rmilne@cnio.es

INTRODUCTION: Several common breast cancer genetic susceptibility variants have
recently been identified. We aimed to determine how these variants combine with a
subset of other known risk factors to influence breast cancer risk in white women
of European ancestry using case-control studies participating in the Breast
Cancer Association Consortium.
METHODS: We evaluated two-way interactions between each of age at menarche, ever 
having had a live birth, number of live births, age at first birth and body mass 
index (BMI) and each of 12 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
(10q26-rs2981582 (FGFR2), 8q24-rs13281615, 11p15-rs3817198 (LSP1), 5q11-rs889312 
(MAP3K1), 16q12-rs3803662 (TOX3), 2q35-rs13387042, 5p12-rs10941679 (MRPS30),
17q23-rs6504950 (COX11), 3p24-rs4973768 (SLC4A7), CASP8-rs17468277,
TGFB1-rs1982073 and ESR1-rs3020314). Interactions were tested for by fitting
logistic regression models including per-allele and linear trend main effects for
SNPs and risk factors, respectively, and single-parameter interaction terms for
linear departure from independent multiplicative effects.
RESULTS: These analyses were applied to data for up to 26,349 invasive breast
cancer cases and up to 32,208 controls from 21 case-control studies. No
statistical evidence of interaction was observed beyond that expected by chance. 
Analyses were repeated using data from 11 population-based studies, and results
were very similar.
CONCLUSIONS: The relative risks for breast cancer associated with the common
susceptibility variants identified to date do not appear to vary across women
with different reproductive histories or body mass index (BMI). The assumption of
multiplicative combined effects for these established genetic and other risk
factors in risk prediction models appears justified.

PMCID: PMC3046455
PMID: 21194473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Clin Epigenetics. 2011 Dec 5;3:8. doi: 10.1186/1868-7083-3-8.

Ribavirin restores ESR1 gene expression and tamoxifen sensitivity in ESR1
negative breast cancer cell lines.

Sappok A(1), Mahlknecht U.

Author information: 
(1)Saarland University Medical Center, Department of Internal Medicine, Division 
of Immunotherapy and Gene Therapy, Homburg/Saar, Germany.
ulrich.mahlknecht@uks.eu.

Tumor growth is estrogen independent in approximately one-third of all breast
cancers, which makes these patients unresponsive to hormonal treatment. This
unresponsiveness to hormonal treatment may be explained through the absence of
the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1). The ESR1 gene re-expression through
epigenetic modulators such as DNA methyltransferase inhibitors and/or histone
deacetylase inhibitors restores tamoxifen sensitivity in ESR1 negative breast
cancer cell lines and opens new treatment horizons in patients who were
previously associated with a poor prognosis.In the study presented herein, we
tested the ability of ribavirin, which shares some structural similarities with
the DNA-methyltransferase inhibitor 5-azacytidine and which is widely known as an
anti-viral agent in the treatment of hepatitis C, to restore ESR1 gene
re-expression in ESR1 negative breast cancer cell lines.In our study we
identified ribavirin to restore ESR1 gene re-expression alone and even more in
combination with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA - up to 276 fold
induction).Ribavirin and analogs could pave the way to novel translational
research projects that aim to restore ESR1 gene re-expression and thus the
susceptibility to tamoxifen-based endocrine treatment strategies.

PMCID: PMC3305339
PMID: 22414275  [PubMed]


479. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Feb 20;333(2):151-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.12.027.
Epub 2010 Dec 25.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation in lactotropes and gonadotropes interferes
with estradiol-dependent and -independent preprolactin, glycoprotein alpha and
luteinizing hormone beta gene expression.

Cao J(1), Patisaul HB, Petersen SL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Graduate Program, 435 Morrill I North,
University of Massachusetts Amherst, 637 North Pleasant Street, Amherst, MA
01003-9298, United States. jcao4@ncsu.edu

Arylhydrocarbon receptor (Ahr) activation by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlordibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) interferes with female reproductive functions, but there is little
information on the specific targets of TCDD in the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal
(HPG) axis. In these studies, we found that TCDD upregulated known AhR target
genes, cytochrome p450 1a1 (Cyp1a1), Cyp1a2 and Cyp1b1 in the rat pituitary
gland. Moreover, 75% of pituitary lactotropes and 45% of gonadotropes contained
Ahr mRNA, and most Ahr-containing cells were estrogen receptor 1 (Esr1)-positive.
TCDD abrogated estradiol (E(2))-induced prolactin (Prl) expression in vivo and in
vitro; conversely, E(2) blocked TCDD upregulation of luteinizing hormone beta
(Lhb) and glycoprotein hormone alpha polypeptide (Cga) expression. TCDD had no
effect on levels of Ahr mRNA, but upregulated Esr1 mRNA. E(2) independently
repressed Ahr and Esr1 expression and blocked TCDD upregulation of Esr1. Thus,
complex interactions between Ahr and Esr alter Prl and luteinizing hormone (LH)
synthesis by direct actions in lactotropes and gonadotropes. These findings
provide important insights into how TCDD disrupts female reproductive functions.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3059512
PMID: 21187122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Chem Biol Interact. 2011 May 30;191(1-3):206-16. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2010.12.013. 
Epub 2010 Dec 21.

Expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors and estrogen metabolizing
enzymes in different breast cancer cell lines.

Hevir N(1), Trot N, Debeljak N, Riner TL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

Prolonged exposure to estrogens is a significant risk factor for the development 
of breast cancer. Estrogens exert carcinogenic effects by stimulating cell
proliferation or through oxidative metabolism that forms DNA-damaging species. In
the present study, we aimed to provide a better understanding of estrogen
metabolism and actions in breast cancer, and to characterize model breast cancer 
cell lines. We determined the expression profiles of the genes for the estrogen
and progesterone receptors, and for 18 estrogen-metabolizing enzymes in eight
cell lines: MCF-7, MCF-10A, T47D, SKBR3, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-361, Hs-578T and
Hs-578Bst cells. Similar gene expression profiles of these receptors and enzymes 
for the formation of estradiol via the aromatase and sulfatase pathways were
observed in the MCF-7 and T47D metastatic cell lines. The MDA-MB-361 cells
expressed ESR1, ESR2 and PGR as well, but differed in expression of the
estrogen-metabolizing enzymes. In the MDA-MB-231 and SKBR3 cells, all of these
estrogen-forming enzymes were expressed, although the lack of ESR1 and the low
levels of ESR2 expression suggested that the estrogens can only act via non-ER
mediated pathways. In the non-tumorigenic MCF-10A cell line, the key enzymes of
the aromatase pathway were not expressed, and the sulfatase pathway also had a
marginal role. The comparison between gene expression profiles of the
non-tumorigenic Hs-578Bst cells and the cancerous Hs-578T cells revealed that
they can both form estrogens via the sulfatase pathway, while the aromatase
pathway is less important in the Hs-578Bst cells. The Hs-578T cells showed low
levels of ESR1, ESR2 and PGR expression, while only ESR1 and ESR2 expression was 
detected in the Hs-578Bst cells. Our data show that the cell lines examined
provide the full range of model systems and should further be compared with the
expression profiles of breast cancer specimens.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21182832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;96(2):E360-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-0912. Epub
2010 Dec 22.

Comprehensive analysis of hormone and genetic variation in 36 genes related to
steroid hormone metabolism in pre- and postmenopausal women from the breast and
prostate cancer cohort consortium (BPC3).

Beckmann L(1), Hüsing A, Setiawan VW, Amiano P, Clavel-Chapelon F, Chanock SJ,
Cox DG, Diver R, Dossus L, Feigelson HS, Haiman C, Hallmans G, Hayes RB,
Henderson BE, Hoover RN, Hunter DJ, Khaw K, Kolonel LN, Kraft P, Lund E, Le
Marchand L, Peeters PH, Riboli E, Stram D, Thomas G, Thun MJ, Tumino R,
Trichopoulos D, Vogel U, Willett WC, Yeager M, Ziegler R, Hankinson SE, Kaaks R; 
BPC3.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center, Im Neuenheimer
Feld 581, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

CONTEXT: Sex steroids play a central role in breast cancer development.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to relate polymorphic variants in 36 candidate genes 
in the sex steroid pathway to serum concentrations of sex steroid hormones and
SHBG.
DESIGN: Data on 700 genetic polymorphisms were combined with existing hormone
assays and data on breast cancer incidence, within the European Prospective
Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) and the Nurses' Health Study (NHS)
cohorts; significant findings were reanalyzed in the Multiethnic Cohort (MEC).
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: We analyzed data from a pooled sample of 3852 pre- and 
postmenopausal Caucasian women from EPIC and NHS and 454 postmenopausal women
from MEC.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Outcome measures were SHBG, testosterone,
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEAS), androstenedione, estrone (E1), and estradiol (E2)
as well as breast cancer risk.
RESULTS: Globally significant associations were found among pre- and
postmenopausal women combined between levels of SHBG and the SHBG gene and
between DHEAS and the FSHR and AKR1C3 genes. Among postmenopausal women, serum E1
and E2 were significantly associated with the genes CYP19 and FSHR, and E1 was
associated with ESR1. None of the variants related to serum hormone levels showed
any significant association with breast cancer risk.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed associations between serum levels of SHBG and the SHBG 
gene and of E1 and E2 and the CYP19 and ESR1 genes. Novel associations were
observed between FSHR and DHEAS, E1, and E2 and between AKR1C3 and DHEAS.

PMCID: PMC3048330
PMID: 21177793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Pharmacogenomics. 2011 Jan;12(1):41-7. doi: 10.2217/pgs.10.164.

The effect of ESR1 and ESR2 gene polymorphisms on the outcome of rheumatoid
arthritis treatment with leflunomide.

Dziedziejko V(1), Kurzawski M, Safranow K, Chlubek D, Pawlik A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Medical Chemistry, Pomeranian Medical University,
Szczecin, Poland.

AIM: Leflunomide is the drug used in the therapy for rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
Previous studies indicated that the efficacy of the therapy with antirheumatic
drugs is more effective in men than in women. Moreover, estrogens can decrease
the anti-inflammatory action of leflunomide. Estrogens act through the estrogen
receptors ESR1 and ESR2. In ESR1 and ESR2 genes, several polymorphisms have been 
detected. The aim of the present study was to examine the association between
polymorphisms in the ESR1 and ESR2 genes and the response to treatment of RA
patients with leflunomide.
MATERIALS & METHODS: The study was carried out on 115 women, mean age 54.1 ± 11.0
years, diagnosed with RA and treated with leflunomide (20 mg daily).
RESULTS: Our results indicated a better response to treatment in patients with
ESR1 rs9340799 AA and rs2234693 TT genotypes after 12 months of therapy. In these
patients, the improvement of erythrocyte sedimentation rate, patient's global
assessment of disease activity on a 100 mm visual analog scale and disease
activity score values was greater than in patients with other genotypes. The ESR1
rs9340799-rs2234693 A-T haplotype was associated with a better response to
treatment, the G-C haplotype with a worse response and the A-C haplotype was
neutral. There were no statistically significant associations of response to
treatment with ESR2 gene rs4986938 and rs1256049 polymorphisms.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study suggest that ESR1 gene polymorphisms
in females with RA may be associated with the response to treatment with
leflunomide.

PMID: 21174621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. BMC Med Genomics. 2010 Dec 20;3:60. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-3-60.

Expression profiling of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded primary breast tumors
using cancer-specific and whole genome gene panels on the DASL® platform.

Reinholz MM(1), Eckel-Passow JE, Anderson SK, Asmann YW, Zschunke MA, Oberg AL,
McCullough AE, Dueck AC, Chen B, April CS, Wickham-Garcia E, Jenkins RB,
Cunningham JM, Jen J, Perez EA, Fan JB, Lingle WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St SW,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. reinholz.monica@mayo.edu

BACKGROUND: The cDNA-mediated Annealing, extension, Selection and Ligation (DASL)
assay has become a suitable gene expression profiling system for degraded RNA
from paraffin-embedded tissue. We examined assay characteristics and the
performance of the DASL 502-gene Cancer Panel v1 (1.5K) and 24,526-gene panel
(24K) platforms at differentiating nine human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-
positive (HER2+) and 11 HER2-negative (HER2-) paraffin-embedded breast tumors.
METHODS: Bland-Altman plots and Spearman correlations evaluated intra/inter-panel
agreement of normalized expression values. Unequal-variance t-statistics tested
for differences in expression levels between HER2 + and HER2 - tumors. Regulatory
network analysis was performed using Metacore (GeneGo Inc., St. Joseph, MI).
RESULTS: Technical replicate correlations ranged between 0.815-0.956 and
0.986-0.997 for the 1.5K and 24K panels, respectively. Inter-panel correlations
of expression values for the common 498 genes across the two panels ranged
between 0.485-0.573. Inter-panel correlations of expression values of 17 probes
with base-pair sequence matches between the 1.5K and 24K panels ranged between
0.652-0.899. In both panels, erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2
(ERBB2) was the most differentially expressed gene between the HER2 + and HER2 - 
tumors and seven additional genes had p-values < 0.05 and log2 -fold changes >
|0.5| in expression between HER2 + and HER2 - tumors: topoisomerase II alpha
(TOP2A), cyclin a2 (CCNA2), v-fos fbj murine osteosarcoma viral oncogene homolog 
(FOS), wingless-type mmtv integration site family, member 5a (WNT5A), growth
factor receptor-bound protein 7 (GRB7), cell division cycle 2 (CDC2), and
baculoviral iap repeat-containing protein 5 (BIRC5). The top 52 discriminating
probes from the 24K panel are enriched with genes belonging to the regulatory
networks centered around v-myc avian myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog
(MYC), tumor protein p53 (TP53), and estrogen receptor a (ESR1). Network analysis
with a two-step extension also showed that the eight discriminating genes common 
to the 1.5K and 24K panels are functionally linked together through MYC, TP53,
and ESR1.
CONCLUSIONS: The relative RNA abundance obtained from two highly differing
density gene panels are correlated with eight common genes differentiating HER2 +
and HER2 - breast tumors. Network analyses demonstrated biological consistency
between the 1.5K and 24K gene panels.

PMCID: PMC3022545
PMID: 21172013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Plant Mol Biol. 2011 Feb;75(3):223-36. doi: 10.1007/s11103-010-9721-5. Epub 2010 
Dec 15.

Genetic integration of DORNRÖSCHEN and DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE reveals hierarchical
interactions in auxin signalling and patterning of the Arabidopsis apical embryo.

Chandler JW(1), Cole M, Jacobs B, Comelli P, Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, Cologne Biocenter, University of Cologne, 
Zuelpicher Strasse 47b, 50674 Cologne, Germany.

DORNRÖSCHEN (DRN) and DORNRÖSCHEN-LIKE (DRNL) encode AP2-domain transcription
factors, which act redundantly in cotyledon organogenesis. A more detailed
genetic study now integrates DRN and DRNL into the CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON (CUC)
regulatory network and places DRN and DRNL differentially within the auxin
signalling network: DRNL function overlaps with that of PIN-FORMED1, and DRN with
PINOID. DRN and DRNL act cell-autonomously and are co-expressed in the early
globular embryo, whereas expression patterns diverge during later stages of
embryogeny. Both genes synergize to provide essential patterning information in
the apical embryo domain, to establish correct CUC, SHOOTMERISTEMLESS and WUSCHEL
expression domains, which relates to the patterning of SAM anlagen to a central
apical position to create two planes of bilateral symmetry in wild type
Arabidopsis thaliana embryos.

PMID: 21161330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Gene Regul Syst Bio. 2010 Nov 22;4:109-24. doi: 10.4137/GRSB.S6007.

Alpha-Tocopherol Modulates Transcriptional Activities that Affect Essential
Biological Processes in Bovine Cells.

Li CJ(1), Li RW, Elsasser TH.

Author information: 
(1)Bovine Functional Genomics Laboratory, Animal and Natural Resources Institute,
ARS, USDA, 10300 Baltimore Ave, Beltsville, MD, 20705, USA.

Using global expression profiling and pathway analysis on a-tocopherol-induced
gene perturbation in bovine cells, this study has generated comprehensive
information on the physiological functions of a-tocopherol. The data confirmed
a-tocopherol is a potent regulator of gene expression and a-tocopherol possesses 
novel transcriptional activities that affect essential biological processes. The 
genes identified fall within a broad range of functional categories and provide
the molecular basis for its distinctive effects. Enrichment analyses of gene
regulatory networks indicate a-tocopherol alter the canonical pathway of lipid
metabolism and transcription factors SREBP1 and SREBP2, (Sterol regulatory
element binding proteins), which mediate the regulatory functions of lipid
metabolism. Transcription factors HNF4-a (Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4), c-Myc,
SP1 (Sp1 transcription factor), ESR1 (estrogen receptor 1, nuclear), and androgen
receptor, along with several others, were centered as the hubs of transcription
regulation networks. The data also provided direct evidence that a-tocopherol is 
involved in maintaining immuno-homeostasis through targeting the C3 (Complement
Component 3) gene.

PMCID: PMC3001320
PMID: 21157515  [PubMed]


486. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 1;5(12):e15031. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015031.

Minimising immunohistochemical false negative ER classification using a
complementary 23 gene expression signature of ER status.

Li Q(1), Eklund AC, Juul N, Haibe-Kains B, Workman CT, Richardson AL, Szallasi Z,
Swanton C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Technical University of Denmark,
Lyngby, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Expression of the oestrogen receptor (ER) in breast cancer predicts
benefit from endocrine therapy. Minimising the frequency of false negative ER
status classification is essential to identify all patients with ER positive
breast cancers who should be offered endocrine therapies in order to improve
clinical outcome. In routine oncological practice ER status is determined by
semi-quantitative methods such as immunohistochemistry (IHC) or other
immunoassays in which the ER expression level is compared to an empirical
threshold. The clinical relevance of gene expression-based ER subtypes as
compared to IHC-based determination has not been systematically evaluated. Here
we attempt to reduce the frequency of false negative ER status classification
using two gene expression approaches and compare these methods to IHC based ER
status in terms of predictive and prognostic concordance with clinical outcome.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Firstly, ER status was discriminated by fitting
the bimodal expression of ESR1 to a mixed Gaussian model. The discriminative
power of ESR1 suggested bimodal expression as an efficient way to stratify breast
cancer; therefore we identified a set of genes whose expression was both strongly
bimodal, mimicking ESR expression status, and highly expressed in breast
epithelial cell lines, to derive a 23-gene ER expression signature-based
classifier. We assessed our classifiers in seven published breast cancer cohorts 
by comparing the gene expression-based ER status to IHC-based ER status as a
predictor of clinical outcome in both untreated and tamoxifen treated cohorts. In
untreated breast cancer cohorts, the 23 gene signature-based ER status provided
significantly improved prognostic power compared to IHC-based ER status
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.006). In tamoxifen-treated cohorts, the 23 gene ER expression signature
predicted clinical outcome (HR<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.20, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00035). These complementary ER
signature-based strategies estimated that between 15.1% and 21.8% patients of
IHC-based negative ER status would be classified with ER positive breast cancer.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Expression-based ER status classification may complement
IHC to minimise false negative ER status classification and optimise patient
stratification for endocrine therapies.

PMCID: PMC2995741
PMID: 21152022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. BMC Cell Biol. 2010 Dec 10;11:98. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-11-98.

Ligands specify estrogen receptor alpha nuclear localization and degradation.

Kocanova S(1), Mazaheri M, Caze-Subra S, Bystricky K.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse; UPS; Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote;
F-31062 Toulouse, France.

BACKGROUND: The estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) is found predominately in the
nucleus, both in hormone stimulated and untreated cells. Intracellular
distribution of the ERa changes in the presence of agonists but the impact of
different antiestrogens on the fate of ERa is a matter of debate.
RESULTS: A MCF-7 cell line stably expressing GFP-tagged human ERa (SK19 cell
line) was created to examine the localization of ligand-bound GFP-ERa. We
combined digitonin-based cell fractionation analyses with fluorescence and
immuno-electron microscopy to determine the intracellular distribution of
ligand-bound ERa and/or GFP-ERa.Using fluorescence- and electron microscopy we
demonstrate that both endogenous ERa and GFP-ERa form numerous nuclear focal
accumulations upon addition of agonist, 17ß-estradiol (E2), and pure antagonists 
(selective estrogen regulator disruptor; SERD), ICI 182,780 or RU58,668, while in
the presence of partial antagonists (selective estrogen regulator modulator;
SERM), 4-hydroxytamoxifen (OHT) or RU39,411, diffuse nuclear staining
persisted.Digitonin based cell fractionation analyses confirmed that endogenous
ERa and GFP-ERa predominantly reside in the nuclear fraction. Overall ERa protein
levels were reduced after estradiol treatment. In the presence of SERMs ERa was
stabilized in the nuclear soluble fraction, while in the presence of SERDs
protein levels decreased drastically and the remaining ERa was largely found in a
nuclear insoluble fraction. mRNA levels of ESR1 were reduced compared to
untreated cells in the presence of all ligands tested, including E2. E2 and SERDs
induced ERa degradation occurred in distinct nuclear foci composed of ERa and the
proteasome providing a simple explanation for ERa sequestration in the nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that chemical structure of ligands directly
affect the nuclear fate and protein turnover of the estrogen receptor alpha
independently of their impact on transcription. These findings provide a
molecular basis for the selection of antiestrogen compounds issue from
pharmacological studies aimed at improving treatment of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3009626
PMID: 21143970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Carcinog. 2010 Nov 12;9:9. doi: 10.4103/1477-3163.72505.

Prognostic implications of carboxyl-terminus of Hsc70 interacting protein and
lysyl-oxidase expression in human breast cancer.

Patani N(1), Jiang W, Newbold R, Mokbel K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The London Breast Institute, The Princess Grace 
Hospital, London.

BACKGROUND: Ubiquitin modification of proteins influences cellular processes
relevant to carcinogenesis. CHIP (carboxyl-terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein)
is a chaperone-dependent E3 ubiquitin ligase, regulating the stability of heat
shock protein 90 (HSP90) interacting proteins. CHIP is implicated in the
modulation of estrogen receptor (ESR1) and Her-2/neu (ERBB2) stability. LOX
(lysyl-oxidase) serves intracellular roles and catalyses the cross-linking of
extracellular matrix (ECM) collagens and elastin. LOX expression is altered in
human malignancies and their peri-tumoral stroma. However, paradoxical roles are 
reported. In this study, the level of mRNA expression of CHIP and LOX were
assessed in normal and malignant breast tissue and correlated with
clinico-pathological parameters.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Breast cancer (BC) tissues (n = 127) and normal tissues (n
= 33) underwent RNA extraction and reverse transcription; transcript levels were 
determined using real-time quantitative PCR and normalized against CK-19.
Transcript levels were analyzed against TNM stage, nodal involvement, tumor grade
and clinical outcome over a ten-year follow-up period.
RESULTS: CHIP EXPRESSION DECREASED WITH INCREASING NOTTINGHAM PROGNOSTIC INDEX
(NPI): NPI-1 vs. NPI-3 (12.2 vs. 0.2, P = 0.0264), NPI-2 vs. NPI-3 (3 vs. 0.2, P 
= 0.0275). CHIP expression decreased with increasing TNM stage: TNM-1 vs. TNM-2
(12 vs. 0, P = 0.0639), TNM-1 vs. TNM-2-4 (12 vs. 0, P = 0.0434). Lower
transcript levels were associated with increasing tumor grade: grade 1 vs. grade 
3 (17.7 vs. 0.3, P = 0.0266), grade 2 vs. grade 3 (5 vs. 0.3, P = 0.0454). The
overall survival (OS) for tumors classified as 'low-level expression', was poorer
than those with 'high-level expression' (118.1 vs. 152.3 months, P = 0.039). LOX 
expression decreased with increasing NPI: NPI-1 vs. NPI-2 (3 vs. 0, P = 0.0301)
and TNM stage: TNM-1 = 3854639, TNM-2 = 908900, TNM-3 = 329, TNM-4 = 1.232 (P =
NS).
CONCLUSION: CHIP expression is associated with favorable prognostic parameters,
including tumor grade, TNM stage and NPI. CHIP expression predicts OS. LOX
expression is associated with improved NPI. In addition to their prognostic
utility, mechanistic insights into tumor suppressor function may offer potential 
therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC2997236
PMID: 21139993  [PubMed]


489. Reproduction. 2011 Feb;141(2):269-81. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0177. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Influence of energy balance on the somatotrophic axis and matrix
metalloproteinase expression in the endometrium of the postpartum dairy cow.

Wathes DC(1), Cheng Z, Fenwick MA, Fitzpatrick R, Patton J.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction Group, Department of Veterinary Basic Sciences, Royal Veterinary 
College, London, UK. dcwathes@rvc.ac.uk

Postpartum dairy cows enter a period of negative energy balance (NEB) associated 
with low circulating IGF1, during which the uterus must undergo extensive repair 
following calving. This study investigated the effects of NEB on expression of
IGF family members and related genes in the involuting uterus. Cows were
allocated to two treatments using differential feeding and milking regimes to
produce mild NEB or severe NEB (SNEB). Uterine endometrial samples collected 2
weeks post partum were analysed by quantitative PCR. The expression of
IGF-binding protein 4 (IGFBP4) mRNA increased in the endometrium of SNEB cows,
with trends towards increased IGFBP1 and reduced IGFBP6 expression. There were no
significant differences between treatments in mRNA expression of IGF1, IGF2 or of
any hormone receptor studied, but significant correlations across all cows in the
expression levels of groups of receptors suggested common regulatory mechanisms: 
type 1 IGF receptor (IGF1R), IGF2R and insulin receptor (INSR); GHR with ESR1;
and ESR2 with NR3C1. The expression of IGF1R and INSR also positively correlated 
with the circulating urea concentration. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are
important in tissue remodelling and can affect IGF signalling via interaction
with IGFBPs. The expression levels of MMP1, MMP3, MMP9 and MMP13 mRNAs all showed
major upregulation in the endometrium of cows in SNEB and all except MMP9 were
highly correlated with expression of IGFBP4. Alpha(2)-HS-glycoprotein (AHSG) and 
PDK4, two genes implicated in insulin resistance, were also highly expressed in
SNEB. These results suggest that cows in SNEB experience alterations to the IGF
and insulin signalling pathways in the postpartum endometrium. This may affect
the rate of tissue repair with a possible negative impact on subsequent
fertility.

PMCID: PMC3021913
PMID: 21123519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(6):R103. doi: 10.1186/bcr2786. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

Clinical significance of the nuclear receptor co-regulator DC-SCRIPT in breast
cancer: an independent retrospective validation study.

Sieuwerts AM(1), Ansems M, Look MP, Span PN, de Weerd V, van Galen A, Foekens JA,
Adema GJ, Martens JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Josephine Nefkens Institute and Cancer
Genomics Centre, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, GE, The Netherlands.
a.sieuwerts@erasmusmc.nl

INTRODUCTION: In this study we aimed to validate the prognostic value of
DC-SCRIPT mRNA expression in a large independent breast cancer cohort. In
addition, since DC-SCRIPT is a transcriptional co-regulator of nuclear receptors,
we explored its prognostic value in relation to estrogen-receptor-a (ESR1) and -ß
(ESR2) and evaluated its predictive value for response to tamoxifen treatment.
METHODS: DC-SCRIPT mRNA levels were measured by real-time PCR in 1,505 primary
invasive breast cancers and associated with outcome (disease-free survival (DFS),
metastasis-free survival (MFS) and overall survival (OS)) using univariate and
multivariable Cox regression analysis. Logistic and Cox regressions were used to 
associate DC-SCRIPT levels with clinical benefit and progression-free survival
(PFS) for 296 patients treated with first-line systemic tamoxifen for advanced
disease.
RESULTS: In univariate and multivariable analysis higher DC-SCRIPT levels were
associated with a favorable outcome for both the entire cohort and patients with 
lymph node-negative (LNN) disease that did not receive adjuvant therapy (DFS, MFS
and OS; all, P < 0.001). This association was most pronounced in small (pT1)
tumors, in ESR1-positive tumors and in tumors with low ESR2 expression. For
first-line endocrine therapy for advanced disease no predictive association was
seen with clinical benefit or PFS.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a higher level of evidence that DC-SCRIPT is
indeed an independent, pure prognostic, factor for primary breast cancer and
shows that DC-SCRIPT mRNA expression is most informative for either ESR1-positive
and/or ESR2-low pT1 tumors.

PMCID: PMC3046448
PMID: 21122099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Int J Cancer. 2011 Oct 1;129(7):1689-98. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25786. Epub 2011 Mar
11.

A candidate CpG SNP approach identifies a breast cancer associated ESR1-SNP.

Harlid S(1), Ivarsson MI, Butt S, Hussain S, Grzybowska E, Eyfjörd JE, Lenner P, 
Försti A, Hemminki K, Manjer J, Dillner J, Carlson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

Altered DNA methylation is often seen in malignant cells, potentially
contributing to carcinogenesis by suppressing gene expression. We hypothesized
that heritable methylation potential might be a risk factor for breast cancer and
evaluated possible association with breast cancer for single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) either involving CpG sequences in extended 5'-regulatory
regions of candidate genes (ESR1, ESR2, PGR, and SHBG) or CpG and missense coding
SNPs in genes involved in methylation (MBD1, MECP2, DNMT1, MGMT, MTHFR, MTR,
MTRR, MTHFD1, MTHFD2, BHMT, DCTD, and SLC19A1). Genome-wide searches for genetic 
risk factors for breast cancers have in general not investigated these SNPs,
because of low minor allele frequency or weak haplotype associations. Genotyping 
was performed using Mass spectrometry-Maldi-Tof in a screening panel of 538 cases
and 1,067 controls. Potential association to breast cancer was identified for 15 
SNPs and one of these SNPs (rs7766585 in ESR1) was found to associate strongly
with breast cancer, OR 1.30 (95% CI 1.17-1.45; p-value 2.1 × 10(-6)), when tested
in a verification panel consisting of 3,211 unique breast cancer cases and 4,223 
unique controls from five European biobank cohorts. In conclusion, a candidate
gene search strategy focusing on methylation-related SNPs did identify a SNP that
associated with breast cancer at high significance.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 21105050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Ann Nutr Metab. 2010;57(3-4):183-9. doi: 10.1159/000321514. Epub 2010 Nov 18.

Epigenetic control of estrogen receptor expression and tumor suppressor genes is 
modulated by bioactive food compounds.

Berner C(1), Aumüller E, Gnauck A, Nestelberger M, Just A, Haslberger AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: The tumor suppressor genes p15(INK)4(b) and p16(INK)4(a) as well as
the estrogen receptor-a (ESR1) gene are abnormally methylated and expressed in
colon cancer. The cancer-preventative abilities of several bioactive food
components have been linked to their estrogenic and epigenetic activities.
METHODS: The effect of folic acid, zebularine, resveratrol, genistein and
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) on tumor cell growth, promoter methylation of
ESR1, p15(INK)4(b) and p16(INK)4(a) and gene expression of ESR1 and ESR2 was
analyzed in Caco-2 cells. Gene expression was measured using real-time PCR, and
promoter CpG methylation was assessed using bisulfite conversion and
methylation-specific PCR.
RESULTS: After exposure to a high concentration of folic acid (20 µmol/l),
enhanced cancer cell growth and concomitant increased methylation of the ESR1
(3.6-fold), p16(INK)4(a) and p15(INK)4(b) promoters was observed. A lower
concentration of folic acid (2 µmol/l) decreased cell growth. The phytoestrogens 
genistein and resveratrol enhanced expression of ESR1 (genistein 200 µmol/l:
2.1-fold; resveratrol 50 µmol/l: 6.3-fold) and ESR2 (2.6- and 3.6-fold,
respectively). Genistein and resveratrol treatment increased promoter methylation
of ESR1 (genistein 200 µmol/l: 2.9-fold; resveratrol 50 µmol/l: 1.4-fold). For
p16(INK)4(a), increased methylation was found after exposure to 10 µmol/l
resveratrol, but for p15(INK)4(b), decreased methylation was found. Both
components showed growth-inhibitory activities. For EGCG, growth inhibition at
100 µmol/l and suppressed promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes
(p16(INK)4(a): 0.9-fold; p15(INK)4(b): 0.6-fold) was seen.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that these food compounds regulate ESR and tumor
suppressor gene expression by multiple mechanisms including epigenetic processes.
An improved understanding of these epigenetic effects could therefore support
specific dietary concepts of epigenetic cancer prevention and intervention.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21088384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 22;5(10):e13533. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013533.

Tamoxifen-independent recombination in the RIP-CreER mouse.

Liu Y(1), Suckale J, Masjkur J, Magro MG, Steffen A, Anastassiadis K, Solimena M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diabetology, Paul Langerhans Institute Dresden, School of Medicine
and University Clinic Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden University of Technology,
Dresden, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The inducible Cre-lox system is a valuable tool to study gene
function in a spatial and time restricted fashion in mouse models. This strategy 
relies on the limited background activity of the modified Cre recombinase (CreER)
in the absence of its inducer, the competitive estrogen receptor ligand,
tamoxifen. The RIP-CreER mouse (Tg (Ins2-cre/Esr1) 1Dam) is among the few
available ß-cell specific CreER mouse lines and thus it has been often used to
manipulate gene expression in the insulin-producing cells of the endocrine
pancreas.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we report the detection of tamoxifen-independent Cre
activity as early as 2 months of age in RIP-CreER mice crossed with three
distinct reporter strains.
SIGNIFICANCE: Evidence of Cre-mediated recombination of floxed alleles even in
the absence of tamoxifen administration should warrant cautious use of this mouse
for the study of pancreatic ß-cells.

PMCID: PMC2965077
PMID: 21063464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 15;17(2):236-46. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1369.
Epub 2010 Nov 8.

Gene expression profiles of estrogen receptor-positive and estrogen
receptor-negative breast cancers are detectable in histologically normal breast
epithelium.

Graham K(1), Ge X, de Las Morenas A, Tripathi A, Rosenberg CL.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Genomics Program and Department of Pathology, Boston University
School of Medicine and Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE: Previously, we found that gene expression in histologically normal
breast epithelium (NlEpi) from women at high breast cancer risk can resemble gene
expression in NlEpi from cancer-containing breasts. Therefore, we hypothesized
that gene expression characteristic of a cancer subtype might be seen in NlEpi of
breasts containing that subtype.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined gene expression in 46 cases of microdissected
NlEpi from untreated women undergoing breast cancer surgery. From 30 age-matched 
cases [15 estrogen receptor (ER)+, 15 ER-] we used Affymetryix U133A arrays. From
16 independent cases (9 ER+, 7 ER-), we validated selected genes using
quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). We then compared gene expression between NlEpi
and invasive breast cancer using four publicly available data sets.
RESULTS: We identified 198 genes that are differentially expressed between NlEpi 
from breasts with ER+ (NlEpiER+) compared with ER- cancers (NlEpiER-). These
include genes characteristic of ER+ and ER- cancers (e.g., ESR1, GATA3, and
CX3CL1, FABP7). qPCR validated the microarray results in both the 30 original
cases and the 16 independent cases. Gene expression in NlEpiER+ and NlEpiER-
resembled gene expression in ER+ and ER- cancers, respectively: 25% to 53% of the
genes or probes examined in four external data sets overlapped between NlEpi and 
the corresponding cancer subtype.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression differs in NlEpi of breasts containing ER+ compared 
with ER- breast cancers. These differences echo differences in ER+ and ER-
invasive cancers. NlEpi gene expression may help elucidate subtype-specific risk 
signatures, identify early genomic events in cancer development, and locate
targets for prevention and therapy.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3059257
PMID: 21059815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Endocrinology. 2010 Dec;151(12):5795-806. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0581. Epub 2010
Nov 3.

Semicomprehensive analysis of the postnatal age-related changes in the mRNA
expression of sex steroidogenic enzymes and sex steroid receptors in the male rat
hippocampus.

Kimoto T(1), Ishii H, Higo S, Hojo Y, Kawato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.

Although sex steroids play a crucial role in the postnatal brain development, the
age-related changes in the hippocampal steroidogenesis remain largely unknown. We
performed comprehensive investigations for the mRNA expressions of 26 sex
steroidogenic enzymes/proteins and three sex steroid receptors in the male rat
hippocampus, at the ages of postnatal day (PD) 1, PD4, PD7, PD10, PD14, 4 wk, and
12 wk (adult), by RT-PCR/Southern blotting analysis. The relative expression
levels of these enzymes/receptors at PD1 were Srd5a1 > Star > Ar ~ Hsd17b4 ~
Hsd17b1 ~ Hsd17b7 ~ Esr1 ~ Srd5a2 > Hsd17b3 > Esr2 > Cyp11a1 > Cyp17a1 > Cyp19a1 
~ Hsd17b2 > 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase I. The mRNA levels of essential
enzymes for progesterone/testosterone/estradiol metabolisms (Cyp17a1, Hsd17b7,
and Cyp19a1) were approximately constant between PD1 and PD14 and then declined
toward the adult levels. Cyp11a1 increased during PD4-PD14 and then considerably 
decreased toward the adult level (~8% of PD1). Hsd17b1, Hsd17b2, and
3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase I mRNA decreased approximately monotonously.
Hsd17b3 increased to approximately 200% of PD1 during PD4-PD14 and was maintained
at this high level. The 5a-reductase mRNA was maintained constant (Srd5a1) or
decreased monotonically (Srd5a2) toward the adult level. The Esr1 level peaked at
PD4 and decreased toward the adult level, whereas Ar greatly increased during
PD1-PD14 and was maintained at this high level. The Star and Hsd17b4 levels were 
maintained constant from neonate to adult. These results suggest that the
hippocampal sex steroidogenic properties are substantially altered during the
postnatal development processes, which might contribute to brain sexual
maturation.

PMID: 21047951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 2010;33(3):165-73. doi: 10.3233/ACP-CLO-2010-0546.

Molecular differences between ductal carcinoma in situ and adjacent invasive
breast carcinoma: a multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification study.

Moelans CB(1), de Weger RA, Monsuur HN, Maes AH, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. cmoelans@umcutrecht.nl

Republished in
    Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Oct;34(5):475-82.

Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) accounts for approximately 20% of
mammographically detected breast cancers. Although DCIS is generally highly
curable, some women with DCIS will develop life-threatening invasive breast
cancer, but the determinants of progression to infiltrating ductal cancer (IDC)
are largely unknown. In the current study, we used multiplex ligation-dependent
probe amplification (MLPA), a multiplex PCR-based test, to compare copy numbers
of 21 breast cancer related genes between laser-microdissected DCIS and adjacent 
IDC lesions in 39 patients. Genes included in this study were ESR1, EGFR, FGFR1, 
ADAM9, IKBKB, PRDM14, MTDH, MYC, CCND1, EMSY, CDH1, TRAF4, CPD, MED1, HER2, CDC6,
TOP2A, MAPT, BIRC5, CCNE1 and AURKA.There were no significant differences in copy
number for the 21 genes between DCIS and adjacent IDC. Low/intermediate-grade
DCIS showed on average 6 gains/amplifications versus 8 in high-grade DCIS
(p=0.158). Furthermore, alterations of AURKA and CCNE1 were exclusively found in 
high-grade DCIS, and HER2, PRDM14 and EMSY amplification was more frequent in
high-grade DCIS than in low/intermediate-grade DCIS. In contrast, the average
number of alterations in low/intermediate and high-grade IDC was similar, and
although EGFR alterations were exclusively found in high-grade IDC compared to
low/intermediate-grade IDC, there were generally fewer differences between
low/intermediate-grade and high-grade IDC than between low/intermediate-grade and
high-grade DCIS.In conclusion, there were no significant differences in copy
number for 21 breast cancer related genes between DCIS and adjacent IDC,
indicating that DCIS is genetically as advanced as its invasive counterpart.
However, high-grade DCIS showed more copy number changes than
low/intermediate-grade DCIS with specifically involved genes, supporting a model 
in which different histological grades of DCIS are associated with distinct
genomic changes that progress to IDC in different routes. These high-grade DCIS
specific genes may be potential targets for treatment and/or predict progression.

PMCID: PMC4605452
PMID: 20978320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Int J Androl. 2011 Oct;34(5 Pt 1):420-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2605.2010.01100.x.
Epub 2010 Sep 21.

Gper and ESRs are expressed in rat round spermatids and mediate
oestrogen-dependent rapid pathways modulating expression of cyclin B1 and Bax.

Chimento A(1), Sirianni R, Zolea F, Bois C, Delalande C, Andò S, Maggiolini M,
Aquila S, Carreau S, Pezzi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaco-Biology, University of Calabria, Arcavacata di Rende
(CS), Italy.

Spermatogenesis is a precisely controlled and timed process, comprising mitotic
divisions of spermatogonia, meiotic divisions of spermatocytes, maturation and
differentiation of haploid spermatids giving rise to spermatozoa. It is well
known that the maintenance of spermatogenesis is controlled by gonadotrophins and
testosterone, the effects of which are modulated by a complex network of locally 
produced factors, including oestrogens. However, it remains uncertain whether
oestrogens are able to activate rapid signalling pathways directly in male germ
cells. Classically, oestrogens act by binding to oestrogen receptors (ESRs) 1 and
2. Recently, it has been demonstrated that rapid oestrogen action can also be
mediated by the G-protein-coupled oestrogen receptor 1 (Gper). The aim of the
present study was to investigate ESRs and Gper expression in primary cultures of 
adult rat round spermatids (RS) and define if oestradiol (E2) is able to
activate, through these receptors, pathways involved in the regulation of genes
controlling rat RS apoptosis and/or maturation. In this study, we demonstrated
that rat RS express ESR1, ESR2 and Gper. Short-time treatment of RS with E2, the 
selective Gper agonist G1 and the selective ESR1 and ERß agonists,
4,4',4"-(4-propyl-[1H]pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl) trisphenol (PPT) and
2,3-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)-propionitrile (DPN), respectively, determined activation
of Extra-cellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) through the involvement of
epidermal growth factor receptor transactivation. In addition, we investigated
the effects of ESRs and Gper pathway activation on factors involved in RS
maturation. Expression of cyclin B1 mRNA was downregulated by E2, G1 and PPT, but
not by DPN. A concomitant and inverse regulation of the pro-apoptotic factor Bax 
mRNA expression was observed in the same conditions, with DPN being the only one 
determining an increase in this factor expression. Collectively, these data
demonstrate that E2 activates, through ESRs and Gper, pathways involved in the
regulation of genes controlling rat RS apoptosis and differentiation such as
cyclin B1 and Bax.

© 2010 The Authors. International Journal of Andrology © 2011 European Academy of
Andrology.

PMID: 20969598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 2010;33(1):13-8. doi: 10.3233/ACP-CLO-2010-0527.

ESR1 amplification is rare in breast cancer and is associated with high grade and
high proliferation: a multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification study.

Moelans CB(1), Monsuur HN, de Pinth JH, Radersma RD, de Weger RA, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. cmoelans@umcutrecht.nl

Republished in
    Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Oct;34(5):489-94.

BACKGROUND: Expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) is predictive for
endocrine therapy response and an important prognostic factor in breast cancer.
Overexpression of ERa can be caused by estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene
amplification and was originally reported to be a frequent event associated with 
a significantly longer survival for ER-positive women treated with adjuvant
tamoxifen monotherapy, which was however questioned by subsequent studies.
METHODS: This study aimed to reanalyze the frequency of ESR1 amplification by
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and fluorescence in situ 
hybridisation (FISH), and to assess clinicopathologic correlations. MLPA was
performed in a group of 135 breast cancer patients, and gains/amplifications were
subjected to FISH.
RESULTS: True ESR1 amplification by MLPA was rare (2%) and only 6% more patients 
showed a modest gain of ESR1. All MLPA-detected ESR1 amplifications and nearly
all ESR1 gains were also FISH amplified and gained, but not all FISH
amplifications/gains were MLPA amplified/gained, leading to an overall
concordance of only 60% between both techniques. All 3 MLPA and FISH ESR1
amplified cases had high ERa expression, but there was no obvious correlation
between ESR1 gain and ER status by IHC. ESR1 gains/amplifications were not
associated with HER2 gain/amplification, but seemed to be associated with older
age. Surprisingly, ESR1 gain/amplification was not associated with low grade as
reported previously, but correlated with high grade and high proliferation.
Furthermore, ESR1 gain/amplification by MLPA was not associated with nodal status
or tumor size (pT status).
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 amplification as detected by MLPA is rare in breast cancer, and
seems to be associated with high ERa expression, high age, high grade and high
proliferation. This study confirms previous studies that showed differences in
the ESR1 amplification frequencies detected by different techniques.

PMCID: PMC4605667
PMID: 20966540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Lupus. 2011 Jan;20(1):85-9. doi: 10.1177/0961203310381514. Epub 2010 Oct 20.

Differential association of juvenile and adult systemic lupus erythematosus with 
genetic variants of oestrogen receptors alpha and beta.

Kisiel BM(1), Kosinska J, Wierzbowska M, Rutkowska-Sak L, Musiej-Nowakowska E,
Wudarski M, Olesinska M, Krajewski P, Lacki J, Rell-Bakalarska M, Jagodzinski PP,
Tlustochowicz W, Ploski R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Diseases and Rheumatology, Military Institute of the
Health Services, Warsaw, Poland.

Oestrogens acting via nuclear receptors (encoded by ESR1 or ESR2) are important
for pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). rs2234693 and rs4986938
are two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) whose C and A variants increase
transcription of ESR1 and ESR2, respectively. The T allele of rs2234693 was
associated with early onset SLE, whereas the role of rs4986938 in SLE was not
reported. Our aim was to examine the role of rs2234693 and rs4986938 in
conferring susceptibility to juvenile and adult SLE (jSLE and aSLE). Genotype
distribution of both SNPs was analysed in 84 jSLE, 112 aSLE patients and 1001
controls. Allele C of rs2234693 was associated with jSLE (OR = 1.87, p = 0.006,
p(corrected)<U+2009>= 0.02), whereas allele A of rs4986938 showed an association with
aSLE (OR = 1.46, p = 0.008, p(corrected)<U+2009>= 0.03). In jSLE, rs2234693 C had lower 
frequency in patients with central nervous system involvement (OR = 0.39, p =
0.005, p(corrected)<U+2009>= 0.04) and showed a trend for increase among males, patients
with renal involvement and those without DR2/3 (p < 0.05, p(corrected)<U+2009>> 0.05).
Whereas our results are consistent with a role of ESR1 variation in jSLE, more
studies are needed since the direction of association was the opposite of that
reported previously. The association between rs4986938 (ESR2) and aSLE is a novel
finding, consistent with our recent report associating this variant with Graves' 
disease.

PMID: 20961965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. BMC Genet. 2010 Oct 21;11:95. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-11-95.

Genetic predisposition for femoral neck stress fractures in military conscripts.

Korvala J(1), Hartikka H, Pihlajamäki H, Solovieva S, Ruohola JP, Sahi T, Barral 
S, Ott J, Ala-Kokko L, Männikkö M.

Author information: 
(1)Oulu Center for Cell-Matrix Research, Biocenter and Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Stress fractures are a significant problem among athletes and
soldiers and may result in devastating complications or even permanent handicap. 
Genetic factors may increase the risk, but no major susceptibility genes have
been identified. The purpose of this study was to search for possible genetic
factors predisposing military conscripts to femoral neck stress fractures.
RESULTS: Eight genes involved in bone metabolism or pathology (COL1A1, COL1A2,
OPG, ESR1, VDR, CTR, LRP5, IL-6) were examined in 72 military conscripts with a
femoral neck stress fracture and 120 controls. The risk of femoral neck stress
fracture was significantly higher in subjects with low weight and body mass index
(BMI). An interaction between the CTR (rs1801197) minor allele C and the VDR C-A 
haplotype was observed, and subjects lacking the C allele in CTR and/or the C-A
haplotype in VDR had a 3-fold higher risk of stress fracture than subjects
carrying both (OR = 3.22, 95% CI 1.38-7.49, p = 0.007). In addition, the LRP5
haplotype A-G-G-C alone and in combination with the VDR haplotype C-A was
associated with stress fractures through reduced body weight and BMI.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that genetic factors play a role in the
development of stress fractures in individuals subjected to heavy exercise and
mechanical loading. The present results can be applied to the design of future
studies that will further elucidate the genetics of stress fractures.

PMCID: PMC2975640
PMID: 20961463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Endocrine. 2010 Jun;37(3):415-24. doi: 10.1007/s12020-010-9322-8. Epub 2010 Mar
25.

Identification of novel transcript variants of estrogen receptor a, ß and
progesterone receptor gene in human endometrium.

Springwald A(1), Lattrich C, Skrzypczak M, Goerse R, Ortmann O, Treeck O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.

The human progesterone receptor (PR) and estrogen receptor genes (ESR1 and ESR2) 
are known to code for a multitude of transcript variants resulting from
alternative splicing. Many of them are translated into nuclear receptor proteins 
with altered structure and function. Expression of these alternative estrogen and
progesterone receptors modulates the cellular response to sexual steroid
hormones. Recent studies also suggested their significance in development of
hormone-dependent diseases like gynecological cancers. We report identification
of 12 new transcript variations of the PR, ESR1, and ESR2 gene in human
endometrium which result from differential exon-skipping. We succeeded in cloning
of four new double or triple exon-deletion transcript variants of ERa, four
single, double or triple exon-skipped mRNA isoforms of ERß, and four new
transcript variations of PR gene. Sequence analysis suggested that at least four 
of them, ERa<U+0394>5/6, ERa<U+0394>5/6/7, PR<U+0394>7, and PR<U+0394>6/7 are translated into receptor
proteins which might exert ligand-independent effects on steroid hormone
signalling. Comparison of pre- and post-menopausal endometrium revealed
differential expression of PR<U+0394>6/7, ERa<U+0394>5/6/7, ERa<U+0394>3/4/5, and ERß<U+0394>1-0N. We also
report differential expression of the exon-skipped isoforms in a panel of human
cancer cell lines derived from the breast, ovary, and endometrium. Our
identification of additional transcript variations further increases the
complexity of steroid hormone receptor gene expression and signalling.

PMID: 20960162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2011 Jan 15;170(2):346-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2010.10.009.
Epub 2010 Oct 16.

Sexual dimorphism in the brain aromatase expression and activity, and in the
central expression of other steroidogenic enzymes during the period of sex
differentiation in monosex rainbow trout populations.

Vizziano-Cantonnet D(1), Anglade I, Pellegrini E, Gueguen MM, Fostier A, Guiguen 
Y, Kah O.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Ciencias, Laboratorio de Fisiología de la Reproducción y Ecología 
de Peces, Iguá 4225, Montevideo 11400, Uruguay. vizziano@gmail.com

Using genetic monosex male and female rainbow trout populations, the potential
sex differences in the central expression of estrogen receptors (esr1, esr2a,
esr2b), brain aromatase (cyp19a1b) and some other steroidogenic enzymes was
studied over the period of sex differentiation (from 35 to 63 dpf: days
post-fertilization) using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (q-PCR). In
addition, aromatase activity was evaluated during this period. The results
indicated that brain aromatase (cyp19a1b) expression and activity showed a clear 
and significant sexually dimorphic pattern with higher levels in male brain
between 35 and 53 dpf before the time of gonad morphological differentiation. At 
that time the expression of a key enzyme involved in the conversion of
cholesterol into steroids, the cyp11a1 (p450scc), as well as the estrogen
receptors were also sexually dimorphic. The dimorphism was lost from 56 dpf
onwards. Transcription factors such as nr5a1b (sf1) and nr0b1 (dax1), but not
foxl2a were also higher in males than in females. These results demonstrate that,
before or during the early period of morphological gonad differentiation, the
brain exhibits a clear sexual dimorphism with respect to the expression and
activity of aromatase as well as of certain enzymes and factors involved in
steroid synthesis as p450scc and sf1. The results suggest a higher potentiality
to produce estrogens by male brains during sex differentiation time.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20955710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 7;5(10):e13217. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013217.

European bone mineral density loci are also associated with BMD in East-Asian
populations.

Styrkarsdottir U(1), Halldorsson BV, Gudbjartsson DF, Tang NL, Koh JM, Xiao SM,
Kwok TC, Kim GS, Chan JC, Cherny S, Lee SH, Kwok A, Ho S, Gretarsdottir S, Kostic
JP, Palsson ST, Sigurdsson G, Sham PC, Kim BJ, Kung AW, Kim SY, Woo J, Leung PC, 
Kong A, Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. unnur.styrkarsdottir@decode.is

Most genome-wide association (GWA) studies have focused on populations of
European ancestry with limited assessment of the influence of the sequence
variants on populations of other ethnicities. To determine whether markers that
we have recently shown to associate with Bone Mineral Density (BMD) in Europeans 
also associate with BMD in East-Asians we analysed 50 markers from 23 genomic
loci in samples from Korea (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>1,397) and two Chinese Hong Kong sample sets
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>3,869 and n<U+200A>=<U+200A>785). Through this effort we identified fourteen loci that
associated with BMD in East-Asian samples using a false discovery rate (FDR) of
0.05; 1p36 (ZBTB40, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.3×10(-9)), 1p31 (GPR177, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00012), 3p22 (CTNNB1,
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00013), 4q22 (MEPE, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0026), 5q14 (MEF2C, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.3×10(-5)), 6q25 (ESR1, 
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0011), 7p14 (STARD3NL, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00025), 7q21 (FLJ42280, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00017), 8q24
(TNFRSF11B, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.4×10(-5)), 11p15 (SOX6, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00033), 11q13 (LRP5, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0033),
13q14 (TNFSF11, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.5×10(-5)), 16q24 (FOXL1, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0010) and 17q21 (SOST,
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.015). Our study marks an early effort towards the challenge of cataloguing 
bone density variants shared by many ethnicities by testing BMD variants that
have been established in Europeans, in East-Asians.

PMCID: PMC2951352
PMID: 20949110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Clin Chem. 2010 Dec;56(12):1845-53. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2010.151233. Epub 2010 
Oct 14.

Automated extraction of DNA and RNA from a single formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue section for analysis of both single-nucleotide
polymorphisms and mRNA expression.

Hennig G(1), Gehrmann M, Stropp U, Brauch H, Fritz P, Eichelbaum M, Schwab M,
Schroth W.

Author information: 
(1)Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics Products, Molecular Research Germany, Cologne, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: There is an increasing need for the identification of both DNA and
RNA biomarkers from pathodiagnostic formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissue samples for the exploration of individualized therapy strategies in
cancer. We investigated a fully automated, xylene-free nucleic acid extraction
method for the simultaneous analysis of RNA and DNA biomarkers related to breast 
cancer.
METHODS: We copurified both RNA and DNA from a single 10-µm section of 210 paired
samples of FFPE tumor and adjacent normal tissues (1-25 years of archival time)
using a fully automated extraction method. Half of the eluate was DNase I
digested for mRNA expression analysis performed by using reverse-transcription
quantitative PCR for the genes estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), progesterone receptor 
(PGR), v-erb-b2 erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2,
neuro/glioblastoma derived oncogene homolog (avian) (ERBB2), epoxide hydrolase 1 
(EPHX1), baculoviral IAP repeat-containing 5 (BIRC5), matrix metallopeptidase 7
(MMP7), vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), and topoisomerase (DNA) II 
alpha 170kDa (TOP2A). The remaining undigested aliquot was used for the analysis 
of 7 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: In 208 of 210 samples (99.0%) the protocol yielded robust
quantification-cycle values for both RNA and DNA normalization. Expression of the
8 breast cancer genes was detected in 81%-100% of tumor tissues and 21%-100% of
normal tissues. The 7 SNPs were successfully genotyped in 91%-97% of tumor and
94%-97% of normal tissues. Allele concordance between tumor and normal tissue was
98.9%-99.5%.
CONCLUSIONS: This fully automated process allowed an efficient simultaneous
extraction of both RNA and DNA from a single FFPE section and subsequent dual
analysis of selected genes. High gene expression and genotyping detection rates
demonstrate the feasibility of molecular profiling from limited archival patient 
samples.

PMID: 20947696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 Jan 15;250(2):137-46. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2010.10.001. Epub 2010 Oct 16.

The UV-absorber benzophenone-4 alters transcripts of genes involved in hormonal
pathways in zebrafish (Danio rerio) eleuthero-embryos and adult males.

Zucchi S(1), Blüthgen N, Ieronimo A, Fent K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Applied Sciences Northwestern
Switzerland, Gründenstrasse 40, CH-4132 Muttenz, Switzerland.

Benzophenone-4 (BP-4) is frequently used as UV-absorber in cosmetics and
materials protection. Despite its frequent detection in the aquatic environment
potential effects on aquatic life are unknown. In this study, we evaluate the
effects of BP-4 in eleuthero-embryos and in the liver, testis and brain of adult 
male fish on the transcriptional level by focusing on target genes involved in
hormonal pathways to provide a more complete toxicological profile of this
important UV-absorber. Eleuthero-embryos and males of zebrafish were exposed up
to 3 days after hatching and for 14 days, respectively, to BP-4 concentrations
between 30 and 3000 µg/L. In eleuthero-embryos transcripts of vtg1, vtg3, esr1,
esr2b, hsd17ß3, cyp19b cyp19a, hhex and pax8 were induced at 3000 µg/L BP-4,
which points to a low estrogenic activity and interference with early thyroid
development, respectively. In adult males BP-4 displayed multiple effects on gene
expression in different tissues. In the liver vtg1, vtg3, esr1 and esr2b were
down-regulated, while in the brain, vtg1, vtg3 and cyp19b transcripts were
up-regulated. In conclusion, the transcription profile revealed that BP-4
interferes with the expression of genes involved in hormonal pathways and
steroidogenesis. The effects of BP-4 differ in life stages and adult tissues and 
point to an estrogenic activity in eleuthero-embryos and adult brain, and an
antiestrogenic activity in the liver. The results indicate that BP-4 interferes
with the sex hormone system of fish, which is important for the risk assessment
of this UV-absorber.

© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20937294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Jan 30;332(1-2):78-87. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.09.016. 
Epub 2010 Oct 7.

Endogenously elevated androgens alter the developmental programming of the
hypothalamic-pituitary axis in male mice.

Gonzalez B(1), Ratner LD, Di Giorgio NP, Poutanen M, Huhtaniemi IT, Calandra RS, 
Lux-Lantos VA, Rulli SB.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental-CONICET, Vuelta de Obligado 2490
(1428), Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Transgenic male mice that express human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) a and ß
subunits constitutively hypersecrete hCG and produce elevated levels of
androgens. The aim of this study was to characterize the hypothalamic-pituitary
function of these transgenic (hCGaß+) males by focusing on FSH regulation. Serum 
FSH levels and pituitary mRNA expression of Fshb, Lhb, Cga, Gnrhr and Esr1 were
reduced, whereas Fst expression was increased in prepubertal hCGaß+ males as
compared with wild-type. In the hypothalamus, Cyp19a1 expression, GnRH
concentration and ex-vivo GnRH pulsatility were elevated in prepubertal hCGaß+
mice, whereas Kiss1 expression was decreased prepubertally and Gad67 expression
was elevated neonatally. The effect of androgens on the developmental programming
of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis of hCGaß+ males was evaluated by perinatal and
prepubertal antiandrogen (flutamide) administration. Our studies identified a
critical window between gestational day 18 and postnatal day 14, during which
chronically elevated androgens and/or their locally produced metabolites activate
the hypothalamus and concomitantly shut-down the gonadotropin axis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20933053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Androl. 2011 May-Jun;32(3):282-94. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.110.010769. Epub 2010
Oct 7.

Genetically induced estrogen receptor a mRNA (Esr1) overexpression does not
adversely affect fertility or penile development in male mice.

Heath J(1), Abdelmageed Y, Braden TD, Williams CS, Williams JW, Paulose T,
Hernandez-Ochoa I, Gupta R, Flaws JA, Goyal HO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Tuskegee
University, Tuskegee, AL, USA.

Previously, we reported that estrogen receptor a mRNA (Esr1) or protein (ESR1)
overexpression resulting from neonatal exposure to estrogens in rats was
associated with infertility and maldeveloped penis characterized by reduced
length and weight and abnormal accumulation of fat cells. The objective of this
study was to determine if mutant male mice overexpressing Esr1 are naturally
infertile or have reduced fertility and/or develop abnormal penis. The fertility 
parameters, including fertility and fecundity indices, numbers of days from the
day of cohabitation to the day of delivery, and numbers of pups per female, were 
not altered from controls as a result of Esr1 overexpression. Likewise, penile
morphology, including the length, weight, and diameter and os penis development, 
was not altered from controls. Conversely, weights of the seminal vesicles and
bulbospongiosus and levator ani (BS/LA) muscles were significantly (P < .05)
lower as compared with controls; however, the weight of the testis, the
morphology of the testis and epididymis, and the plasma and testicular
testosterone concentration were not different from controls. Hence, genetically
induced Esr1 overexpression alone, without an exogenous estrogen exposure during 
the neonatal period, is unable to adversely affect the development of the penis
as well as other male reproductive organs, except for limited, but significant,
reductions in weights of the seminal vesicles and BS/LA muscles.

PMCID: PMC3653629
PMID: 20930192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biol Reprod. 2011 Feb;84(2):207-17. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.087353. Epub 2010
Oct 6.

Estrogen, efferent ductules, and the epididymis.

Joseph A(1), Shur BD, Hess RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61802, USA.

Estrogen's presence in the male reproductive system has been known for over 60
years, but its potential function in the epididymis remains an important area of 
investigation. Estrogen is synthesized by germ cells, producing a relatively high
concentration in rete testis fluid. There are two estrogen receptors (ESR), the
presence of which in the head of the epididymis is well documented and consistent
between species; however, in other regions of the epididymis, their expression
appears to be isotype, species, and cell specific. ESR1 is expressed
constitutively in the epididymis; however, its presence is downregulated by high 
doses of estrogen, making the design of experiments complicated, as the phenotype
of the Cyp19a1(-/-) mouse does not resemble that of the Esr1(-/-) mouse.
Ligand-independent and DNA-binding Esr1 mutant models further demonstrate the
complexity and importance of both signaling pathways in maintenance of efferent
ductules and epididymis. Data now reveal the presence of not only classical
nuclear receptors, but also cytoplasmic ESR and rapid responding membrane
receptors; however, their importance in the epididymis remains undetermined. ESR1
regulates ion transport and water reabsorption in the efferent ducts and
epididymis, and its regulation of other associated genes is continually being
uncovered. In the male, some genes, such as Aqp9 and Slc9a3, contain both
androgen and estrogen response elements and are dually regulated by these
hormones. While estrogen pathways are a necessity for fertility in the male,
future studies are needed to understand the interplay between androgens and
estrogens in epididymal tissues, particularly in cell types that contain both
receptors and their cofactors.

PMCID: PMC3071263
PMID: 20926801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Endocrinology. 2010 Dec;151(12):5710-20. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0356. Epub 2010 Oct
6.

Molecular cloning, characterization, and chromosome mapping of reptilian estrogen
receptors.

Katsu Y(1), Matsubara K, Kohno S, Matsuda Y, Toriba M, Oka K, Guillette LJ Jr,
Ohta Y, Iguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institutes of Natural
Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi, Japan.

In many vertebrates, steroid hormones are essential for ovarian differentiation
during a critical developmental stage as well as promoting the growth and
differentiation of the adult female reproductive system. Although studies have
been extensively conducted in mammals and a few fish, amphibians, and bird
species, the molecular mechanisms of sex steroid hormone (estrogens) action have 
been poorly examined in reptiles. Here, we evaluate hormone receptor and ligand
interactions in two species of snake, the Okinawa habu (Protobothrops
flavoviridis, Viperidae) and the Japanese four-striped rat snake (Elaphe
quadrivirgata, Colubridae) after the isolation of cDNAs encoding estrogen
receptor a (ESR1) and estrogen receptor ß (ESR2). Using a transient transfection 
assay with mammalian cells, the transcriptional activity of reptilian (Okinawa
habu, Japanese four-striped rat snake, American alligator, and Florida red-belly 
freshwater turtle) ESR1 and ESR2 was examined. All ESR proteins displayed
estrogen-dependent activation of transcription via an estrogen-response
element-containing promoter; however, the responsiveness to various estrogens was
different. Further, we determined the chromosomal locations of the snake steroid 
hormone receptor genes. ESR1 and ESR2 genes were localized to the short and long 
arms of chromosome 1, respectively, whereas androgen receptor was localized to a 
pair of microchromosomes in the two snake species examined. These data provide
basic tools that allow future studies examining receptor-ligand interactions and 
steroid endocrinology in snakes and also expands our knowledge of sex steroid
hormone receptor evolution.

PMCID: PMC2999499
PMID: 20926589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Cancer. 2010 Sep 29;9:263. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-263.

Maximum growth and survival of estrogen receptor-alpha positive breast cancer
cells requires the Sin3A transcriptional repressor.

Ellison-Zelski SJ(1), Alarid ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin
53706, USA.

BACKGROUND: Sin3A is an evolutionarily conserved transcriptional repressor which 
regulates gene expression as part of the multi-protein Sin3 repressive complex.
It functions as a scaffold upon which proteins with enzymatic activity dock,
including chromatin modifying histone deacetylases. Although regulation of
transcription by Sin3A has been studied in detail, little is understood about the
function of Sin3A in cancer cells. We previously showed that Sin3A is expressed
in breast cancer cells and is a repressor of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERa, ESR1) 
gene expression. Here, we expand our previous studies to elucidate the function
of Sin3A in the control of gene expression and growth of breast cancer cells.
RESULTS: Analysis of gene expression following knockdown of Sin3A revealed
changes in both basal and regulated gene transcription. Genes of known importance
in breast cancer and estrogen signaling, including ERBB2, PGR, MYC, CLU, and
NCOA2, were among those identified as Sin3A-responsive. The mechanism of Sin3A
action varied among genes and was found to be mediated through both HDAC1/2
-dependent and -independent activities. Loss of Sin3A inhibited breast cancer
cell growth by increasing apoptosis without affecting cell cycle progression.
Analysis of both ERa-positive and ERa-negative cell lines revealed that the
effects of Sin3A on growth were cell-type specific, as Sin3A expression promoted 
maximum growth of only the ERa-positive cells, and, notably, Sin3A protein itself
was increased by estrogen. Further gene expression experiments revealed that
Sin3A repressed expression of key apoptotic genes, including TRAIL, TRAILR1,
CASP10, and APAF1, in ERa-positive, but not ERa-negative, cell lines, which could
provide a mechanistic explanation for cell-type differences in growth.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies Sin3A as a regulator of gene expression,
survival, and growth in ERa-positive breast cancer cells. Sin3A regulates the
transcription of genes involved in breast cancer and apoptosis and acts through
multiple mechanisms not limited to histone deacetylase function. These findings
reveal previously undescribed functions of Sin3A in breast cancer and provide
evidence for an important role of this transcriptional repressor in ERa-positive 
tumor cell growth.

PMCID: PMC2956731
PMID: 20920219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Fertil Steril. 2011 Jan;95(1):369-71, 371.e1-2. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.08.051.

ESR1 promoter polymorphism is not associated with nonsyndromic cryptorchidism.

Lo Giacco D(1), Ars E, Bassas L, Galan JJ, Rajmil O, Ruíz P, Caffaratti J,
Guarducci E, Ruiz-Castané E, Krausz C.

Author information: 
(1)Andrology Service, Molecular Biology Laboratory, Fundació Puigvert,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

The ESR1 promoter microsatellite (TA)n was reported as a potential functional
polymorphism. In a case-control study, we were unable to demonstrate any
association between (TA)n and nonsyndromic cryptorchidism in Italian and Spanish 
study populations.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20887985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Maturitas. 2010 Dec;67(4):363-7. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2010.08.006. Epub 2010 
Sep 29.

Evaluation of PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha gene
(ESR1) in relation to menstrual cycle timing and reproductive parameters in
post-menopausal women.

Silva IV(1), Rezende LC, Lanes SP, Souza LS, Madeira KP, Cerri MF, Paes MF,
Daltoé RD, Chambô-Filho A, Guimarães MC, Graceli JB, Rangel LB.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biotecnologia/RENORBIO, Universidade Federal do
Espírito Santo, Vitória, Espírito Santo, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association of -397T>C and -351A>G single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) - also called PvuII and XbaI, respectively - located on
estrogen receptor alpha (ERS1) gene with age at menarche, menopause onset,
fertility and miscarriage in a population of post-menopausal women.
STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional study with 273 healthy, high miscegenated,
post-menopausal women (mean age of 63.1±9.7 years old). Subjects were genotyped
for PvuII and XbaI SNPs by PCR-RFLP and confirmed by automatic sequencing.
Reproduction informations (age at menarche, age at menopause, number of
pregnancies, fertility rate and miscarriages) were obtained by retrospective
study using a questionnaire.
RESULT(S): Age at menarche, menopause onset, number of pregnancies, total
fertility rate, and parity did not seem to be influenced by any of the studied
genotypes (chi-square, p>0.05). However, women carrying the xx genotype showed a 
44% higher chance of miscarriage, whereas this value did not trespass 16% for any
other genotype analyzed. It has been also observed a higher occurrence of
miscarriage in association with combined xxpp genotype of ERS1 gene (chi-square, 
p<0.01).
CONCLUSION(S): The present data indicate that the studied SNPs on ERS1 gene do
not influence the menstrual cycle timing and parity but there is a strong
relationship between the xx ERS1 SNP genotype and the incidence of miscarriage in
the post-menopausal population analyzed.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20884142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Nov 29;42A(4):290-300. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00107.2010. Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Actions and interactions of progesterone and estrogen on transcriptome profiles
of the bovine endometrium.

Shimizu T(1), Krebs S, Bauersachs S, Blum H, Wolf E, Miyamoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Animal and Food Hygiene, Obihiro University of Agriculture 
and Veterinary Medicine, Obihiro, Japan.

The aim of our study was to analyze endometrial gene expression profiles in
ovariectomized cows treated with estradiol and/or progesterone by using
microarray analysis. Clustering of differentially expressed genes allowed
separation into distinct hormone response patterns. These patterns could be
classified into independent and interdependent actions of the steroid hormones
estrogen and progesterone. The use of ovariectomized cows and external
administration of hormones identified a set of genes whose regulation depends on 
a progesterone priming effect. The progesterone-primed estrogen response
comprises gene functions such as migration, cell differentiation, and cell
adhesion and therefore may play a crucial role in tissue remodeling, as one of
its key regulators in the endometrium, TGFB2, is among this group of
progesterone-primed genes. Functional annotation analysis of the
estrogen-responsive gene clusters shows a clear dominance of functions such as
cell cycle, morphogenesis, and differentiation. The functional profile of the
progesterone-responsive clusters is less clear but nevertheless shows some
important fertility-related terms like luteinization, oocyte maturation, and
catecholamine metabolism. We looked for putative regulators of the steroid
hormone response in endometrium by searching for enriched transcription factor
binding sites in the promoter regions of the genes with similar hormone response 
profile. This analysis identified transcription factors such as SP1, NFYA, FOXA2,
IRF2, ESR1, and NOBOX as candidate regulators of gene expression in bovine
endometrium treated with steroid hormones. Taken together, our data provide novel
insights into the regulation of bovine endometrial physiology by steroid
hormones.

PMID: 20876846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Int J Androl. 2011 Oct;34(5 Pt 1):486-500. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2605.2010.01109.x.
Epub 2010 Sep 27.

The anti-oestrogen fulvestrant (ICI 182,780) reduces the androgen receptor
expression, ERK1/2 phosphorylation and cell proliferation in the rat ventral
prostate.

Fernandes SA(1), Gomes GR, Siu ER, Damas-Souza DM, Bruni-Cardoso A, Augusto TM,
Lazari MF, Carvalho HF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo - Escola Paulista de Medicina, INFAR, Vila
Clementino, São Paulo, Brazil.

This study proposed to investigate further the role of oestrogens during pubertal
growth of rat ventral prostate, by analysing the effect of anti-oestrogen
fulvestrant (ICI 182,780) on the expression of androgen (AR) and oestrogen
receptors (ESR1 and ESR2), mitogen-activated protein kinase (ERK1/2)
phosphorylation, and expression of Ki-67, a biomarker for cell proliferation.
Ventral prostates were obtained from 90-day-old rats treated once a week for 2
months with vehicle (control) or ICI 182,780 (10 mg/rat, s.c.). Transcripts for
AR, ESR1 and ESR2 were evaluated by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Expression of AR, ESR1, ESR2, total and phospho-ERK1/2 was analysed by 
Western blot or immunofluorescence. Ki-67-positive cells and myosin heavy chain
were detected by immunohistochemistry. Cylindrical epithelial cells slightly
taller, epithelial dysplasia and an increase in smooth muscle layer were observed
in the ventral prostate from ICI 182,780-treated rats. ICI 182,780 did not change
the mRNA, but decreased the protein levels for AR in the ventral prostate. The
expression of ESR1 (mRNA and protein) was upregulated by ICI 182,780, but no
changes were observed on ESR2 expression (mRNA and protein). ICI 182,780
decreased the phosphorylation state of ERK1/2, with no changes in total ERK1/2
levels. Ki-67-positive cells in the ventral prostate were also decreased by ICI
182,780. In conclusion, ICI 182,780 induces downregulation of AR expression and
may block the translocation of ESR1 and ESR2 from the nucleus to the plasma
membrane, decreasing ERK1/2 phosphorylation and prostatic epithelial cell
proliferation. These findings provide a basis for physiological roles of
oestrogen in the ventral prostate. Further studies with fulvestrant are necessary
in benign prostate hyperplasia and prostatic cancer models.

© 2010 The Authors. International Journal of Andrology © 2011 European Academy of
Andrology.

PMID: 20874728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Aquat Toxicol. 2010 Nov 15;100(4):354-64. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2010.08.016.
Epub 2010 Sep 22.

Waterborne fluoxetine disrupts the reproductive axis in sexually mature male
goldfish, Carassius auratus.

Mennigen JA(1), Lado WE, Zamora JM, Duarte-Guterman P, Langlois VS, Metcalfe CD, 
Chang JP, Moon TW, Trudeau VL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Advances Research in Environmental Genomics, Department of Biology,
University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Fluoxetine (FLX) is a pharmaceutical acting as a selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor and is used to treat depression in humans. Fluoxetine and the major
active metabolite norfluoxetine (NFLX) are released to aquatic systems via
sewage-treatment effluents. They have been found to bioconcentrate in wild fish, 
raising concerns over potential endocrine disrupting effects. The objective of
this study was to determine effects of waterborne FLX, including environmental
concentrations, on the reproductive axis in sexually mature male goldfish. We
initially cloned the goldfish serotonin transporter to investigate tissue and
temporal expression of the serotonin transporter, the FLX target, in order to
determine target tissues and sensitive exposure windows. Sexually mature male
goldfish, which showed the highest levels of serotonin transporter expression in 
the neuroendocrine brain, were exposed to FLX at 0.54µg/L and 54µg/L in a 14-d
exposure before receiving vehicle or sex pheromone stimulus consisting of either 
4.3nM 17,20ß-dihydroxy-4-pregnene-3-one (17,20P) or 3nM prostaglandin F2(a)
(PGF2(a)). Reproductive endpoints assessed included gonadosomatic index, milt
volume, and blood levels of the sex steroids testosterone and estradiol.
Neuroendocrine function was investigated by measuring blood levels of luteinizing
hormone, growth hormone, pituitary gene expression of luteinizing hormone, growth
hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone and neuroendocrine brain expression of
isotocin and vasotocin. To investigate changes at the gonadal level of the
reproductive axis, testicular gene expression of the gonadotropin receptors, both
the luteinizing hormone receptor and the follicle-stimulating hormone receptor,
were measured as well as expression of the growth hormone receptor. To
investigate potential impacts on spermatogenesis, testicular gene expression of
the spermatogenesis marker vasa was measured and histological samples of testis
were analyzed qualitatively. Estrogen indices were measured by expression and
activity analysis of gonadal aromatase, as well as liver expression analysis of
the estrogenic marker, esr1. After 14d, basal milt volume significantly decreased
at 54µg/L FLX while pheromone-stimulated milt volume decreased at 0.54µg/L and
54µg/L FLX. Fluoxetine (54µg/L) inhibited both basal and pheromone-stimulated
testosterone levels. Significant concentration-dependent reductions in
follicle-stimulating hormone and isotocin expression were observed with FLX in
the 17,20P- and PGF2(a)-stimulated groups, respectively. Estradiol levels and
expression of esr1 concentration-dependently increased with FLX. This study
demonstrates that FLX disrupts reproductive physiology of male fish at
environmentally relevant concentrations, and potential mechanisms are discussed.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20864192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2011 May;36(4):473-83. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2010.07.022. Epub 2010 Sep 17.

Variants in estrogen receptor alpha gene are associated with phenotypical
expression of obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Alonso P(1), Gratacòs M, Segalàs C, Escaramís G, Real E, Bayés M, Labad J,
Pertusa A, Vallejo J, Estivill X, Menchón JM.

Author information: 
(1)OCD Clinical and Research Unit, Psychiatry Department, Hospital Universitari
de Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain. mpalonso@bellvitgehospital.cat

Compelling data from animal and clinical studies suggest that sex steroids may
play a role in the etiopathology of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). The aim 
of this study was to investigate whether variants in estrogen receptor genes ESR1
and ESR2 may contribute to the genetic susceptibility to OCD, through a
case-control association study using an extensive linkage disequilibrium-mapping 
approach. Twenty tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms (tagSNPs) covering the ESR2 
region and nine tagSNPS from regions of ESR1 reported to be related to
transcriptional control were genotyped in 229 OCD patients and 279 controls. SNP 
association and haplotype analysis were performed. The association of these genes
and OCD subphenotypes was tested, considering early-onset OCD, comorbid tic and
affective disorders, and OCD symptom dimensions. No significant difference in the
distribution of alleles or genotypes was detected between controls and OCD
subjects. Nevertheless, on analyzing OCD subphenotypes, SNP rs34535804 in ESR1
and a five SNPs haplotype, located at the 5' end of intron 1 of ESR1, were
associated with the presence of contamination obsessions and cleaning
compulsions. Specifically, carriers of the ACCCG haplotype, a combination of
functional alleles related to higher ER alpha expression, showed a reduced risk
of suffering from these symptoms. Our results suggest that the ESR1 gene may
contribute to the genetic vulnerability to certain OCD manifestations. The
dissection of OCD into more homogeneous subphenotypes may well help to identify
susceptibility genes for the disorder.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20850223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cancer Epidemiol. 2011 Feb;35(1):48-55. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2010.08.005. Epub
2010 Sep 17.

Selected estrogen receptor 1 and androgen receptor gene polymorphisms in relation
to risk of breast cancer and fibrocystic breast conditions among Chinese women.

Sakoda LC(1), Blackston CR, Doherty JA, Ray RM, Lin MG, Gao DL, Stalsberg H, Feng
Z, Thomas DB, Chen C.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epidemiology, Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA.

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms in sex hormone receptor-encoding genes may alter the
activity of sex hormone receptors and thereby affect susceptibility to breast
cancer and related outcomes.
METHODS: In a case-control study of women from Shanghai, China, we examined the
risk of breast cancer and fibrocystic breast conditions associated with the ESR1 
PvuII (rs2234693) and XbaI (rs9340799) and AR CAG repeat ((CAG)(n)) and GGC
repeat ((GGC)(n)) polymorphisms among 614 women with breast cancer, 467 women
with fibrocystic conditions, and 879 women without breast disease. We also
evaluated whether risk differed by the presence/absence of proliferative changes 
(in the extratumoral epithelium or fibrocystic lesion), menopausal status, or
body mass index (BMI). Age-adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (95% CI) were calculated using logistic regression.
RESULTS: Only associations with AR (CAG)(n) and (GGC)(n) genotypes were detected.
Allocating AR (CAG)(n) genotypes into six categories, with the
(CAG)(22-24)/(CAG)(22-24) genotype category designated as the reference group,
the (CAG)(>24)/(CAG)(>24) genotype category was associated with an increased risk
of fibrocystic breast conditions (OR, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.1-3.0). Relative to the AR
(GGC)(17)/(GGC)(17) genotype, the (GGC)(17)/(GGC)(14) genotype was associated
with elevated risks of incident breast cancer (OR, 2.6; 95% CI, 1.3-5.4) and
fibrocystic conditions (OR, 2.3; 95% CI, 1.1-4.5). Results did not differ
according to proliferation status, menopausal status, or BMI.
CONCLUSION: Although these data lend support for a link between AR variation and 
breast disease development, given the low frequency of the putative
risk-conferring genotypes and other constraints, further confirmation of our
results is needed.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3062069
PMID: 20846920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Endocrinol. 2010 Dec;207(3):281-8. doi: 10.1677/JOE-10-0290. Epub 2010 Sep 10.

Ex3aERKO male infertility phenotype recapitulates the aERKO male phenotype.

Goulding EH(1), Hewitt SC, Nakamura N, Hamilton K, Korach KS, Eddy EM.

Author information: 
(1)Gamete Biology Group, Laboratory of Reproduction and Developmental Toxicology,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Disruption of the Esr1 gene encoding estrogen receptor a (ERa) by insertion of a 
neomycin resistance gene (neo) into exon 2 (aERKO mice) was shown previously to
cause infertility in male mice. While full-length ERa protein was not expressed
in aERKO mice, alternative splicing resulted in the low-level expression of a
truncated form lacking the N-terminus A/B domain and containing the DNA- and
ligand-binding domains. Thus, it was unclear whether the reproductive phenotype
in aERKO males was only due to the lack of full-length ERa or was affected by the
presence of the variant ERa isoform. The present study examined male mice with
deletion of exon 3 of Esr1 gene, lacking the DNA-binding domain, and null for ERa
(Ex3aERKO). Dilation of some seminiferous tubules was apparent in male Ex3aERKO
mice as early as postnatal day 10 and was pronounced in all tubules from day 20
onward. At 6 weeks of age, sperm numbers and sperm motility were lower in
Ex3aERKO mice than in wild-type (WT) mice, and the rete testis and efferent
ductules were dilated. Mating studies determined that adult Ex3aERKO males were
infertile and failed to produce copulatory plugs. Serum testosterone levels and
Hsd17b3 and Cyp17a1 transcript levels were significantly higher, but serum
estradiol, progesterone, LH, and FSH levels and Cyp19a1 transcript levels were
not significantly different from those in WT mice. These results confirm and
extend those seen in other studies on male mice with deletion of exon 3 of Esr1
gene. In addition, the reproductive phenotype of male Ex3aERKO mice recapitulated
the phenotype of aERKO mice, strongly suggesting that the aERKO male infertility 
was not due to the presence of the DNA-binding domain in the truncated form of
ERa and that full-length ERa is essential for maintenance of male fertility.

PMCID: PMC2995255
PMID: 20833731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Nov;88(5):626-9. doi: 10.1038/clpt.2010.143. Epub 2010 
Sep 8.

Estrogen receptor genotypes, menopausal status, and the effects of tamoxifen on
lipid levels: revised and updated results.

Hayes DF(1), Skaar TC, Rae JM, Henry NL, Nguyen AT, Stearns V, Li L, Philips S,
Desta Z, Flockhart DA; Consortium on Breast Cancer Pharmacogenomics (COBRA).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Breast Oncology Program, Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of Michigan Health and Hospitals System, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA. hayesdf@umich.edu

We previously reported that the ESR1 XbaI genotypes were associated with baseline
and tamoxifen-induced serum lipid profiles. The analysis in that study was
carried out by PCR followed by restriction-enzyme digestion. After reanalysis
using more robust TaqMan assays, the findings related to ~10% of the genotypes
for the ESR1 XbaI single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) were revised. For the
other genotypes (i.e., ESR1 PvuII, ESR2, and CYP2D6), the results were nearly
identical to those in the previous study. Upon reanalysis, previously reported
associations between the ESR1 Xba1 genotypes and baseline triglyceride and
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels were no longer observed.
Previously reported associations between the ESR1 XbaI genotypes and
tamoxifen-induced changes in levels of total cholesterol, triglycerides, and
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol were also no longer observed. However,
the following observations from the original report did not change: (i) the
levels of circulating lipids are lower in women taking tamoxifen; (ii) there is
an association between the ESR2-02 genotypes and changes in triglyceride levels; 
and (iii) neither ESR1 PvuII nor CYP2D6 is associated with any changes in serum
lipid concentrations in patients receiving treatment with tamoxifen.

PMCID: PMC4077673
PMID: 20827267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biol Reprod. 2011 Jan;84(1):52-61. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085340. Epub 2010 
Sep 8.

In vivo treatments with fulvestrant and anastrozole differentially affect gene
expression in the rat efferent ductules.

Gomes GR(1), Yasuhara F, Siu ER, Fernandes SA, Avellar MC, Lazari MF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Instituto Nacional de Farmacologia e Biologia 
Molecular, Vila Clementino, São Paulo, Brazil.

Estrogen plays a key role in maintaining the morphology and function of the
efferent ductules. We previously demonstrated that the antiestrogen fulvestrant
markedly affected gene expression in the rat efferent ductules. The mechanism of 
fulvestrant action to modulate gene expression may involve not only the blockade 
of ESR1 and ESR2 estrogen receptors, but also the activation of ESR1 and ESR2
when the receptors are tethered to AP-1 or SP1 transcription factors, or the
activation of the G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1. We therefore compared
the effects of two strategies to interfere with estrogen action in the rat
efferent ductules: treatment with fulvestrant or with the aromatase inhibitor
anastrozole. Whereas fulvestrant markedly increased Mmp7 and Spp1, and reduced
Nptx1 mRNA levels, no changes were observed with anastrozole. Fulvestrant caused 
changes in epithelial morphology that were not seen with anastrozole. Fulvestrant
shifted MMP7 immunolocalization in the epithelial cells from the supranuclear to 
the apical region; this effect was less pronounced with anastrozole. In vitro
studies of (35)S-methionine incorporation showed that protein release was
increased, whereas tissue protein content in the efferent ductules of
fulvestrant-treated rats was decreased. Although fulvestrant markedly affected
gene expression, no changes were observed on AP-1 and SP1 DNA-binding activity.
The blockade of ESRs seems to be the major reason explaining the differences
between both treatments. At least some of the effects of fulvestrant appear to
result from compensatory mechanisms activated by the dramatic changes caused by
ESR1 blockade.

PMID: 20826728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2011 Jan;66(1):51-5. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glq160.
Epub 2010 Sep 5.

Association of CYP19 and ESR1 pleiotropic genes with human longevity.

Corbo RM(1), Ulizzi L, Positano L, Scacchi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, La Sapienza University, P.le A. 
Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy. rosamaria.corbo@uniroma1.it

Aromatase (CYP19) and estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) are involved in the
metabolism of estrogens, which have a relevant role in female and male aging.
Moreover, due to their influence on fertility, both genes may be part of the
longevity-fertility trade-off mechanism. This investigation examines the
association of ESR1 (PvuII and XbaI) and CYP19 (rs4646) polymorphisms with
longevity. A sample of 258 individuals (mean age = 83.1 ± 5.7 years) was
recruited in 2000. Based on mortality data collected in 2009, the sample was
divided into two groups of participants surviving more than 90 years or not. The 
analysis showed that ESR1 PP (odds ratio = 2.2) and CYP19 genotypes carrying the 
T allele (odds ratio =<U+2009> 1.9) were significantly associated with longevity
(survival to age more than 90 years). As the ESR1 PP genotypes were found
associated with reduced fertility in the same sample, we may infer that ESR1
genotypes could exert an antagonistic pleiotropic effect on longevity and
fertility.

PMID: 20819792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(4):R65. doi: 10.1186/bcr2632. Epub 2010 Aug 27.

Expression levels of uridine 5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase genes in breast
tissue from healthy women are associated with mammographic density.

Haakensen VD(1), Biong M, Lingjærde OC, Holmen MM, Frantzen JO, Chen Y, Navjord
D, Romundstad L, Lüders T, Bukholm IK, Solvang HK, Kristensen VN, Ursin G,
Børresen-Dale AL, Helland A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University
Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Montebello, NO-0310, Norway.

INTRODUCTION: Mammographic density (MD), as assessed from film screen mammograms,
is determined by the relative content of adipose, connective and epithelial
tissue in the female breast. In epidemiological studies, a high percentage of MD 
confers a four to six fold risk elevation of developing breast cancer, even after
adjustment for other known breast cancer risk factors. However, the biologic
correlates of density are little known.
METHODS: Gene expression analysis using whole genome arrays was performed on
breast biopsies from 143 women; 79 women with no malignancy (healthy women) and
64 newly diagnosed breast cancer patients, both included from mammographic
centres. Percent MD was determined using a previously validated, computerized
method on scanned mammograms. Significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) was
performed to identify genes influencing MD and a linear regression model was used
to assess the independent contribution from different variables to MD.
RESULTS: SAM-analysis identified 24 genes differentially expressed between
samples from breasts with high and low MD. These genes included three uridine
5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) genes and the oestrogen receptor gene 
(ESR1). These genes were down-regulated in samples with high MD compared to those
with low MD. The UGT gene products, which are known to inactivate oestrogen
metabolites, were also down-regulated in tumour samples compared to samples from 
healthy individuals. Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the UGT
genes associated with the expression of UGT and other genes in their vicinity
were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Three UGT enzymes were lower expressed both in breast tissue
biopsies from healthy women with high MD and in biopsies from newly diagnosed
breast cancers. The association was strongest amongst young women and women using
hormonal therapy. UGT2B10 predicts MD independently of age, hormone therapy and
parity. Our results indicate that down-regulation of UGT genes in women exposed
to female sex hormones is associated with high MD and might increase the risk of 
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2949660
PMID: 20799965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Fertil Steril. 2011 Jan;95(1):353-6. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.07.1067. Epub
2010 Aug 24.

Epistasis between CYP19A1 and ESR1 polymorphisms is associated with premature
ovarian failure.

Kim S(1), Pyun JA, Kang H, Kim J, Cha DH, Kwack K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University,
Seongnam, South Korea.

Because an interaction between CYP19A1 and ESR1 may play a key role in
determining the level of circulating E2 by way of the
hypothalamus-hypophysis-ovarian axis, the effect of single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP)-SNP interactions between CYP19A1 and ESR1 on the development
of premature ovarian failure (POF) was investigated by comparing the
polymorphisms of 98 patients with POF and 218 matched controls of Korean
ethnicity. A significant association with POF risk was found for the combined
genetic effect between the CYP19A1 3'untranslated region (UTR) SNP rs10046
(CT+TT) and the intronic ESR1 SNP rs1569788 (CC) genotype (odds ratio=12.67, 95% 
confidence interval: 1.61-99.71), and a statistically significant association was
also observed between POF and the CYP19A1 3'UTR SNP rs10046 under a dominant
model (odds ratio=2.51, 95% confidence interval: 1.33-4.76), suggesting that
epistasis between ESR1 and CYP19A1 may be involved in the regulation of
folliculogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20797716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Schizophr Bull. 2012 May;38(3):433-43. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbq091. Epub 2010 Aug 
23.

Gender-specific reduction of estrogen-sensitive small RNA, miR-30b, in subjects
with schizophrenia.

Mellios N(1), Galdzicka M, Ginns E, Baker SP, Rogaev E, Xu J, Akbarian S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Brudnick Neuropsychiatric Research Institute,
Worcester, MA, USA. nmellios@mit.edu

Estrogen signaling pathways affect cortical function and metabolism, are thought 
to play a role in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia, and exert neuroprotective
effects in female subjects at risk. However, the molecular signatures of estrogen
signaling in normal and diseased cerebral cortex remain largely unexplored.
Expression of the estrogen-sensitive small RNA, microRNA-30b (miR-30b), was
studied in 30 controls and 30 matched samples from subjects diagnosed with
schizophrenia from prefrontal cortex (PFC), as well as in 23 samples from
parietal cortex (12 controls and 11 schizophrenia cases). The majority of case
and control samples were genotyped for an estrogen receptor a (Esr1) sequence
variant (rs2234693) previously associated with genetic risk, and a subset of them
were subjected to further analysis to determine expression of mature and
precursor forms of miR-30b (pre/pri-miR-30b). Gender-dimorphic expression was
also explored in mouse frontal cortex and hippocampus. A significant interaction 
between gender and diagnosis was discovered for changes in mature miR-30b levels,
so that miR-30b expression was significantly reduced in the cerebral cortex of
female but not male subjects with schizophrenia. In addition, disease-related
changes in miR-30b expression in a subset of female subjects were further
modulated by Esr1 genotype. Changes after antipsychotic drug exposure remained
insignificant. These preliminary findings point to the possibility that
disease-related changes in the expression of small noncoding RNAs such as miR-30b
in schizophrenia could be influenced by gender and potentially regulated by
estrogen signaling.

PMCID: PMC3329977
PMID: 20732949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Br J Nutr. 2011 Jan;105(1):71-9. doi: 10.1017/S0007114510003065. Epub 2010 Aug
23.

Genomic and metabolomic patterns segregate with responses to calcium and vitamin 
D supplementation.

Elnenaei MO(1), Chandra R, Mangion T, Moniz C.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Biochemistry Department, King's College Hospital, Denmark Hill,
London SE5 9RS, UK.

Inter-individual response differences to vitamin D and Ca supplementation may be 
under genetic control through vitamin D and oestrogen receptor genes, which may
influence their absorption and/or metabolism. Metabolomic studies on blood and
urine from subjects supplemented with Ca and vitamin D reveal different metabolic
profiles that segregate with genotype. Genotyping was performed for oestrogen
receptor 1 gene (ESR1) and vitamin D receptor gene (VDR) in fifty-six
postmenopausal women. Thirty-six women were classified as low bone density as
determined by a heel ultrasound scan and twenty women had normal bone density
acting as 'controls'. Those with low bone density (LBD) were supplemented with
oral Ca and vitamin D and were classified according to whether they were
'responders' or 'non-responders' according to biochemical results before and
after therapy compared to controls receiving no supplementation. Metabolomic
studies on serum and urine were done for the three groups at 0 and 3 months of
therapy using NMR spectroscopy with pattern recognition. The 'non-responder'
group showed a higher frequency of polymorphisms in the ESR1 (codons 10 and 325) 
and VDR (Bsm1 and Taq1), compared with to the 'responders'. The wild-type
genotype for Fok1 was more frequent in those with LBD (70 %) compared with the
control group (10 %). Distinctive patterns of metabolites were displayed by NMR
studies at baseline and 3 months of post-treatment, segregating responders from
non-responders and controls. Identification of potential 'non-responders' to
vitamin D and Ca, before therapy, based on a genomic and/or metabolomic profile
would allow targeted selection of optimal therapy on an individual basis.

PMID: 20727239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biochemistry. 2010 Sep 7;49(35):7625-33. doi: 10.1021/bi100804f.

Occurrence of a quadruplex motif in a unique insert within exon C of the bovine
estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1).

Derecka K(1), Balkwill GD, Garner TP, Hodgman C, Flint AP, Searle MS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Division of Animal Sciences, University of Nottingham, 
Sutton Bonington, Leicestershire LE12 5RD, UK.

The 5' end of exon C of the bovine estrogen receptor alpha gene (bov-ESR1)
includes a unique G-rich insert, not found in other closely related mammalian
genes, which lies close to both a double E-box transcription factor binding site 
and the site of a single nucleotide (G/A) polymorphism. Biophysical studies,
using CD and UV absorbance measurements, show that this 22 base insert leads to
the formation of a family of stable G-quadruplex structures which are unaffected 
by the G/A polymorphism. Multiplex PCR shows that the region including the
G-quadruplex is transcribed into RNA, and studies with a synthetic RNA transcript
sequence demonstrated formation of a highly stable parallel-folded quadruplex
structure. Luciferase reporter constructs demonstrate that the G-rich sequence
reduces rates of translation when present in the 5'-UTR of mRNA transcripts.
Mutations (GGG to AAA) that destabilize the quadruplex lead to a 15-fold
enhancement of translational efficiency, suggesting that a possible biological
role of the insert in exon C of the bov-ESR1 is to regulate translation of this
exon.

PMID: 20715834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncogene. 2010 Nov 11;29(45):6071-83. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.333. Epub 2010 Aug
16.

Biological reprogramming in acquired resistance to endocrine therapy of breast
cancer.

Aguilar H(1), Solé X, Bonifaci N, Serra-Musach J, Islam A, López-Bigas N,
Méndez-Pertuz M, Beijersbergen RL, Lázaro C, Urruticoechea A, Pujana MA.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Research Laboratory, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Bellvitge
Institute for Biomedical Research (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet, Barcelona, Spain.

Endocrine therapies targeting the proliferative effect of 17ß-estradiol through
estrogen receptor a (ERa) are the most effective systemic treatment of
ERa-positive breast cancer. However, most breast tumors initially responsive to
these therapies develop resistance through molecular mechanisms that are not yet 
fully understood. The long-term estrogen-deprived (LTED) MCF7 cell model has been
proposed to recapitulate acquired resistance to aromatase inhibitors in
postmenopausal women. To elucidate this resistance, genomic, transcriptomic and
molecular data were integrated into the time course of MCF7-LTED adaptation.
Dynamic and widespread genomic changes were observed, including amplification of 
the ESR1 locus consequently linked to an increase in ERa. Dynamic transcriptomic 
profiles were also observed that correlated significantly with genomic changes
and were predicted to be influenced by transcription factors known to be involved
in acquired resistance or cell proliferation (for example, interferon regulatory 
transcription factor 1 and E2F1, respectively) but, notably, not by canonical ERa
transcriptional function. Consistently, at the molecular level, activation of
growth factor signaling pathways by EGFR/ERBB/AKT and a switch from
phospho-Ser118 (pS118)- to pS167-ERa were observed during MCF7-LTED adaptation.
Evaluation of relevant clinical settings identified significant associations
between MCF7-LTED and breast tumor transcriptome profiles that characterize
ERa-negative status, early response to letrozole and tamoxifen, and recurrence
after tamoxifen treatment. In accordance with these profiles, MCF7-LTED cells
showed increased sensitivity to inhibition of FGFR-mediated signaling with
PD173074. This study provides mechanistic insight into acquired resistance to
endocrine therapies of breast cancer and highlights a potential therapeutic
strategy.

PMID: 20711236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Biol Res Nurs. 2010 Jul;12(1):84-97. doi: 10.1177/1099800410371118.

The association between the rs2234693 and rs9340799 estrogen receptor alpha gene 
polymorphisms and risk factors for cardiovascular disease: a review.

Casazza K(1), Page GP, Fernandez JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL, USA.
kristac@uab.edu

Although estrogen is primarily thought of as the hormone involved in female
reproduction, it also plays a role in many additional physiological and
pathological processes. Recent studies have demonstrated an association between
estrogen and clustered risk factors for cardiovascular disease (CVD), such as
lipid and glucose metabolism and obesity-related phenotypes, as well as
occurrence and severity of CVD. Evidence suggesting a genetic basis for this link
is accumulating. Several polymorphisms of the estrogen receptor (ER) alpha (ESR1)
gene exist that may influence the impact of estrogen, leading to clinically
relevant phenotypes. Based on the relationship ERS1 seems to exhibit with CVD
risk factors, these polymorphisms may play a role in the mediation of
vasoprotective effects, modulation of cardiovascular physiology, and development 
of risk factors for CVD. The two most frequently studied polymorphisms located in
ESR1 are often identified by their restriction endonucleases Pvull (rs2234693)
and Xbal (rs9340799). ln this review, we have evaluated and summarized the
results of studies involving rs2234693 and rs9340799 and clustered risk factors
accompanying development of CVD. Despite inconsistent findings, together these
studies provide some support for a relationship between polymorphisms in ESR1 and
risk factors for CVD. These summarized findings do not yet support inclusion of
ESR1 genotypes in genetic testing algorithms for predisposition to CVD, but they 
do indicate that further investigation into the potential connection between ESR1
and risk factors for CVD is warranted.

PMID: 20702456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Clin Chim Acta. 2010 Nov 11;411(21-22):1817-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.08.001.
Epub 2010 Aug 10.

Estrogen receptor a genetic variants and the risk of stroke in a South Indian
population from Andhra Pradesh.

Munshi A(1), Sharma V, Kaul S, Al-Hazzani A, Alshatwi AA, Manohar VR, Rajeshwar
K, Babu MS, Jyothy A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Hospital for Genetic Diseases, Osmania University,
Begumpet, Hyderabad-500016, India. anjanadurani@yahoo.co.in

BACKGROUND: Stroke is a complex disease caused by combination of multiple risk
factors. Recent findings have suggested that stroke has a strong genetic
component. Evidence suggests that variations in the estrogen receptor a (ESR1)
gene may influence stroke risk.
AIMS: The present study was carried out to investigate the role of ESR1 gene
polymorphisms [PvuII (rs 2234693) and XbaI (rs 9340799)] with stroke in a South
Indian population from Andhra Pradesh. The relationship between ESR1 genotypes
with estradiol levels was also investigated in pre- and postmenopausal women.
METHODS: Four hundred patients with ischemic stroke and three hundred and eighty 
subjects were enrolled in this case-control study. Ischemic stroke subtypes were 
classified according to TOAST (Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment)
classification. The ESR1 PvuII and XbaI genotypes were determined by PCR-RFLP
method. Serum estradiol was measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: In case of PvuII polymorphism statistically significant difference was
observed in the genotypic and allelic frequencies between patients and controls
(joint analysis of men and women) (p=0.003 and 0.004 respectively). However, the 
XbaI genotypes and alleles did not show an association with stroke in the study
population. When the analysis was carried out separately for men and women, the
PvuII polymorphism did not show significant association with stroke in men; women
showed a significant association. Further when women were grouped in to
premenopausal and postmenopausal, the premenopausal group did not show a
significant association with the polymorphism but significant association with
stroke was found in postmenopausal women. A stepwise multiple logistic regression
analysis confirmed these findings. Women with pp genotype had low estradiol
levels in comparison with PP genotypic individuals (p<0.05). Further evaluating
the association of this polymorphism with stroke subtypes, we found significant
association of PvuII polymorphism with extracranial atherosclerosis, lacunar and 
cardioembolic stroke.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion our results suggest the PvuII gene polymorphism is
significantly associated with stroke in postmenopausal women in a South Indian
population from Andhra Pradesh. The pp genotypes have average 17ß estradiol
levels which are significantly low in comparison with PP genotypes. Therefore
postmenopausal women with a high frequency of pp genotype are more predisposed to
ischemic stroke. However, this is a preliminary study and the results need to be 
confirmed in a larger cohort.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20699091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Clin Rheumatol. 2010 Nov;29(11):1285-93. doi: 10.1007/s10067-010-1548-6. Epub
2010 Aug 10.

Evaluation of the effects of vitamin D receptor and estrogen receptor 1 gene
polymorphisms on bone mineral density in postmenopausal women.

Durusu Tanriover M(1), Bora Tatar G, Uluturk TD, Dayangac Erden D, Tanriover A,
Kilicarslan A, Oz SG, Erdem Yurter H, Sozen T, Sain Guven G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of General Internal Medicine,
Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, and Department of Orthopedics and
Traumatology, Gazi Mustafa Kemal Public Hospital, 06100, Sihhiye, Ankara, Turkey.
mdurusu@hacettepe.edu.tr

The aim of this study is to evaluate the effects of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1)
and vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms on bone mineral density (BMD) in 
a group of previously untreated osteoporotic women. Effects of demographic,
environmental, and hormonal factors were also evaluated in this context. Fifty
women who did not have a prior diagnosis or treatment of osteoporosis were
compared with 50 nonosteoporotic postmenopausal women. Demographic and
morphometric characteristics, medical history, dietary habits, exercise history, 
and sunlight exposure were recorded. The diagnosis of osteoporosis was made with 
regard to BMD measurements with DEXA. Blood samples were obtained for serum
biochemistry, bone turnover markers, and VDR and ESR1 gene polymorphism analysis.
Polymorphic sites of VDR and ESR1 genes were amplified by polymerase chain
reaction and examined using restriction fragment length polymorphism. Bb genotype
was significantly higher in the osteoporotic group when compared to controls
(p=0.022). Each 1 U decrease in the body mass index (BMI) increased the risk of
osteoporosis by 8% independent of the genotype. We could not observe a
significant effect of ESR1 polymorphism on BMD or osteoporosis risk. The
interaction of ApaI and BsmI genotypes were found to be significant (p=0.041) and
the AaBb genotype, when corrected for BMI, was shown to increase the risk of
osteoporosis five times (p=0.005). However, the results demonstrated
insignificant p values when correction for multiple testing was performed with
the Bonferroni method in the logistic regression model. A predominance of Bb
genotype of the VDR gene was evident in this group of postmenopausal Turkish
women. Moreover, the combined genotype AaBb conferred a five times increased risk
for osteoporosis when corrected for clinical variables.

PMID: 20697762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Sep 20;28(27):4111-9. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.28.4273. Epub 2010
Aug 9.

Genomic index of sensitivity to endocrine therapy for breast cancer.

Symmans WF(1), Hatzis C, Sotiriou C, Andre F, Peintinger F, Regitnig P,
Daxenbichler G, Desmedt C, Domont J, Marth C, Delaloge S, Bauernhofer T, Valero
V, Booser DJ, Hortobagyi GN, Pusztai L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Blvd, Houston, TX 77030, USA. fsymmans@mdanderson.org

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Sep 20;28(27):4101-3.

PURPOSE: We hypothesize that measurement of gene expression related to estrogen
receptor a (ER; gene name ESR1) within a breast cancer sample represents
intrinsic tumoral sensitivity to adjuvant endocrine therapy.
METHODS: A genomic index for sensitivity to endocrine therapy (SET) index was
defined from genes coexpressed with ESR1 in 437 microarray profiles from newly
diagnosed breast cancer, unrelated to treatment or outcome. The association of
SET index and ESR1 levels with distant relapse risk was evaluated from
microarrays of ER-positive breast cancer in two cohorts who received 5 years of
tamoxifen alone as adjuvant endocrine therapy (n = 225 and 298, respectively), a 
cohort who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by tamoxifen and/or
aromatase inhibition (n = 122), and two cohorts who received no adjuvant systemic
therapy (n = 208 and 133, respectively).
RESULTS: The SET index (165 genes) was significantly associated with distant
relapse or death risk in both tamoxifen-treated cohorts (hazard ratio [HR] =
0.70, 95% CI, 0.56 to 0.88, P = .002; and HR = 0.76, 95% CI, 0.63 to 0.93, P =
.007) and in the chemo-endocrine-treated cohort (HR = 0.19; 95% CI, 0.05 to 0.69,
P = .011) independently from pathologic response to chemotherapy, but was not
prognostic in two untreated cohorts. No distant relapse or death was observed
after tamoxifen alone if node-negative and high SET or after chemo-endocrine
therapy if intermediate or high SET.
CONCLUSION: The SET index of ER-related transcription predicted survival benefit 
from adjuvant endocrine therapy, not inherent prognosis. Prior chemotherapy
seemed to enhance the efficacy of adjuvant endocrine therapy related to SET
index.

PMCID: PMC2953969
PMID: 20697068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Eur J Med Res. 2010;15:277-86.

Methylated APC and GSTP1 genes in serum DNA correlate with the presence of
circulating blood tumor cells and are associated with a more aggressive and
advanced breast cancer disease.

Matuschek C(1), Bölke E, Lammering G, Gerber PA, Peiper M, Budach W, Taskin H,
Prisack HB, Schieren G, Orth K, Bojar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Therapy and Radiation Oncology, University of
Düsseldorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Tumor-related methylated DNA and circulating tumor cells (CTC) in the
peripheral blood might be of prognostic importance in breast cancer. Thus, the
aim of our study was to examine free methylated DNA and CTC in the blood from
breast cancer patients and to correlate it with clinicopathological features
known to influence prognosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We prospectively obtained serum samples from 85 patients
with breast cancer and 22 healthy volunteers. Sera were analysed by methylation
specific PCR (MethyLight PCR) for five genes: adenomatous polyposis coli (APC),
ras association domain family protein 1A (RASSF1A), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1),
CDKN2A (p16) and glutathione s-transferase pi 1 (GSTP1). Beta actin (ACTB) served
as control. In parallel matched peripheral blood of 63 patients was used to assay
for circulating tumor cells in the peripheral blood by a modified immunomagnetic 
AdnaTest BreastCancerSelect with PCR detection for EPCAM, MUC1, MGB1 and SPDEF.
RESULTS: A hypermethylation in the APC gene in 29% (25/85), in RASSF1A in 26%
(22/85), in GSTP1 in 18% (14/76) and in ESR1 in 38% (32/85) of all breast cancer 
patients was detected. No hypermethylation of CDKN2A was found (0/25). Blood
samples of patients were defined CTC positive by detecting the EPCAM 13% (8/63), 
MUC1 16% (10/63), MGB 9% (5/55), SPDEF 12% (7/58) and in 27% detecting one or
more genes (15/55). A significant difference was seen in methylated APC DNA
between cancer patients and healthy volunteers. Moreover, methylated APC, RASSF1 
and CTC were significantly different in metastatic versus non-metastatic disease.
In addition, the presence of methylated APC, RASSF1A and CTC correlated
significantly with AJCC-staging (p = 0.001, p = 0.031 and 0.002, respectively).
High incidences of methylations were found for the genes RASSF1 and ESR1 in
healthy individuals (both 23% 5/22). Methylated GSTP1 was predominantly found in 
the serum of patients with large primaries (p = 0.023) and was highly
significantly correlated with positive Her2/neu status (p = 0.003). Elevated
serum CA15.3 was strongly correlated with methylated APC and CTC detection (both 
p = 0.000). Methylated ESR1 failed to exhibit significant correlations with any
of the above mentioned parameters. The presence of CTC in peripheral blood was
significantly associated with methylated APC (p = 0.012) and methylated GSTP1 (p 
= 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The detection of methylated APC and GSTP1 DNA in serum correlated
with the presence of CTC in the blood of breast cancer patients. Both methylated 
DNA and CTC correlated with a more aggressive tumor biology and advanced disease.

PMCID: PMC3351951
PMID: 20696638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biol Reprod. 2010 Nov;83(5):825-32. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.084301. Epub 2010
Aug 4.

Progesterone withdrawal, and not increased circulating relaxin, mediates the
decrease in myometrial relaxin receptor (RXFP1) expression in late gestation in
rats.

Vodstrcil LA(1), Shynlova O, Westcott K, Laker R, Simpson E, Wlodek ME, Parry LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Physiology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.

In pregnant rats, a significant decrease in myometrial relaxin family peptide
receptor 1 (RXFP1) expression, indicative of a functional relaxin withdrawal for 
activation of myometrial contractions, occurs in late gestation and during
spontaneous labor. This coincides with the highest level of circulating relaxin
and a decrease in progesterone. We investigated the potential regulatory role of 
these two systemic factors on myometrial RXFP1 expression by examining the
effects of the antiprogestin RU486 and a monoclonal antibody against rat relaxin 
(MCA1) in pregnant rats. Rats were injected with RU486 on Gestational Day (GD) 7,
16, or 19 and were killed on GD 8, 17, or 20. RU486 caused a significant
reduction in myometrial RXFP1. Plasma progesterone and 17beta-estradiol levels
were increased in RU486-treated animals compared with controls. RU486 treatment
also caused significant increases in myometrial Esr1 and Vegf and a decrease in
Esr2. MCA1 was administered i.v. to rats from GD 17 to GD 19. On GD 20, no
significant effect of MCA1 treatment on myometrial RXFP1 expression was observed 
compared with controls. Furthermore, there was no change in Esr1 or Esr2. A
significant reduction in myometrial Vegf, however, was observed. We suggest that 
blocking progesterone action with RU486 increases plasma 17beta-estradiol and
myometrial Esr1 and results in decreased RXFP1 expression. In summary, myometrial
RXFP1 expression is mediated mainly by progesterone and not circulating relaxin
in pregnant rats.

PMID: 20686183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jan;33(1):198.e15-24. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.06.016. Epub 2010 Jul 31.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene variants are associated with Alzheimer's disease.

Boada M(1), Antunez C, López-Arrieta J, Caruz A, Moreno-Rey C, Ramírez-Lorca R,
Morón FJ, Hernández I, Mauleón A, Rosende-Roca M, Martínez-Lage P, Marín J,
Tárraga L, Alegret M, Pedrajas JR, Urda N, Royo JL, Saez ME, Gayán J,
González-Pérez A, Real LM, Ruiz A, Galán JJ.

Author information: 
(1)ACE Foundation, Catalan Institute of Applied Neurosciences, Barcelona, Spain.

The present research is aimed at assessing the role of 3 estrogen receptor alpha 
(ESR1) gene variants in late onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) susceptibility. One
thousand one hundred thirteen unrelated late onset sporadic AD patients, 1109
healthy controls and 121 neurologically healthy elderly controls were used to
carry out case-control genetic association studies with ESR1 rs3844508,
rs2234693, and ESR1 noncoding deletion 1 (ESR1-NCD1) polymorphisms. Thirty-five
healthy male samples were used for molecular analyses. The rs2234693 polymorphism
is associated with AD in our population (odds ratio [OR], 1.29; p = 0.008). The
rs3844508 marker confers protection against AD in males (OR, 0.57; p = 0.001) and
the deletion ESR1-NCD1 is a risk factor for AD in women (OR, 1.67; p < 0.001).
Molecular analyses on ESR1-NCD1 indicate that this deletion confers a higher
response to estradiol activity on ESR1 receptor and it is also associated with
differential expression of ESR1 isoforms. Our results support the involvement of 
ESR1 gene in AD and point to the existence of sexual dimorphism for ESR1 markers.
In addition, carriers of ESR1-NCD1 deletion could overrespond to estradiol
action.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20674091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS Genet. 2010 Jul 22;6(7):e1001029. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001029.

Ancestry-shift refinement mapping of the C6orf97-ESR1 breast cancer
susceptibility locus.

Stacey SN(1), Sulem P, Zanon C, Gudjonsson SA, Thorleifsson G, Helgason A,
Jonasdottir A, Besenbacher S, Kostic JP, Fackenthal JD, Huo D, Adebamowo C,
Ogundiran T, Olson JE, Fredericksen ZS, Wang X, Look MP, Sieuwerts AM, Martens
JW, Pajares I, Garcia-Prats MD, Ramon-Cajal JM, de Juan A, Panadero A, Ortega E, 
Aben KK, Vermeulen SH, Asadzadeh F, van Engelenburg KC, Margolin S, Shen CY, Wu
PE, Försti A, Lenner P, Henriksson R, Johansson R, Enquist K, Hallmans G, Jonsson
T, Sigurdsson H, Alexiusdottir K, Gudmundsson J, Sigurdsson A, Frigge ML,
Gudmundsson L, Kristjansson K, Halldorsson BV, Styrkarsdottir U, Gulcher JR,
Hemminki K, Lindblom A, Kiemeney LA, Mayordomo JI, Foekens JA, Couch FJ, Olopade 
OI, Gudbjartsson DF, Thorsteinsdottir U, Rafnar T, Johannsson OT, Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. simon.stacey@decode.is

We used an approach that we term ancestry-shift refinement mapping to investigate
an association, originally discovered in a GWAS of a Chinese population, between 
rs2046210[T] and breast cancer susceptibility. The locus is on 6q25.1 in
proximity to the C6orf97 and estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) genes. We identified 
a panel of SNPs that are correlated with rs2046210 in Chinese, but not
necessarily so in other ancestral populations, and genotyped them in breast
cancer case:control samples of Asian, European, and African origin, a total of
10,176 cases and 13,286 controls. We found that rs2046210[T] does not confer
substantial risk of breast cancer in Europeans and Africans (OR = 1.04, P =
0.099, and OR = 0.98, P = 0.77, respectively). Rather, in those ancestries, an
association signal arises from a group of less common SNPs typified by rs9397435.
The rs9397435[G] allele was found to confer risk of breast cancer in European (OR
= 1.15, P = 1.2 x 10(-3)), African (OR = 1.35, P = 0.014), and Asian (OR = 1.23, 
P = 2.9 x 10(-4)) population samples. Combined over all ancestries, the OR was
1.19 (P = 3.9 x 10(-7)), was without significant heterogeneity between ancestries
(P(het) = 0.36) and the SNP fully accounted for the association signal in each
ancestry. Haplotypes bearing rs9397435[G] are well tagged by rs2046210[T] only in
Asians. The rs9397435[G] allele showed associations with both estrogen receptor
positive and estrogen receptor negative breast cancer. Using early-draft data
from the 1,000 Genomes project, we found that the risk allele of a novel SNP
(rs77275268), which is closely correlated with rs9397435, disrupts a partially
methylated CpG sequence within a known CTCF binding site. These studies
demonstrate that shifting the analysis among ancestral populations can provide
valuable resolution in association mapping.

PMCID: PMC2908678
PMID: 20661439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dig Dis Sci. 2011 Feb;56(2):387-96. doi: 10.1007/s10620-010-1312-4. Epub 2010 Jul
16.

DNA methylation in the rectal mucosa is associated with crypt proliferation and
fecal short-chain fatty acids.

Worthley DL(1), Whitehall VL, Le Leu RK, Irahara N, Buttenshaw RL, Mallitt KA,
Greco SA, Ramsnes I, Winter J, Hu Y, Ogino S, Young GP, Leggett BA.

Author information: 
(1)Conjoint Gastroenterology Laboratory, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital
Research Foundation Clinical Research Centre, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
daniel.worthley@uqconnect.edu.au

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation varies throughout the normal colorectal mucosa and
DNA methylation in normal appearing mucosa is associated with serrated and
adenomatous neoplasia elsewhere within the colorectum.
AIMS: The purpose of this study was to measure luminal chemistry, rectal
proliferation and mucosal DNA methylation and thus determine whether regional and
pathological patterns of DNA methylation could be explained by luminal and
epithelial factors.
METHODS: Twenty healthy subjects had normal rectal mucosal biopsies and a 24-h
fecal collection. Rectal biopsies were analyzed for epithelial proliferation
(Ki67 immunohistochemistry) and DNA methylation at 17 different markers,
including "type A" markers (ESR1, GATA5, HIC1, HPP1, SFRP1), "type C" markers
(MGMT, MLH1, CDKN2A, MINT1, MINT2, MINT31, IGF2, CACNA1G, NEUROG1, SOCS1, RUNX3),
and LINE-1. Fecal analysis included short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), pH and
ammonia. Mean "type A" and CIMP panel methylation Z-scores were calculated.
RESULTS: Rectal proliferation was significantly correlated with methylation at
ESR1 (<U+03C1> = 0.81, P = 0.003) and GATA5 (<U+03C1> = 0.78, P = 0.012). LINE-1 methylation
was 71.7 vs. 74.1%, in patients with "low" and "high" fecal total SCFA
concentration (defined by the median value), respectively (P = 0.0019). On
multivariate linear regression "type A" methylation was independently associated 
with rectal proliferation (P = 0.001). LINE-1 methylation was directly associated
with rectal proliferation (P = 0.038) and total fecal SCFA concentration (P =
0.002), and inversely associated with fecal NH(3) concentrations (P = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation in normal rectal mucosa is associated with crypt
proliferation and fecal SCFA concentration. These associations may help to
explain regional differences in DNA methylation as well as providing a possible
link between the colorectal lumen and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20635146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Oct;49(10):948-62. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20807.

Identification of primary gene targets of TFAP2C in hormone responsive breast
carcinoma cells.

Woodfield GW(1), Chen Y, Bair TB, Domann FE, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA.

The TFAP2C transcription factor is involved in mammary development,
differentiation, and oncogenesis. Previous studies established a role for TFAP2C 
in the regulation of ESR1 (ERalpha) and ERBB2 (Her2) in breast carcinomas.
However, the role of TFAP2C in different breast cancer phenotypes has not been
examined in detail. To develop a more complete characterization of TFAP2C target 
genes, ChIP-seq with anti-TFAP2C antibody and expression arrays with TFAP2C knock
down were analyzed in MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells. Genomic sequences common to
the ChIP-seq data set defined the consensus sequence for TFAP2C chromatin binding
as the nine base sequence SCCTSRGGS (S = G/C, r = A/G), which closely matches the
previously defined optimal in vitro binding site. Comparing expression arrays
before and after knock down of TFAP2C with ChIP-seq data demonstrated a
conservative estimate that 8% of genes altered by TFAP2C expression are primary
target genes and includes genes that are both induced and repressed by TFAP2C. A 
set of 447 primary target genes of TFAP2C was identified, which included ESR1
(ERalpha), FREM2, RET, FOXA1, WWOX, GREB1, MYC, and members of the retinoic acid 
response pathway. The identification of ESR1, WWOX, GREB1, and FOXA1 as primary
targets confirmed the role of TFAP2C in hormone response. TFAP2C plays a critical
role in gene regulation in hormone responsive breast cancer and its target genes 
are different than for the Her2 breast cancer phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2928401
PMID: 20629094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Placenta. 2010 Jul;31(7):568-75. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2010.05.004. Epub 2010
Jun 8.

Placental gene expression in a rat 'model' of placental insufficiency.

Goyal R(1), Yellon SM, Longo LD, Mata-Greenwood E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Perinatal Biology, Department of Basic Sciences, School of
Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA 92350, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Placental insufficiency is a major factor associated with pregnancy
complications such as miscarriages, intrauterine growth restriction and
pre-eclampsia. Recent studies have identified the Brown Norway (BN) rat as a
natural 'model' of placental insufficiency associated with decreased trophoblast 
remodeling of maternal uterine arteries.
HYPOTHESIS: Genetic pathways involved in angiogenesis and immune cell regulation 
are dysregulated in the placenta of BN rats.
METHODS: Global gene expression in placentas from BN rats were compared with that
from Sprague-Dawley (SD) controls at 17.5 days of gestation using the Affimetrix 
Rat 1.0 microarray chip, and results confirmed with real-time PCR and
immunoblotting.
RESULTS: We found significant differences in 272 genes with 108 being
up-regulated and 164 down-regulated in BN placentas compared to SD placentas. BN 
placentas overexpressed genes involved in the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) such
as Ace, Ace2, Agtr1a, Nox4, and Ephx2, while key genes involved in angiogenesis, 
such as Mmp1, Mmp10, Fgfbp1, Esr1, Itga2, Rgs5, and Ccnb1 were down-regulated. We
also observed increased expression of Timd2, Itm2a, Irak3, and Csf1r, and
decreased expression of Slpi, Ncam1, and Igsf3 in BN placentas. In addition, we
observed lower placental weights in BN males compared to BN females, together
with increased expression of Cyp1a1 in BN males, as compared to BN females.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates differential expression of genes
involved in blood pressure, angiogenesis and immune cell regulation in BN
placenta, and suggests that the RAS may be involved in the pathogenesis of
placental dysfunction observed in BN rats.

PMID: 20621762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010 Sep 1;247(2):98-104. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2010.05.017. Epub 2010 Jun 4.

Developmental programming: impact of fetal exposure to endocrine-disrupting
chemicals on gonadotropin-releasing hormone and estrogen receptor mRNA in sheep
hypothalamus.

Mahoney MM(1), Padmanabhan V.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Biosciences and Neuroscience Program, University of Illinois, 2001 
S. Lincoln Ave., Urbana, IL 61802, USA.

Bisphenol-A (BPA) and methoxychlor (MXC), two endocrine-disrupting chemicals
(EDCs) with estrogenic and antiandrogenic effects, disrupt the reproductive
system. BPA has profound effects on luteinizing hormone (LH) surge amplitude, and
MXC has profound effects on on LH surge timing in sheep. The neural mechanisms
involved in the differential disruption of the LH surge by these two EDCs remain 
to be elucidated. We tested the hypothesis that the differential effects of BPA
and MXC on LH surge system involved changes in hypothalamic
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and estrogen receptors (ESR), ESR1 and
ESR2, mRNA expression. Pregnant sheep were given daily injections of cottonseed
oil (controls), MXC, or BPA (5mg/kg/day) from day 30 to 90 of gestation (term
147d). Offspring from these animals were euthanized as adults, during the late
follicular phase following synchronization of estrus with prostaglandin
F(2alpha), just before the expected onset of preovulatory LH surge and changes in
mRNA expression of hypothalamic GnRH, ESR1, and ESR2 quantified following in situ
hybridization. GnRH mRNA expression was significantly lower in both groups of
EDC-treated females compared to controls. ESR1 expression was increased in
prenatal BPA- but not MXC-treated females in medial preoptic area relative to
controls. In contrast, ESR2 expression was reduced in the medial preoptic area of
both EDC-treated groups. Differences in expression of ESR1/ESR2 receptors may
contribute to the differential effects of BPA and MXC on the LH surge system.
These findings provide support that prenatal exposure to EDCs alters the neural
developmental trajectory leading to long-term reproductive consequences in the
adult female.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2914852
PMID: 20621667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Menopause. 2010 Jul;17(4):874-86. doi: 10.1097/gme.0b013e3181df4a19.

A review of estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) polymorphisms, mood, and
cognition.

Sundermann EE(1), Maki PM, Bishop JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL, USA.
esundermann@psych.uic.edu

OBJECTIVE: There are significant individual differences in the extent to which
mood and cognition change as a function of reproductive stage, menstrual phase,
postpartum, and hormone therapy use. This review explores the extent to which
variations or polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) predict
cognitive and mood outcomes.
METHODS: A literature search was conducted from 1995 to November 2009 through
PubMed, Embase, and PsychINFO. Twenty-five manuscripts that summarize
investigations of ESR1 in mental health were reviewed.
RESULTS: Among studies investigating ESR1 in relation to cognition, 11 of 14
case-control studies reported an association between ESR1 polymorphisms and risk 
for developing dementia. Three of four prospective cohort studies reported an
association between ESR1 polymorphisms and significant cognitive decline. There
are inconsistencies between case-control and cohort studies regarding whether
specific ESR1 alleles increase or decrease the risk for cognitive dysfunction.
The relationships between ESR1 and cognitive impairment tend to be specific to or
driven by women and restricted to risk for Alzheimer disease rather than other
dementia causes. Three of five studies examining ESR1 polymorphisms in relation
to anxiety or depressive symptoms found significant associations. Significant
associations have also been reported between ESR1 polymorphisms and
childhood-onset mood disorder and premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: A strong relationship between ESR1 variants and cognitive outcomes
is evident, and preliminary evidence suggests a role of the ESR1 gene in certain 
mood outcomes. Insights into the discordant results will come from future studies
that include haplotype analyses, analyses within specific ethnic/racial
populations, and sex-stratified analyses.

PMCID: PMC2901885
PMID: 20616674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Jul;19(7):1871-8. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-0216.

Inherited variations in AR, ESR1, and ESR2 genes are not associated with prostate
cancer aggressiveness or with efficacy of androgen deprivation therapy.

Sun T(1), Lee GS, Werner L, Pomerantz M, Oh WK, Kantoff PW, Freedman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Sex steroid hormone receptors mediate essential processes in normal
prostate growth and contribute to prostate cancer development.
METHOD: In this study, we investigated the association between common inherited
variation of the AR, ESR1, and ESR2 genes and two clinically relevant traits: the
risk of developing aggressive prostate cancer and the response to androgen
deprivation therapy (ADT) in a hospital-based cohort. A total of 43 tagging
single nucleotide polymorphisms covering the loci of AR (n = 4), ESR1 (n = 32),
and ESR2 (n = 7) were successfully genotyped in 4,073 prostate cancer cases.
RESULTS: None of these single nucleotide polymorphisms were significantly
associated with disease aggressiveness as assessed by the D'Amico risk
classification, pathologic stage, or the response to ADT.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that common genetic variations in AR, ESR1, or
ESR2 are not strongly associated with prostate cancer aggressiveness or response 
to ADT.
IMPACT: Our study did not find convincing evidence of inherited variations in the
major receptors for androgens and estrogens and their associations with prostate 
cancer traits.

PMCID: PMC3755451
PMID: 20615892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Maturitas. 2010 Sep;67(1):84-90. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2010.05.011. Epub 2010 
Jul 6.

XbaI polymorphism of the estrogen receptor alpha gene influences the effect of
raloxifene on the endothelial function.

Zavratnik A(1), Zegura B, Marc J, Prezelj J, Pfeifer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University Medical Centre, Ljubljanska 5, 2000
Maribor, Slovenia. Andrej.Zavratnik@ukc-mb.si

OBJECTIVES: Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in
postmenopausal women and estrogen deficiency may be an important factor in its
development. The selective estrogen receptor modulator, raloxifene, exerts a part
of its actions through the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) activation. We explored
if polymorphisms of the ESR1 modify the effects of 6 months raloxifene treatment 
on endothelial function.
METHODS: A total of 53 postmenopausal women, mean age 59.7+/-6.2, finished the
prospective clinical trial. The PvuII, XbaI, and P325P polymorphisms of the ESR1 
gene were analyzed. In all subjects endothelium-dependent flow mediated
dilatation (FMD) and cell adhesion molecules (CAM) ICAM-1, VCAM-1 and E-selectin 
were measured before and after 6 months of raloxifene treatment.
RESULTS: There was no difference in FMD between the ESR1 genotypes, at baseline. 
After raloxifene treatment, the FMD was significantly greater in subjects with XX
genotype of XbaI polymorphism compared to xx (p=0.03) and borderline greater when
compared to Xx genotype (p=0.053). The FMD increased significantly with
raloxifene treatment in women with Xx genotype of XbaI and Pp genotype of PvuII
polymorphisms (p=0.027 and p=0.034, respectively). The P325P polymorphism did not
influence the FMD after raloxifene. None of the ESR1 gene polymorphisms had any
impact on the levels of CAM before or after the treatment. When analysing the
whole group, a significant decrease in E-selectin (p<0.001) and a small increase 
in ICAM-1 levels (p=0.029) was observed with raloxifene treatment, but no
influence on VCAM-1 levels or FMD overall was seen.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that XbaI and possibly PvuII polymorphisms of the
ESR1 gene influence the impact of raloxifene treatment on endothelial function.
This effect could be of pharmacogenomic and clinical importance.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20609538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2010 Oct;157(2):198-204. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2010.06.003. Epub 2010 Jun 23.

Upregulation of estrogen receptor subtypes and vitellogenin mRNA in cinnamon
clownfish Amphiprion melanopus during the sex change process: profiles on effects
of 17beta-estradiol.

Kim NN(1), Jin DH, Lee J, Kil GS, Choi CY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Marine Environment & BioScience, Korea Maritime University, Busan 
606-791, Republic of Korea.

In the present study, we investigated the expression pattern of estrogen
receptors (esr) and vitellogenin (vtg) mRNA in the gonads and liver during sex
change in cinnamon clownfish by using quantitative polymerase chain reaction. We 
divided gonadal development during the sex change from male to female into 3
stages (mature male, male at 90days after removing female, and mature female) and
investigated esr and vtg mRNA expressions during the sex change. With female, the
esr and vtg mRNA expressions increased. In western blot analysis, Esr1 protein
was detected only in the ovaries of female cinnamon clownfish. Also, to
understand the effect of 17beta-estradiol (E(2)), we investigated the esr and vtg
mRNA expression patterns in the gonads and liver, and the changes in plasma E(2) 
level after E(2) injection. E(2) treatment increased both mRNA expression levels 
of esr and vtg and plasma E(2) levels. The present study describes the molecular 
characterization of esr subtypes and the interactions between esr and vtg after
E(2) treatment in cinnamon clownfish.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20601066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2010 Oct;122(4):193-203. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2010.06.011. Epub 2010 Jun 25.

Association of polymorphisms in the estrogen receptors alpha, and beta (ESR1,
ESR2) with the occurrence of male infertility and semen parameters.

Safarinejad MR(1), Shafiei N, Safarinejad S.

Author information: 
(1)safarinejad@urologist.md

Male infertility is a multifactorial condition with a strong genetic component.
In the last decade a large number of investigations focused on the identification
of gene variants affecting spermatogenesis in human. Polymorphisms of the
estrogen receptor (ER) genes, have been implicated in male infertility, however, 
comprehensive data are lacking. We investigated the association between the ER-a 
gene (ESR1) PvuII and XbaI and ER-ß gene (ESR2) RsaI and Alul polymorphisms and
the idiopathic male infertility in Iranian males. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
method and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) were used to detect
the ER-a, and ER-ß gene polymorphisms in 164 infertile men and 164 age-matched
healthy controls. Reproductive hormones were measured and at least two semen
analyses were performed in each subject. Significant differences were observed in
the frequency distribution of Pvull and XbaI in the ESR-a gene and RsaI and Alul 
in the ER-ß gene between patients and controls. The presence of the ER-a Pvull TC
(OR = 0.56, 95% CI: 0.26-0.80; P = 0.011), ER-a XbaI AG (OR = 0.51, 95% CI:
0.31-0.84; P = 0.017), and ER-ß Alul GG (OR = 0.48, 95% CI: 0.265-0.84; P =
0.012) genotypes suggest a protective effect for infertility. The ER-ß RsaI AG
(OR = 2.32, 95% CI: 1.61-3.22; P = 0.012) and ER-ß Alul AG (OR=2.76, 95% CI:
1.64-3.66; P=0.014) genotypes are associated with increased infertility risk.
Subjects (both fertile and infertile) with ER-a Pvull TT, ER-a XbaI AA, ER-ß RsaI
AG, and ER-ß Alul AG genotypes had significantly lower levels of serum sex
hormone binding globulin (SHBG), and luteinizing hormone (LH), but, higher serum 
levels of free estradiol and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH). The same
genotypes had significantly lower values for sperm density, sperm motility, and
percentage of sperm with normal morphology. Our results further suggest a
possible role of ESR-a, and ER-ß variants on male infertility. Further studies
are needed to replicate our findings as well as to better elucidate the
biological mechanisms of the modulation of ESR-a, and ER-ß on male infertility.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20599614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Clin Chim Acta. 2010 Dec 14;411(23-24):1883-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.06.028.
Epub 2010 Jul 3.

The -351A/G polymorphism of ESR1 is associated with risk of myocardial infarction
but not with extreme longevity.

Roszkowska-Gancarz M(1), Kurylowicz A, Polosak J, Ambroziak M,
Puzianowska-Kuznicka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Center of
Postgraduate Education, 99/103 Marymoncka Street, 01-813 Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Women live longer than men. Some possible reasons for this advantage 
are the protection provided by high concentrations of 17ß-estradiol (E2) during
the premenopausal period and polymorphic variants of the estrogen receptors
(ERs), which mediate various cardiovascular functions of E2.
METHODS: We tested whether the -351A/G and -397T/C polymorphisms of the
ERa-encoding ESR1 were associated with extreme longevity. The genomic DNA of 148 
centenarians (C), 414 young controls (Y), and 208 myocardial infarction patients 
(MI) was analyzed by RFLP-PCR.
RESULTS: Both polymorphisms were equally distributed in the Y, C, and in
centenarians never diagnosed with MI (HC). In centenarians, none of these
polymorphisms was associated with a particular lipid profile. The AA genotype of 
the -351A/G polymorphism was less frequent in the C, HC and Y groups than in MI
patients (p=0.058, p=0.021, and p=0.004, respectively). In MI patients, the GG
genotype of the -351A/G polymorphism was associated with significantly lower mean
total cholesterol, LDL, and HDL levels compared to the AG (p=0.0194, p=0.0213,
and p=0.0367, respectively) and AA genotypes (p=0.0014, p=0.0078, and p=0.0448,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The -351A/G ESR1 polymorphism might be associated with MI, but not
with extreme longevity.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 20599431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Cancer Res. 2010 Jul;8(7):1048-59. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0189. Epub
2010 Jun 29.

Long-term stability of demethylation after transient exposure to
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine correlates with sustained RNA polymerase II occupancy.

Kagey JD(1), Kapoor-Vazirani P, McCabe MT, Powell DR, Vertino PM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics and Molecular Biology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

DNA methyltransferase inhibitors are currently the standard of care for
myelodysplastic syndrome and are in clinical trials for leukemias and solid
tumors. However, the molecular basis underlying their activity remains poorly
understood. Here, we studied the induction and long-term stability of gene
reactivation at three methylated tumor suppressor loci in response to the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaCdR) in human breast
cancer cells. At the TMS1/ASC locus, treatment with 5-azaCdR resulted in partial 
DNA demethylation, the reengagement of RNA polymerase II (Pol II), and a shift
from a repressive chromatin profile marked with H3K9me2 and H4K20me3 to an active
profile enriched in H3ac and H3K4me2. Using a single-molecule approach coupling
chromatin immunoprecipitation with bisulfite sequencing, we show that H3ac,
H3K4me2, and Pol II selectively associated with the demethylated alleles, whereas
H3K9me2 preferentially marked alleles resistant to demethylation. H4K20me3 was
unaffected by DNA demethylation and associated with both unmethylated and
methylated alleles. After drug removal, TMS1 underwent partial remethylation, yet
a subset of alleles remained stably demethylated for over 3 months. These alleles
remained selectively associated with H3K4me2, H3ac, and Pol II and correlated
with a sustained low level of gene expression. TMS1 alleles reacquired H3K9me2
over time, and those alleles that became remethylated retained H3ac. In contrast,
CDH1 and ESR1 were remethylated and completely silenced within approximately 1
week of drug removal, and failed to maintain stably unmethylated alleles. Our
data suggest that the ability to maintain Pol II occupancy is a critical factor
in the long-term stability of drug-induced CpG island demethylation.

PMCID: PMC3086892
PMID: 20587535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2011 Jun;27(6):425-33. doi: 10.3109/09513590.2010.495434.
Epub 2010 Jun 29.

Polymorphisms in ESR1, ESR2 and HSD17B1 genes are associated with fertility
status in endometriosis.

Lamp M(1), Peters M, Reinmaa E, Haller-Kikkatalo K, Kaart T, Kadastik U, Karro H,
Metspalu A, Salumets A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
merit.lamp@ut.ee

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether polymorphisms in genes involved in biosynthesis
and signalling of sex steroids influence susceptibility to endometriosis and to
infertility associated with it.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients with endometriosis (n = 150) and fertile controls
(n = 199) were genotyped for polymorphisms in oestrogen receptor genes ESR1
(rs2234693 - T/C single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), dinucleotide (TA)(n)
repeat) and ESR2 (dinucleotide (CA)(n) repeat), progesterone receptor gene PGR
(rs10895068 - G/A SNP, 306-bp Alu-insertion), 17ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
type 1 gene HSD17B1 (rs605059 - A/G SNP), and aromatase gene CYP19A1 (rs10046 -
C/T SNP, (TTTA)(n) tetranucleotide repeat, 3-bp TCT insertion/deletion
polymorphism).
RESULTS: The HSD17B1 A/G SNP A allele increased overall endometriosis risk and
the risk of stage I-II disease, while ESR1 longer (TA)(n) repeats only correlated
with susceptibility to stage I-II endometriosis. When considering patients'
fertility status, HSD17B1 A/G SNP A allele and ESR1 longer (TA)(n) repeats were
associated with endometriosis accompanied by infertility, while ESR2 shorter
(CA)(n) repeats were linked with endometriosis without infertility. Other
polymorphisms were distributed similarly among patients and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants in ESR1, ESR2, and HSD17B1 genes could modify
susceptibility to endometriosis and might influence the fertility status in
endometriosis patients.

PMID: 20586553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Pathol. 2010 Aug;177(2):884-95. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.091166. Epub 2010
Jun 25.

Loss of estrogen receptor 1 enhances cervical cancer invasion.

Zhai Y(1), Bommer GT, Feng Y, Wiese AB, Fearon ER, Cho KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109-2200, USA.

If left untreated, some cervical high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions will
progress to invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), but the molecular events
conferring invasive potential remain poorly defined. In prior work, we identified
48 genes that were down-regulated in SCCs compared with high-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesions and normal squamous epithelia. In this study, a
functional screening strategy was used to identify which of these genes regulate 
cervical cancer cell invasion. Two independent squamous epithelial cell lines
were transduced with a library of short hairpin RNAs targeting the differentially
expressed genes and tested for invasion of the chick chorioallantoic membrane.
PCR was used to recover specific short hairpin RNAs from cells that invaded the
chorioallantoic membrane. Constructs targeting estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) were
highly enriched in the invasive cells. The short hairpin RNA-mediated inhibition 
of ESR1 in SCC- and precancer-derived cell lines increased invasiveness in both
in vivo and in vitro assays. Conversely, restoration of ESR1 expression in
ESR1-negative cervical cancer cells reduced cell invasiveness. Loss of ESR1
expression was found to accompany cervical cancer progression in an analysis of
primary normal cervix, low grade squamous intraepithelial lesions, high-grade
squamous intraepithelial lesions, and SCC specimens. Molecular mechanisms
underlying down-regulation of ESR1 in invasive cervical carcinomas appear to be
complex and likely heterogeneous. Our findings indicate that loss of ESR1 has a
major role in mediating cervical cancer invasion and progression.

PMCID: PMC2913367
PMID: 20581058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Genet Sel Evol. 2010 Jun 25;42:23. doi: 10.1186/1297-9686-42-23.

Non-additive effects of RBP4, ESR1 and IGF2 polymorphisms on litter size at
different parities in a Chinese-European porcine line.

Muñoz M(1), Fernández AI, Ovilo C, Muñoz G, Rodriguez C, Fernández A, Alves E,
Silió L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Mejora Genética Animal, INIA, Ctra de la Coruña km 7.5,
Madrid, Spain. mariamm@inia.es

BACKGROUND: The aim of this work was to study the effects on litter size of
variants of the porcine genes RBP4, ESR1 and IGF2, currently used in genetic
tests for different purposes. Moreover, we investigated a possible effect of the 
interaction between RBP4-MspI and ESR1-PvuII polymorphisms. The
IGF2-intron3-G3072A polymorphism is actually used to select lean growth, but
other possible effects of this polymorphism on reproductive traits need to be
evaluated.
METHODS: Detection of polymorphisms in the genomic and cDNA sequences of RBP4
gene was carried out. RBP4-MspI and IGF2-intron3-G3072A were genotyped in a
hyperprolific Chinese-European line (Tai-Zumu) and three new RBP4 polymorphisms
were genotyped in different pig breeds. A bivariate animal model was implemented 
in association analyses considering the number of piglets born alive at early
(NBA12) and later parities (NBA3+ ) as different traits. A joint analysis of
RBP4-MspI and ESR1-PvuII was performed to test their possible interaction. In the
IGF2 analysis, paternal or maternal imprinting effects were also considered.
RESULTS: Four different RBP4 haplotypes were detected (TGAC, GGAG, GAAG and GATG)
in different pig breeds and wild boars. A significant interaction effect between 
RBP4-MspI and ESR1-PvuII polymorphisms of 0.61 +/- 0.29 piglets was detected on
NBA3+. The IGF2 analysis revealed a significant increase on NBA3+ of 0.74 +/-
0.37 piglets for the paternally inherited allele A.
CONCLUSIONS: All the analyzed pig and wild boar populations shared one of the
four detected RBP4 haplotypes. This suggests an ancestral origin of the quoted
haplotype. The joint use of RBP4-MspI and ESR1-PvuII polymorphisms could be
implemented to select for higher prolificacy in the Tai-Zumu line. In this
population, the paternal allele IGF2-intron3-3072A increased litter size from the
third parity. The non-additive effects on litter size reported here should be
tested before implementation in other pig breeding schemes.

PMCID: PMC3238285
PMID: 20576168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cancer. 2010 Oct 1;116(19):4495-501. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25348.

Relation between normal rectal methylation, smoking status, and the presence or
absence of colorectal adenomas.

Paun BC(1), Kukuruga D, Jin Z, Mori Y, Cheng Y, Duncan M, Stass SA, Montgomery E,
Hutcheon D, Meltzer SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, the Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is 1 of the leading causes of death in the
Western world. CRC develops from premalignant lesions, chiefly colorectal
adenomas. Currently, the most accurate and recommended screening method for
finding colorectal adenomas is colonoscopy performed on all individuals aged>50
years. However, the costs and risks associated with this procedure are relatively
high. The objectives of the current study were to correlate epigenetic
alterations that occur in normal rectal mucosa, smoking status, and age with the 
presence or absence of concomitant colorectal adenomas and to assess the
potential clinical value of methylation in normal rectal biopsies as a screening 
assay for the presence of polyps and, hence, the need for a full colonoscopy.
METHODS: One hundred thirteen normal rectal mucosal biopsies from 113 patients
were studied. DNA was extracted, modified with sodium bisulfite, and subjected to
real-time quantitative, methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction analysis
for the following genes: adenomatous polyposis coli (APC); cadherin 1, type 1,
E-cadherin (epithelial) (CDH1); estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1); cytokine high in
normal 1 (HIN1); hyperplastic polyposis protein 1 (HPP1); O-6 methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT); neural epidermal growth factor-like 1 (NELL1); splicing
factor 3B, 14-kDa subunit (p14); cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor 2B
(inhibits CDK4) (p15); retinoic acid receptor beta (RARß); somatostatin (SST);
tachykinin, precursor 1 (TAC1); and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) 
metallopeptidase inhibitor 3 (TIMP3). Data were then analyzed using several
proprietary software programs.
RESULTS: By using several sets of genes, clinical characteristics, and
multivariate analyses, the authors developed a prediction model for the presence 
of concomitant colorectal adenomas at the time of rectal biopsy. They also
observed strong correlations between smoking status and rectal methylation
pattern and between smoking status and the presence or risk of concomitant
adenomas.
CONCLUSIONS: A prediction model was developed for the presence of colorectal
adenomas based on gene methylation patterns in the normal rectum. The results
indicated that these genes may be involved in early stages of adenoma formation. 
The observed epigenetic alterations in these markers may be caused in part by the
effects of smoking and/or age. Normal rectal methylation may be useful as a
biomarker for narrowing the population in need of screening colonoscopy.

Copyright © 2010 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC2988654
PMID: 20572039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Jul 1;16(13):3473-84. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-3092.
Epub 2010 Jun 22.

Diverse associations between ESR1 polymorphism and breast cancer development and 
progression.

Ding SL(1), Yu JC, Chen ST, Hsu GC, Hsu HM, Ho JY, Lin YH, Chang CC, Fann CS,
Cheng CW, Wu PE, Shen CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Kang-Ning Junior College of Medical Care and
Management, Taipei, Taiwan. slding@knjc.edu.tw

PURPOSE: To test the hypothesis that polymorphisms of ESR1, the gene encoding
estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha), are associated with susceptibility, clinical
phenotype, and progression of breast cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A case-control study was done on 940 patients with incident
breast cancer and 1,547 healthy female controls. Fifteen single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) selected from chr6:152,170,379-152,466,100 (exons 1-8 of the 
ESR1 gene, excluding flanking sequences), reflecting major polymorphisms of this 
gene, were genotyped. Frequencies of SNPs were compared between cases and
controls to identify SNPs associated with cancer susceptibility and between cases
with different clinical phenotypes to determine the role of ESR1 polymorphism in 
cancer progression.
RESULTS: SNPs located in one cluster in intron 1 and one haplotype, based on
these SNPs, showed a significant association with breast cancer susceptibility.
The tumorigenic contribution of these intron 1 SNPs was more obvious in
combination with reproductive risk factors (P for interaction <0.05). One of
these intron 1 SNPs was also significantly associated with low ERalpha expression
in tumors. Interestingly, the same intron 1 SNPs showed a correlation with worse 
clinical phenotypes, including poor differentiation of tumor cells and a late
stage. These intron 1 SNPs also showed a significant association with the 5-year 
breast cancer-specific survival rate of patients, but had opposite effects in
ERalpha-negative and ERalpha-positive early-stage patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide support for diverse roles of ESR1 polymorphism 
in determining susceptibility in different stages of breast cancer. The
differences between the important ESR1 SNPs identified in Chinese women in this
study and those identified in studies on Western women with breast cancer suggest
different roles of ERalpha in these two populations.

PMID: 20570923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Jun;127(2):345-55. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-0984-y. 
Epub 2010 Jun 17.

Amplification of ESR1 may predict resistance to adjuvant tamoxifen in
postmenopausal patients with hormone receptor positive breast cancer.

Nielsen KV(1), Ejlertsen B, Müller S, Møller S, Rasmussen BB, Balslev E, Lænkholm
AV, Christiansen P, Mouridsen HT.

Author information: 
(1)Dako A/S, Produktionsvej 42, 2600, Glostrup, Denmark. kirsten.vang@dako.com

The estrogen receptor (ER) is the target of tamoxifen, but endocrine therapies do
not benefit all patients with ER positive tumors. We therefore hypothesized that 
copy number changes in the ESR1 gene, encoding ER, confer resistance. Within a
consecutive series of ER positive, postmenopausal patients allocated to 5 years
tamoxifen, we identified 61 patients with recurrence less than 4 years and 48
patients without recurrence at least 7 years after initiation of adjuvant
tamoxifen. Archival tissue containing primary tumor was collected from 97
patients (89%). Tumor samples were analyzed for ESR1 copy number changes using
FISH with a probe covering the ESR1 gene at 6q25 and a reference probe covering
the centromere of chromosome 6. The assay was validated in a material of 120
normal breast samples. FISH analysis for ESR1 was successful in 91 patients
(94%). Amplification (ratio ESR1/CEN-6 = 2.0) was observed in 11 of 50 (22%)
patients with early recurrence, compared to two of 41 (5%) patients without
recurrence. The difference is statistically significant (P = 0.033). In both
groups, two patients with ESR1 deletion (ratio ESR1/CEN-6 < 0.8) were identified.
ESR1 amplification was significantly associated with poor disease-free survival
(P = 0.0054) and overall survival (P = 0.0004). This pilot study supports our
hypothesis that ESR1 amplification is associated with a poorer outcome following 
adjuvant treatment with tamoxifen in ER positive early breast cancer. This study 
also revealed the existence of ESR1 deletions. The prognostic and predictive
impact of ESR1 copy number changes needs further exploration in clinical trials.

PMID: 20556506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Sep;95(9):E112-20. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2768. Epub 
2010 Jun 16.

Analysis of recently identified osteoporosis susceptibility genes in Han Chinese 
women.

Liu JM(1), Zhang MJ, Zhao L, Cui B, Li ZB, Zhao HY, Sun LH, Tao B, Li M, Ning G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Rui-jin Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao-tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: In Europeans and populations of European origin, several osteoporosis
susceptibility genes, including ZBTB40, RANK, RANKL, OPG, MHC, and ESR1, were
recently identified. However, none of these has been fully investigated in Han
Chinese populations.
OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: In this relatively large cross-sectional sample of 1012 Han
Chinese women, 21 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within 11 candidate
genes that were newly identified in Europeans were tested, and their associations
with bone mineral densities (BMDs) and osteoporotic fracture were investigated.
RESULTS: A total of 21 SNPs were genotyped. Five SNPs in four genes [ZBTB40
(rs7524102, rs6696981), ESR1 (rs9479055), OPG (rs6469804), and RANK (rs3018362)] 
were found to be associated with lumbar spine BMD. Seven SNPs in five genes
[ZBTB40 (rs7524102, rs6696981), OPG (rs6993813, rs6469804), RANK (rs3018362),
LRP5 (rs3736228), and SOST (rs1513670)] were found to be associated with total
hip BMD. SPTBN1 (rs11898505) and SOST (rs1107748) were associated with
osteoporotic fracture. A significant gene-gene interaction for osteoporotic
fracture involving rs1107748 in SOST and rs6469804 in OPG gene was identified
from generalized multifactor dimensionality reduction analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides an independent replication of the associations
between several SNPs in ZBTB40, ESR1, OPG, RANK, LRP5, and SOST with lumbar spine
and/or total hip BMDs in a large sample of Han Chinese women. The results of this
study further support the significant associations found between osteoporotic
fracture and SNPs in SPTBN1 and SOST. Our results suggest that these variants
represent osteoporosis susceptibility genes in both Han Chinese and European
populations.

PMID: 20554715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Sep;45(3):147-59. doi: 10.1677/JME-10-0041. Epub 2010 Jun 
16.

Age- and cell-related gene expression of aromatase and estrogen receptors in the 
rat testis.

Bois C(1), Delalande C, Nurmio M, Parvinen M, Zanatta L, Toppari J, Carreau S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Estrogènes et Reproduction, EA 2608, Université de Caen Basse
Normandie, Esplanade de la Paix, F-14032 Caen Cedex, France.

Spermatogenesis is a complex and coordinated process leading to the formation of 
spermatozoa. This event, which is under the control of numerous endocrine and
paracrine factors, seems to also be controlled by estrogens which exert their
effects via nuclear estrogen receptors (ESRs) ESR1 and ESR2. Estrogens are
synthesized by aromatase which is biologically expressed in the rat testis. The
objective of our study was to clarify the gene expression patterns of aromatase
and ESRs according to age and in the two compartments of the adult rat testis. In
the adult, transcripts of aromatase vary according to the germ cell type and to
the stages of seminiferous epithelium, a maximum being observed at stage I. The
ESR1 gene is highly expressed in the adult testis and in stages from VIIc-d to
XIV. Moreover, both ESR mRNA levels are higher in purified round spermatids than 
in pachytene spermatocytes, suggesting a putative role of estrogens in the
haploid steps of spermatogenesis. The variability of the results in the
expression of both ESRs led us to explore the putative presence of variants in
the rat testis. Concerning ESR1, we have shown the presence of the full-length
form and of one isoform with exon 4 deleted. For ESR2, besides the wild type,
three isoforms were observed: one with exon 3 deleted, another with an insertion 
of 54 nucleotides, and the last one with both modifications. Therefore, the
stage-regulated expression of aromatase and ESR1 genes in the rat testis suggests
a likely role of estrogens in spermatogenesis.

PMID: 20554652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 1;285(40):30814-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.142869. Epub 2010
Jun 14.

ZFP423 coordinates Notch and bone morphogenetic protein signaling, selectively
up-regulating Hes5 gene expression.

Masserdotti G(1), Badaloni A, Green YS, Croci L, Barili V, Bergamini G, Vetter
ML, Consalez GG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan,
Italy.

Zinc finger protein 423 encodes a 30 Zn-finger transcription factor involved in
cerebellar and olfactory development. ZFP423 is a known interactor of SMAD1-SMAD4
and of Collier/Olf-1/EBF proteins, and acts as a modifier of retinoic
acid-induced differentiation. In the present article, we show that ZFP423
interacts with the Notch1 intracellular domain in mammalian cell lines and in
Xenopus neurula embryos, to activate the expression of the Notch1 target
Hes5/ESR1. This effect is antagonized by EBF transcription factors, both in
cultured cells and in Xenopus embryos, and amplified in vitro by BMP4, suggesting
that ZFP423 acts to integrate BMP and Notch signaling, selectively promoting
their convergence onto the Hes5 gene promoter.

PMCID: PMC2945575
PMID: 20547764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Proc Biol Sci. 2010 Nov 7;277(1698):3353-61. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2010.1007. Epub
2010 Jun 9.

A polymorphism in the oestrogen receptor gene explains covariance between digit
ratio and mating behaviour.

Forstmeier W(1), Mueller JC, Kempenaers B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Behavioural Ecology and Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck
Institute for Ornithology, Eberhard-Gwinner-Strasse, D-82319 Seewiesen, Germany.

In vertebrates, including humans, the relative length of the second to the fourth
digit correlates with sex hormone-dependent behavioural, psychological and
physiological traits. However, despite a decade of research, the underlying
mechanism linking digit ratio to these sex hormone-dependent traits remains
unclear. Previous work suggests that during embryo development, circulating
levels of plasma androgens or oestrogens may act through their receptors to
affect transcription levels of posterior HOX genes in the developing digits,
thereby possibly influencing their relative length. The correlation between digit
ratio and sex hormone-dependent traits might thus stem from variation in
expression or sensitivity of the sex hormone receptors, or from variation in sex 
hormone levels in the embryo. Here, we show that in a population of 1156 zebra
finches Taeniopygia guttata, a polymorphism in the oestrogen receptor a gene
(ESR1) explains 11.3 per cent of the variation in digit ratio, and is also
associated with male and female-mating behaviour. By contrast, we found no
associations between digit ratio or mating behaviours and polymorphisms in the
androgen receptor gene. Thus, our results (i) provide an explanation for the
observed significant genetic covariance between digit ratio and male and female
mating behaviour and (ii) strongly confirm the indicator function of digit ratio 
through the oestrogen pathway. Finally, we note that the commonly invoked effect 
of foetal testosterone on human digit ratio seems to be substantially weaker than
the effect described here.

PMCID: PMC2981936
PMID: 20534613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard Subst Environ Eng. 2010 Jan;45(9):1054-9. doi: 
10.1080/10934529.2010.486329.

Improving solids retention in upflow anaerobic sludge blanket reactors at low
temperatures using lamella settlers.

Halalsheh MM(1), Muhsen HH, Shatanawi KM, Field JA.

Author information: 
(1)Water and Environmental Research and Study Centre, University of Jordan,
Amman, Jordan. Halalshe@ju.edu.jo

Lamella settlers were used to increase sludge concentration in pilot scale UASB
reactors treating concentrated sewage at low temperature. The aim was to increase
sludge retention time (SRT) and achieve better digestion in UASB reactors without
the need for increasing the hydraulic retention time (HRT). Two modified UASB
reactors were used for this purpose. In the first reactor, lamella settlers were 
installed in the settling zone of the UASB reactor and the reactor was named
UASB-ESR1. In the second reactor, lamella settlers were installed underneath the 
gas liquid separator (GLS) and the reactor was named UASB-ESR2. The sludge
concentration, sludge profile, and system performance of each reactor were
monitored. The obtained sludge concentrations were 50 and 53 g TS/l for UASB-ESR1
and UASB-ESR2, respectively. The measured concentrations were almost double the
concentrations reported for conventional UASB reactors ranging 16-26 g TS/l. The 
calculated SRT in the modified UASB reactors was 103 days in both reactors. The
average total COD (COD(tot)) and suspended COD (COD(ss)) removal efficiencies
were 38% and 60%, respectively for the UASB-ESR1. The average COD(tot) and
COD(ss) removal efficiencies for the UASB-ESR2 were 41% and 62%, respectively.
The modified reactors were considered at the startup period and the performances 
of the modified systems are expected to significantly improve when arriving at
steady state conditions.

PMID: 20526935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2010 May 28;5(5):e10868. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010868.

Mutually positive regulatory feedback loop between interferons and estrogen
receptor-alpha in mice: implications for sex bias in autoimmunity.

Panchanathan R(1), Shen H, Zhang X, Ho SM, Choubey D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati,
Ohio, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), an autoimmune disease,
predominantly affects women of childbearing age. Moreover, increased serum levels
of interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) are associated with the disease. Although, the
female sex hormone estrogen (E2) is implicated in sex bias in SLE through
up-regulation of IFN-gamma expression, the molecular mechanisms remain unknown.
Here we report that activation of IFN (alpha or gamma)-signaling in immune cells 
up-regulates expression of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha; encoded by the Esr1 
gene) and stimulates expression of target genes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found that treatment of mouse splenic cells
and mouse cell lines with IFN (alpha or gamma) increased steady-state levels of
ERalpha mRNA and protein. The increase in the ERalpha mRNA levels was primarily
due to the transcriptional mechanisms and it was dependent upon the activation of
signal transducer and activator of transcription-1 (STAT1) factor by IFN.
Moreover, the IFN-treatment of cells also stimulated transcription of a reporter 
gene, expression of which was driven by the promoter region of the murine Esr1
gene. Notably, splenic cells from pre-autoimmune lupus-prone (NZB x NZW)F(1)
female mice had relatively higher steady-state levels of mRNAs encoded by the IFN
and ERalpha-responsive genes as compared to the age-matched males.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our observations identify a novel mutually positive
regulatory feedback loop between IFNs and ERalpha in immune cells in mice and
support the idea that activation of this regulatory loop contributes to sex bias 
in SLE.

PMCID: PMC2878324
PMID: 20526365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2010 Jun;9(3):275-9.

T29C genotype polymorphism of estrogen receptor alpha is associated with initial 
response to interferon-alpha therapy in chronic hepatitis B patients.

Zhang TT(1), Zhang ZH, Gao YF, Zhang YF, Yang DL, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical
College, Hefei, China.

BACKGROUND: Virological clearance, delayed progression to cirrhosis or liver
cancer, and increased survival are the long-term goals of antiviral therapy in
chronic hepatitis B patients. Identification of host factors correlated with
therapeutic response may contribute greatly to individual treatment. This study
aimed at investigating whether T29C genotype polymorphism of estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) is associated with the initial response to interferon-alpha
(IFN-alpha) therapy in chronic hepatitis B patients.
METHODS: The initial responses of 100 patients to IFN-alpha therapy were
evaluated and compared by classifying them into three groups according to T29C
genotype polymorphism of ESR1: T/T, T/C, and C/C genotype groups. Polymerase
chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism was used to analyze the
genotype polymorphism in T29C.
RESULTS: The frequency of initially combined response was markedly higher in both
the T/T and T/C groups than in the C/C group (Z=10.326, P=0.006 and Z=26.247,
P=0.000, respectively). In addition, the initial virological response was higher 
in the T/T and T/C groups than the C/C group (X2=5.674, P=0.017 and X2=4.980,
P=0.026, respectively). In 78 initially HBeAg-positive patients, however, the
frequency of initial e-antigen disappearance or seroconversion among the T/T,
T/C, and C/C genotype groups was 34.15%, 27.78% and 15.79%, respectively, which
were not significantly different.
CONCLUSION: The T29C genotype polymorphism of ESR1 is associated with the initial
response to IFN-alpha in patients with chronic hepatitis B, and might be a
significant marker for predicting the initial response to IFN-alpha, at least in 
this study population.

PMID: 20525555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Calcif Tissue Int. 2010 Jul;87(1):25-35. doi: 10.1007/s00223-010-9375-y. Epub
2010 May 28.

Genotypes and haplotypes of the estrogen receptor genes, but not the
retinoblastoma-interacting zinc finger protein 1 gene, are associated with
osteoporosis.

Harsløf T(1), Husted LB, Carstens M, Stenkjaer L, Langdahl BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus Sygehus, Tage-Hansens Gade 2, 8000, Aarhus C, Denmark. torbhars@rm.dk

Osteoporosis is a common age-related disease with a strong genetic influence.
Polymorphisms of ESR1 have consistently been shown to be associated with bone
mineral density (BMD) and fracture; however, in regulating bone metabolism, ESR1 
interacts with both ESR2 and RIZ1. We therefore examined the effects of
polymorphisms in the ESR1, ESR2, and RIZ1 genes and their haplotypes on vertebral
fractures and BMD in a case-control study comprising 462 osteoporotic patients
and 336 controls. In ESR1, we found the variant C allele of the XbaI polymorphism
to be associated with decreased risk of vertebral fractures in women (P < 0.01), 
whereas in men, the T allele seemed protective (P = 0.05). The variant G allele
of the PvuII polymorphism decreased the risk of vertebral fractures independently
of lumbar spine BMD in women (P = 0.04) but had no effect in men. Haplotype X-P-H
(XbaI:C, PvuII:G, and a high number of TA repeats) was associated with decreased 
risk of vertebral fractures in women (P = 0.04) but not men. In ESR2, the G
allele of the AluI polymorphism was associated with increased fracture risk (P = 
0.04), and the haplotype that comprises rs1256031:T and AluI:A increased lumbar
spine BMD by 0.04 +/- 0.02 g/cm(2) (P < 0.05) and decreased the risk of vertebral
fractures (P = 0.04). There was no effect of the RIZ1 polymorphism on BMD or
fracture risk and no evidence of interaction between the polymorphisms and
haplotypes thereof. We confirm that genetic variants in ESR1 and ESR2, but not
RIZ1, are important in osteoporosis. We found no evidence of interaction between 
polymorphisms, but we found that the effects of genetic variants in ESR1 might be
sex dependent.

PMID: 20508921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. BMC Cancer. 2010 May 20;10:217. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-217.

Hypermethylated 14-3-3-sigma and ESR1 gene promoters in serum as candidate
biomarkers for the diagnosis and treatment efficacy of breast cancer metastasis.

Zurita M(1), Lara PC, del Moral R, Torres B, Linares-Fernández JL, Arrabal SR,
Martínez-Galán J, Oliver FJ, Ruiz de Almodóvar JM.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Oncology, Hospital Virgen de Nieves, Granada, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Numerous hypermethylated genes have been reported in breast cancer,
and the silencing of these genes plays an important role in carcinogenesis, tumor
progression and diagnosis. These hypermethylated promoters are very rarely found 
in normal breast. It has been suggested that aberrant hypermethylation may be
useful as a biomarker, with implications for breast cancer etiology, diagnosis,
and management. The relationship between primary neoplasm and metastasis remains 
largely unknown. There has been no comprehensive comparative study on the
clinical usefulness of tumor-associated methylated DNA biomarkers in primary
breast carcinoma and metastatic breast carcinoma. The objective of the present
study was to investigate the association between clinical extension of breast
cancer and methylation status of estrogen receptor1 (ESR1) and stratifin
(14-3-3-sigma) gene promoters in disease-free and metastatic breast cancer
patients.
METHODS: We studied two cohorts of patients: 77 patients treated for breast
cancer with no signs of disease, and 34 patients with metastatic breast cancer.
DNA was obtained from serum samples, and promoter methylation status was
determined by using DNA bisulfite modification and quantitative
methylation-specific PCR.
RESULTS: Serum levels of methylated gene promoter 14-3-3-sigma significantly
differed between Control and Metastatic Breast Cancer groups (P < 0.001), and
between Disease-Free and Metastatic Breast Cancer groups (P < 0.001). The ratio
of the 14-3-3-sigma level before the first chemotherapy cycle to the level just
before administration of the second chemotherapy cycle was defined as the
Biomarker Response Ratio [BRR]. We calculated BRR values for the "continuous
decline" and "rise-and-fall" groups. Subsequent ROC analysis showed a sensitivity
of 75% (95% CI: 47.6 - 86.7) and a specificity of 66.7% (95% CI: 41.0 - 86.7) to 
discriminate between the groups for a cut-off level of BRR = 2.39. The area under
the ROC curve (Z = 0.804 +/- 0.074) indicates that this test is a good approach
to post-treatment prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The relationship of 14-3-3-sigma with breast cancer metastasis and
progression found in this study suggests a possible application of 14-3-3-sigma
as a biomarker to screen for metastasis and to follow up patients treated for
metastatic breast cancer, monitoring their disease status and treatment response.

PMCID: PMC2889892
PMID: 20487521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Int J Cancer. 2011 Jan 15;128(2):492-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25363. Epub 2010 Apr 5.

Methylation patterns in cell-free plasma DNA reflect removal of the primary tumor
and drug treatment of breast cancer patients.

Liggett TE(1), Melnikov AA, Marks JR, Levenson VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.

Abnormal DNA methylation is a feature of most types of cancer, which is reflected
in cell-free circulating DNA in plasma. It is, however, unknown whether surgical 
removal of the tumor and subsequent therapy induces changes in plasma DNA
methylation, which can be used to monitor treatment. In this pilot study,
methylation in cell-free plasma DNA of 20 breast cancer patients was determined
by the previously developed MethDet-56 technique. Samples at three time points
were analyzed-before surgery (baseline), after surgery (to evaluate the effects
of resection) and after surgery on tamoxifen therapy (to determine the effects of
treatment). Methylation patterns of healthy controls were used as a reference for
all comparisons. Seven promoters were differentially methylated (p < 0.05) in at 
least one comparison; three changed after surgery; another one changed after
beginning of tamoxifen treatment; and four were differentially methylated in
baseline versus combined treatment samples. Increased methylation of PR PROX,
MDGI, PAX 5 and RARß2 at baseline (presurgery) diminished toward the healthy
controls with the lowest methylation in the combined treatment group. Surgery
alone decreased methylation in PAX 5 and RARß2, whereas tamoxifen treatment
changed methylation only in the B promoter of ESR1. Methylation patterns in
cell-free plasma DNA change after surgery and tamoxifen treatment, most
significantly-after combined treatment. The baseline (presurgery) patterns become
similar to those of healthy controls, suggesting that methylation patterns in
cell-free plasma DNA may be used to monitor treatment.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMCID: PMC2970661
PMID: 20473856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mod Pathol. 2010 Jul;23(7):1029-39. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.84. Epub 2010 May
14.

Molecular profiling of invasive breast cancer by multiplex ligation-dependent
probe amplification-based copy number analysis of tumor suppressor and oncogenes.

Moelans CB(1), de Weger RA, Monsuur HN, Vijzelaar R, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. cmoelans@umcutrecht.nl

Several oncogenes and tumor-suppressor genes have been shown to be implicated in 
the development, progression and response to therapy of invasive breast cancer.
The phenotypic uniqueness (and thus the heterogeneity of clinical behavior) among
patients' tumors may be traceable to the underlying variation in gene copy number
of these genes. To obtain a more complete view of gene copy number changes and
their relation to phenotype, we analyzed 20 breast cancer-related genes in 104
invasive breast cancers with the use of multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA). We identified MYC gene amplification in 48% of patients,
PRDM14 in 34%, topoisomerase IIalpha (TOP2A) in 32%, ADAM9 in 32%, HER2 in 28%,
cyclin D1 (CCND1) in 26%, EMSY in 25%, IKBKB in 21%, AURKA in 17%, FGFR1 in 17%, 
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) in 16%, CCNE1 in 12% and EGFR in 9% of patients.
There was a significant correlation between the number of amplified genes and the
histological grade and mitotic index of the tumor. Gene amplifications of EGFR,
CCNE1 and HER2 were negatively associated with estrogen receptor status whereas
FGFR1, ADAM9, IKBKB and TOP2A revealed a positive association. Amplifications of 
ESR1, PRDM14, MYC and HER2 were associated with a high mitotic index, and PRDM14 
and HER2 amplifications with high histological grade. MYC amplification was
detected more frequently in ductal tumors and high-level MYC amplifications were 
significantly associated with large tumor size. HER2/MYC, HER2/CCNE1 and EGFR/MYC
co-amplified tumors were significantly larger than tumors with either of these
amplifications. Gene loss occurred most frequently in E-cadherin (CDH1) (20%) and
FGFR1 (10%). In conclusion, MLPA analysis with this 'breast cancer kit' allowed
to simultaneously assess copy numbers of 20 important breast cancer genes,
providing an overview of the most frequent (co)amplifications as well as
interesting phenotypic correlations, and thereby data on the potential importance
of these genes in breast cancer.

PMID: 20473280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Aug;30(8):1583-90. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.205757. Epub 2010 May 13.

The mouse atherosclerosis locus at chromosome 10 (Ath11) acts early in lesion
formation with subcongenic strains delineating 2 narrowed regions.

Wolfrum S(1), Rodríguez JM, Tan M, Chen KY, Teupser D, Breslow JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics and Metabolism, Rockefeller University, New
York, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Ath11, an atherosclerosis susceptibility locus on proximal chromosome 
10 (0 to 21 cM) revealed in a cross between apolipoprotein E deficient C57BL/6
(B6) and FVB mice, was recently confirmed in congenic mice. The objectives of
this study were to assess how Ath11 affects lesion development and morphology, to
determine aortic gene expression in congenics, and to narrow the congenic
interval.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Assessing lesion area over time in congenic mice showed that
homozygosity for the FVB allele increased lesion area at 6 weeks persisting
through to 24 weeks of age. Staining of aortic root sections at 16 weeks did not 
reveal obvious differences between congenics. Aortic expression-array analysis at
6 weeks revealed 97 genes that were >2-fold regulated, including 1 gene in the
quantitative trait locus interval, Aldh8a1, and 2 gene clusters regulated by
Hnf4alpha and Esr1. Analysis of lesion area in 11 subcongenic strains revealed 2 
narrowed regions, 10a (21 genes), acting in females, and 10b (7 genes), acting in
both genders.
CONCLUSIONS: Ath11 appears to act early in lesion formation, with significant
effects on aortic gene expression. This quantitative trait locus is genetically
complex, containing a female-specific region 10a from 0 to 7.3 megabases (21
genes) and a gender-independent region 10b from 20.1 to 21.9 megabases (7 genes).

PMCID: PMC2917113
PMID: 20466976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Res. 2010 Jun 1;70(11):4759-66. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2572. Epub
2010 May 11.

Optical redox ratio differentiates breast cancer cell lines based on estrogen
receptor status.

Ostrander JH(1), McMahon CM, Lem S, Millon SR, Brown JQ, Seewaldt VL, Ramanujam
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, Duke University Medical 
Center and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Fitzpatrick Institute for
Photonics, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA. julie.ostrander@duke.edu

Autofluorescence spectroscopy is a powerful imaging technique that exploits
endogenous fluorophores. The endogenous fluorophores NADH and flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD) are two of the principal electron donors and acceptors in
cellular metabolism, respectively. The optical oxidation-reduction (redox) ratio 
is a measure of cellular metabolism and can be determined by the ratio of
NADH/FAD. We hypothesized that there would be a significant difference in the
optical redox ratio of normal mammary epithelial cells compared with breast tumor
cell lines and that estrogen receptor (ER)-positive cells would have a higher
redox ratio than ER-negative cells. To test our hypothesis, the optical redox
ratio was determined by collecting the fluorescence emission for NADH and FAD via
confocal microscopy. We observed a statistically significant increase in the
optical redox ratio of cancer compared with normal cell lines (P < 0.05).
Additionally, we observed a statistically significant increase in the optical
redox ratio of ER(+) breast cancer cell lines. The level of ESR1 expression,
determined by real-time PCR, directly correlated with the optical redox ratio
(Pearson's correlation coefficient = 0.8122, P = 0.0024). Furthermore, treatment 
with tamoxifen and ICI 182,870 statistically decreased the optical redox ratio of
only ER(+) breast cancer cell lines. The results of this study raise the
important possibility that fluorescence spectroscopy can be used to identify
subtypes of breast cancer based on receptor status, monitor response to therapy, 
or potentially predict response to therapy. This source of optical contrast could
be a potentially useful tool for drug screening in preclinical models.

Copyright 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3826951
PMID: 20460512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Med Oncol. 2011 Dec;28(4):934-40. doi: 10.1007/s12032-010-9554-8. Epub 2010 May
11.

Significance of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR-1) gene imbalances in colon and
hepatocellular carcinomas based on tissue microarrays analysis.

Tsiambas E(1), Georgiannos SN, Salemis N, Alexopoulou D, Lambropoulou S, Dimo B, 
Ioannidis I, Kravvaritis C, Karameris A, Patsouris E, Dourakis S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Athens, and Department 
of Breast Cancer Surgery, Blue Cross Hospital, str Patriarchou Grigoriou E 17 Ag 
Paraskevi Attiki, 15341, Athens, Greece. tsiambasecyto@yahoo.gr

Estrogen receptor alpha-encoded by ESR1 gene-overexpression correlates with
prognosis and response to specific chemotherapy in breast adenocarcinoma cases.
Mechanisms of ESR-1 deregulation in carcinomas remain under investigation. To
analyze ESR1 in carcinomas of different histogenesis. Using tissue microarray
technology, 172 primary carcinomas including breast ductal adenocarcinomas
(n=60), hepatocellular carcinomas (n=52), and colon adenocarcinomas (n=60) were
cored and re-embedded in three paraffin blocks. Initial diagnosis was based on
liquid based cytology (LiquiPrep/ThinPrep). Immunohistochemistry and fluorescence
in situ hybridization were performed. Quantitative evaluation of ER-a protein
levels was assessed by applying digital image analysis. ER-a overexpression was
observed in 41/60 (68.3%), 23/52 (44.2%) and 4/60 (6.6%) cases, respectively.
ESR1 gene multiple copies were confirmed in 13/60 (21.6%) breast adenocarcinomas,
but high amplification only in 8/13 (62.8%). Allelic absence was identified in
3/52 (5.7%) hepatocellular carcinomas, whereas colon adenocarcinomas demonstrated
gene gains in 5/60 (8.3%) cases referred to chr 6 aneuploidy and not to
amplification. ER-a overall expression was associated strongly to ESR1 gene
copies only in breast carcinoma (P=0.036). ESR-1 gene overexpression happens
frequently in breast cancer, but only a subset of them are high amplified cases
correlated to increased response rates in hormonal therapy (tamoxifen). Absence
of this mechanism in hepatocellular and colon carcinomas maybe is a negative
factor for applying this therapy. This is a pattern of histo-genetic depended
targeted therapeutic strategy.

PMID: 20458558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Reprod Dev. 2010 Aug;56(4):405-10. Epub 2010 Apr 28.

Analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the 3' region of the estrogen
receptor 1 gene in normal and cryptorchid Miniature Dachshunds and Chihuahuas.

Pathirana IN(1), Tanaka K, Kawate N, Tsuji M, Kida K, Hatoya S, Inaba T, Tamada
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Advanced Pathobiology, Graduate School of Life and Environmental
Sciences, Osaka Prefecture University, Osaka, Japan.

This study was performed to examine the distribution of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and estimated haplotypes in the canine estrogen receptor
(ER) alpha gene (ESR1) and the association of them with different phenotypes of
cryptorchidism (CO) in Miniature Dachshunds and Chihuahuas. Forty CO and 68
normal dogs were used, and CO was classified into unilateral (UCO; n=33) and
bilateral CO (BCO; n=5) or into abdominal (ACO; n=16) and inguinal CO (ICO;
n=22). Thirteen DNA fragments located in the 70-kb region at the 3' end of ESR1
were amplified by PCR and sequenced to examine 13 SNPs (#1-#13) reported in a
canine SNP database. Ten SNPs (#1-#4, #7, #8, #10-#13) were not polymorphic, and 
5 new SNPs (#14-#18) were discovered. A common haplotype block in normal, CO and 
CO phenotypes was identified for an approximately 20-kb region encompassing 4
SNPs (#14-#17). Allele, genotype and haplotype frequencies in CO without
classification by phenotype and also in UCO, ACO and ICO phenotypes were not
statistically different from the normal group. Significant differences in
genotype frequencies and homozygosity for the estimated GTTG haplotype within the
block were observed in BCO compared with the normal group, although the number of
BCO animals was small. Our results demonstrate that the examined SNPs and
haplotypes in the 3' end of canine ESR1 are not associated with unilateral,
abdominal and inguinal CO phenotypes and CO per se in Miniature Dachshunds and
Chihuahuas. Further studies are necessary to suggest a clear association between 
the ESR1 SNPs and bilateral CO in dogs.

PMID: 20453437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Biol Reprod. 2010 Aug 1;83(2):307-17. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.084160. Epub
2010 May 5.

Expression and signaling of G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) in rat
sertoli cells.

Lucas TF(1), Royer C, Siu ER, Lazari MF, Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Escola Paulista de Medicina, INFAR, Vila
Clementino, São Paulo, Brazil.

Erratum in
    Biol Reprod. 2014 Nov;91(5):126.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the expression and signaling of
the G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) in cultured immature rat Sertoli
cells--in which we have previously described the classical estrogen receptors
(ESR1 and ESR2). Expression of GPER in cultured Sertoli cells from 15-day-old
rats was detected by RT-PCR and immunoassays. Gper transcripts also were present 
in testes from 5-, 15-, and 120-day-old rats. Short-term treatment of Sertoli
cells with 17beta-estradiol (E2), the GPER agonist G-1, or the ESR antagonist ICI
182,780 (ICI) rapidly activated MAPK3/1 (ERK1/2), even after down-regulation of
ESR1 and ESR2, suggesting a role for GPER in the rapid E2 action in these cells. 
MAPK3/1 phosphorylation induced by ICI or G-1 was blocked by pertussis toxin,
selective inhibitor of the SRC family of protein tyrosine kinases,
metalloprotease inhibitor, MAP2K1/2 inhibitor, and epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) kinase inhibitor. Furthermore, E2, but not G-1, induced
up-regulation of cyclin D1 in the Sertoli cells. This effect was blocked by ICI. 
E2 and G-1 decreased BAX and increased BCL2 expression and these effects were
blocked by MAP2K1/2 inhibitor and EGFR kinase inhibitor. The pretreatment with
ICI did not block the effect of E2. Taken together, these results indicate that
in Sertoli cells 1) GPER-mediated MAPK3/1 activation occurs via EGFR
transactivation through G protein beta gamma subunits that promote SRC-mediated
metalloprotease-dependent release of EGFR ligands, which bind to EGFR and lead to
MAPK3/1 phosphorylation; 2) E2-ESRs play a role in Sertoli cell proliferation;
and 3) E2-GPER may regulate gene expression involved with apoptosis. ESR and GPER
may mediate actions important for Sertoli cell function and maintenance of normal
testis development and homeostasis.

PMID: 20445128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Genome Res. 2010 Jun;20(6):733-44. doi: 10.1101/gr.101923.109. Epub 2010 May 4.

Estrogen-mediated epigenetic repression of large chromosomal regions through DNA 
looping.

Hsu PY(1), Hsu HK, Singer GA, Yan PS, Rodriguez BA, Liu JC, Weng YI, Deatherage
DE, Chen Z, Pereira JS, Lopez R, Russo J, Wang Q, Lamartiniere CA, Nephew KP,
Huang TH.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics Program, Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology,
and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

The current concept of epigenetic repression is based on one repressor unit
corresponding to one silent gene. This notion, however, cannot adequately explain
concurrent silencing of multiple loci observed in large chromosome regions. The
long-range epigenetic silencing (LRES) can be a frequent occurrence throughout
the human genome. To comprehensively characterize the influence of estrogen
signaling on LRES, we analyzed transcriptome, methylome, and estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1)-binding datasets from normal breast epithelia and breast cancer
cells. This "omics" approach uncovered 11 large repressive zones (range, 0.35
approximately 5.98 megabases), including a 14-gene cluster located on 16p11.2. In
normal cells, estrogen signaling induced transient formation of multiple DNA
loops in the 16p11.2 region by bringing 14 distant loci to focal ESR1-docking
sites for coordinate repression. However, the plasticity of this free DNA
movement was reduced in breast cancer cells. Together with the acquisition of DNA
methylation and repressive chromatin modifications at the 16p11.2 loci, an
inflexible DNA scaffold may be a novel determinant used by breast cancer cells to
reinforce estrogen-mediated repression.

PMCID: PMC2877570
PMID: 20442245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Neoplasma. 2010;57(4):306-15.

Estrogen receptor alpha polymorphisms: correlation with clinicopathological
parameters in breast cancer.

Anghel A(1), Raica M, Narita D, Seclaman E, Nicola T, Ursoniu S, Anghel M,
Popovici E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicince and Pharmacy, Victor
Babes, Timisoara, Romania. biochim@umft.ro

Polymorphisms in estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) have been previously
associated with breast cancer risk; however, the results were not fully
consistent. Our purpose was to study interactions between common genotypes in
ESR1, breast cancer risk and tumor phenotypes. 6 ESR1 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in 103 breast cancer patients and 90 controls
using hybridization probes; the genotypes were correlated with known prognostic
factors for breast cancer and 5 years-follow up data. To assess estrogen and
progesterone receptors (ER, PR) and HER2/neu expressions, immunohistochemistry
was performed. Our results showed that rs3798577 was significantly associated
with the risk of breast cancer, the common allele C conferring susceptibility
(p-trend=4 x 10(-5)); rs3798577 was also correlated with PR expression (p=0.01), 
but not with ER expression; rs2228480 (p=0.047) and rs1801132 (p=0.02) were
associated with the age at diagnosis; rs1801132 was correlated with
hypercholesterolemia (p=0.003) and increased BMI (body mass index) (p=0.01);
rs2234693 showed a low significant association (p=0.042) with the tumor grade;
rs3798577 was correlated with disease-free survival (p=0.05), allele C conferring
increased risk for relapses, but it reached not statistical significance after
adjustments. In conclusions, we identified four genotypes significantly
correlated with either the risk or some tumor characteristics, suggesting that
the main selection criteria of the investigated SNPs (frequency and the position 
in modulating domains of the gene) are pertinent instruments for establish
correlations between the gene structure and the tumor phenotype.

PMID: 20429621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2010 Aug;39(2):116-30. doi:
10.1016/j.domaniend.2010.03.001. Epub 2010 Apr 10.

Expression of luteal estrogen receptor, interleukin-1, and apoptosis-associated
genes after PGF2alpha administration in rabbits at different stages of
pseudopregnancy.

Maranesi M(1), Zerani M, Lilli L, Dall'Aglio C, Brecchia G, Gobbetti A, Boiti C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biopathological Science, Laboratory of Biotechnology,
Section of Physiology, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

The dynamic expression for estrogen receptor subtype-1 (ESR1), interleukin-1beta 
(IL1B), and apoptosis-associated genes, as well as nitric oxide synthase
activity, were examined in corpora lutea (CL) of rabbits after prostaglandin
F(2alpha) (PGF(2alpha)) administration on either day 4 or day 9 of
pseudopregnancy. By reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, the
steady-state level of ESR1 transcript was lower (P < 0.01) and that of
anti-apoptotic B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (BCL2) -like 1 (BCL2L1) was greater in day 4
(P < 0.01) than in day 9 CL. Western blot analysis revealed that BCL2-associated 
X protein (BAX) abundance was greater in day 4 (P < 0.01) than in day 9 CL,
whereas BCL2L1 protein was undetectable at both luteal stages. After PGF(2alpha),
ESR1 transcript decreased (P < 0.01) in day 9 CL, whereas IL1B mRNA showed a
transitory increase (P < 0.01) at both stages. The pro-apoptotic tumor protein
p53 (TP53) gene had diminished (P < 0.01) on day 4 and on day 9 after a
transitory increase (P < 0.01), whereas the BAX/BCL2L1 expression ratio increased
(P < 0.01) in day 9 CL 24 h after treatment. Following PGF(2alpha), TP53 protein 
increased (P < 0.01) at both luteal stages, and BAX decreased (P < 0.01) in day 4
CL but increased (P < 0.01) 24 h later in day 9 CL; BCL2L1 became detectable 6 h 
later in day 4 CL. Nitric oxide synthase activity temporarily increased (P <
0.01) following PGF(2alpha). These findings suggest that PGF(2alpha) regulates
luteolysis by ESR1 mRNA down-regulation and modulation of pro- and anti-apoptotic
pathways in CL that have acquired a luteolytic capacity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20427144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2010 Apr 28;8:39. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-8-39.

Activation of the transcription factor, nuclear factor kappa-B, during the
estrous cycle and early pregnancy in the pig.

Ross JW(1), Ashworth MD, Mathew D, Reagan P, Ritchey JW, Hayashi K, Spencer TE,
Lucy M, Geisert RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078,
USA.

Establishment and maintenance of pregnancy in the pig involves intricate
communication between the developing conceptuses and the maternal endometrium.
This process occurs during trophoblast elongation which is spaciotemporally
associated with conceptus synthesis and release of IL1B concomitant with
pregnancy-specific endometrial up-regulation of IL-1 receptors, providing the
potential for activation of the transcription factor, NFKB. The objective of the 
current investigation was to determine changes in expression and cellular
localization of NFKB and associated factors during the estrous cycle and early
pregnancy in the pig. In situ hybridization was used to localize changes in PGR, 
ESR1, and TNFRSF11A during the peri-implantation period. Quantitative RT-PCR was 
utilized to demonstrate gene expression changes for NFKB1, RELA, TNFRSF11A, TLR4,
NFKBIA and NFKBIB. Transcription factor ELISA demonstrated an overall increase in
RELA during the peri-implantation period in both cyclic and pregnant gilts. While
the presence of TNFSF11A and TLR4 were both detected, TLR4 expression changes
were temporally associated with NFKB expression and activation. Collectively,
these data demonstrate that NFKB activation may occur during the period of
uterine receptivity in both the cyclic and pregnant endometrium.

PMCID: PMC2876169
PMID: 20426870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2010 Jul;18(7):927-33. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2010.04.002.
Epub 2010 Apr 22.

Common variations in estrogen-related genes are associated with severe
large-joint osteoarthritis: a multicenter genetic and functional study.

Riancho JA(1), García-Ibarbia C, Gravani A, Raine EV, Rodríguez-Fontenla C,
Soto-Hermida A, Rego-Perez I, Dodd AW, Gómez-Reino JJ, Zarrabeitia MT, Garcés CM,
Carr A, Blanco F, González A, Loughlin J.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital UM Valdecilla-IFIMAV, Universidad de
Cantabria, RETICEF, Santander, Spain. rianchoj@unican.es

OBJECTIVE: Several lines of evidence suggest that estrogens influence the
development of osteoarthritis (OA). The aim of this study was to explore the
association of two common polymorphisms within the aromatase (CYP19A1) and
estrogen receptor (ER) alpha (ESR1) genes with severe OA of the lower limbs.
METHODS: The rs1062033 (CYP19A1) and rs2234693 (ESR1) single nucleotide
polymorphisms were genotyped in 5528 individuals (3147 patients with severe hip
or knee OA, and 2381 controls) from four centres in Spain and the United Kingdom.
Gene expression was measured in femoral bone samples from a group of patients.
RESULTS: In the global analysis, both polymorphisms were associated with OA, but 
there was a significant sex interaction. The GG genotype at rs1062033 was
associated with an increased risk of knee OA in women [odds ratio (OR) 1.23;
P=0.04]. The CC genotype at rs2234693 tended to be associated with reduced OA
risk in women (OR 0.76, P=0.028, for knee OA; OR=0.84, P=0.076 for hip OA), but
with increased risk of hip OA in men (OR 1.28; P=0.029). Women with unfavourable 
genotypes at both loci had an OR of 1.61 for knee OA (P=0.006). The rs1062033
genotype associated with higher OA risk was also associated with reduced
expression of the aromatase gene in bone.
CONCLUSIONS: Common genetic variations of the aromatase and ER genes are
associated with the risk of severe OA of the large joints of the lower limb in a 
sex-specific manner. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that
estrogen activity may influence the development of large-joint OA.

Copyright 2010 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 20417295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Reproduction. 2010 Jul;140(1):143-53. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0113. Epub 2010 Apr 19.

The effect of elevated progesterone and pregnancy status on mRNA expression and
localisation of progesterone and oestrogen receptors in the bovine uterus.

Okumu LA(1), Forde N, Fahey AG, Fitzpatrick E, Roche JF, Crowe MA, Lonergan P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture, Food Science and Veterinary Medicine, University
College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

To investigate the effects of pregnancy or post-ovulatory progesterone (P(4))
supplementation on the expression of oestrogen and P(4) receptors (ESRs and PGRs)
in the bovine uterus, heifers (n=263) were randomly assigned to the following
treatments: i) cyclic, normal P(4); ii) cyclic, high P(4); iii) pregnant, normal 
P(4); and iv) pregnant, high P(4) on days 5, 7, 13 and 16 of pregnancy/oestrous
cycle. Elevated P(4) was achieved through P(4)-releasing intravaginal device
insertion on day 3 after oestrus, resulting in increased concentrations from day 
3.5 to 8 (P<0.05) in the high groups than in the normal groups. Irrespective of
treatment, PGR and ESR1 mRNA expressions were highest on days 5 and 7 and
decreased on day 13 (P<0.05), while ESR2 mRNA expression increased on day 7
(P<0.05) and similar levels were maintained within the normal P(4) groups
subsequently. Expression in the high P(4) groups decreased on day 13 (P<0.05).
PGR-AB and PGR-B protein expressions were high in the luminal and superficial
glands on days 5 and 7, but by day 13, expression had declined to very low or
undetectable levels and high P(4) concentration tended to decrease or decreased
significantly (P<0.05) the expression in these regions on days 5 and 7. ESR1
protein expression was high, with no treatment effect. ESR2 protein was also
highly expressed, with no clear effect of treatment. In conclusion, early
post-ovulatory P(4) supplementation advances the disappearance of PGR protein
from the luminal epithelium on days 5 and 7, and decreases ESR2 mRNA expression
during the mid-luteal phase, but has no effect on PGR or ESR1 mRNA expression.

PMID: 20403910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2010 May 27;365(1546):1517-35. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2009.0235.

Oestrogens and spermatogenesis.

Carreau S(1), Hess RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Caen, EA 2608, USC 2006 INRA, IFR
146, 14032 Caen, France.

The role of oestrogens in male reproductive tract physiology has for a long time 
been a subject of debate. The testis produces significant amounts of oestrogenic 
hormones, via aromatase, and oestrogen receptors (ERs)alpha (ESR1) and ERbeta
(ESR2) are selectively expressed in cells of the testis as well as the epididymal
epithelium, depending upon species. This review summarizes the current knowledge 
concerning the presence and activity of aromatase and ERs in testis and sperm and
the potential roles that oestrogens may have in mammalian spermatogenesis. Data
show that physiology of the male gonad is in part under the control of a balance 
of androgens and oestrogens, with aromatase serving as a modulator.

PMCID: PMC2871919
PMID: 20403867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Reproduction. 2010 Jun;139(6):1057-66. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0069. Epub 2010 Apr
13.

Expression of basigin in reproductive tissues of estrogen receptor-{alpha} or
-{beta} null mice.

Chen L(1), Bi J, Nakai M, Bunick D, Couse JF, Korach KS, Nowak RA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Animal Sciences Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois,
Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

Basigin plays important roles in both male and female reproduction because
basigin (Bsg) null male and female mice are infertile. The aim of the present
study was to determine whether basigin expression in reproductive organs requires
estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1, ERalpha) or -beta (ESR2, ERbeta). Expression of
basigin protein in the testis, ovary, and male and female reproductive tracts was
studied in adult wild-type (WT), Esr1-null (alphaERKO), and Esr2-null (betaERKO) 
mice by immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting. Basigin mRNA levels in ovary and
uterus were examined by quantitative RT-PCR. In females, basigin protein
expression was observed mainly in granulosa and interstitial cells of the ovary
and epithelial cells of the proximal oviduct in all genotypes. Basigin protein
was also expressed in the uterine epithelium at proestrus and estrus in WT and
betaERKO mice but not in alphaERKO mice. However, a higher level of basigin mRNA 
was observed in uteri of alphaERKO mice compared with WT and betaERKO mice. In
males, basigin was expressed in Leydig cells and all germ cells except
spermatogonia in all genotypes. Basigin was present in epithelial cells lining
the efferent ductules in WT and betaERKO mice, but expression was greatly reduced
in alphaERKO mice. In epididymal ducts, basigin expression was observed in
epithelial cells in the caput and cauda in all genotypes. These data suggest that
expression of basigin protein requires ESR1, but not ESR2, in the uterus and
efferent ductules, but is independent of estrogen receptor in the ovary, oviduct,
testis, and epididymis.

PMCID: PMC4778977
PMID: 20388736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Pathol Oncol Res. 2010 Dec;16(4):485-96. doi: 10.1007/s12253-010-9263-9. Epub
2010 Apr 11.

Estrogen receptor alpha polymorphisms and the risk of malignancies.

Anghel A(1), Narita D, Seclaman E, Popovici E, Anghel M, Tamas L.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes
Timisoara, Eftimie Murgu 2A, Timisoara 300041, Romania.

Estrogens represent risk factors for endocrine-related cancers and play also an
important role in the development and progression of other malignancies. In order
to analyze the associations between estrogen receptor gene alpha polymorphisms
and cancers susceptibility, we genotyped six single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 163 Caucasian cancer patients--103 breast cancers and 60 other
malignancies (colorectal, bladder, hepatocellular carcinoma and acute myeloid
leukemia)--and 114 healthy controls using hybridization probes. We performed
Armitage`s association trend-test to evaluate the risk. Linkage disequilibrium
(LD) was assessed for each pair of markers. The genotypes CC and CT of rs3798577 
were significantly associated with the cancers risk (p-trend breast = 4 × 10(-5);
p-trend cancers = 1 × 10(-5)); in discrepancy with breast cancer where the
C-allele represented the risk allele, for bladder, hepatocellular carcinomas and 
leukemia, the T allele seems to confer susceptibility. The minor G allele of
rs1801132 was protective in our cases (p = 1 × 10(-4)); for rs2228480, the
heterozygous frequency was higher for cancer groups (p = 0.03); the SNP pairs
rs2228480&rs3798577 and rs2234693&rs9340799 were in low LD; the haplotypes T-A of
rs2234693&rs9340799 and G-C of rs2228480&rs3798577 showed a trend to be higher
represented in breast cancers; T allele of rs2234693 was higher expressed in
breast, colon cancers and leukemia; rs2077647 was associated with colon (p =
0.008, C-risk allele) and bladder (p = 0.01, T-risk allele) cancers. We concluded
that ESR1 polymorphisms may have distinct impact in carcinogenesis and further
genotyping will establish whether these findings remain significant in larger
cohorts.

PMID: 20383761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cancer Epidemiol. 2010 Jun;34(3):328-37. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2010.03.005. Epub
2010 Apr 8.

Polymorphisms in genes of the steroid hormone biosynthesis and metabolism
pathways and endometrial cancer risk.

Ashton KA(1), Proietto A, Otton G, Symonds I, McEvoy M, Attia J, Gilbert M,
Hamann U, Scott RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Medical Genetics, School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of
Health, University of Newcastle, Australia.

Comment in
    Cancer Epidemiol. 2011 Feb;35(1):104.

OBJECTIVES: The incidence of endometrial cancer has recently increased
substantially and studies have shown that altered levels of exogenous and
endogenous hormones are associated with individual variation in endometrial
cancer risk. The environmental and reproductive risk factors that influence these
hormones are well known, however, genetic variants involved in hormone
biosynthesis and estrogen metabolism have not been well established in
endometrial cancer.
METHODS: To determine whether polymorphisms in genes of the steroid hormone
biosynthesis and metabolism pathways are associated with endometrial cancer risk,
28 polymorphisms in 18 genes were genotyped in 191 endometrial cancer cases and
291 healthy controls.
RESULTS: The GSTM1 deletion and the variant (GG) genotype of the CYP1B1 rs1800440
polymorphism were associated with a decreased risk of developing endometrial
cancer. Furthermore, combinations of haplotypes in CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and GSTs were
associated with a decreased risk. The analysis of the repeat polymorphisms
revealed that women with the long repeat allele length of the ESR1 (GT)n repeat
polymorphism were at an increased risk of developing endometrial cancer.
Conversely, women with two long repeat length alleles of the (CAG)n repeat
polymorphism in the AR correlated with a decrease in endometrial cancer risk
compared to women with one or two alleles with the short repeat length.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings are consistent with our hypothesis that variability in 
genes involved in steroidogenesis and estrogen metabolism may alter the risk of
developing endometrial cancer, suggesting that they may be useful as biomarkers
for genetic susceptibility to endometrial cancer.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20381444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010 Jul;35(8):1818-25. doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.49. Epub
2010 Apr 7.

Estrogen receptor 1 gene (ESR1) is associated with restrictive anorexia nervosa.

Versini A(1), Ramoz N, Le Strat Y, Scherag S, Ehrlich S, Boni C, Hinney A,
Hebebrand J, Romo L, Guelfi JD, Gorwood P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U894-Team 1, Center of Psychiatry and Neurosciences, University Paris
Descartes, 2ter rue d'Alésia, Paris, France.

Anorexia nervosa (AN) is a highly heritable young-onset psychiatric illness the
etiology of which remains unknown. Estrogen alpha and beta receptors, encoded by 
ESR1 and ESR2 genes, are involved in food intake regulation and eating behavior, 
and may have a potential role in AN. We performed a family-based association
study of 17 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) encompassing ESR1 and ESR2
genes in a cohort of 321 French AN families. We attempted to replicate this
finding in a cohort of 41 restrictive AN (RAN) families and in a population-based
study of 693 young women. Using the transmission disequilibrium test, a
significant over-transmission was detected between AN and ESR1 rs726281 and
rs2295193. These SNPs and another among ESR1 were more specifically associated
with the RAN subtype (rs726281, p=0.005, odds ratio (OR)=2.1, 95% confidence
interval (95% CI)=1.2-3.6; rs3798577, p=0.021, OR=1.6, 95% CI=1.1-2.3; and
rs2295193, p=0.007, OR=1.7, 95% CI=1.2-2.5). A large eight-SNPs haplotype of ESR1
gene was also associated with AN (p<0.0001, OR=3.1, 95% CI=1.8-5.1). Association 
of ESR1 SNPs and RAN was driven by paternal over-transmissions (p<0.0001, OR=3.7,
95% CI=1.9-7.3). Furthermore, we confirmed the preferential paternal
over-transmission of the ESR1 rs726281 on the independent German sample of 41 RAN
trios (p=0.025, OR=3, 95% CI=1.1-8.3). Finally, rs3798577 was associated with
eating disorders in a population-based sample of 693 women (p<0.01). Our findings
are strongly in favor of an association between ESR1 polymorphisms and AN. In
particular, ESR1 gene confers a high risk of vulnerability to the restrictive
subtype of AN, and suggests that the estrogen pathway has to be further analyzed 
in AN.

PMCID: PMC3055492
PMID: 20375995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 15;16(8):2391-401. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-2471. 
Epub 2010 Apr 6.

ERBB2 and TOP2A in breast cancer: a comprehensive analysis of gene amplification,
RNA levels, and protein expression and their influence on prognosis and
prediction.

Brase JC(1), Schmidt M, Fischbach T, Sültmann H, Bojar H, Koelbl H, Hellwig B,
Rahnenführer J, Hengstler JG, Gehrmann MC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany. j.brase@dkfz.de

PURPOSE: The prognostic and predictive relevance of epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (ERBB2) and topoisomerase II alpha (TOP2A) have long been a matter of 
debate. However, the correlation of DNA amplification, RNA levels, and protein
expression and their prognostic role and association with anthracycline responses
in node-negative breast cancer have not yet been evaluated.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We first analyzed TOP2A and ERBB2 at the levels of gene
amplification, and RNA and protein expression, and studied their correlations.
Additionally, TOP2A and ERBB2 were analyzed in 782 node-negative breast
carcinomas in patients who did not receive systemic therapy and in 80 patients
treated with epirubicin and cyclophosphamide (EC) prior to surgery.
RESULTS: TOP2A gene amplification did not correlate with protein expression (P = 
0.283) and showed an association with gene expression with only borderline
significance (P = 0.047). By contrast, TOP2A RNA levels correlated with protein
expression (P < 0.001). TOP2A gene expression was significantly associated with
the metastasis-free interval (MFI; P < 0.001) and was associated with complete
remission in patients treated with EC (P = 0.002). In contrast to TOP2A, ERBB2
gene amplification correlated with RNA level (P < 0.001) and protein expression
(P < 0.001). ERBB2 gene expression was associated with the MFI only in estrogen
receptor-positive carcinomas, whereas ERBB2 protein expression (P = 0.032) was
associated with MFI in the entire cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our study indicates that the TOP2A RNA level is a good
prognostic marker and is also associated with a favorable response to
anthracyclin-based therapy. By contrast, ESR1 was associated with poorer
responses to anthracyclin-based therapy, whereas the association with ERBB2 RNA
was not significant.

PMID: 20371687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Reproduction. 2010 Jun;139(6):1067-75. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0443. Epub 2010 Mar
16.

Neonatal administration of tamoxifen causes disruption of myometrial development 
but not adenomyosis in the C57/BL6J mouse.

Mehasseb MK(1), Bell SC, Habiba MA.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Sciences Section, Department of Cancer Studies and Molecular
Medicine, University of Leicester, Robert Kilpatrick Clinical Sciences Building, 
Leicester LE2 7LX, UK.

We previously demonstrated that in the CD-1 mouse, which exhibits a high
incidence of age-related adenomyosis, neonatal exposure to tamoxifen induced
premature uterine adenomyosis and was associated with abnormal development
particularly of the inner myometrium. In the present study, we examined the
effect of neonatal tamoxifen administration upon uterine development in the
C57/BL6J mouse strain that is not known to develop uterine adenomyosis. Female
C57/BL6J pups (n=20) were treated with oral tamoxifen (1 mg/kg) from age 1 to 5
days. Uteri from control and treated mice were obtained on days 5, 10, 15 and 42 
of age. We examined sections histologically using image analysis and
immunohistochemistry for alpha-smooth muscle actin (ACTA2, alpha-SMA), desmin,
vimentin, laminin, fibronectin and oestrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1). Following
tamoxifen exposure, all uteri showed inner myometrium thinning, lack of
continuity, disorganisation and bundling. However, adenomyosis was not seen in
any uterus. ACTA2 immunostaining was less in the circular muscle layer of treated
mice. The temporal pattern of desmin immunostaining found in control mice was
absent in tamoxifen-treated mice. There was no difference in the localisation of 
laminin or fibronectin between control and tamoxifen-treated groups. However,
laminin immunostaining was reduced in the circular muscle layer of treated mice. 
Vimentin could not be detected in either group. In conclusion, our results
demonstrate that the development of the inner myometrium is particularly
sensitive to oestrogen antagonism, and is affected by steroid receptor
modulation. Although tamoxifen induces inner myometrial changes including that of
ACTA2, desmin, ESR1 and laminin expression in C57/BL6J neonatal mice similar to
those induced in CD-1 mice, C57/BL6J mice did not develop premature adenomyosis. 
Thus, disruption of the development and differentiation of the inner myometrium
cannot alone explain the development of tamoxifen-associated adenomyosis, and
this must be dependent upon its interaction with strain-dependent factors.

PMID: 20368191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Endocrinol. 2010 Jun;205(3):253-62. doi: 10.1677/JOE-10-0029. Epub 2010 Mar 26.

Modulation of responses to stress by estradiol benzoate and selective estrogen
receptor agonists.

Serova LI(1), Harris HA, Maharjan S, Sabban EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, New York 10595, USA.

Previously, pretreatment with estradiol benzoate (EB) was found to modulate the
response of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and gene expression in
several catecholaminergic neuronal locations in ovariectomized (OVX) rats exposed
to single immobilization stress (IMO). Here, we investigated the role of estrogen
receptor (ER) subtypes, using selective agonists for ERalpha (propyl pyrazole
triol, PPT) or ERbeta (WAY-200070) in two major central noradrenergic systems and
the HPA axis after exposure to single and repeated IMO. OVX female rats received 
21 daily injections of either EB (25 mug/kg), PPT (10 mg/kg), WAY-200070 (10
mg/kg), or vehicle. Injections of EB and PPT, but not WAY-200070, elicited
reduced body weight and increased uterine weight, showing their selectivity. Both
EB and PPT increased corticosterone levels about two- to threefold, but prevented
any further rise with either single or repeated IMO, indicating an ERalpha
(ESR1)-, but not ERbeta (ESR2)-, mediated mechanism. In the locus coeruleus (LC),
the rise in dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (Dbh) mRNA with both stress paradigms was
abrogated in EB- or PPT-injected animals. However, WAY-200070 blocked the
response of DBH mRNA to single IMO but not to repeated IMO. In the nucleus of the
solitary tract (NTS), the rise in tyrosine hydroxylase and DBH mRNAs with both
IMOs was absent, or greatly attenuated, in EB- or PPT-treated rats. In most
cases, WAY-200070 inhibited the response to single IMO but not to repeated IMO.
The results demonstrate that pretreatment with estradiol, or ER-selective
agonists, modulates the stress-triggered induction of gene expression of
norepinephrine biosynthetic enzymes in LC and NTS, with ER selectivity depending 
on duration of the stress.

PMCID: PMC2927979
PMID: 20348154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cancer. 2010 Mar 25;9:68. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-68.

DNA methylation profiling in doxorubicin treated primary locally advanced breast 
tumours identifies novel genes associated with survival and treatment response.

Dejeux E(1), Rønneberg JA, Solvang H, Bukholm I, Geisler S, Aas T, Gut IG,
Børresen-Dale AL, Lønning PE, Kristensen VN, Tost J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Epigenetics, Centre National de Génotypage, CEA - Institut de
Génomique, Evry, France. dejeux@cng.fr

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer in women and consists of a 
heterogeneous collection of diseases with distinct histopathological, genetic and
epigenetic characteristics. In this study, we aimed to identify DNA methylation
based biomarkers to distinguish patients with locally advanced breast cancer who 
may benefit from neoadjuvant doxorubicin treatment.
RESULTS: We investigated quantitatively the methylation patterns in the promoter 
regions of 14 genes (ABCB1, ATM, BRCA1, CDH3, CDKN2A, CXCR4, ESR1, FBXW7, FOXC1, 
GSTP1, IGF2, HMLH1, PPP2R2B, and PTEN) in 75 well-described pre-treatment samples
from locally advanced breast cancer and correlated the results to the available
clinical and molecular parameters. Six normal breast tissues were used as
controls and 163 unselected breast cancer cases were used to validate
associations with histopathological and clinical parameters.Aberrant methylation 
was detected in 9 out of the 14 genes including the discovery of methylation at
the FOXC1 promoter. Absence of methylation at the ABCB1 promoter correlated with 
progressive disease during doxorubicin treatment. Most importantly, the DNA
methylation status at the promoters of GSTP1, FOXC1 and ABCB1 correlated with
survival, whereby the combination of methylated genes improved the subdivision
with respect to the survival of the patients. In multivariate analysis GSTP1 and 
FOXC1 methylation status proved to be independent prognostic markers associated
with survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative DNA methylation profiling is a powerful tool to
identify molecular changes associated with specific phenotypes. Methylation at
the ABCB1 or GSTP1 promoter improved overall survival probably due to prolonged
availability and activity of the drug in the cell while FOXC1 methylation might
be a protective factor against tumour invasiveness. FOXC1 proved to be general
prognostic factor, while ABCB1 and GSTP1 might be predictive factors for the
response to and efficacy of doxorubicin treatment. Pharmacoepigenetic effects
such as the reported associations in this study provide molecular explanations
for differential responses to chemotherapy and it might prove valuable to take
the methylation status of selected genes into account for patient management and 
treatment decisions.

PMCID: PMC2861056
PMID: 20338046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Anim Reprod Sci. 2010 Jul;120(1-4):142-50. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2010.02.020. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Ovarian steroids regulate prostaglandin secretion in the feline endometrium.

Siemieniuch MJ(1), Bowolaksono A, Skarzynski DJ, Okuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Immunology and Pathology, Institute of Animal
Reproduction and Food Research of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Olsztyn 10-747,
Poland. m.siemieniuch@pan.olsztyn.pl

Sex steroids, i.e. progesterone (P(4)) and 17beta-estradiol (E(2)), fluctuate
during the feline estrous cycle and their alterations correspond to many events
in cat reproduction. In order to investigate possible effects of sex steroids on 
prostaglandin (PG) secretion in the cultured endometrial cells, mRNA expressions 
coding for PG-endoperoxide synthase (PTGS2) in the epithelial and stromal cells
harvested with sex steroids were studied by RT-PCR. The effects of ovarian
steroids on PG secretion in the epithelial and stromal cells were also
investigated. E(2) at a dose 10(-7)M significantly increased prostaglandin
F2alpha (PGF(2alpha)) secretion in the epithelial cells (P<0.01). PGF(2alpha)
production was intensified by the treatment in combination with both steroids
(P<0.001). P(4) at any dose alone had no effect on PGF(2alpha) secretion in the
epithelial cells, whereas at a dose 10(-5)M enhanced prostaglandin E2 (PGE(2))
production (P<0.05). The ovarian steroids stimulated both PGF(2alpha) and PGE(2) 
in the epithelial cells of the feline endometrium via an E(2) receptor (ESR1)-
and P(4) receptor (PGR)-dependent genomic-pathway. In contrast to the epithelial 
cells, neither P(4) nor E(2) affected PG secretion in the stromal cells. PTGS2
mRNA expression was not affected by ovarian steroids in either cell types. The
overall results suggest that PG secretion is regulated by P(4) and E(2) and this 
effect is not due to changes in PTGS2 mRNA expression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20334988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Apr 6;107(14):6358-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909998107. Epub 2010 Mar 22.

Estrogen receptor ESR1 controls cell migration by repressing chemokine receptor
CXCR4 in the zebrafish posterior lateral line system.

Gamba L(1), Cubedo N, Ghysen A, Lutfalla G, Dambly-Chaudière C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Unité 881, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, Université Montpellier 2, 34095 Montpellier, France.

The primordium that generates the embryonic posterior lateral line of zebrafish
migrates from the head to the tip of the tail along a trail of SDF1-producing
cells. This migration critically depends on the presence of the SDF1 receptor
CXCR4 in the leading region of the primordium and on the presence of a second
SDF1 receptor, CXCR7, in the trailing region of the primordium. Here we show that
inactivation of the estrogen receptor ESR1 results in ectopic expression of
cxcr4b throughout the primordium, whereas ESR1 overexpression results in a
reciprocal reduction in the domain of cxcr4b expression, suggesting that ESR1
acts as a repressor of cxcr4b. This finding could explain why estrogens
significantly decrease the metastatic ability of ESR-positive breast cancer
cells. ESR1 inactivation also leads to extinction of cxcr7b expression in the
trailing cells of the migrating primordium; this effect is indirect, however, and
due to the down-regulation of cxcr7b by ectopic SDF1/CXCR4 signaling in the
trailing region. Both ESR1 inactivation and overexpression result in aborted
migration, confirming the importance of this receptor in the control of
SDF1-dependent migration.

PMCID: PMC2851976
PMID: 20308561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Haematologica. 2010 Jun;95(6):922-7. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.016220. Epub 2010
Mar 19.

Impact of genomic risk factors on outcome after hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia.

Dickinson AM(1), Pearce KF, Norden J, O'Brien SG, Holler E, Bickeböller H,
Balavarca Y, Rocha V, Kolb HJ, Hromadnikova I, Sedlacek P, Niederwieser D, Brand 
R, Ruutu T, Apperley J, Szydlo R, Goulmy E, Siegert W, de Witte T, Gratwohl A.

Author information: 
(1)Haematological Sciences, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University,
UK. a.m.dickinson@ncl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Non-HLA gene polymorphisms have been shown to influence outcome after
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Results were derived from
heterogeneous, small populations and their value remains a matter of debate.
DESIGN AND METHODS: In this study, we assessed the effect of single nucleotide
polymorphisms in genes for interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL1RN), interleukin
4 (IL4), interleukin 6 (IL6), interleukin 10 (IL10), interferon (IFNG), tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) and the cell surface receptors tumor necrosis factor
receptor II (TNFRSFIB), vitamin D receptor (VDR) and estrogen receptor alpha
(ESR1) in a homogeneous cohort of 228 HLA identical sibling transplants for
chronic myeloid leukemia. Three good predictors of overall survival, identified
via statistical methods including Cox regression analysis, were investigated for 
their effects on transplant-related mortality and relapse. Predictive power was
assessed after integration into the established European Group for Blood and
Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) risk score.
RESULTS: Absence of patient TNFRSFIB 196R, absence of donor IL10 ATA/ACC and
presence of donor IL1RN allele 2 genotypes were associated with increased
transplantation-related mortality and decreased survival. Application of
prediction error and concordance index statistics gave evidence that integration 
improved the EBMT risk score.
CONCLUSIONS: Non-HLA genotypes were associated with survival after allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. When three genetic polymorphisms were
added into the EBMT risk model they improved the goodness of fit. Non-HLA
genotyping could, therefore, be used to improve donor selection algorithms and
risk assessment prior to allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

PMCID: PMC2878789
PMID: 20305143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Lupus. 2010 May;19(6):734-40. doi: 10.1177/0961203309359517. Epub 2010 Mar 19.

Association of estrogen and aromatase gene polymorphisms with systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Wang J(1), Nuite M, McAlindon TE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Experimental and animal studies suggested that estrogens play an important role
in the development of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) through a variety of
mechanisms involved in the regulation of the immune system. The objective of this
study was to investigate the association between genetic variations in estrogen
metabolic pathway genes, including estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1), estrogen
receptor beta (ESR2), and aromatase (CYP19A1), and risk of SLE. We performed a
genetic study of SLE among 46 medical record-confirmed female SLE cases and 102
female controls participating in an Internet-based case-control study of SLE.
Polymorphisms analysed included: ESR1 PvuII, XbaI, and GT repeat; ESR2 RsaI,
AluI, and CA repeat; and CYP19A1 RsaI, SfaN1, and TTTA repeat. We found
significant association of the ESR1 PvuII (PP vs. pp, odds ratio (OR): 3.1, 95%
confidence interval (CI): 1.1-9.3) and XbaI (XX vs. xx, adjusted OR: 3.4, 95% CI:
1.1-10.5) with SLE. Carrying the PPXX genotype conferred the highest risk (PPXX
vs. ppxx, OR: 4.6, 95% CI: 1.3-15.9). We also found an association of SLE with
the ESR2 CA repeat (SS vs. LL, OR: 2.8, 95% CI: 1.0-8.0). Our results support a
role of estrogen in pathogenesis of SLE and suggested that genetic variants in
the estrogen receptor genes might influence susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3653634
PMID: 20305046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Jul;16(6):370-5. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.02.012. Epub 2010 Mar 20.

Polymorphisms of caffeine metabolism and estrogen receptor genes and risk of
Parkinson's disease in men and women.

Palacios N(1), Weisskopf M, Simon K, Gao X, Schwarzschild M, Ascherio A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health 655 Huntington Ave.,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. palacios@hsph.harvard.edu

Caffeine intake has been associated with a decreased risk of Parkinson's disease 
(PD) in men but the effect in women is less clear, and appears to be modified by 
use of post-menopausal estrogens. In a nested case-control study within the
Nurses Health Study (NHS) and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study (HPFS), we
examined associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of caffeine 
metabolizing genes (CYP1A2 and NAT2) and estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2),
their interaction with caffeine intake and hormone replacement therapy (PMH) use 
(collected prospectively) and risk of PD. We matched 159 female cases to 724
controls and 139 male cases to 561 controls on birth year, source of DNA (blood
or buccal smear), age and sex. The CYP1A2 rs762551 polymorphism (lower enzyme
inducibility) was marginally associated with an increased risk of PD (RR, for
increasing number of minor alleles=1.34; 95% CI 1.02, 1.78 in women, but not in
men. None of the NAT2 (classified as slow vs. fast acetylator), ESR1 or ESR2
polymorphisms were significantly associated with an altered risk of PD.
Marginally significant interactions were observed between caffeine intake and the
ESR1 polymorphism rs3798577 (p=0.07) and ESR2 polymorphism rs1255998 (p=0.07).
The observed increased risk of PD among female but not male carriers of the
rs762551 polymorphism of CYP1A2 and the interactions of caffeine with ESR1
rs3798577 and ESR2 rs1255998 may provide clues to explain the relationship
between gender, caffeine intake, estrogen status and risk of PD and need to be
replicated.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2916058
PMID: 20304699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2010 Mar 19;8:27. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-8-27.

Swimming suppresses hepatic vitellogenesis in European female silver eels as
shown by expression of the estrogen receptor 1, vitellogenin1 and vitellogenin2
in the liver.

Palstra AP(1), Schnabel D, Nieveen MC, Spaink HP, van den Thillart G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Einsteinweg
55, 2333 CC Leiden, The Netherlands. a.p.palstra@biology.leidenuniv.nl

BACKGROUND: When European silver eels (Anguilla anguilla) venture into the
Atlantic Ocean for their 6,000 km semelparous spawning run to the Sargasso Sea,
they are still in a prepubertal stage. Further sexual development appears to be
blocked by dopaminergic inhibition of hypothalamus and pituitary activity.
Recently, we found that swimming for several weeks in freshwater stimulated the
incorporation of fat droplets in the oocytes. So, it was hypothesized that long
term swimming in seawater would release the inhibition further and would also
stimulate the production of vitellogenin by the liver.
METHODS: For this study a swim-flume was constructed to allow simulated migration
of migratory female silver eels for 3 months (1,420 km) in natural seawater at 20
degrees C. Primers were designed for polymerase chain reactions to measure the
mRNA expression of estrogen receptor 1 (esr1), vitellogenin1 (vtg1) and
vitellogenin2 (vtg2) genes in the liver of European female silver eels.
RESULTS: In comparison to resting eels, swimming eels showed a diminished
expression of esr1, vtg1 and vtg2 in the liver. They also had lower plasma
calcium (Ca; indicative of vitellogenin) levels in their blood. This showed that 
vitellogenesis is more strongly suppressed in swimming than in resting eels.
However, when eels were subsequently stimulated by 3 weekly carp pituitary
extract injections, the expression of the same genes and plasma levels of Ca
strongly increased in both groups to similar levels, thus equalizing the initial 
differences between resting and swimming.
CONCLUSIONS: It is concluded that vitellogenesis remains suppressed during
resting and even more during swimming. The fact that swimming stimulates fat
deposition in the oocytes but suppresses vitellogenesis indicates that these
events are separated in nature and occur sequentially. Swimming-suppressed
vitellogenesis may imply that in nature eels undergo vitellogenesis and final
maturation near or at the spawning grounds.

PMCID: PMC2847565
PMID: 20302623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 12;5(3):e9678. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009678.

Levels of 17beta-estradiol receptors expressed in embryonic and adult zebrafish
following in vivo treatment of natural or synthetic ligands.

Chandrasekar G(1), Archer A, Gustafsson JA, Andersson Lendahl M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

The nuclear receptors encompass a group of regulatory proteins involved in a
number of physiological processes. The estrogen receptors (ERs), of which one
alpha and one beta form exist in mammals function as transcription factors in
response to 17beta-estradiol (E2). In zebrafish there are three gene products of 
estrogen receptors and they are denoted esr1 (ERalpha), esr2a (ERbeta2) and esr2b
(ERbeta1). Total RNA of zebrafish early life stages (<3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 72, 96
and 120 hours post fertilization) and of adult fish (liver, intestine, eye,
heart, brain, ovary, testis, gill, swim bladder and kidney) were isolated
following in vivo exposures. Using specific primers for each of the three
zebrafish ERs the expression levels were quantified using real time PCR
methodology. It was shown that in absence of exposure all three estrogen
receptors were expressed in adult fish. The levels of expression of two of these 
three ER genes, the esr1 and esr2a were altered in organs such as liver,
intestine, brain and testis in response to ligand (E2, diethylstilbestrol or
4-nonylphenol). During embryogenesis two of the three receptor genes, esr1 and
esr2b were expressed, and in presence of ligand the mRNA levels of these two
genes increased. The conclusions are i) estrogen receptor genes are expressed
during early development ii) altered expression of esr genes in response to
ligand is dependent on the cellular context; iii) the estrogenic ligand
4-nonylphenol, a manufactured compound commonly found in sewage of water
treatment plants, acts as an agonist of the estrogen receptor during development 
and has both agonist and antagonist properties in tissues of adult fish. This
knowledge of esr gene function in development and in adult life will help to
understand mechanisms of interfering mimicking endocrine chemicals in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2837374
PMID: 20300630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Epidemiol. 2010 Apr 15;171(8):851-8. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwq016. Epub 2010 Mar 
17.

Field synopsis and synthesis of genetic association studies in osteoarthritis:
the CUMAGAS-OSTEO information system.

Zintzaras E(1), Kitsios GD, Ziogas DC, Rodopoulou P, Karachalios T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomathematics, University of Thessaly School of Medicine, 2
Panepistimiou Street, Biopolis, Larissa 41110, Greece. zintza@med.uth.gr

A comprehensive and systematic assessment of the current status of genetic
association studies (GAS) for osteoarthritis was conducted. Data from 327 GAS
involving 187 distinct genetic variants were analyzed and cataloged in
CUMAGAS-OSTEO, a Web-based information system (http://biomath.med.uth.gr) that
allows the retrieval and synthesis of data from GAS on osteoarthritis. In
individual studies, 66 variants (mostly single nucleotide polymorphisms) showed
significant associations with osteoarthritis risk. For 19 variants, the
association was significant at P < 0.01, with an increased risk greater than 30%.
Only 2.4% of studies had statistical power greater than 50% to detect a modest
genetic effect. Nineteen variants were investigated by 4 or more studies, and
their results were subjected to meta-analysis. Significant associations were
derived for 2 variants (GDF5 rs143383, LRCH1 rs912428) in the main meta-analysis 
and for 2 other variants (TXNDC3 rs4720262, ESR1 rs2234693) in subgroup analysis 
by ethnicity or osteoarthritic body site. Heterogeneity ranged from none to high.
In general, there was consistency of genetic effects across ethnic groups and
body sites, and there was no differential magnitude of effect in large studies
versus small studies. CUMAGAS-OSTEO may be a useful tool for identifying
pertinent gene-osteoarthritis associations and providing an updated summary of
risk effects.

PMID: 20237151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Dev Cell. 2010 Mar 16;18(3):450-62. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.12.023.

BCL6 canalizes Notch-dependent transcription, excluding Mastermind-like1 from
selected target genes during left-right patterning.

Sakano D(1), Kato A, Parikh N, McKnight K, Terry D, Stefanovic B, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University, College of
Medicine, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2010 Mar 16;18(3):338-40.

Although the Notch signaling pathway is one of the most intensely studied
intracellular signaling pathways, the mechanisms by which Notch signaling
regulates transcription remain incompletely understood. Here, we report that B
cell leukemia/lymphoma 6 (BCL6), a transcriptional repressor, is a
Notch-associated factor. BCL6 is necessary to maintain the expression of Pitx2 in
the left lateral plate mesoderm during the patterning of left-right asymmetry in 
Xenopus embryos. For this process, BCL6 forms a complex with BCL6 corepressor
(BCoR) on the promoters of selected Notch target genes such as enhancer of split 
related 1. BCL6 also inhibits the transcription of these genes by competing for
the Notch1 intracellular domain, preventing the coactivator Mastermind-like1
(MAM1) from binding. These results define a mechanism restricting Notch-activated
transcription to cell-type-appropriate subsets of target genes, and elucidate its
relevance in vivo during left-right asymmetric development.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2841049
PMID: 20230751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Mar 15;16(6):1790-801. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-2481. 
Epub 2010 Mar 9.

Intratumoral estrogen disposition in breast cancer.

Haynes BP(1), Straume AH, Geisler J, A'Hern R, Helle H, Smith IE, Lønning PE,
Dowsett M.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Biochemistry and Medicine, Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United
Kingdom. ben.haynes@icr.ac.uk

PURPOSE: The concentration of estradiol (E(2)) in breast tumors is significantly 
higher than that in plasma, particularly in postmenopausal women. The
contribution of local E(2) synthesis versus uptake of E(2) from the circulation
is controversial. Our aim was to identify possible determinants of intratumoral
E(2) levels in breast cancer patients.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The expression of genes involved in estrogen synthesis,
metabolism, and signaling was measured in 34 matched samples of breast tumor and 
normal breast tissue, and their correlation with estrogen concentrations
assessed.
RESULTS: ESR1 (9.1-fold; P < 0.001) and HSD17B7 (3.5-fold; P < 0.001) were
upregulated in ER(+) tumors compared with normal tissues, whereas STS (0.34-fold;
P < 0.001) and HSD17B5 (0.23-fold; P < 0.001) were downregulated. Intratumoral
E(2) levels showed a strong positive correlation with ESR1 expression in all
patients (Spearman r = 0.55, P < 0.001) and among the subgroups of postmenopausal
(r = 0.76, P < 0.001; n = 23) and postmenopausal ER(+) patients (r = 0.59, P =
0.013; n = 17). HSD17B7 expression showed a significant positive correlation (r =
0.59, P < 0.001) whereas HSD17B2 (r = -0.46, P = 0.0057) and HSD17B12 (r = -0.45,
P = 0.0076) showed significant negative correlations with intratumoral E(2) in
all patients. Intratumoral E(2) revealed no correlation to CYP19, STS, and
HSD17B1 expression. Multivariate models comprising ESR1 and plasma E(2) predicted
between 50% and 70% of intratumoral E(2) variability.
CONCLUSION: Uptake due to binding to the ER, rather than intratumoral estrogen
synthesis by aromatase or sulfatase, is the single most important correlate and a
probable determinant of intratumoral E(2). An increased expression of HSD17B7 may
explain the increased ratio of E(2) to estrone (E(1)) in breast tumors compared
with normal tissue.

PMID: 20215536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cancer Res. 2010 Mar 15;70(6):2538-47. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2089. Epub
2010 Mar 9.

BRD7, a subunit of SWI/SNF complexes, binds directly to BRCA1 and regulates
BRCA1-dependent transcription.

Harte MT(1), O'Brien GJ, Ryan NM, Gorski JJ, Savage KI, Crawford NT, Mullan PB,
Harkin DP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast,
Belfast, Northern Ireland, United Kingdom. m.harte@qub.ac.uk

We carried out a yeast two-hybrid screen using a BRCA1 bait composed of amino
acids 1 to 1142 and identified BRD7 as a novel binding partner of BRCA1. This
interaction was confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous BRCA1 and BRD7
in T47D and HEK-293 cells. BRD7 is a bromodomain containing protein, which is a
subunit of PBAF-specific Swi/Snf chromatin remodeling complexes. To determine the
functional consequences of the BRCA1-BRD7 interaction, we investigated the role
of BRD7 in BRCA1-dependent transcription using microarray-based expression
profiling. We found that a variety of targets were coordinately regulated by
BRCA1 and BRD7, such as estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha). Depletion of BRD7 or
BRCA1 in either T47D or MCF7 cells resulted in loss of expression of ERalpha at
both the mRNA and protein level, and this loss of ERalpha was reflected in
resistance to the antiestrogen drug fulvestrant. We show that BRD7 is present,
along with BRCA1 and Oct-1, on the ESR1 promoter (the gene which encodes
ERalpha). Depletion of BRD7 prevented the recruitment of BRCA1 and Oct-1 to the
ESR1 promoter; however, it had no effect on the recruitment of the other Swi/Snf 
subunits BRG1, BAF155, and BAF57 or on RNA polymerase II recruitment. These
results support a model whereby the regulation of ERalpha transcription by BRD7
is mediated by its recruitment of BRCA1 and Oct-1 to the ESR1 promoter.

PMID: 20215511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 May;95(5):2384-90. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2101. Epub 
2010 Mar 9.

Genetics of hypospadias: are single-nucleotide polymorphisms in SRD5A2, ESR1,
ESR2, and ATF3 really associated with the malformation?

van der Zanden LF(1), van Rooij IA, Feitz WF, Vermeulen SH, Kiemeney LA, Knoers
NV, Roeleveld N, Franke B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, P.O.
Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

CONTEXT: Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male external
genitalia with a multifactorial etiology. Little is known about the genes
involved in hypospadias. A few genetic associations have been reported but mainly
in studies of small sample size. Most of these associations have not been
replicated.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate whether previously reported
associations for four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved in
hormonal pathways could be replicated in a large Dutch hypospadias sample. The
SNPs investigated are rs523349 in steroid-5 alpha-reductase (SRD5A2), rs6932902
in estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), rs2987983 in ESR2, and rs11119982 in activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3).
DESIGN, PARTICIPANTS, AND METHODS: We genotyped 620 Caucasian hypospadias cases
and 596 controls for these SNPs using TaqMan-based genotyping.
RESULTS: We did not replicate the associations of the SNPs in SRD5A2 and ESR1
with hypospadias. The SNPs in ESR2 and ATF3 were borderline associated with
hypospadias [odds ratios 0.9 (95% confidence interval 0.7-1.0) and 1.2 (95%
confidence interval 1.0-1.4), respectively] but in the opposite direction
compared with earlier publications. Stratification according to localization of
the urethral opening produced comparable results in the subgroups.
CONCLUSIONS: The lack of consistency between our and previously performed studies
might represent spurious results or chance findings in our or the earlier
studies, differences in criteria used to select the study populations, or a real 
difference between populations, i.e. different genes contributing to disease
risk. These results once again confirm the importance of replication in genetic
association approaches.

PMID: 20215396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Tumori. 2009 Nov-Dec;95(6):753-61.

DNA/RNA markers for colorectal cancer risk in preserved stool specimens: a pilot 
study.

Kato I(1), Badsha KZ, Land S, Nechvatal JM, Matherly LH, Tarca AL, Majumdar AP,
Basson MD, Ram JL.

Author information: 
(1)Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University, 110 East Warren Avenue,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA. katoi@karmanos.org

AIMS AND BACKGROUND: Exfoliated cells in human stool offer excellent
opportunities to non-invasively detect molecular markers associated with
colorectal tumorigenesis, and to evaluate the effects of exposures to exogenous
and endogenous carcinogenic or chemopreventive substances. This pilot study
investigated the feasibility of determining DNA methylation and RNA expression
simultaneously in stool specimens treated with a single type of nucleic acid
preservatives.
METHODS: Stool specimens from 56 volunteers that were preserved up to a week with
RNA later were used in this study. Bisulfite sequencing was used to determine
methylation at 27 CpG loci on the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) promoter. Taqman
assay was used for quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reactions 
to measure cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2) and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
mRNA expression. Subjects' basic demographic and other selected risk factors for 
colorectal cancer were captured through questionnaires and correlated with the
levels of these markers.
RESULTS: Less than 10% of the samples failed in individual assays. Overall, 24.0%
of the CpG loci on the ESR1 promoter were methylated. COX2 expression and alcohol
use were positively correlated; an inverse association was present between EGFR
expression and cigarette smoking; and subjects using anti-diabetic medication had
higher ESR1 methylation. In addition, higher EGFR expression levels were
marginally associated with history of polyps and family history of colorectal
cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates that simultaneous analyses for DNA
and RNA markers are feasible in stool samples treated with a single type of
nucleotide preservatives. Among several associations observed, the association
between EGFR expression and polyps deserves further investigation as a potential 
target for colorectal cancer screening. Larger studies are warranted to confirm
some of our observations.

PMID: 20210241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Aug;25(8):1821-9. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.62.

Replication of previous genome-wide association studies of bone mineral density
in premenopausal American women.

Ichikawa S(1), Koller DL, Padgett LR, Lai D, Hui SL, Peacock M, Foroud T, Econs
MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN, USA. ichikawa@iupui.edu

Bone mineral density (BMD) achieved during young adulthood (peak BMD) is one of
the major determinants of osteoporotic fracture in later life. Genetic variants
associated with BMD have been identified by three recent genome-wide association 
studies. The most significant single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from these
studies were genotyped to test whether they were associated with peak BMD in
premenopausal American women. Femoral neck and lumbar spine BMD were determined
by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry in two groups of premenopausal women: 1524
white women and 512 black women. In premenopausal white women, two SNPs in the
C6orf97/ESR1 region were significantly associated with BMD (p < 4.8 x 10(-4)),
with suggestive evidence for CTNNBL1 and LRP5 (p < .01). Evidence of association 
with one of the two SNPs in the C6orf97/ESR1 region also was observed in
premenopausal black women. Furthermore, SNPs in SP7 and a chromosome 4 intergenic
region showed suggestive association with BMD in black women. Detailed analyses
of additional SNPs in the C6orf97/ESR1 region revealed multiple genomic blocks
independently associated with femoral neck and lumbar spine BMD. Findings in the 
three published genome-wide association studies were replicated in independent
samples of premenopausal American women, suggesting that genetic variants in
these genes or regions contribute to peak BMD in healthy women in various
populations.

PMCID: PMC3153352
PMID: 20200978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2012 Mar;120(3):154-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1249006.
Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Associations of estrogen receptor alpha and beta gene polymorphisms with sex
steroid levels and body fat content in men.

Sakka C(1), Efstathiadou ZA, Polyzos SA, Goutou M, Stakias N, Koukoulis GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital, School of Medicine,
University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: Estrogens play an important role in male physiology. We investigated
the possible association of four single nucleotide polymorphisms in Estrogen
Receptor a ( ESR1) and Estrogen Receptor ß ( ESR2) genes with circulating levels 
of sex steroids and Sex Hormone Binding Globulin (SHBG) in men.
DESIGN AND METHODS: SHBG, total and calculated free testosterone (TT and cal FT),
estradiol (E2) and free Estradiol (FE2) were determined in a population-based
cohort of 170 apparently healthy Greek men. Body mass index (BMI), waist
circumference (WC) and percentage of body fat (%fat) content were measured in all
participants. Genotyping for the PVU II and XBA I polymorphisms of the ESR1 gene 
and for the RSA I and ALU I polymorphisms of the ESR2 gene was performed.
RESULTS: PVU II showed an association with E2 levels [median (IQR) pp 58.5
(42.1-73.4) pg/ml vs. Pp 48.8 (42.9-60.1) and PP 57.7 (44-70.5), p=0.032], and
with %fat [mean±SD pp 24.6±5.3 vs. Pp 22.4±5.2 and PP 21.2±6.7, p=0.044], after
adjustment for age and WC. Furthermore, the effect of PVU II on E2 was
independent of %fat (p=0.038). A synergistic effect of the two ESR1 polymorphisms
on E2 (p=0.023), FE2 (p=0.03) and %fat (p=0.004) was present. Finally, a
synergistic effect of the ESR1 and ESR2 genes on TT (p=0.009), independent of
age, WC and %fat also emerged.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variation in ESR1 is associated with serum estradiol levels 
and body fat content regulation in men. Furthermore, a synergistic effect of ESR1
and ESR2 genes is exerted on serum testosterone levels.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 20200813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Korean J Lab Med. 2010 Feb;30(1):76-83. doi: 10.3343/kjlm.2010.30.1.76.

Estrogen receptor 1, glutathione S-transferase P1, glutathione S-transferase M1, 
and glutathione S-transferase T1 genes with dysmenorrhea in Korean female
adolescents.

Woo HY(1), Kim KH, Lim SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Dysmenorrhea is the most common gynecologic complaint among
adolescent females. We investigated the association between genetic polymorphisms
and dysmenorrhea.
METHODS: A total of 202 postmenarcheal Korean female adolescents 16-17 yr old
participated in this study. Genotyping for glutathione S-transferase mu 1
(GSTM1), glutathione S-transferase theta 1 (GSTT1), glutathione S-transferase pi 
1 (GSTP1), and estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) was performed using PCR-based methods.
RESULTS: The PP+Pp genotype of the ESR1 gene was more frequent than pp genotypes 
in subjects with dysmenorrhea than in subjects without dysmenorrhea (odds
ratio=2.440; 95% confidence interval, 1.036-5.753; P=0.040) using an unadjusted
univariate logistic regression analysis. The relationship between dysmenorrhea
and ESR1 gene polymorphisms remained significant after adjustment for
premenstrual syndrome, years elapsed after menarche, and family history of
dysmenorrhea. No significant difference was observed between subjects with
dysmenorrhea and subjects without dysmenorrhea for polymorphisms of GSTM1, GSTT1,
and GSTP1 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that ESR1 gene polymorphisms may be associated
with dysmenorrhea.

PMID: 20197727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi. 2009 Oct-Dec;113(4):996-1000.

Premenstrual dysphoric disorder: neuroendocrine interferences.

Poiana C(1), Musat M, Carsote M, Chirita C.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Department, School of Medicine, "C. Davila" University of
Medicine and Pharmacy Bucuresti.

Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) consists in severe cognitive and mood
changes, more aggressive as seen in premenstrual syndrome (PMS). These two
syndromes are situated at the border between gynecology and psychiatry but the
link between the two domains remains the neuroendocrine underlying mechanisms. In
present, there are some molecular systems certainly proved as being involved,
like estrogens. The hormonal pattern consists not in different levels of the
hormones but different response to normal hormonal levels. The cyclical
biochemical triggers are related to neurotransmitters as serotonin, endorphin and
gamma-amino butyric acid (GABA). The heritability of the syndrome is sustained by
genetic polymorphism in ESR1 gene. Thus, the PMDD is the result of multiple
disturbances regarding neuroendocrine systems.

PMID: 20191865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Med Sci Monit. 2010 Mar;16(3):CR132-136.

Breast cancer relapse prediction based on multi-gene RT-PCR algorithm.

Pluciennik E(1), Krol M, Nowakowska M, Kusinska R, Potemski P, Kordek R, Bednarek
AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cancerogenesis, Medical University of Lodz, Mazowiecka
6/8 Str., 92-215 Lodz, Poland. elzbieta.pluciennik@umed.lodz.pl

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is very heterogeneous disease at both the clinical and 
molecular levels. Most research is based on analysis of a single gene, but only
complex investigation of genes involved in different cell processes such as
apoptosis or signal transduction can help to better understand the biology of
this type of tumour. Novel techniques such as microarrays and real-time RT-PCR
allow performance of such complex research. Only this kind of approach can
improve cancer treatment through individualisation of disease cases with
different molecular backgrounds.
MATERIAL/METHODS: We performed quantitative RT-PCR to analyze levels of
expression of 10 genes in 119 patient samples: 4 with known good prognosis
signature (WWOX, ESR1, CDH, BAX) and 6 previously reported as bad prognosis
markers of breast cancer (KRT5, KRT14, KRT17, CCNE1, BCL2, BIRC5).
RESULTS: The algorithm composed of 10 genes distinguishes 2 statistically
significant groups of patients with different rates of disease-free survival.
However, when patients were divided into 2 groups according to estrogen receptor 
status, this algorithm could be applied only for a group with estrogen receptor
negative breast cancer. High algorithm value is a good prognostic factor of
disease-free survival for patients with estrogen negative breast cancers
(HR=0.26; p=0.0039), but not for patients with ER positive tumors (p>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The presented multigene algorithm may be used for outcome evaluation
for estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer patients.

PMID: 20190683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Lung Cancer. 2010 Nov;70(2):152-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2010.01.019. Epub 2010 
Feb 24.

Copy number alterations and expression profiles of candidate genes in a pulmonary
inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor.

Jung SH(1), Yim SH, Hu HJ, Jung CK, Lee SH, Kim DH, Chung YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Research Center for Genome Polymorphism, The Catholic University of
Korea School of Medicine, 505 Banpo-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul 137-701, Republic of
Korea.

Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) is a soft tissue neoplasm composed of
myofibroblastic spindle cells accompanied by the inflammatory infiltrate. In
addition to its phenotypic ambiguity, pathogenic mechanisms of the IMT also
remain elusive. Although several chromosomal aberrations have been identified by 
karyotyping, detailed characteristics and extent of copy number alterations in
IMT are unknown. Copy number alterations of an IMT case were examined using 30K
whole-genome oligoarray-comparative genomic hybridization. RNA expression of
putative cancer-related genes located in the chromosomal altered regions was
assessed by qRT-PCR. We identified seven copy number gained regions, seven lost
regions, nine amplifications and six homozygous deletions, which covers 2.5% of
total genome. In homozygously deleted regions, RNA levels of putative tumor
suppressors, SEMA3B, SEMA3F and SULT2A1, were significantly repressed being
consistent with copy number status. In high-level amplification regions, RNA
expression of four potential cancer-related genes was examined; GSTT1, ESR1, EVI1
and MITF. Among them, GSTT1 and ESR1 were significantly up-regulated, but EVI1
and MITF showed insignificant elevation of RNA expression. To our knowledge, this
is the first genome-wide analysis of copy number alterations in IMT. Most of the 
putative cancer-related genes identified in this study are supposedly novel in
IMT. Taken together, our results will help to elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms
of IMT.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20185201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010 Mar;3(3):301-11. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-09-0069. Epub 2010 Feb 23.

Gene expression patterns in the human breast after pregnancy.

Asztalos S(1), Gann PH, Hayes MK, Nonn L, Beam CA, Dai Y, Wiley EL, Tonetti DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago,
833 South Wood Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Epidemiologic studies have established that pregnancy has a bidirectional,
time-dependent effect on breast cancer risk; a period of elevated risk is
followed by a long-term period of protection. The purpose of the present study
was to determine whether pregnancy and involution are associated with gene
expression changes in the normal breast, and whether such changes are transient
or persistent. We examined the expression of a customized gene set in normal
breast tissue from nulliparous, recently pregnant (0-2 years since pregnancy),
and distantly pregnant (5-10 years since pregnancy) age-matched premenopausal
women. This gene set included breast cancer biomarkers and genes related to
immune/inflammation, extracellular matrix remodeling, angiogenesis, and hormone
signaling. Laser capture microdissection and RNA extraction were done from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded reduction mammoplasty and benign biopsy
specimens and analyzed using real-time PCR arrays containing 59 pathway-specific 
and 5 housekeeping genes. We report 14 of 64 (22%) of the selected gene set to be
differentially regulated (at P < 0.05 level) in nulliparous versus parous breast 
tissues. Based on gene set analysis, inflammation-associated genes were
significantly upregulated as a group in both parous groups compared with
nulliparous women (P = 0.03). Moreover, parous subjects had significantly reduced
expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha, ESR1), progesterone receptor
(PGR), and ERBB2 (Her2/neu) and 2-fold higher estrogen receptor-beta (ESR2)
expression compared with nulliparous subjects. These initial data, among the
first on gene expression in samples of normal human breast, provide intriguing
clues about the mechanisms behind the time-dependent effects of pregnancy on
breast cancer risk.

PMID: 20179293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Apr;95(4):1898-908. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2071. Epub
2010 Feb 19.

Effect of polymorphisms in selected genes involved in pituitary-testicular
function on reproductive hormones and phenotype in aging men.

Huhtaniemi IT(1), Pye SR, Holliday KL, Thomson W, O'Neill TW, Platt H, Payne D,
John SL, Jiang M, Bartfai G, Boonen S, Casanueva FF, Finn JD, Forti G, Giwercman 
A, Han TS, Kula K, Lean ME, Pendleton N, Punab M, Silman AJ, Vanderschueren D,
Labrie F, Wu FC; European Male Aging Study Group.

Collaborators: Forti G, Petrone L, Corona G, Vanderschueren D, Boonen S, Borghs
H, Kula K, Slowikowska-Hilczer J, Walczak-Jedrzejowska R, Huhtaniemi I, Giwercman
A, Wu F, Silman A, O'Neill T, Finn J, Steer P, Tajar A, Lee D, Pye S, Casanueva
F, Lage M, Bartfai G, Földesi I, Fejes I, Punab M, Korrovitz P, Jiang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Campus,
Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom. ilpo.huhtaniemi@imperial.ac.uk

CONTEXT: Polymorphisms in genes involved in regulation, biosynthesis, metabolism,
and actions of testicular sex hormones may influence hormone balance and
phenotype of aging men.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the relationships between polymorphisms in genes
related to pituitary-testicular endocrine function and health status.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Using cross-sectional baseline data, we conducted a
multinational prospective cohort observational study consisting of a population
survey of community-dwelling men.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 2748 men, aged 40-79 (mean +/- sd, 60.2 + 11.2) yr, were
randomly recruited from eight European centers. Forty-three polymorphisms were
genotyped in the following genes: androgen receptor (AR), estrogen receptor-alpha
and -beta (ESR1 and ESR2), steroid 5alpha-reductase type II (SRD5A2),
17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1), aromatase (CYP19A1), sex
hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), LH beta-subunit (LHB), and LH receptor (LHCGR).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We measured the associations between gene polymorphisms
and endocrine, metabolic, and phenotypic parameters related to aging and sex
hormone action.
RESULTS: Several polymorphisms in SHBG, ESR2, AR, CYP19A1, and LHB were
significantly associated with circulating levels of SHBG, LH, total, free, and
bioavailable testosterone and estradiol, the LH x testosterone product, and
indices of insulin sensitivity. Apart from several previously reported
associations between genes affecting estrogen levels and heel ultrasound
parameters, no associations existed between polymorphisms and nonhormonal
variables (anthropometry, blood lipids, blood pressure, hemoglobin, prostate
symptoms, prostate-specific antigen, sexual dysfunction, cognition).
CONCLUSION: In aging men, polymorphisms in genes related to the
pituitary-testicular endocrine function significantly influence circulating LH,
testosterone, and estradiol levels, but the downstream effects may be too small
to influence secondary phenotypic parameters.

PMID: 20173016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Carcinogenesis. 2010 May;31(5):842-6. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq038. Epub 2010 Feb
19.

Polymorphisms of estrogen receptors and risk of biliary tract cancers and
gallstones: a population-based study in Shanghai, China.

Park SK(1), Andreotti G, Rashid A, Chen J, Rosenberg PS, Yu K, Olsen J, Gao YT,
Deng J, Sakoda LC, Zhang M, Shen MC, Wang BS, Han TQ, Zhang BH, Yeager M, Chanock
SJ, Hsing AW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
National Institute of Health, EPS-MSC 7234, 6120 Executive Boulevard, Bethesda,
MD 20892-7234, USA.

Biliary tract cancer encompasses tumors of the gallbladder, bile duct and ampulla
of Vater. Gallbladder cancer is more common in women, whereas bile duct cancer is
more common in men, suggesting that sex hormones may play a role in the etiology 
of these cancers. The intracellular action of estrogens is regulated by the
estrogen receptor (ESR); thus, we examined the role of common genetic variants in
ESR genes on the risk of biliary tract cancers and stones in a population-based
case-control study in Shanghai, China (411 cancer cases, 895 stone cases and 786 
controls). We genotyped six single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), four in ESR1 
(rs2234693, rs3841686, rs2228480 and rs1801132) and two in ESR2 (rs1256049 and
rs4986938). In all participants, the ESR1 rs1801132 (P325P) G allele was
associated with excess risks of bile duct [odds ratio (OR) = 1.7, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) 1.1-2.8] and ampulla of Vater cancers (OR = 2.1, 95% CI 0.9-4.9)
compared with the CC genotype. The association with bile duct cancer was apparent
among men (OR = 2.8, 95% CI 1.4-5.7) but not among women (P-heterogeneity =
0.01). Also, the ESR2 rs4986938 (38 bp 3' of STP) GG genotype was associated with
a higher risk of bile duct cancer (OR = 3.3, 95% CI 1.3-8.7) compared with the AA
genotype, although this estimate was based on a small number of subjects. None of
the other SNPs examined was associated with biliary tract cancers or stones.
False discovery rate-adjusted P-values were not significant (P > 0.1). No
association was found for ESR1 haplotype based on four SNPs. These preliminary
results suggest that variants in ESR genes could play a role in the etiology of
biliary tract cancers, especially bile duct cancer in men.

PMCID: PMC2864412
PMID: 20172949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2010 May 1;166(3):529-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2010.02.015. 
Epub 2010 Feb 18.

Nucleotide sequence, tissue expression patterns and phylogenetic analysis of
estrogen receptor one mRNA in the Murray rainbowfish (Melanotaenia fluviatilis)
(Atheriniformes, Actinopterygii).

Woods M(1), Kumar A, Barton M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Environmental Contaminants Research, CSIRO Land and Water, PMB 2,
Glen Osmond 5064, Australia. marianne.woods@csiro.au

Estrogens are steroidal hormones that control many physiological processes in
both female and male vertebrates. Like other vertebrates, fish have two distinct 
estrogen receptors (Esr) subtypes, Esr1 and Esr2a that have been isolated in a
number of species, as well as a third subtype, Esr2b. The mRNA encoding the Esr1 
was isolated from the female liver of an Australian freshwater fish, the Murray
rainbowfish, Melanotaenia fluviatilis. The rainbowfish esr1 cDNA was 2569 bp in
length and with an open reading frame to encode a protein of 611 amino acids.
Phylogenetic analysis and multiple amino acid sequence alignment indicated close 
relationship and high similarity with killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus) and
gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata). Expression of rainbowfish esr1 mRNA was
abundant in the liver, gonads and intestine of adult female and male rainbowfish.
This is the first isolation of the full-length nucleotide sequence of an estrogen
receptor from rainbowfish. This sequence provides a valuable molecular tool that 
can be used in future studies investigating estrogen mechanisms, actions and
tissue-specific expression in juvenile and adult rainbowfish.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20171224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Genet Genomics. 2010 Apr;283(4):341-9. doi: 10.1007/s00438-010-0522-y. Epub
2010 Feb 18.

High-throughput assessment of CpG site methylation for distinguishing between
HCV-cirrhosis and HCV-associated hepatocellular carcinoma.

Archer KJ(1), Mas VR, Maluf DG, Fisher RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Virginia Commonwealth University, 730 East Broad 
Street, P.O. Box 980032, Richmond, VA 23298-0032, USA. kjarcher@vcu.edu

Methylation of promoter CpG islands has been associated with gene silencing and
demonstrated to lead to chromosomal instability. Therefore, some postulate that
aberrantly methylated CpG regions may be important biomarkers indicative of
cancer development. In this study we used the Illumina GoldenGate Methylation
BeadArray Cancer Panel I for simultaneously profiling methylation of 1,505 CpG
sites in order to identify methylation differences in 76 liver tissues ranging
from normal to pre-neoplastic and neoplastic states. CpG sites for ESR1, GSTM2,
and MME were significantly differentially methylated when comparing the
pre-neoplastic tissues from patients with concomitant hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) to the pre-neoplastic tissues from patients without HCC. When comparing
paired HCC tissues to their corresponding pre-neoplastic non-tumorous tissues,
eight CpG sites, including one CpG site that was hypermethylated (APC) and seven 
(NOTCH4, EMR3, HDAC9, DCL1, HLA-DOA, HLA-DPA1, and ERN1) that were hypomethylated
in HCC, were identified. Our study demonstrates that high-throughput methylation 
technologies may be used to identify differentially methylated CpG sites that may
prove to be important molecular events involved in carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2898187
PMID: 20165882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Endocrinol. 2010 May;205(2):147-57. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0474. Epub 2010 Feb 17.

Response of adult mouse uterus to early disruption of estrogen receptor-alpha
signaling is influenced by Krüppel-like factor 9.

Simmons CD(1), Pabona JM, Zeng Z, Velarde MC, Gaddy D, Simmen FA, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, 4301 W Markham Street, Little Rock, Arkansas 72202, USA.

Inappropriate early exposure of the hormone-responsive uterus to estrogenic
compounds is associated with increased risk for adult reproductive diseases
including endometrial cancers. While the dysregulation of estrogen receptor-alpha
(ESR1) signaling is well acknowledged to mediate early events in tumor
initiation, mechanisms contributing to sustained ESR1 activity later in life and 
leading to induction of oncogenic pathways remain poorly understood. We had shown
previously that the transcription factor Krüppel-like factor 9 (KLF9) represses
ESR1 expression and activity in Ishikawa endometrial glandular epithelial cells. 
We hypothesized that KLF9 functions as a tumor suppressor, and that loss of its
expression enhances ESR1 signaling. Here, we evaluated the contribution of KLF9
to early perturbations in uterine ESR1 signaling pathways elicited by the
administration of synthetic estrogen diethylstilbestrol (DES) to wild-type (WT)
and Klf9 null (KO) mice on postnatal days (PNDs) 1-5. Uterine tissues collected
at PND84 were subjected to histological, immunological, and molecular analyses.
Compared with WT mice, KO mice demonstrated larger endometrial glands and lower
endometrial gland numbers; DES exposure exacerbated these differences. Loss of
KLF9 expression resulted in increased glandular ESR1 immunoreactivity with DES,
without effects on serum estradiol levels. Quantitative RT-PCR analyses indicated
altered expression of uterine genes commonly dysregulated in endometrial cancers 
(Akt1, Mmp9, Slpi, and Tgfbeta1) and of those involved in growth regulation (Fos,
Myc, Tert, and Syk), with loss of Klf9, alone or in concert with DES. Our data
support a molecular network between KLF9 and ESR1 in the uterus, and suggest that
silencing of KLF9 may contribute to endometrial dysfunctions initiated by
aberrant estrogen action.

PMCID: PMC2972657
PMID: 20164373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Environ Sci Technol. 2010 Mar 15;44(6):2156-62. doi: 10.1021/es902995q.

Water chemistry alters gene expression and physiological end points of chronic
waterborne copper exposure in zebrafish, Danio rerio.

Craig PM(1), Wood CM, McClelland GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, 1280 Main St. West, Hamilton, ON, 
L8S 4K1, Canada. pcraig@uottawa.ca

This is the first study to implement a genomic approach to ascertain both
transcriptional and functional end points of chronic Cu toxicity in fish
associated with experimentally manipulated water chemistries. Over 21 d,
zebrafish acclimated to softwater (Na(+) = 0.06 mM, Ca(2+) = 0.08 mM, Mg(2+) =
0.03 mM) were exposed to the following: soft-water (Ctrl); 12 microg L(-1) Cu
(Cu); 3.3 mM Na(+) (Na); 3.3 mM Na(+) + 12 microg L(-1) Cu (Na + Cu); 3.3 mM
Ca(2+) (Ca); or 3.3 mM Ca(2+) + 12 microg L(-1) Cu (Ca + Cu). Although effective 
at reducing Cu load in all tissues, Na(+) in the presence of Cu did not decrease 
the degree of oxidative damage, particularly in the gill and gut. In contrast, Ca
+ Cu treatment decreased Cu accumulation in gill, but not liver or gut, with no
reduction in oxidative damage. Transcriptional analysis of candidate genes
(atp7a, ctr1, ECaC, esr1) showed principally a down regulation of transcripts
with the Cu only treatment, while Ca + Cu treatment restored some of the genes to
control levels. Conversely, the Na + Cu treatment had a strong, opposing affect
when compared to that of Cu alone. Zebrafish Affymetrix GeneChips revealed
significantly clustered patterns of expression. Changes in expression induced by 
Cu appeared to be opposite to the majority of the other treatments. Our data on
the preventative or enhancing effects of Na(+) and Ca(2+) both alone and in the
presence of Cu, may, in the future, facilitate the incorporation of gene
expression end points into a biotic ligand model predicting chronic Cu toxicity
in this tropical model species of genomic importance.

PMID: 20163087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Jul;211(1):200-2. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.01.026. Epub 2010 Jan 28.

ESR1 genetic variants, haplotypes and the risk of coronary heart disease and
ischemic stroke in the Finnish population: a prospective follow-up study.

Kunnas T(1), Silander K, Karvanen J, Valkeapää M, Salomaa V, Nikkari S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical School, University of Tampere, and
Research Unit of the Laboratory Centre, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere,
Finland. tarja.kunnas@uta.fi

Association of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene variants and risk of coronary
heart disease (CHD) and ischemic stroke was evaluated in the FINRISK-study. From 
14,140 individuals, 2225 were selected for genotyping using a case-cohort design.
Time-to-event analysis showed that the CC genotype of -397T/C ERS1 gene
contributed to higher risk of CHD only in men (HR, 1.68, CI 1.03-2.74). The
-351A/G polymorphism was not independently associated with CHD. Haplotype
analysis of these two variants indicated that in men, haplotype TA conferred
lower risk of CHD (HR=0.72, CI 0.55-0.95), whereas men with haplotype CA had 1.8 
higher risk of CHD events (CI 1.21-2.77), compared to other haplotypes. No
association was found with ischemic stroke. Our study suggests that the minor
allele -397C of the ESR1 gene confers risk of CHD among Finnish men, both in
homozygous state and as part of a haplotype with the -351A allele.

Copyright (c) 2010. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 20153472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cancer Causes Control. 2010 Jun;21(6):897-908. doi: 10.1007/s10552-010-9518-5.
Epub 2010 Feb 11.

Genetic variation in sex-steroid receptors and synthesizing enzymes and
colorectal cancer risk in women.

Lin J(1), Zee RY, Liu KY, Zhang SM, Lee IM, Manson JE, Giovannucci E, Buring JE, 
Cook NR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. jhlin@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

OBJECTIVES: Several lines of evidence have suggested that female hormones may
lower the risk for developing colorectal cancer. However, the mechanisms by which
sex hormones affect colorectal cancer development remain unknown. We sought to
determine whether the association may be under genetic control by evaluating
genetic variation in estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2), progesterone receptor
(PGR), aromatase cytochrome 450 enzyme (CYP19A1), and 17 beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 2 gene (HSD17B2).
METHODS: We included 158 incident cases of colorectal cancer and 563 randomly
chosen control subjects from 28,345 women in the Women's Health Study aged 45 or 
older who provided blood samples and had no history of cancer or cardiovascular
disease at baseline in 1993. All cases and controls were Caucasians of European
descent. A total of 63 tagging and putative functional SNPs in the 5 genes were
included for analysis. Unconditional logistic regression was used to estimate
odds ratio (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: There was no association between variation in ESR1, ESR2, PGR, CYP19A1
and HSD17B2 and colorectal cancer risk after correction for multiple comparisons 
(p values after correction > or =0.25). There was also no association with any of
the haplotypes examined (p > or = 0.15) and no evidence of joint effects of
variants in the 5 genes (p > or = 0.51).
CONCLUSION: Our data offer insufficient support for an association between
variation in ESR1, ESR2, PGR, CYP19A1, and HSD17B2 and risk for developing
colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2873149
PMID: 20148360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Biol Reprod. 2010 May;82(5):948-57. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.079889. Epub 2010
Feb 3.

Absence of estrogen receptor alpha leads to physiological alterations in the
mouse epididymis and consequent defects in sperm function.

Joseph A(1), Hess RA, Schaeffer DJ, Ko C, Hudgin-Spivey S, Chambon P, Shur BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, USA.

Male mice deficient in ESR1 (ERalpha) (Esr1KO mice) are infertile, and sperm
recovered from the cauda epididymis exhibit reduced motility and fail to
fertilize eggs in vitro. These effects on sperm appear to result from defective
epididymal function and not a direct effect on spermatogenesis, as Esr1KO germ
cells transplanted into wild-type testes yield normal offspring. We hypothesized 
that the previously described defect in efferent duct fluid reabsorption would
lead to alterations in the epididymal fluid milieu, which would negatively impact
sperm function. Analysis of the epididymal fluid revealed that the Esr1KO
maintains a higher luminal pH throughout the epididymis, confirming an inability 
of the efferent ducts and/or epididymis to properly acidify the luminal contents.
Subsequent studies showed that these abnormalities were not the result of global 
defects in epididymal function since protein secretion by the Esr1KO epididymis
appeared normal as judged by SDS-PAGE of total secreted proteins and by
immunoblotting of candidate secreted proteins. To gain insight into the basis of 
the aberrant fluid homeostasis in the Esr1KO epididymis, the expression of
several enzymes and transporters known to be involved in acid/base regulation
were analyzed. The levels of SLC9A3 (NHE3) as well as carbonic anhydrase XIV and 
SLC4A4 (NBC1) were all reduced in the proximal portion of the Esr1KO epididymis, 
while other components appeared unaffected, including other ion transporters and 
ATP6V0A1 (V-ATPase). The altered luminal milieu of the Esr1KO epididymis was
shown to lead to a corresponding increase in the intracellular pH of Esr1KO
sperm, relative to sperm from control animals. Since pH and bicarbonate ions are 
critical regulators of sperm cAMP levels and motility, we attempted to bypass the
abnormal luminal and intracellular environment by supplementing sperm with
exogenous cAMP. This treatment rescued all defective motility parameters, as
assayed by CASA, further showing that motility defects are not intrinsic to the
sperm but, rather, result from the abnormal epididymal milieu.

PMCID: PMC2857635
PMID: 20130267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biol Reprod. 2010 May;82(5):958-67. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.080366. Epub 2010
Feb 3.

Epididymal hypo-osmolality induces abnormal sperm morphology and function in the 
estrogen receptor alpha knockout mouse.

Joseph A(1), Shur BD, Ko C, Chambon P, Hess RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois 61802, USA.

Estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) is highly expressed in the efferent ductules of
all species studied as well as in the epididymal epithelium in mice and other
select species. Male mice lacking ESR1 (Esr1KO) are infertile, but
transplantation studies demonstrated that Esr1KO germ cells are capable of
fertilization when placed in a wild-type reproductive tract. These results
suggest that extratesticular regions, such as the efferent ductules and
epididymis, are the major source of pathological changes in Esr1KO males.
Previous studies have shown alterations in ion and fluid transporters in the
efferent duct and epididymal epithelia of Esr1KO males, leading to misregulation 
of luminal fluid pH. To determine the effect of an altered epididymal milieu on
Esr1KO sperm, we assayed sperm morphology in the different regions of the
epididymis. Sperm recovered from the epididymis exhibited abnormal flagellar
coiling and increased incidence of spontaneous acrosome reactions, both of which 
are consistent with exposure to abnormal epididymal fluid. Analysis of the
epididymal fluid revealed that the osmolality of the Esr1KO fluid was reduced
relative to wild type, consistent with prior reports of inappropriate fluid
absorption from the efferent ductules. This, along with the finding that
morphological defects increased with transit through the epididymal duct,
suggests that the anomalies in sperm are a consequence of the abnormal luminal
environment. Consistent with this, incubating Esr1KO sperm in a more
wild-type-like osmotic environment significantly rescued the abnormal flagellar
coiling. This work demonstrates that Esr1KO mice exhibit an abnormal fluid
environment in the lumen of the efferent ducts and epididymis, precluding normal 
sperm maturation and instead resulting in progressive deterioration of sperm that
contributes to infertility.

PMCID: PMC2857636
PMID: 20130266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2009 Nov;53(8):923-33.

Estrogen receptors and function in the male reproductive system.

Lazari MF(1), Lucas TF, Yasuhara F, Gomes GR, Siu ER, Royer C, Fernandes SA,
Porto CS.

Author information: 
(1)Setor de Endocrinologia Experimental, Departamento de Farmacologia, Escola
Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

A substantial advance in our understanding on the estrogen signaling occurred in 
the last decade. Estrogens interact with two receptors, ESR1 and ESR2, also known
as ERalpha and ERbeta, respectively. ESR1 and ESR2 belong to the nuclear receptor
family of transcription factors. In addition to the well established
transcriptional effects, estrogens can mediate rapid signaling, triggered within 
seconds or minutes. These rapid effects can be mediated by ESRs or the G
protein-coupled estrogen receptor GPER, also known as GPR30. The effects of
estrogen on cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis are often mediated 
by growth factors. The understanding of the cross-talk between androgen, estrogen
and growth factors signaling pathways is therefore essential to understand the
physiopathological mechanisms of estrogen action. In this review we focused on
recent discoveries about the nature of the estrogen receptors, and on the
signaling and function of estrogen in the male reproductive system.

PMID: 20126844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Clin Chim Acta. 2010 Apr 2;411(7-8):597-600. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.01.026. Epub
2010 Jan 29.

Association of estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms with BMD and their
affect on estradiol levels in pre- and postmenopausal women in south Indian
population from Andhra Pradesh.

Jeedigunta Y(1), Bhoomi Reddy PR, Kolla VK, Munshi A, Ananthapur V, Narasimulu G,
Akka J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Hospital for Genetic Diseases, Osmania University,
Begumpet, Hyderabad, A.P, India.

Erratum in
    Clin Chim Acta. 2010 Sep 6;411(17-18):1394.

BACKGROUND: Osteoporosis is a multifactorial disorder with a strong genetic
component and ESR1 is suggested as a candidate gene for osteoporosis. Therefore
the present study is aimed to investigate the role of ESR1 gene polymorphisms and
its influence on estradiol levels and BMD in osteoporotic women of Indian
ethnicity.
METHODS: Four-hundred twenty-seven osteoporotic women and 460 age matched
controls were included in the study. ESR1 gene polymorphism was assessed by
PCR-RFLP method. Serum estradiol was measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: The frequency of pp and xx genotypes as well as p and x alleles was
significantly high in pre- and postmenopausal osteoporotics when compared to
controls (p<0.001). They had low BMD and estradiol levels in comparison with PP
and XX genotype individuals (p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The ESR1 gene is associated with low bone mass and low estradiol
levels in all our study subjects. It is likely that the allele exerts its
influence on the bone in early adulthood leading to an increased risk of
osteoporosis later in life.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20116372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Jan 28;11:16. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-16.

Haplotypes of intron 4 of the estrogen receptor alpha gene and hip fractures: a
replication study in Caucasians.

Velasco J(1), Hernández JL, Pérez-Castrillón JL, Zarrabeitia MT, Alonso MA,
González-Macías J, Riancho JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital U,M, Valdecilla, University of
Cantabria, RETICEF, Santander, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Despite their great impact, few genetic association studies have used
hip fractures as an endpoint. However, the association of two polymorphisms on
intron 4 of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) with hip fractures was recently
reported in a Chinese population. The aim of this study was to investigate
whether such association is also present in Caucasians.
METHODS: We analyzed those two SNPs and another neighbour SNP located on the exon
4 of ESR1 in 787 patients with hip fractures and 953 controls from Spain.
RESULTS: The allelic frequencies differed markedly from those reported in Asian
populations. Nevertheless, haplotypes including the rs3020314 and rs1884051 loci 
in intron 4 showed a significant association with hip fractures (omnibus test p =
0.006 in the whole group and 0.00005 in women). In the sex-stratified analysis,
the association was significant in females, but not in males. In women, the CA
haplotype appeared to have a protective influence, being present in 6.5% of the
controls, but only in 3% of patients with fractures (odds ratio 0.39; 95%
confidence interval 0.26-0.59; estimated population preventive fraction 3.5%).
The inclusion of the rs1801132 SNP of exon 4 further increased the statistical
significance of the association (odds ratio 0.17; 95% CI 0.08-0.37; p = 0.00001).
Each SNP appeared to contribute independently to the association. No
genotype-related differences in gene expression were found in 42 femoral bone
samples.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the association of some polymorphisms in the
region of exon 4/intron 4 of ESR1 and hip fractures in women. However, there are 
marked differences in allele frequencies between Asian and Caucasian populations.

PMCID: PMC2837017
PMID: 20109228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. BMC Cancer. 2010 Jan 28;10:23. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-23.

Simultaneous CXCL12 and ESR1 CpG island hypermethylation correlates with poor
prognosis in sporadic breast cancer.

Ramos EA(1), Camargo AA, Braun K, Slowik R, Cavalli IJ, Ribeiro EM, Pedrosa Fde
O, de Souza EM, Costa FF, Klassen G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Pathology, Federal University of Parana, Curitiba, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: CXCL12 is a chemokine that is constitutively expressed in many organs
and tissues. CXCL12 promoter hypermethylation has been detected in primary breast
tumours and contributes to their metastatic potential. It has been shown that the
oestrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene can also be silenced by DNA methylation. In 
this study, we used methylation-specific PCR (MSP) to analyse the methylation
status in two regions of the CXCL12 promoter and ESR1 in tumour cell lines and in
primary breast tumour samples, and correlated our results with
clinicopathological data.
METHODS: First, we analysed CXCL12 expression in breast tumour cell lines by
RT-PCR. We also used 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) treatment and DNA
bisulphite sequencing to study the promoter methylation for a specific region of 
CXCL12 in breast tumour cell lines. We evaluated CXCL12 and ESR1 methylation in
primary tumour samples by methylation-specific PCR (MSP). Finally, promoter
hypermethylation of these genes was analysed using Fisher's exact test and
correlated with clinicopathological data using the Chi square test, Kaplan-Meier 
survival analysis and Cox regression analysis.
RESULTS: CXCL12 promoter hypermethylation in the first region (island 2) and
second region (island 4) was correlated with lack of expression of the gene in
tumour cell lines. In the primary tumours, island 2 was hypermethylated in 14.5% 
of the samples and island 4 was hypermethylated in 54% of the samples. The ESR1
promoter was hypermethylated in 41% of breast tumour samples. In addition, the
levels of ER alpha protein expression diminished with increased frequency of ESR1
methylation (p < 0.0001). This study also demonstrated that CXCL12 island 4 and
ESR1 methylation occur simultaneously at a high frequency (p = 0.0220).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study showing a simultaneous involvement of
epigenetic regulation for both CXCL12 and ESR1 genes in Brazilian women. The
methylation status of both genes was significantly correlated with histologically
advanced disease, the presence of metastases and death. Therefore, the
methylation pattern of these genes could be used as a molecular marker for the
prediction of breast cancer outcome.

PMCID: PMC2834618
PMID: 20109227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Hum Genet. 2010 Mar;127(3):249-85. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0773-z. Epub 2009 Dec 
12.

Genetics of osteoporosis: accelerating pace in gene identification and
validation.

Li WF(1), Hou SX, Yu B, Li MM, Férec C, Chen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The First Affiliated Hospital, General Hospital of
the People's Liberation Army, 100037 Beijing, China.

Osteoporosis is characterized by low bone mineral density and structural
deterioration of bone tissue, leading to an increased risk of fractures. It is
the most common metabolic bone disorder worldwide, affecting one in three women
and one in eight men over the age of 50. In the past 15 years, a large number of 
genes have been reported as being associated with osteoporosis. However, only in 
the past 4 years we have witnessed an accelerated pace in identifying and
validating osteoporosis susceptibility loci. This increase in pace is mostly due 
to large-scale association studies, meta-analyses, and genome-wide association
studies of both single nucleotide polymorphisms and copy number variations. A
comprehensive review of these developments revealed that, to date, at least 15
genes (VDR, ESR1, ESR2, LRP5, LRP4, SOST, GRP177, OPG, RANK, RANKL, COLIA1, SPP1,
ITGA1, SP7, and SOX6) can be reasonably assigned as confirmed osteoporosis
susceptibility genes, whereas, another >30 genes are promising candidate genes.
Notably, confirmed and promising genes are clustered in three biological
pathways, the estrogen endocrine pathway, the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway,
and the RANKL/RANK/OPG pathway. New biological pathways will certainly emerge
when more osteoporosis genes are identified and validated. These genetic findings
may provide new routes toward improved therapeutic and preventive interventions
of this complex disease.

PMID: 20101412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2010 Feb;19(2):297-304. doi: 10.1089/jwh.2008.1317.

Estrogen receptor-1 genetic polymorphisms for the risk of premature ovarian
failure and early menopause.

Yang JJ(1), Cho LY, Lim YJ, Ko KP, Lee KS, Kim H, Yim SV, Chang SH, Park SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to investigate the role of the estrogen
receptor 1 (ESR1) genetic polymorphisms for early menopause that was classified
as premature ovarian failure (POF) and early menopause (EM) and to examine
whether the associations of ESR1 genetic variants are different for POF and EM.
METHODS: We selected 100 POF cases and matched 100 EM cases and 200 normal
menopause (NM) controls from the Korean Multi-Center Cohort. Among them, we
restricted idiopathic POF and EM cases vs NM controls by excluding POF/EM cases
with medical/surgical causes. The XbaI (rs9340799) and PvuII (rs2234693) in the
ESR1 gene were genotyped. The single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and haplotype 
effects were analyzed by multivariate logistic regression and haplotype analysis.
Also nominal polytomous logistic regression was used to find whether ESR1 genetic
variants are differently associated with POF and EM.
RESULTS: The global p values for idiopathic POF and EM were 0.08 and 0.39
(SNP-based), and <0.001 and 0.12 (haplotype-based), respectively. The XbaI
genetic variant containing the X allele was marginally significantly associated
with a reduced risk of idiopathic POF (OR = 0.6, 95% CI 0.3-1.0). The P-x
haplotype and diplotypes significantly decreased the risk of idiopathic POF (OR =
0.5, 95% CI 0.2-0.9; OR = 0.4, 95% CI 0.2-0.9, respectively). In contrast from
POF, the P-x haplotypes and diplotypes insignificantly increased the risk for
both idiopathic EM (p(polytomous) = 0.009 for P-x haplotype; p(polytomous) = 0.02
for P-x diplotypes).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the ESR1 gene including PvuII and XbaI
polymorphisms may modify the risk of idiopathic premature ovarian failure (POF)
but not idiopathic early menopause (EM) risk.

PMID: 20095908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Endocrinol. 2010 Apr;205(1):69-78. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0315. Epub 2010 Jan 21.

Development and characterization of five rainbow trout pituitary single-cell
clone lines capable of producing pituitary hormones.

Chen MJ(1), Chiou PP, Liao YH, Lin CM, Chen TT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, U-3125
Storrs, Connecticut 06269, USA.

Five single-cell clone lines (mRTP1B, mRTP1E, mRTP1F, mRTP1K, and mRTP2A) have
been developed from adult rainbow trout pituitary glands. These cell lines have
been maintained in a CO(2)-independent medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine 
serum (FBS) for more than 150 passages. At about 150 passages, the doubling time 
of each single-cell clone in a CO(2)-independent medium supplemented with 10% FBS
at 20 degrees C was 3.6+/-0.7, 2.8+/-0.7, 3.2+/-0.8, 5.5+/-0.6, and 6.6+/-0.6
days respectively. Each single-cell clone contains 60+/-2 chromosomes, which is
within the range of the 2N chromosome numbers reported for rainbow trout. Reverse
transcription-PCR analysis revealed that in addition to expressing gh, prolactin 
(prl), and estradiol (E(2)) receptor alpha (e2ralpha or esr1) genes, each
single-cell clone line also expressed other pituitary-specific genes such as tsh,
gonadotropin 1 (gth-1 or fshb), gonadotropin 2 (gth-2 or lhb), somatolactin (sl
or smtl), proopiomelanocortin-B (pomcb), and corticosteroid receptor (cr or
nr3c1). Immunocytochemical analysis showed that all the five single-cell clones
produced both Gh and Prl. Furthermore, the expression of gh and prl genes in the 
single-cell clone lines is responsive to induction by E(2), dexamethasone, and
o,p'-dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane. All together, these results confirm that
each of the single-cell clones was derived from rainbow trout pituitary glands.
These single-cell clone lines not only can be used to study factors that regulate
the expression of pituitary hormone genes, but can also be developed as a rapid
screening system for identifying environmental endocrine disruptors.

PMID: 20093282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 26;107(4):1553-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0913517107. Epub 2010 Jan 4.

MYCN-regulated microRNAs repress estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) expression and
neuronal differentiation in human neuroblastoma.

Lovén J(1), Zinin N, Wahlström T, Müller I, Brodin P, Fredlund E, Ribacke U,
Pivarcsi A, Påhlman S, Henriksson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

MYCN, a proto-oncogene normally expressed in the migrating neural crest, is in
its amplified state a key factor in the genesis of human neuroblastoma (NB).
However, the mechanisms underlying MYCN-mediated NB progression are poorly
understood. Here, we present a MYCN-induced miRNA signature in human NB involving
the activation and transrepression of several miRNA genes from paralogous
clusters. Several family members derived from the miR-17 approximately 92
cluster, including miR-18a and miR-19a, were among the up-regulated miRNAs.
Expression analysis of these miRNAs in NB tumors confirmed increased levels in
MYCN-amplified samples. Specifically, we show that miR-18a and miR-19a target and
repress the expression of estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1), a ligand-inducible
transcription factor implicated in neuronal differentiation. Immunohistochemical 
staining demonstrated ESR1 expression in human fetal sympathetic ganglia,
suggesting a role for ESR1 during sympathetic nervous system development.
Concordantly, lentiviral restoration of ESR1 in NB cells resulted in growth
arrest and neuronal differentiation. Moreover, lentiviral-mediated inhibition of 
miR-18a in NB cells led to severe growth retardation, outgrowth of
varicosity-containing neurites, and induction of neuronal sympathetic
differentiation markers. Bioinformatic analyses of microarray data from NB tumors
revealed that high ESR1 expression correlates with increased event-free survival 
in NB patients and favorable disease outcome. Thus, MYCN amplification may
disrupt estrogen signaling sensitivity in primitive sympathetic cells through
deregulation of ESR1, thereby preventing the normal induction of neuroblast
differentiation. Collectively, our findings demonstrate the molecular
consequences of abnormal miRNA transcription in a MYCN-driven tumor and offer
unique insights into the pathology underlying MYCN-amplified NB.

PMCID: PMC2824410
PMID: 20080637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Oct;44(10):765-70.

[Differential expression of microRNAs associated with estrogen receptor alpha and
progesterone receptor in typeIand typeII endometrial adenocarcinomas.].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou J(1), Shen K, Zeng JF, Yang JX, Cao DY, Cui QC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking Union Medical College
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify differentially expression of microRNAs associated with
expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and progesterone receptor (PR)
between type I and type II endometrial adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: Two kinds of endometrial adenocarcinoma cell lines, Ishikawa and KLE,
was transplanted into nude mice and biopsied to identify the expression of
ERalpha, PR and p53, and test their response to estrogen and progesterone.
Cultured the two cell lines under the estrogen-free and progesterone-free
circumstance, total RNA was isolated to identify the differentially expressed
microRNAs by microarray for prediction the microRNAs which target ESR1 and PGR by
software miRANDA and TargetScan, and then was validated by real-time PCR in two
cell lines cultured both in vivo and in vitro and ten specimens from patients.
RESULTS: Ishikawa cell line was confirmed from type I endometrial adenocarcinoma,
KLE cell line was confirmed from type II endometrial adenocarcinoma. One hundred 
and twenty-six differentially expressed microRNAs between the two cell lines were
identified by microRNA microarray, among of which may target ESR1 included
hsa-miR-100, 99a, and may target PGR included hsa-miR-378, 768-3p. The
differential expression of hsa-miR-100, 99a, 378, 768-3p identified by microarray
between Ishikawa and KLE in vivo and in vitro was equal to that by real-time PCR,
while Hsa-miR-100 was significantly down expressed in type I group specimens
compared to type II group (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Hsa-miR-100 is significantly down-expressed in type I endometrial
adenocarcinoma compared to type II, which may be a great potential to target
ESR1.

PMID: 20078964  [PubMed - in process]


123. Biol Reprod. 2010 May;82(5):815-24. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.082065. Epub 2010
Jan 14.

Endocrine characterization of the reproductive axis in highly prolific lacaune
sheep homozygous for the FecLL mutation.

Drouilhet L(1), Taragnat C, Fontaine J, Duittoz A, Mulsant P, Bodin L, Fabre S.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 444 INRA-ENVT, Laboratoire de Génétique Cellulaire, Castanet-Tolosan,
France.

A prolific allele named FecL(L) is known to segregate in the meat breed of the
French Lacaune sheep on the basis of ovulation rate record. To gain more
knowledge about the physiological effects of FecL(L), ewes homozygous for FecL(L)
(L/L) were compared to wild-type ewes (+/+) for ovarian phenotype and
reproductive endocrine profiles. At the ovarian level, the increased ovulation
rate in L/L ewes was associated with an increased number of antral follicles of
greater than 3 mm and with preovulatory follicles being, on average, 1 mm
smaller. Intrafollicular estradiol and testosterone concentrations were not
significantly different between the two genotypes. In contrast, L/L large
follicles (>or=6 mm) had lower intrafollicular progesterone concentration. At the
molecular level, expressions of ovarian markers, such as CYP19A1, CYP11A1,
CYP17A1, LHR, and INHA, were not significantly different between the two
genotypes. In contrast, FSHR and STAR mRNA levels increased in granulosa cells
from L/L ewes. Plasma concentrations of estradiol, luteinizing hormone (LH),
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and progesterone measured across a
synchronized estrous cycle revealed a significant increase in estradiol levels
during the follicular phase, a precocious LH surge, and an increase in
progesterone level during the luteal phase of L/L ewes compared to +/+ ewes.
Circulating concentrations of FSH were not different between the two genotypes.
The precocious LH surge was associated with an increase in frequency of LH
pulsatility during the follicular phase. At the pituitary level, mRNA levels for 
LHB, FSHB, GNRHR, and ESR1 were not significantly different between the two
genotypes. In contrast, ESR2 mRNA expression was decreased in L/L ewes compared
to +/+ ewes. Based on ovarian phenotype and endocrine profiles, these findings
suggest that the mutation in the FecL gene affects ovarian function in a
different way compared to other known prolific mutations affecting the bone
morphogenetic protein signaling system in the ovine species.

PMID: 20075395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Jun;31(6):1060-7. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq009. Epub 2010 Jan 
11.

Hormone therapy, DNA methylation and colon cancer.

Wu AH(1), Siegmund KD, Long TI, Cozen W, Wan P, Tseng CC, Shibata D, Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 1441 Eastlake Avenue, Los Angeles, CA, USA. annawu@usc.edu

Observational epidemiological studies and randomized trials have reported a
protective effect of estrogen and progestin therapy (EPT) on the risk of
colorectal cancer but the findings on estrogen-alone therapy (ET) are less
consistent. The mechanism by which menopausal hormones influence risk of
colorectal cancer has not been well studied. To further investigate the
relationship between menopausal hormones and risk of colon cancer, we conducted a
population-based case-control study in Los Angeles County involving 831 women
with newly diagnosed colon cancer and 755 population-based control women. Risk of
colon cancer decreased significantly with increasing duration of current use of
ET and EPT; the adjusted relative risk was 0.83 [95% confidence interval (95% CI)
= 0.76-0.99)] per 5 years of ET use and 0.88 (95% CI = 0.78-0.99) per 5 years of 
EPT use. Risk of colon cancer was unrelated to past ET or EPT use. We explored if
current use of menopausal hormones is associated with DNA methylation of estrogen
receptor (ESR1 and ESR2), progesterone receptor and other genes in the colonic
tissues of a subset of colon cancer patients (n = 280) we interviewed. Our
results suggest that current menopausal hormone users compared with non-current
users displayed increased DNA methylation of progesterone receptor in the
'normal' colonic tissues (P = 0.055) and increased DNA methylation of ESR1 in the
'tumorous' colonic tissues (P = 0.056). These findings on DNA methylation and
hormone therapy use need confirmation in larger studies.

PMCID: PMC2878358
PMID: 20064828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Clin Chim Acta. 2010 Apr 2;411(7-8):505-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2009.12.028. Epub
2010 Jan 7.

Association of estrogen receptor-alpha gene polymorphisms with cardiac autonomic 
nervous activity in healthy young Japanese males.

Matsunaga T(1), Gu N, Yamazaki H, Adachi T, Yasuda K, Moritani T, Tsuda K,
Nishiyama T, Nonaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Kyoto University, Japan. dmmed-028@umin.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Estrogens exert beneficial effects on the cardiovascular system that 
are mediated by estrogen receptors. We examined the association between the
estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms and cardiac
autonomic nervous function in Japanese males.
METHODS: We examined 252 young healthy males for association of ESR1 PvuII and
XbaI polymorphisms and short-term heart rate variability (HRV) during supine rest
and in a standing position. The very low frequency (VLF), low frequency (LF), and
high frequency (HF) components of HRV were quantified by frequency domain
analysis.
RESULTS: Carriers of the ESR1 PvuII C allele had higher mean blood pressure (BP),
while the XbaI GG genotype was significantly associated with higher diastolic and
mean BP, but lower HR. In the haplotype analysis, carriers of the ESR1 haplotype 
2 (PvuII C and XbaI A) allele had a higher systolic and mean BP, and lower HRV
spectral powers (total power, VLF, LF, and HF components) in a supine rest
compared with those of non-carriers.
CONCLUSIONS: The ESR1 PvuII and XbaI haplotype is associated with BP variation
and the reduction in cardiac autonomic nervous activity in young Japanese males, 
which may be precursors of future pathological episodes of cardiovascular
diseases.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20060387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Jan;19(1):245-50. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0729.

ESR1/SYNE1 polymorphism and invasive epithelial ovarian cancer risk: an Ovarian
Cancer Association Consortium study.

Doherty JA(1), Rossing MA, Cushing-Haugen KL, Chen C, Van Den Berg DJ, Wu AH,
Pike MC, Ness RB, Moysich K, Chenevix-Trench G, Beesley J, Webb PM, Chang-Claude 
J, Wang-Gohrke S, Goodman MT, Lurie G, Thompson PJ, Carney ME, Hogdall E, Kjaer
SK, Hogdall C, Goode EL, Cunningham JM, Fridley BL, Vierkant RA, Berchuck A,
Moorman PG, Schildkraut JM, Palmieri RT, Cramer DW, Terry KL, Yang HP,
Garcia-Closas M, Chanock S, Lissowska J, Song H, Pharoah PD, Shah M, Perkins B,
McGuire V, Whittemore AS, Di Cioccio RA, Gentry-Maharaj A, Menon U, Gayther SA,
Ramus SJ, Ziogas A, Brewster W, Anton-Culver H; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study
Management Group; Australian Cancer Study (Ovarian Cancer), Pearce CL; Ovarian
Cancer Association Consortium (OCAC).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epidemiology (M4-C308), Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, PO 
Box 19024, Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA. jdoherty@fhcrc.org

We genotyped 13 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the estrogen receptor
alpha gene (ESR1) region in three population-based case-control studies of
epithelial ovarian cancer conducted in the United States, comprising a total of
1,128 and 1,866 non-Hispanic white invasive cases and controls, respectively. A
SNP 19 kb downstream of ESR1 (rs2295190, G-to-T change) was associated with
invasive ovarian cancer risk, with a per-T-allele odds ratio (OR) of 1.24 [95%
confidence interval (CI), 1.06-1.44, P = 0.006]. rs2295190 is a nonsynonymous
coding SNP in a neighboring gene called spectrin repeat containing, nuclear
envelope 1 (SYNE1), which is involved in nuclear organization and structural
integrity, function of the Golgi apparatus, and cytokinesis. An isoform encoded
by SYNE1 has been reported to be downregulated in ovarian and other cancers.
rs2295190 was genotyped in an additional 12 studies through the Ovarian Cancer
Association Consortium, with 5,279 invasive epithelial cases and 7,450 controls. 
The per-T-allele OR for this 12-study set was 1.09 (95% CI, 1.02-1.17; P =
0.017). Results for the serous subtype in the 15 combined studies were similar to
those overall (n = 3,545; OR, 1.09; 95% CI, 1.01-1.18; P = 0.025), and our
findings were strongest for the mucinous subtype (n = 447; OR, 1.32; 95% CI,
1.11-1.58; P = 0.002). No association was observed for the endometrioid subtype. 
In an additional analysis of 1,459 borderline ovarian cancer cases and 7,370
controls, rs2295190 was not associated with risk. These data provide suggestive
evidence that the rs2295190 T allele, or another allele in linkage disequilibrium
with it, may be associated with increased risk of invasive ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC2863004
PMID: 20056644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(1):R3. doi: 10.1186/bcr2466. Epub 2010 Jan 7.

Frequent aberrant DNA methylation of ABCB1, FOXC1, PPP2R2B and PTEN in ductal
carcinoma in situ and early invasive breast cancer.

Muggerud AA(1), Rønneberg JA, Wärnberg F, Botling J, Busato F, Jovanovic J,
Solvang H, Bukholm I, Børresen-Dale AL, Kristensen VN, Sørlie T, Tost J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University
Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Montebello, Oslo, N-0310, Norway.

INTRODUCTION: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a non-invasive lesion of the
breast that is frequently detected by mammography and subsequently removed by
surgery. However, it is estimated that about half of the detected lesions would
never have progressed into invasive cancer. Identifying DCIS and invasive cancer 
specific epigenetic lesions and understanding how these epigenetic changes are
involved in triggering tumour progression is important for a better understanding
of which lesions are at risk of becoming invasive.
METHODS: Quantitative DNA methylation analysis of ABCB1, CDKN2A/p16INK4a, ESR1,
FOXC1, GSTP1, IGF2, MGMT, MLH1, PPP2R2B, PTEN and RASSF1A was performed by
pyrosequencing in a series of 27 pure DCIS, 28 small invasive ductal carcinomas
(IDCs), 34 IDCs with a DCIS component and 5 normal breast tissue samples. FOXC1, 
ABCB1, PPP2R2B and PTEN were analyzed in 23 additional normal breast tissue
samples. Real-Time PCR expression analysis was performed for FOXC1.
RESULTS: Aberrant DNA methylation was observed in all three diagnosis groups for 
the following genes: ABCB1, FOXC1, GSTP1, MGMT, MLH1, PPP2R2B, PTEN and RASSF1A. 
For most of these genes, methylation was already present at the DCIS level with
the same frequency as within IDCs. For FOXC1 significant differences in
methylation levels were observed between normal breast tissue and invasive
tumours (P < 0.001). The average DNA methylation levels were significantly higher
in the pure IDCs and IDCs with DCIS compared to pure DCIS (P = 0.007 and P =
0.001, respectively). Real-time PCR analysis of FOXC1 expression from 25 DCIS, 23
IDCs and 28 normal tissue samples showed lower gene expression levels of FOXC1 in
both methylated and unmethylated tumours compared to normal tissue (P < 0.001).
DNA methylation levels of FOXC1, GSTP1, ABCB1 and RASSF1A were higher in
oestrogen receptor (ER) positive vs. ER negative tumours; whereas methylation
levels of FOXC1, ABCB1, PPP2R2B and PTEN were lower in tumours with a TP53
mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative methylation analysis identified ABCB1, FOXC1, PPP2R2B
and PTEN as novel genes to be methylated in DCIS. In particular, FOXC1 showed a
significant increase in the methylation frequency in invasive tumours. Low FOXC1 
gene expression in both methylated and unmethylated DCIS and IDCs indicates that 
the loss of its expression is an early event during breast cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC2880421
PMID: 20056007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2010 Jan;220(1):77-82.

Association of the G2014G genotype in estrogen receptor 1 gene with failure of
the mifepristone-induced termination of early pregnancy.

Wang N(1), Zhao H, Han W, He B, Zhang S, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, National Research Institute for Family Planning,
Beijing, China.

Mifepristone is a synthetic steroid compound that has been applied to terminate
early pregnancy for many years. However, about 15% of the women undergo failure
in termination of early pregnancy, the causes of which remain largely unknown. We
herein selected estrogen receptor 1 gene (ESR1) as a candidate gene to determine 
whether single nuclear polymorphisms (SNPs) in ESR1 were associated with the
failure of mifepristone-induce abortion. The subjects recruited were 30 subjects 
that failed to abort and 60 subjects with a successful medical abortion. Three
SNPs, T-397C (rs2234693), C325G (rs1801132), and G2014A (rs2228480), were
analyzed by PCR, followed by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)
analysis. The latter two polymorphic sites are located in the protein-coding
region, but do not alter the amino acid. Among the three SNPs examined, we found 
the significant role of the G2014A polymorphism; namely, the distribution of the 
GG, AG and AA genotypes was different between the failure group and the success
group. The frequency of the GG (G2014G) genotype was higher in the failure group 
(86.7%) than that in the success group (60.0%) (p = 0.030), while the frequency
of the G2014A heterozygote was lower in the failure group (6.7%) than in the
success group (28.3%) (p = 0.013). Moreover, the frequency of the G allele was
higher in the failure group (90%) and lower in the success group (10.0%) (p =
0.013). These results indicate that the GG genotype of the G2014A polymorphism is
associated with the risk of failure in the mifepristone-induced abortion.

PMID: 20046055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Soc Reprod Fertil Suppl. 2010;67:325-40.

Endocrine actions of interferon-tau in ruminants.

Hansen TR(1), Henkes LK, Ashley RL, Bott RC, Antoniazzi AQ, Han H.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction and Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Centro de Ciências Rurais, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria,
97105-900 Santa Maria, RS, Brazil. thomas.hansen@colostate.edu

The ovine conceptus releases interferon-tau (IFNT), which prevents upregulation
of the endometrial estrogen receptor (ESR1) and, consequently, oxytocin receptor 
(OXTR), thereby disrupting pulsatile release of prostaglandin F2alpha (PGF) in
response to oxytocin. IFNT, through paracrine action on the endometrium, protects
the corpus luteum (CL) during maternal recognition of pregnancy. Pregnancy also
induces IFN stimulated genes (ISGs) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs), which is interpreted to reflect a "prompted" antiviral and immune cell
response peripherally in ruminants. IFNT was recently demonstrated to be released
from the uterus in amounts of 200 microg (2 x 10(7) U)/24 h via the uterine vein 
and to induce ISGs in the CL during maternal recognition of pregnancy. Delivery
of recombinant ovine (ro) IFNT into the uterine vein in a location that is
upstream of the utero-ovarian plexus from Day 10 to 17 maintained serum
progesterone concentrations and extended normal 16-17 d estrous cycles to beyond 
32 d. It is concluded from these studies that IFNT is released into the uterine
vein and initiates a peripheral antiviral response to protect pregnancy from
maternal viral infection. It also may have endocrine action through inducing
luteal resistance to PGF and longer-term survival of the CL and maintenance of
pregnancy.

PMID: 21755682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Oct;123(3):757-65. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0675-8. 
Epub 2009 Dec 22.

Gene amplification in ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast.

Burkhardt L(1), Grob TJ, Hermann I, Burandt E, Choschzick M, Jänicke F, Müller V,
Bokemeyer C, Simon R, Sauter G, Wilczak W, Lebeau A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistr. 52, 20246, Hamburg, Germany.

Multiple different biologically and clinically relevant genes are often amplified
in invasive breast cancer, including HER2, ESR1, CCND1, and MYC. So far, little
is known about their role in tumor progression. To investigate their significance
for tumor invasion, we compared pure ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and DCIS
associated with invasive cancer with regard to the amplification of these genes. 
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed on a tissue microarray
containing samples from 130 pure DCIS and 159 DCIS associated with invasive
breast cancer. Of the latter patients, we analyzed the intraductal and invasive
components separately. In addition, lymph node metastases of 23 patients with
invasive carcinoma were included. Amplification rates of pure DCIS and DCIS
associated with invasive cancer did not differ significantly (pure DCIS vs. DCIS 
associated with invasive cancer: HER2 22.7 vs. 24.2%, ESR1 19.0 vs. 24.1%, CCND1 
10.0 vs. 14.8%, MYC 11.8 vs. 6.5%; P > 0.05). Furthermore, we observed a high
concordance of the amplification status for all genes if in situ and invasive
carcinoma of individual patients were compared. This applied also to the
corresponding lymph node metastases. Our results indicate no significant
differences between the gene amplification status of DCIS and invasive breast
cancer concerning HER2, ESR1, CCND1, and MYC. Therefore, our data suggest an
early role of all analyzed gene amplifications in breast cancer development but
not in the initiation of invasive tumor growth.

PMID: 20033484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Reproduction. 2010 Mar;139(3):623-30. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0454. Epub 2009 Dec 23.

Transient estrogen exposure from birth affects uterine expression of
developmental markers in neonatal gilts with lasting consequences in pregnant
adults.

Chen JC(1), Wiley AA, Ho TY, Frankshun AL, Hord KM, Bartol FF, Bagnell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901, USA.

Disruption of estrogen-sensitive, estrogen receptor (ER)-dependent events during 
porcine uterine development between birth (postnatal day=PND 0) and PND 14
affects patterns of uterine morphoregulatory gene expression in the neonate with 
lasting consequences for reproductive success. Uterine capacity for conceptus
support is reduced in pregnant adult gilts exposed to estradiol valerate (EV) for
14 days from birth. Objectives here were to determine effects of EV exposure from
birth through PND 13 on neonatal uterine and adult endometrial markers of growth,
patterning, and remodeling. Targets included the relaxin receptor (RXFP1),
estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGFA),
morphoregulatory markers HOXA10 and WNT7A, and the matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP)2 and MMP9. Gilts were treated daily with EV (50 microg/kg body weight per
day, i.m.) or corn oil vehicle from birth through PND 13. Uteri were obtained
from neonates on PND 14 and from adults on pregnancy day 12 (PxD 12). In
neonates, EV exposure from birth increased uterine RXFP1 gene expression, and
both ESR1 and VEGFA proteins. At PxD 12, endometrial RXFP1 mRNA remained
elevated, while ESR1 protein was reduced. Early EV treatment decreased neonatal
uterine WNT7A, but increased HOXA10 expression. WNT7A expression was reduced in
EV-treated adults. Transient EV exposure increased MMP9 transcripts at PND 14,
whereas both latent and active MMP9 activity was increased due to early EV
treatment in adults on PxD 12. Results support the hypothesis that transient,
estrogen-induced disruption of porcine uterine development from birth alters
early programming events that lead to functional consequences in the adult.

PMID: 20032211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Reproduction. 2010 Mar;139(3):599-611. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0305. Epub 2009 Dec
22.

Ontogeny of the oestrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2 during gonadal development in
the tammar wallaby, Macropus eugenii.

Calatayud NE(1), Pask AJ, Shaw G, Richings NM, Osborn S, Renfree MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, 
Australia. nec@unimelb.edu.au

Oestrogen has wide ranging effects in development mediated mainly via the two
oestrogen receptors, alpha (ESR1, also known as ERalpha) and beta (ESR2, also
known as ERbeta). Oestrogen is the key factor that directs the indifferent gonad 
to become an ovary in many non-mammalian vertebrates. Oestrogen is not required
for early ovarian differentiation in mammals but can disrupt normal testicular
development in eutherians. Surprisingly, exogenous oestrogen can cause sex
reversal of an XY gonad in two marsupials, the North American opossum and the
tammar wallaby. To understand the mechanism by which oestrogen induces sex
reversal, we characterised the genes for ESR1 and ESR2 and examined their
expression during gonadal differentiation in the tammar wallaby, Macropus
eugenii. Both receptors were expressed in the somatic cells and germ cells of the
indifferent gonad in both XX and XY foetuses throughout all stages of
development, and persisted in these cells into adulthood. ERs were also present
in many other tissues including kidney, pituitary and mammary gland. ER mRNA was 
not significantly altered by exogenous oestrogen in cultured XY gonads but the
receptors translocated to the nucleus in its presence. These findings confirm
that there is conserved expression of the ERs in the indifferent gonad despite
the lack of available ligand during early gonadal development. The receptors can 
respond to exogenous estrogen at this early stage and are capable of transducing 
signals in the early mammalian gonad. However, the selective forces that
maintained conserved ER expression in this tissue remain unknown.

PMID: 20028801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2010 Mar;119(1-2):26-34. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2009.12.002. Epub 2009 Dec 16.

Isolation and characterization of three estrogen receptor transcripts in
Oreochromis mossambicus (Peters).

Esterhuyse MM(1), Helbing CC, van Wyk JH.

Author information: 
(1)Ecophysiology Laboratory, Department of Botany and Zoology, University of
Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch, South Africa. mme2@sun.ac.za

Exposure of aquatic organisms to 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) induces a variety of
estrogen-responsive genes, including vitellogenin (vtg)-the precursor protein of 
egg yolk in oviparous animals and to date the single most used gene product in
screening for estrogenic endocrine disruption. Transcription regulation of vtg by
E(2) is dependent on binding of the ligand (E(2)) to a specific nuclear receptor 
(estrogen receptor, ESR) which in turn binds to an estrogen responsive element
(ERE) in the promoter of vtg. Since a local tilapiine, Oreochromis mossambicus
(Peters), is targeted as a model for estrogenic endocrine disruption in Southern 
Africa, a platform of knowledge is necessary for the ontogenic and tissue
specific behavior of ESR in this species before vtg levels can be interpreted in 
relation to such endocrine disruption. Therefore, three ESR cDNA sequences (ESR1,
ESR2a and ESR2b) in O. mossambicus were isolated and QPCR protocols were
developed to ascertain their quantitative transcript levels in adult brain,
gonadal and hepatic tissues. ESR1 transcript levels were highest in female liver 
tissue compared to males and other tissues, whereas the levels for ESR2a and b
were not statistically significantly different between male and female tissues.
Quantitative gene levels during development demonstrated a sharp increase in ESR1
during the stage of gonad differentiation (50-60 days post-fertilization) in this
species. Finally, an induction experiment in adult male liver tissue confirms the
upregulation of ESR1 by E(2).

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20025969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biol Reprod. 2010 Apr;82(4):706-13. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.081307. Epub 2009
Dec 16.

ERBB receptor feedback inhibitor 1 regulation of estrogen receptor activity is
critical for uterine implantation in mice.

Kim TH(1), Lee DK, Franco HL, Lydon JP, Jeong JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Normal endometrial function requires a balance of progesterone (P4) and estrogen 
(E2) effects. E2 acts to stimulate the proliferation of uterine epithelial cells,
while P4 action inhibits E2-mediated proliferation of the epithelium. P4 through 
its cognate receptor, the P4 receptor (Pgr), has important roles in the
establishment and maintenance of pregnancy. In previous studies, we have
identified ERBB receptor feedback inhibitor 1 (Errfi1) as a downstream target of 
Pgr action in the uterus. Herein, we show that Errfi1 mRNA expression was
significantly increased in the uterus after Day 2.5 of gestation. Its expression 
is also induced in the uterus by acute E2 treatment, and this induction is
synergistically induced by chronic E2 and P4 treatment. Although it is known that
conditional ablation of Errfi1 in the Pgr-positive cells (Errfi1(d/d)) results in
infertility, the function of Errfi1 in reproductive biology has remained elusive.
Using Errfi1(d/d) mice, we have identified Errfi1 as an important mediator of
uterine implantation. Epithelial ESR1 and target genes were significantly
increased in the uteri of Errfi1(d/d) mice. Our results identify a new signaling 
paradigm of steroid hormone regulation in female reproductive biology that adds
insight into the underlying dysregulation of hormonal signaling in human
reproductive disorders such as endometriosis and endometrial cancer.

PMCID: PMC2842487
PMID: 20018910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Haematologica. 2010 May;95(5):752-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.016303. Epub 2009
Dec 16.

Pharmacogenetic risk factors for altered bone mineral density and body
composition in pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

te Winkel ML(1), van Beek RD, de Muinck Keizer-Schrama SM, Uitterlinden AG, Hop
WC, Pieters R, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC, Sophia Children's
Hospital, 3015 GJ Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: This study investigates pharmacogenetic risk factors for bone mineral
(apparent) density (BM(A)D) and body composition in pediatric acute lymphoblastic
leukemia
DESIGN AND METHODS: We determined the influence of SNPs in 4 genes (vitamin-D
receptor (VDR: BsmI/ApaI/TaqI and Cdx-2/GATA), collagen type I alpha 1 (SpI),
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1: PvuII/XbaI), glucocorticoid receptor (BclI)) on body
composition, BM(A)D and fracture risk during dexamethasone-based pediatric acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia treatment. Body composition and BMD were measured
repeatedly during and after treatment using dual energy X-ray absorptiometry.
RESULTS: Non-carriers of VDR 5'-end (Cdx-2/GATA) haplotype 3 revealed a
significant larger fat gain than carriers (Delta%fat: non-carriers: +1.76SDS,
carriers: +0.77SDS, P<0.001). At diagnosis and during therapy, lumbar spine BMD
was significantly higher in non-carriers of VDR 5'-end (Cdx-2/GATA) haplotype 3
than in carriers. The other SNPs did not influence BMD or fracture risk
during/after treatment. The year after treatment completion, lean body mass
increased in non-carriers of ESR1 (PvuII/XbaI) haplotype 3 and decreased in
carriers (Delta lean body mass: non-carriers:+0.28SDS, carriers: -0.55SDS,
P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Only VDR 5'-end (Cdx-2/GATA) haplotype 3 was identified as
protective factor against excessive fat gain and as a risk factor for lower
lumbar spine BMD during treatment. Carrying ESR1 (PvuII/XbaI) haplotype 3
negatively influenced recovery of lean body mass after pediatric acute
lymphoblastic leukemia treatment.

PMCID: PMC2864381
PMID: 20015871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Open Endocrinol J. 2009;3:5-11.

Do Genetic Alterations in Sex Steroid Receptors Contribute to Lacrimal Gland
Disease in Sjögren's Syndrome?

Richards SM(1), Sullivan DA.

Author information: 
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Defects in sex steroid receptors have been linked to the onset,
progression and severity, as well as the sex-related prevalence, of a variety of 
autoimmune disorders, including lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis
and diabetes. We hypothesize that defects in estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1),
estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) and/or the androgen receptor (AR) may also
contribute to the development of lacrimal gland autoimmune sequelae in Sjögren's 
syndrome. To begin to test this hypothesis, we examined whether mutations exist
in the coding regions of ESR1, ESR2 and AR transcripts in lacrimal tissues of
mouse models of Sjögren's syndrome. METHODS: Lacrimal and submandibular glands
were collected from adult MRL/MpJ-Tnfrsf6(lpr), nonobese diabetic and/or BALB/c
mice. Tissues were pooled according to sex and experiment and processed for cDNA 
generation. PCR primers were designed to amplify 566-875 base pair segments of
the entire open reading frame of each receptor. Segments were amplified, purified
and then sequenced. Receptor sequences were assembled and compared to each other 
and to known NCBI sequences. RESULTS: Our results show that almost all ESR1, ESR2
and AR sequences in exocrine tissues of male and female autoimmune and
non-autoimmune mice were identical to those of NCBI standards. There was a G-->A 
shift at position 998 of the ESR2 complete coding sequence in all tissue samples 
when compared to NCBI reference sequence U81451.1, but this polymorphism was not 
found in other ESR2 reference sequences. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that 
defects in the coding region of sex steroid receptors do not contribute to the
pathogenesis of lacrimal gland disease in mouse models of Sjögren's syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2789469
PMID: 19997529  [PubMed]


137. Oncogene. 2010 Mar 18;29(11):1653-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.449. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

DNA methylation within the normal colorectal mucosa is associated with
pathway-specific predisposition to cancer.

Worthley DL(1), Whitehall VL, Buttenshaw RL, Irahara N, Greco SA, Ramsnes I,
Mallitt KA, Le Leu RK, Winter J, Hu Y, Ogino S, Young GP, Leggett BA.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital Research Foundation Clinical Research
Centre, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. daniel.worthley@uqconnect.edu.au

There are two major molecular pathways to sporadic colorectal cancer, the
chromosomal instability (CIN) and the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)
pathways. This study recruited 166 patients undergoing colonoscopy. Biopsy
samples were collected from the cecum, transverse colon, sigmoid colon and
rectum. DNA methylation was quantified at 'type A' (ESR1, GATA5, HIC1, HPP1,
SFRP1) and 'type C' markers (MGMT, MLH1, CDKN2A, MINT2, MINT31, IGF2, CACNA1G,
NEUROG1, SOCS1, RUNX3), and LINE-1. 'Type A' genes are frequently methylated in
normal and neoplastic tissues, proportional to tissue age. 'Type C' methylation
is more specific for neoplasia. The last five 'type C' markers comprise a CIMP
panel. The mean 'type A' and CIMP-panel methylation Z-scores were calculated. In 
all, 88 patients had adenomatous lesions, 32 had proximal serrated polyps (PSPs) 
and 50 were normal. Most 'type A' genes showed direct correlations between
methylation and age (ESR1, rho=0.66, P<0.0001), with higher methylation distally 
(ESR1, P<0.0001). On multivariate analysis, 'type A' methylation was inversely
associated with colorectal adenomas (odds ratio=0.23, P<0.001), the precursor to 
CIN cancers. CIMP-panel methylation was significantly associated with advanced
PSPs (odds ratio=5.1, P=0.009), the precursor to CIMP cancers. DNA methylation in
normal mucosa varied with age and region and was associated with pathway-specific
pathology. In the future, the colorectal field could yield important information 
and potentially inform clinical practice.

PMID: 19966864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2009 Dec;30(12):1634-42. doi: 10.1038/aps.2009.169.

Association between VDR and ESR1 gene polymorphisms with bone and obesity
phenotypes in Chinese male nuclear families.

Gu JM(1), Xiao WJ, He JW, Zhang H, Hu WW, Hu YQ, Li M, Liu YJ, Fu WZ, Yu JB, Gao 
G, Yue H, Ke YH, Zhang ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Osteoporosis, Metabolic Bone Disease and Genetics Research Unit,
The Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai,
China.

AIM: The goal of this study was to determine whether polymorphisms in the vitamin
D receptor (VDR) and estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) genes are associated with
variations of peak bone mineral density (BMD) and obesity phenotypes in young
Chinese men.
METHODS: A total of 1215 subjects from 400 Chinese nuclear families were
genotyped by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism
(PCR-RFLP) and allele-specific multiple PCR (ASM-PCR) analysis at the ApaI, FokI,
and CDX2 sites in the VDR gene and the PvuII and XbaI sites in the ESR1 gene. BMD
at the lumbar spine and hip, total fat mass, and total lean mass were measured
using dual energy X-ray absorptiometry. The associations between VDR and ESR1
gene polymorphisms with peak BMD, body mass index (BMI), total fat mass, total
lean mass, and percentage fat mass (PFM) were determined using quantitative
transmission disequilibrium tests (QTDTs).
RESULTS: Using QTDTs, no significant within-family associations were obtained
between genotypes or haplotypes of the VDR and ESR1 genes and peak BMD. For the
obesity phenotypes, the within-family associations were significant between CDX2 
genotypes and BMI (P=0.046), fat mass (P=0.004), and PFM (P=0.020). Further,
PvuII was significantly associated with the variation of fat mass and PFM
(P=0.002 and P=0.039, respectively). A subsequent 1000 permutations were in
agreement with these within-family association results.
CONCLUSION: Our findings showed that VDR and ESR1 polymorphisms were associated
with total fat mass in young Chinese men, but we failed to find a significant
association between VDR and ESR1 genotypes and peak BMD. These findings suggested
that the VDR and ESR1 genes are quantitative trait loci (QTL) underlying fat mass
variation in young Chinese men.

PMCID: PMC4007503
PMID: 19960008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Br J Cancer. 2010 Jan 19;102(2):294-300. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605460. Epub 2009
Dec 1.

Lack of association between oestrogen receptor polymorphisms and change in bone
mineral density with tamoxifen therapy.

Henry NL(1), Nguyen A, Azzouz F, Li L, Robarge J, Philips S, Cao D, Skaar TC, Rae
JM, Storniolo AM, Flockhart DA, Hayes DF, Stearns V.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Oncology Program, University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. norahh@med.umich.edu

BACKGROUND: Tamoxifen, a selective oestrogen receptor (ER) modulator, increases
bone mineral density (BMD) in postmenopausal women and decreases BMD in
premenopausal women. We hypothesised that inherited variants in candidate genes
involved in oestrogen signalling and tamoxifen metabolism might be associated
with tamoxifen effects in bone.
METHODS: A total of 297 women who were initiating tamoxifen therapy were enrolled
in a prospective multicentre clinical trial. Lumbar spine and total hip BMD
values were measured using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) at baseline and
after 12 months of tamoxifen therapy. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
ESR1, ESR2, and CYP2D6 were tested for associations in the context of menopausal 
status and previous chemotherapy, with a mean percentage change in BMD over 12
months.
RESULTS: The percentage increase in BMD was greater in postmenopausal women and
in those patients who had been treated with chemotherapy. No significant
associations between tested SNPs and either baseline BMD or change in BMD with 1 
year of tamoxifen therapy were detected.
CONCLUSION: The evaluated SNPs in ESR and CYP2D6 do not seem to influence BMD in 
tamoxifen-treated subjects.

PMCID: PMC2816645
PMID: 19953095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 Nov 30;7:139. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-139.

Mating changes the subcellular distribution and the functionality of estrogen
receptors in the rat oviduct.

Orihuela PA(1), Zuñiga LM, Rios M, Parada-Bustamante A, Sierralta WD, Velásquez
LA, Croxatto HB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Inmunología de la Reproducción, Facultad de Química y Biología,
Universidad de Santiago de Chile, Santiago, Chile. pedro.orihuela@usach.cl

BACKGROUND: Mating changes the mode of action of 17beta-estradiol (E2) to
accelerate oviductal egg transport from a nongenomic to a genomic mode, although 
in both pathways estrogen receptors (ER) are required. This change was designated
as intracellular path shifting (IPS).
METHODS: Herein, we examined the subcellular distribution of ESR1 and ESR2
(formerly known as ER-alpha and ER-beta) in oviductal epithelial cells of rats on
day 1 of cycle (C1) or pregnancy (P1) using immunoelectron microscopy for ESR1
and ESR2. The effect of mating on intraoviductal ESR1 or ESR2 signaling was then 
explored comparing the expression of E2-target genes c-fos, brain creatine kinase
(Ckb) and calbindin 9 kDa (s100g) in rats on C1 or P1 treated with selective
agonists for ESR1 (PPT) or ESR2 (DPN). The effect of ER agonists on egg transport
was also evaluated on C1 or P1 rats.
RESULTS: Receptor immunoreactivity was associated with the nucleus, cytoplasm and
plasma membrane of the epithelial cells. Mating affected the subcellular
distribution of both receptors as well as the response to E2. In C1 and P1 rats, 
PPT increased Ckb while both agonists increased c-fos. DPN increased Ckb and
s100g only in C1 and P1 rats, respectively. PPT accelerated egg transport in both
groups and DPN accelerated egg transport only in C1 rats.
CONCLUSION: Estrogen receptors present a subcellular distribution compatible with
E2 genomic and nongenomic signaling in the oviductal epithelial cells of C1 and
P1 although IPS occurs independently of changes in the distribution of ESR1 and
ESR2 in the oviductal epithelial cells. Mating affected intraoviductal
ER-signaling and induced loss of functional involvement of ESR2 on E2-induced
accelerated egg transport. These findings reveal a profound influence on the ER
signaling pathways exerted by mating in the oviduct.

PMCID: PMC2789086
PMID: 19948032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Jun;121(3):737-42. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0640-6. 
Epub 2009 Nov 26.

Combined genetic effect of CDK7 and ESR1 polymorphisms on breast cancer.

Jeon S(1), Choi JY, Lee KM, Park SK, Yoo KY, Noh DY, Ahn SH, Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
28 Yongon-Dong, Jongno-Gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

Breast cancer development is related to genes regulating cell cycle progression
such as CCND1, CDK7, and ESR1. We conducted a hospital-based case-control study
to evaluate the role of genetic polymorphisms in these genes in breast cancer
development among Korean women. Questionnaire data and samples were obtained from
864 incident breast cancer cases and 723 controls recruited from 1995 to 2002.
Four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in three genes were genotyped by
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry
[CCND1 Ex4-1G>A (rs9344), CDK7 Ex2-28C>T (rs2972388), ESR1 P325P Ex4-122G>C
(rs1801132), and ESR1 T594T Ex8+229G>A (rs2228480)], and their associations with 
breast cancer risk were assessed. The odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) were estimated by unconditional logistic regression analysis
adjusted for age, education, age at the first full-term pregnancy, and family
history of breast cancer. Women carrying the CDK7 TT genotype had increased risk 
of breast cancer (OR, 1.4; 95% CI, 1.1-1.7). There was no significant association
between breast cancer risk and the genetic polymorphisms of CCND1 and ESR1.
However, when CDK7 and ESR1 P325P were combined, women carrying both the CDK7 TT 
and ESR1 P325P CC genotypes showed increased breast cancer risk (OR, 1.7; 95% CI,
1.1-2.5; P for trend, <0.01). In conclusion, our findings suggest that the
combined genotypes of CDK7 and ESR1 are associated with breast cancer risk among 
Korean women.

PMID: 19941161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Feb;298(2):R494-507. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00632.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 25.

Gene expression profiling of the short-term adaptive response to acute caloric
restriction in liver and adipose tissues of pigs differing in feed efficiency.

Lkhagvadorj S(1), Qu L, Cai W, Couture OP, Barb CR, Hausman GJ, Nettleton D,
Anderson LL, Dekkers JC, Tuggle CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, 2255 Kildee Hall, Ames,
IA 50011-3150, USA.

Residual feed intake (RFI) is a measure of feed efficiency, in which low RFI
denotes improved feed efficiency. Caloric restriction (CR) is associated with
feed efficiency in livestock species and to human health benefits, such as
longevity and cancer prevention. We have developed pig lines that differ in RFI, 
and we are interested in identifying the genes and pathways that underlie feed
efficiency. Prepubertal Yorkshire gilts with low RFI (n = 10) or high RFI (n =
10) were fed ad libitum or fed at restricted intake of 80% of maintenance energy 
requirements for 8 days. We measured serum metabolites and hormones and generated
transcriptional profiles of liver and subcutaneous adipose tissue on these
animals. Overall, 6,114 genes in fat and 305 genes in liver were differentially
expressed (DE) in response to CR, and 311 genes in fat and 147 genes in liver
were DE due to RFI differences. Pathway analyses of CR-induced DE genes indicated
a dramatic switch to a conservation mode of energy usage by down-regulating
lipogenesis and steroidogenesis in both liver and fat. Interestingly, CR altered 
expression of genes in immune and cell cycle/apoptotic pathways in fat, which may
explain part of the CR-driven lifespan enhancement. In silico analysis of
transcription factors revealed ESR1 as a putative regulator of the adaptive
response to CR, as several targets of ESR1 in our DE fat genes were annotated as 
cell cycle/apoptosis genes. The lipid metabolic pathway was overrepresented by
down-regulated genes due to both CR and low RFI. We propose a common energy
conservation mechanism, which may be controlled by PPARA, PPARG, and/or CREB in
both CR and feed-efficient pigs.

PMID: 19939971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2009 Nov;117(10):610-5.

Estrogen receptor beta gene variants may be associated with more favorable
metabolic profile in postmenopausal women undergoing coronary angiography.

Saltiki K(1), Mantzou E, Doukas C, Kanakakis I, Zotos P, Lazaros L, Georgiou I,
Alevizaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department Medical Therapeutics, ALEXANDRA Hospital, Athens University School 
of Medicine, Greece. saze@otenet.gr

AIM: Estrogen action is exerted on the vasculature through estrogen receptors ER 
alpha and ER beta. We have previously reported significant association of ER
alpha gene (ESR1) variants with more severe coronary artery disease (CAD) in
postmenopausal women. The influence of ER beta gene (ESR2) variants on the
cardiovascular system is not well established. We investigated the association of
common ESR2 variants with risk factors for cardiovascular disease and with the
severity of CAD in postmenopausal women.
METHODS: ESR2 polymorphisms Alu I (1730 G > A) and Rsa I (1082 G > A) were
studied in 174 postmenopausal women undergoing coronary angiography (age 45 - 88 
yrs). The severity of CAD (0 - 3 vessels with > 50 % stenosis), indices of
obesity and other predisposing risk factors for cardiovascular disease,
biochemical and hormonal parameters were recorded.
RESULTS: 75 women had 0, 39 had one, 37 had two and 23 had three vessels with
severe stenosis in the coronary angiography. There was no association between Alu
I (allele frequency = 40.2 %) and Rsa I (allele frequency = 2.6 %) variants and
CAD severity. Carriers of Alu I had lower BMI (p = 0.044), lower waist perimeter 
(p = 0.029) and lower total cholesterol (p = 0.033) and LDL levels (p = 0.029).
There was no association between Rsa I polymorphism and any metabolic risk
factors.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR2 Alu I polymorphism may have a favorable influence on risk
factors for cardiovascular disease such as obesity indices and cholesterol
levels. It does not appear to be associated with the severity of CAD in women.

PMID: 19938352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2009 Dec;42(12):1138-42. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Effect of estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) gene polymorphism on high density
lipoprotein levels in response to hormone replacement therapy.

Nogueira-de-Souza NC(1), Guerreiro da Silva ID, Carvalho CV, Pulchinelli A,
Haidar MA, Baracat EC, Massad-Costa AM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular, Departamento de Ginecologia, Escola
Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

Studies have shown that estrogen replacement therapy and estrogen plus progestin 
replacement therapy alter serum levels of total, LDL and HDL cholesterol levels. 
However, HDL cholesterol levels in women vary considerably in response to hormone
replacement therapy (HRT). A significant portion of the variability of these
levels has been attributed to genetic factors. Therefore, we investigated the
influence of estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) gene polymorphisms on HDL levels in
response to postmenopausal HRT. We performed a prospective cohort study on 54
postmenopausal women who had not used HRT before the study and had no significant
general medical illness. HRT consisted of conjugated equine estrogen and
medroxyprogesterone acetate continuously for 1 year. The lipoprotein levels were 
measured from blood samples taken before the start of therapy and after 1 year of
HRT. ESR1 polymorphism (MspI C>T, HaeIII C>T, PvuII C>T, and XbaI A>G)
frequencies were assayed by restriction fragment length polymorphism. A general
linear model was used to describe the relationships between HDL levels and
genotypes after adjusting for age. A significant increase in HDL levels was
observed after HRT (P = 0.029). Women with the ESR1 PvuII TT genotype showed a
statistically significant increase in HDL levels after HRT (P = 0.032). No
association was found between other ESR1 polymorphisms and HDL levels. According 
to our results, the ESR1 PvuII TT genotype was associated with increased levels
of HDL after 1 year of HRT.

PMID: 19936541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Hum Genet. 2010 Jan;55(1):50-4. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2009.122. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Association between ESR1 and ESR2 gene polymorphisms and hyperlipidemia in
Chinese Han postmenopausal women.

Zhao T(1), Zhang D, Liu Y, Zhou D, Chen Z, Yang Y, Li S, Yu L, Zhang Z, Feng G,
He L, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 294 Taiyuan Road, Shanghai, PR China.

Estrogen was considered to be an important protective factor for cardiovascular
diseases in women. Genetic association studies suggested that variations of
ESR1and ESR2 genes might have a potential role in lipid profile. Our study aimed 
to investigate the association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of ESR1 
and ESR2 with hyperlipidemia in Chinese Han postmenopausal women. A total of 443 
postmenopausal women aged between 55 and 71 years were recruited from Shanghai,
China for a case-control study (154 women with hyperlipidemia and 289 controls). 
We measured plasma estradiol concentration, glucose and lipid profile levels,
evaluated their lifestyle and sequenced four SNPs, namely PvuII (rs2234693) and
XbaI (rs9340799) of ESR1 and 1082A>G (rs1256049) and 1730A>G (rs4986938) of ESR2.
PvuII (rs2234693) and XbaI (rs9340799) showed significantly different
distributions between cases and controls (P=0.002 and P=0.023, respectively). In 
addition, haplotypes constructed from PvuII-XbaI were also associated with
hyperlipidemia (global P=0.012). Haplotypes T-A (P=0.005, odds ratio (OR) 1.52,
95% confidence interval (95% CI): 1.13-2.05) and C-G (P=0.010, OR 0.62, 95% CI:
0.43-0.89) had susceptible and protective effects, respectively. 1082A>G
(rs1256049) and 1730A>G (rs4986938) showed no statistical association with
hyperlipidemia. In conclusion, our results suggested that ESR1 might have a
potential role in hyperlipidemia risk, independent of age, estradiol level, body 
mass index and lifestyle in Chinese Han postmenopausal women.

PMID: 19927160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Angiology. 2010 Apr;61(3):275-82. doi: 10.1177/0003319709351256. Epub 2009 Nov
18.

Association of estrogen receptor {alpha} genotypes/ haplotypes with carotid
intima-media thickness in Taiwanese women.

Wu MM(1), Hsieh YC, Lien LM, Chen WH, Bai CH, Chiu HC, Chen HH, Chung WT, Lee YC,
Hsu CY, Lin HW, Chiou HY.

Author information: 
(1)Taipei Medical University, Taiwan.

The estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) is an important mediator of the
atheroprotective effect of estrogen on the vasculature system. We examined the
potential associations between common single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
variants of ESR1 and intima-media thickness (IMT) in carotid arteries, a strong
predictor of cardiovascular disease (CVD). A total of 760 study participants (343
men and 407 women), who had undergone a Duplex ultrasonographic examination of
carotid artery, were investigated. Measurement of IMT was performed on a 10-mm
segment of the common carotid artery (CCA). Fourteen sequence-validated SNPs of
high frequency of Oriental origin were selected and genotyped by the method of
Light-Cycler-480-assisted real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by
melting curve analysis. Results from multiple linear regression analyses showed
significant associations of SNPs rs2228480 (Ex8+229G>A) and rs3798758
(Ex8+1988C>A) with the carotid IMT values in women but not in men. Women with SNP
rs2228480 (Ex8+229G>A) A/A genotype had a 0.048 mm (7.1%) increase in IMT values 
versus the other genotypes combined (P = .030). In women who carried the
rs3798758 (Ex8+1988C>A) CA+AA combined genotypes, their carotid IMT measures were
0.020 mm (2.9%) decreased as compared with those in women who carried C/ C
genotype (P = .042). In haplotype analysis, women with the T-A haplotype versus
C-C haplotype of combined rs3798577 (Ex8+1264T>C) and rs3798758 (Ex8+1988C>A)
were also found to be associated with a decreased IMT value at a borderline
significance (P = .057). Some common SNPs in the ESR1 could be important in
modulating carotid atherosclerosis and thereby CVD susceptibility in Taiwanese
women.

PMID: 19926619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Feb;298(2):E304-19. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00504.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 17.

Impaired oxidative metabolism and inflammation are associated with insulin
resistance in ERalpha-deficient mice.

Ribas V(1), Nguyen MT, Henstridge DC, Nguyen AK, Beaven SW, Watt MJ, Hevener AL.

Author information: 
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of
Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, University of California Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, California 90095-7073, USA.

Impaired estrogen action is associated with the metabolic syndrome in humans. We 
sought to determine whether impaired estrogen action in female C57Bl6 mice,
produced by whole body Esr1 ablation, could recapitulate aspects of this
syndrome, including inflammation, insulin resistance, and obesity. Indeed, we
found that global knockout (KO) of the estrogen receptor (ER)alpha leads to
reduced oxygen uptake and caloric expenditure compared with wild-type (WT) mice. 
In addition, fasting insulin, leptin, and PAI-1 levels were markedly elevated,
whereas adiponectin levels were reduced in normal chow-fed KO. Furthermore,
ERalpha-KO mice exhibited impaired glucose tolerance and marked skeletal muscle
insulin resistance that was accompanied by the accumulation of bioactive lipid
intermediates, inflammation, and diminished PPARalpha, PPARdelta, and UCP2
transcript levels. Although the relative glucose intolerance and insulin
resistance phenotype in KO mice became more severe with high-fat feeding, WT mice
were refractory to these dietary-induced effects, and this protection coincided
with a marked increase in circulating adiponectin and heat shock protein 72
levels in muscle, liver, and fat. These data indicate that ERalpha is critical
for the maintenance of whole body insulin action and protection against tissue
inflammation during both normal chow and high-fat feeding.

PMCID: PMC2822483
PMID: 19920214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Hum Pathol. 2010 Mar;41(3):358-65. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.08.008. Epub 2009 
Nov 6.

Overexpression of cell division cycle 7 homolog is associated with gene
amplification frequency in breast cancer.

Choschzick M(1), Lebeau A, Marx AH, Tharun L, Terracciano L, Heilenkötter U,
Jaenicke F, Bokemeyer C, Simon R, Sauter G, Schwarz J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Centre Hamburg-Eppendorf, 20246
Hamburg, Germany.

Cell division cycle 7 is a widely expressed protein kinase implicated in cell
division, cell cycle checkpoint mechanisms, and cancer progression. To determine 
the relationship of cell division cycle 7 protein expression with tumor
phenotype, molecular features and prognosis, 2197 highly characterized breast
carcinomas were analyzed on a tissue microarray. Detectable cell division cycle 7
expression was found in 1088 (57%) of breast cancer specimens and 228 (11.9%)
exhibited a moderate or strong expression. High levels of cell division cycle 7
expression were significantly related to medullary histotype (P < .0001); high
tumor grade (P < .0001); negative estrogen receptor status (P < .0001); high Ki67
expression level (P < .0001); p53 and p16 overexpression (P < .0001); and
amplification of HER2 (P < .0001), c-myc (P < .0001), MDM2 (P = .043), CCND1 (P =
.0084), and ESR1 (P = .0012) as well as with the number of amplified genes (P <
.0001). There was also a tendency towards worse prognosis in cell division cycle 
7 positive as compared to negative breast cancers. The relationship between cell 
division cycle 7 and number of amplifications was independent from tumor
proliferation raising the possibility of a direct influence of cell division
cycle 7 expression for amplification development. In conclusion, cell division
cycle 7 is a replication associated protein with relationships to gene
amplification and genomic instability in breast carcinomas. These data support
the potential utility of newly developed small molecule cell division cycle 7
inhibitors as a therapeutic alternative in at least a subset of breast
carcinomas.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19896697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Immunol. 2009 Dec 1;183(11):7031-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802665. Epub 2009
Nov 4.

Female and male sex hormones differentially regulate expression of Ifi202, an
interferon-inducible lupus susceptibility gene within the Nba2 interval.

Panchanathan R(1), Shen H, Bupp MG, Gould KA, Choubey D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
45267, USA.

Increased expression of IFN-inducible Ifi202 gene in certain strains of female
mice is associated with susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Although, the development of SLE is known to have a strong sex bias, the
molecular mechanisms remain unknown. Here we report that in vivo treatment of
orchiectomized (NZB x NZW)F(1) male mice with the female sex hormone
17beta-estradiol significantly increased steady-state levels of Ifi202 mRNA in
splenic cells, whereas treatment with the male hormone dihydrotestosterone
decreased the levels. Moreover, increased expression of Ifi202 in B6.Nba2 B cells
and reduced expression in T cells were associated with increased levels of
estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) and androgen receptor, respectively.
Furthermore, the steady-state levels of Ifi202 mRNA were higher in splenic cells 
from C57BL/6, B6.Nba2, NZB, and (NZB x NZW)F(1) female mice as compared with
males. 17beta-estradiol treatment of B cells and WT276 cells increased Ifi202
mRNA levels, whereas treatment with dihydrotestosterone decreased the levels.
Interestingly, overexpression of ERalpha in WT276 cells increased the expression 
of Ifi202 and stimulated the activity of the 202-luc-reporter through the
c-Jun/AP-1 DNA-binding site. Accordingly, ERalpha preferentially associated with 
the regulatory region of the Ifi202 gene in female B6.Nba2 B cells than in males.
Furthermore, Ifi202 mRNA levels were detectable in splenic cells of wild-type
(Esr1(+/+)), but not null (Esr1(-/-)), (NZB x NZW)F(1) female mice. Collectively,
our observations demonstrate that the female and male sex hormones differentially
regulate the expression of Ifi202, thus providing support for the role of Ifi202 
in sex bias in SLE.

PMCID: PMC2783550
PMID: 19890043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Rheumatol. 2009 Dec;36(12):2772-9. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.081208. Epub 2009 Nov 2.

The relationship of estrogen receptor-alpha and -beta genes with osteoarthritis
of the hand.

Wise BL(1), Demissie S, Cupples LA, Felson DT, Yang M, Shearman AM, Aliabadi P,
Hunter DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Framingham Heart Study, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We examined reported associations between radiographic hand
osteoarthritis (OA) and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in 2 candidate
genes associated with OA in other joints: estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta
(ESR2).
METHODS: In 539 Framingham Offspring Study participants (49% men; mean age 61 +/-
9 yrs) joint-specific radiographic hand OA was defined as Kellgren/Lawrence (K/L)
scores >or= 2 in the first carpometacarpal joint (CMC), distal interphalangeal
joints (DIP), first-digit interphalangeal joint (IP), or proximal interphalangeal
joints (PIP). Four SNP were genotyped for ESR1 (PvuII-rs2234693, XbaI-rs9340799, 
rs2077647, and rs1801132) and 4 for ESR2 (rs1256031, rs1256034, rs1256059,
rs944460). Logistic regression analyses were performed to evaluate the
relationships between genotypes and hand OA, adjusting for age, sex, height, and 
weight.
RESULTS: Radiographic hand OA was identified in at least one investigated joint
of DIP (39%), PIP (33%), and first CMC (40%). There was no evidence of
association between OA and genotype at any polymorphism. We found no significant 
association between our OA phenotypes or generalized or severe generalized OA as 
defined by Ushiyama and heterozygosity for rs2234693 and rs9340799, although in
metaanalysis with the former study this heterozygosity remained significantly
associated with generalized or severe generalized OA.
CONCLUSION: We found no significant association between hand OA and the
investigated polymorphisms of ESR1 or ESR2 despite published reports of
association and a priori hypotheses implicating their potential roles. However,
we could not absolutely exclude associations with rs2234693, rs9340799, or
rs944460.

PMCID: PMC3641579
PMID: 19884274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2009 Sep-Oct;26(9-10):503-10. doi:
10.1007/s10815-009-9354-2. Epub 2009 Oct 29.

Evaluation of in vitro fertilization parameters and estrogen receptor alpha gene 
polymorphisms for women with unexplained infertility.

Ayvaz OU(1), Ekmekçi A, Baltaci V, Onen HI, Unsal E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Gazi
University, Besevler, 06500 Ankara, Turkey. ozg_e@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: Association of ESR1 gene PvuII, XbaI and (TA)n microsatellite
polymorphisms and woman infertility was evaluated.
METHODS: Infertile(n = 104) and fertile(n = 107) women were included in this
study. We performed polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment-length
polymorphism analysis for detecting ESR1 polymorphisms.
RESULT(S): PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms confered risk for infertility in a simple
dominant manner in which a significant relationship was observed between
infertile and control women. Infertile women had fewer(<18) short repeat alleles 
in promotor region. ESR1 genotypes were compared concerning maturation,
fertilization, pregnancy rates and embryo quality. Although no difference was
found in terms of pregnancy rates, maturation and fertilization rates were
significantly smaller in pp and xx genotypes. Also, pp genotypes had
significantly lower number of good quality embryos. Long TA repeat in promotor
was found to be associated with low fertilization rate.
CONCLUSION(S): Polymorphisms at the ESR1 gene are associated with infertility in 
this Turkish infertile women population.

PMCID: PMC2788690
PMID: 19866355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Biol Reprod. 2010 Mar;82(3):497-503. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.081315. Epub
2009 Oct 28.

Estrogen receptor ESR1 is indispensable for the induction of persistent vaginal
change by neonatal 5alpha-dihydrotestosterone exposure in mice.

Miyagawa S(1), Katsu Y, Ohta Y, Sudo T, Lubahn DB, Iguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic
Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, and Department of Basic
Biology, The Graduate School for Advanced Studies, Okazaki, Aichi, Japan.

Development of the reproductive organs can be strongly affected by the hormonal
environment. In the mouse, exposure to estrogens and androgens during the
critical developmental period induces estrogen-independent cell proliferation and
differentiation in the adult vaginal epithelium, which often results in cancerous
lesions later in life. In the present study, we assessed the contributions of
estrogen receptor 1 (alpha) (ESR1) to the developmental effects of the
nonaromatizable androgen 5alpha-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) on female mouse vagina 
and external genitalia. The vagina of Esr1(-/-) mice treated neonatally with DHT 
showed atrophic epithelium, whereas the vaginal epithelium of Esr1(+/+) mice was 
stratified and keratinized even after ovariectomy. In addition, neonatal
treatment with DHT led to persistent phosphorylation of ESR1 in the vaginae of
60-day-old ovariectomized mice. We infer from these data that ESR1 is obligatory 
for the induction and maintenance of persistent vaginal epithelial changes
induced by neonatal administration of DHT. Neonatal DHT treatment also induced
hypospadias in both Esr1(-/-) and Esr1(+/+) mice. In contrast, DHT-induced
formation of an os penis-like large bone in the clitoris was found in Esr1(-/-)
mice but not in Esr1(+/-) or Esr1(+/+) mice. These results shed light on
mechanisms of the induction of developmental effects elicited by sex steroid
hormones on the developing animals.

PMID: 19864317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Nov;18(11):3036-43. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0678. Epub 2009 Oct 27.

DNA hypermethylation of ESR1 and PGR in breast cancer: pathologic and
epidemiologic associations.

Gaudet MM(1), Campan M, Figueroa JD, Yang XR, Lissowska J, Peplonska B, Brinton
LA, Rimm DL, Laird PW, Garcia-Closas M, Sherman ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA. mia.gaudet@einstein.yu.edu

Improved understanding of the etiology of estrogen receptor-alpha
(ERalpha)-negative and progesterone receptor (PR)-negative breast cancers may
permit improved risk prediction. In vitro studies implicate DNA hypermethylation 
of the ERalpha and PR promoters in the pathogenesis of ERalpha-negative and
PR-negative tumors, but results are not definitive. We evaluated 200 invasive
breast cancers selected from a population-based case-control study. DNA extracted
from fixed tumor tissue cores was tested using MethyLight to assess DNA
methylation at four CpG islands: ESR1 promoters A and B; PGR promoters A and B;
and a CpG shore, ESR1 promoter C. DNA methylation results were compared with
levels of ERalpha and PR, tumor characteristics, and breast cancer risk factors. 
We observed mild to moderate DNA methylation levels in most tumors for ESR1
promoters A and B and PGR promoter B, and a few tumors showed mild methylation in
PGR promoter A. In contrast, ESR1 promoter C showed a wide range of methylation
and was weakly correlated with lower expression levels of ERalpha (beta = -0.26; 
P < 0.0001) and PR (beta = -0.25; P < 0.0001). The percentage of tumors with
methylated PGR promoters A and B was significantly higher for tumors with low
ERalpha (A, Fisher's test P = 0.0001; B, P = 0.033) and PR levels (A, P = 0.0006;
B, P = 0.001). Our data suggest that the relationships between DNA methylation of
ESR1 and PGR promoters and protein expression are weak and unlikely to represent 
a predominant mechanism of receptor silencing. In contrast to CpG islands, ESR1
promoter C showed a wider range of methylation levels and inverse associations
with ERalpha and PR expression.

PMCID: PMC2783691
PMID: 19861523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Hum Reprod. 2010 Jan;25(1):283-7. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dep375. Epub 2009 Oct 27.

Estrogen receptor {alpha} gene polymorphisms in patients with idiopathic
premature ovarian failure.

Yoon SH(1), Choi YM, Hong MA, Lee GH, Kim JJ, Im HJ, Min EG, Kang BM, Yoon BK,
Moon SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital,
Goyang, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: It has been reported that polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor
(ER)-alpha gene (ESR1) may be associated with reproductive patterns of women.
This study was performed to investigate whether the genetic polymorphisms of the 
ER-alpha gene are associated with idiopathic premature ovarian failure (POF) in a
Korean population.
METHODS: The subjects were 126 idiopathic POF patients and 221 post-menopausal
controls recruited from university hospitals between 1999 and 2004. Genotyping
was performed by MGB primer/probe Taqman assay. Haplotypes were deduced by using 
the Haploview version 4.1. Bonferroni correction was applied for the correction
of multiple testing.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in the allele distribution of the
ER-alpha gene (TA)n repeats between the POF and the control group. For the PvuII 
polymorphism, the POF group showed a higher frequency of TT genotype compared
with the controls (41.3 versus 26.3%, P = 0.004, 98.75% CI 1.8-28.2%). No
significant difference was found in the distribution of the XbaI polymorphism
between the POF and the control group. Haplotype analysis showed that the
frequency of TA haplotype was significantly higher in the POF patients compared
with the controls (64.7 versus 52.7%, P = 0.002, 98.75% CI 2.4-21.6%).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the ER-alpha gene polymorphisms may be
associated with idiopathic POF.

PMID: 19861327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2009 Dec;13(6):779-84. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2009.0068.

Association of EGFR and HER2 polymorphisms with risk and clinical features of
thyroid cancer.

Rebaï M(1), Kallel I, Hamza F, Charfeddine S, Kaffel R, Guermazi F, Rebaï A.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Bioinformatics, Biostatistics and Signalling, Centre of Biotechnology 
of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.

The epidermal growth factor receptor family plays a critical role in the control 
of many physiological processes. Genetic alterations and/or variations in the
gene encoding these receptors have been implicated in a variety of human cancers.
In this study we evaluate the association of two single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNP), R497K and I655V, of the EGFR and HER2 genes, respectively, with thyroid
cancer risk. The analysis was performed with 302 healthy individuals and 106
thyroid cancer patients. No significant difference was found in the allelic and
genotypic frequency distribution of the SNP R497K between the control and patient
groups. While for the SNP I655V, the allele G is more frequent in patients than
in controls and was associated with an increased risk of thyroid cancer (odds
ratio = 1.88; 95% confidence intervals: 1.18-3.01; p = 0.007). We have also
investigated the relationship between these two polymorphic sites and
clinicopathological characteristics such as thyroid-stimulating hormone level,
off-thyroxin, serum thyroglobulin, tumor histology, metastasis, tumor status,
tumor stage, and survival. No significant association was observed. Tumor status 
was found significantly associated with HER2 I655V as well as with two previously
studied markers in the thyroid hormone receptor A and estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) 
genes (D17S2189 and D6S440, respectively). We also report a correlation between
thyroglobulin level and genotypes for SNP rs2228480 in exon 8 of the ESR1 gene.
In conclusion, our results suggest that the SNP HER2 I655V, but not the EGFR
R497K, was associated with thyroid cancer risk.

PMID: 19860576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biochemistry. 2009 Dec 8;48(48):11487-95. doi: 10.1021/bi901420k.

Repression of translation of human estrogen receptor alpha by G-quadruplex
formation.

Balkwill GD(1), Derecka K, Garner TP, Hodgman C, Flint AP, Searle MS.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, School of Chemistry, University of
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK.

Tissue-specific expression of the human estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) is
achieved through multiple promoter sequences resulting in various mRNA
transcripts encoding a common protein but differing in their 5'-untranslated
region (5'-UTR). Many cancers are estrogen-sensitive with neoplastic growth
stimulated through the estrogen receptor, a transcription factor that regulates
developmental genes. We demonstrate that the human ESR1 gene is rich in potential
quadruplex-forming sequences with 3 of 20 identified within exonic regions. In
particular, we show using CD, UV, and NMR spectroscopy that a stable DNA
G-quadruplex motif is formed within the exon C gene sequence. This motif, which
PCR shows is transcribed in normal and neoplastic endometrium and in MCF-7 cells,
forms a stable RNA quadruplex demonstrable by CD and UV analysis. Cloning the
exon C G-quadruplex sequence upstream of a luciferase reporter gene caused a
6-fold reduction of enzymatic activity compared to a mutant sequence. We conclude
that the exon C G-quadruplex motif is present in the 5'-UTR of the mRNA
transcript, where it modulates the efficiency of translation.

PMID: 19860473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Coll Antropol. 2009 Sep;33(3):933-7.

Interactions of MinK and e-NOS gene polymorphisms appear to be inconsistent
predictors of atrial fibrillation propensity, but long alleles of ESR1 promoter
TA repeat may be a promising marker.

Smalcelj A(1), Sertic J, Golubic K, Jurcic L, Banfic L, Brida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, University Hospital Centre "Zagreb",
School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
anton.smalcelj@kbc.zagreb.hr

Interactions of MinK and e-NOS Gene Polymorphisms Appear to Be Inconsistent
Predictors of Atrial Fibrillation Propensity, but Long Alleles of ESR1 Promoter
TA Repeat May Be a Promising Marker. We analyzed minK, e-NOS and ESR1 gene
polymorphisms in 40 patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) without major
structural heart disease compared to 35 healthy controls. A missense polymorphism
in the minK gene with A/G substitution at nucleotide 112 causing serine (S) to
glycine (G) change, 786 T/C polymorphism in the 5' flanking region of e-NOS gene 
and TA polymorphism in the regulatory region of estrogen receptor ESR1 gene with 
long (> or = 19 TA repeats) and short alleles were examined. Only a slight
increase in minK G allele frequency, but with marked excess in AG/TT combination 
of minK and e-NOS polymorphisms was found in the AF group. The interpretation
remains tentative due to small groups precluding statistical significance of
differences, possible lab flaws and inconsistencies with earlier data. However,
ESR1 long allele homozygotes were strikingly more frequent in the AF than in
control group, reaching statistical significance surprisingly in males (p <
0.02). Functional activity of estrogen receptors may be more critical in males
than in females with abundance of circulating estrogen. Contrasting the intricate
complexity of genetic polymorphisms influencing cardiac rhythm with our modest
research, we would limit the conclusion to the plea for further research of ESR1 
role in AF.

PMID: 19860128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Aug;122(3):711-20. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0588-6. 
Epub 2009 Oct 27.

Analysis of breast cancer related gene expression using natural splines and the
Cox proportional hazard model to identify prognostic associations.

Kreike B(1), Hart G, Bartelink H, van de Vijver MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 
121, Amsterdam 1066 CX, The Netherlands.

Many studies correlating gene expression data to clinical parameters assume a
linear increase or decrease of the clinical parameter under investigation with
the expression of a gene. We have studied genes encoding important breast
cancer-related proteins using a model for survival-type data that is based on
natural splines and the Cox proportional hazard model, thereby removing the
linearity assumption. Expression data of 16 genes were studied in relation to
metastasis-free probability in a cohort of 295 consecutive breast cancer patients
treated at The Netherlands Cancer Institute. The independent predictive power for
disease outcome of the 16 individual genes was tested in a multivariable model
with known clinical and pathological risk factors. There is a linear relationship
between increasing expression and a higher or lower hazard for distant metastasis
for ESR1, ERBB4, VEGF, CCNE2, EZH2, and UPA; for ERBB2, ERBB3, CCND1, CCNE1, EED,
CXCR4, CCR7, SDF1, and PAI1 there is no clear increase or decrease; and for EGFR 
there seems to be a non-linear relation. Multivariable analysis showed that the
70-gene prognosis profile outperforms all the other variables in the model
(hazard-rate 5.4, 95% CI 2.5-11.7; P = 0.000018). EGFR-expression seems to have a
non-linear relation with disease outcome, indicating that lower but also higher
expression of EGFR are associated with worse outcome compared to intermediate
expression levels; the other genes show no or a linear relation.

PMID: 19859804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Bone. 2010 Mar;46(3):628-42. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.10.021. Epub 2009 Oct 24.

Loading-related regulation of gene expression in bone in the contexts of estrogen
deficiency, lack of estrogen receptor alpha and disuse.

Zaman G(1), Saxon LK, Sunters A, Hilton H, Underhill P, Williams D, Price JS,
Lanyon LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Basic Sciences, The Royal Veterinary College,
University of London, Royal College Street, London NW1 0TU, UK. gzaman@rvc.ac.uk

Loading-related changes in gene expression in resident cells in the tibia of
female mice in the contexts of normality (WT), estrogen deficiency (WT-OVX),
absence of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha(-/-)) and disuse due to sciatic
neurectomy (WT-SN) were established by microarray. Total RNA was extracted from
loaded and contra-lateral non-loaded tibiae at selected time points after a
single, short period of dynamic loading sufficient to engender an osteogenic
response. There were marked changes in the expression of many genes according to 
context as well as in response to loading within those contexts. In WT mice at 3,
8, 12 and 24 h after loading the expression of 642, 341, 171 and 24 genes,
respectively, were differentially regulated compared with contra-lateral bones
which were not loaded. Only a few of the genes differentially regulated by
loading in the tibiae of WT mice have recognized roles in bone metabolism or have
been linked previously to osteogenesis (Opn, Sost, Esr1, Tgfb1, Lrp1, Ostn, Timp,
Mmp, Ctgf, Postn and Irs1, BMP and DLX5). The canonical pathways showing the
greatest loading-related regulation were those involving pyruvate metabolism,
mitochondrial dysfunction, calcium-induced apoptosis, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis,
aryl hydrocarbon receptor and oxidative phosphorylation. In the tibiae from
WT-OVX, ERalpha(-/-) and WT-SN mice, 440, 439 and 987 genes respectively were
differentially regulated by context alone compared to WT. The early response to
loading in tibiae of WT-OVX mice involved differential regulation compared to
their contra-lateral non-loaded pair of fewer genes than in WT, more
down-regulation than up-regulation and a later response. This was shared by
WT-SN. In tibiae of ERalpha(-/-) mice, the number of genes differentially
regulated by loading was markedly reduced at all time points. These data indicate
that in resident bone cells, both basal and loading-related gene expression is
substantially modified by context. Many of the genes differentially regulated by 
the earliest loading-related response were primarily involved in energy
metabolism and were not specific to bone.

PMCID: PMC2887492
PMID: 19857613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Soc Reprod Fertil Suppl. 2009;66:87-102.

The role of gene discovery, QTL analyses and gene expression in reproductive
traits in the pig.

Onteru SK(1), Ross JW, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics, Iowa
State University, Ames, IA, USA.

The reproductive performance of the sow is one of the key factors affecting
production profitability of the pig industry. Reproductive traits are in general,
lowly heritable, and with reliable markers, they can be used to enhance current
selection procedures for improvement of these traits. To find potential markers, 
large scale quantitative trait loci (QTL) and candidate gene studies have been
conducted for reproductive traits. The present review discusses QTL and candidate
gene discovery, large scale SNP association studies, gene expression profiling
and discovery of miRNA regulation of pig reproductive tissues. Many QTL have been
found for reproduction traits and a limited number of useful genes (e.g.: ESR1,
PRLR, FSHB, EPOR and RBP4) have been found to have significant associations with 
reproductive traits. Expression studies with reproductive tissues have revealed
differential expression within a few gene networks which need further mapping and
association analyses to select prospective gene markers. The near completion of
the pig genome sequence and the development of high density SNP chips will allow 
for large scale SNP association studies for pig reproductive traits in the
future. Collection of appropriate phenotypes in large numbers and in broad
populations representative of the swine industry are required if such genomic
studies will ultimately be successful.

PMID: 19848272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Ann Intern Med. 2009 Oct 20;151(8):528-37.

Collaborative meta-analysis: associations of 150 candidate genes with
osteoporosis and osteoporotic fracture.

Richards JB(1), Kavvoura FK, Rivadeneira F, Styrkársdóttir U, Estrada K,
Halldórsson BV, Hsu YH, Zillikens MC, Wilson SG, Mullin BH, Amin N, Aulchenko YS,
Cupples LA, Deloukas P, Demissie S, Hofman A, Kong A, Karasik D, van Meurs JB,
Oostra BA, Pols HA, Sigurdsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U, Soranzo N, Williams FM,
Zhou Y, Ralston SH, Thorleifsson G, van Duijn CM, Kiel DP, Stefansson K,
Uitterlinden AG, Ioannidis JP, Spector TD; Genetic Factors for Osteoporosis
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2009 Oct 20;151(8):581-2.

BACKGROUND: Osteoporosis is a highly heritable trait. Many candidate genes have
been proposed as being involved in regulating bone mineral density (BMD). Few of 
these findings have been replicated in independent studies.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationship between BMD and fracture and all common
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in previously proposed osteoporosis
candidate genes.
DESIGN: Large-scale meta-analysis of genome-wide association data.
SETTING: 5 international, multicenter, population-based studies.
PARTICIPANTS: Data on BMD were obtained from 19 195 participants (14 277 women)
from 5 populations of European origin. Data on fracture were obtained from a
prospective cohort (n = 5974) from the Netherlands.
MEASUREMENTS: Systematic literature review using the Human Genome Epidemiology
Navigator identified autosomal genes previously evaluated for association with
osteoporosis. We explored the common SNPs arising from the haplotype map of the
human genome (HapMap) across all these genes. BMD at the femoral neck and lumbar 
spine was measured by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry. Fractures were defined as
clinically apparent, site-specific, validated nonvertebral and vertebral
low-energy fractures.
RESULTS: 150 candidate genes were identified and 36 016 SNPs in these loci were
assessed. SNPs from 9 gene loci (ESR1, LRP4, ITGA1, LRP5, SOST, SPP1, TNFRSF11A, 
TNFRSF11B, and TNFSF11) were associated with BMD at either site. For most genes, 
no SNP was statistically significant. For statistically significant SNPs (n =
241), effect sizes ranged from 0.04 to 0.18 SD per allele. SNPs from the LRP5,
SOST, SPP1, and TNFRSF11A loci were significantly associated with fracture risk; 
odds ratios ranged from 1.13 to 1.43 per allele. These effects on fracture were
partially independent of BMD at SPP1 and SOST.
LIMITATION: Only common polymorphisms in linkage disequilibrium with SNPs in
HapMap could be assessed, and previously reported associations for SNPs in some
candidate genes could not be excluded.
CONCLUSION: In this large-scale collaborative genome-wide meta-analysis, 9 of 150
candidate genes were associated with regulation of BMD, 4 of which also
significantly affected risk for fracture. However, most candidate genes had no
consistent association with BMD.

PMCID: PMC2842981
PMID: 19841454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Br J Cancer. 2009 Oct 20;101(8):1469-80. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605275.

Gene expression profiling integrated into network modelling reveals heterogeneity
in the mechanisms of BRCA1 tumorigenesis.

Fernández-Ramires R(1), Solé X, De Cecco L, Llort G, Cazorla A, Bonifaci N,
Garcia MJ, Caldés T, Blanco I, Gariboldi M, Pierotti MA, Pujana MA, Benítez J,
Osorio A.

Author information: 
(1)Spanish National Cancer Center (CNIO) and CIBERER, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Gene expression profiling has distinguished sporadic breast tumour
classes with genetic and clinical differences. Less is known about the molecular 
classification of familial breast tumours, which are generally considered to be
less heterogeneous. Here, we describe molecular signatures that define BRCA1
subclasses depending on the expression of the gene encoding for oestrogen
receptor, ESR1.
METHODS: For this purpose, we have used the Oncochip v2, a cancer-related cDNA
microarray to analyze 14 BRCA1-associated breast tumours.
RESULTS: Signatures were found to be molecularly associated with different
biological processes and transcriptional regulatory programs. The signature of
ESR1-positive tumours was mainly linked to cell proliferation and regulated by
ER, whereas the signature of ESR1-negative tumours was mainly linked to the
immune response and possibly regulated by transcription factors of the
REL/NFkappaB family. These signatures were then verified in an independent series
of familial and sporadic breast tumours, which revealed a possible prognostic
value for each subclass. Over-expression of immune response genes seems to be a
common feature of ER-negative sporadic and familial breast cancer and may be
associated with good prognosis. Interestingly, the ESR1-negative tumours were
substratified into two groups presenting slight differences in the magnitude of
the expression of immune response transcripts and REL/NFkappaB transcription
factors, which could be dependent on the type of BRCA1 germline mutation.
CONCLUSION: This study reveals the molecular complexity of BRCA1 breast tumours, 
which are found to display similarities to sporadic tumours, and suggests
possible prognostic implications.

PMCID: PMC2768459
PMID: 19826428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Neurosci Lett. 2009 Dec 25;467(2):155-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.10.028. Epub 
2009 Oct 12.

Association between the estrogen receptor TA polymorphism and Harm avoidance.

Gade-Andavolu R(1), Macmurray J, Comings DE, Calati R, Chiesa A, Serretti A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Research Institute of the Desert, Rancho Mirage, California, United
States.

In the last decade a large number of studies focused on the recognition of gene
variants modulating temperamental traits. The gene coding for the estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1) appears to be an interesting candidate and it has been
found to be linked to Harm avoidance (HA). The aim of the present study was to
investigate whether the ESR1 TA dinucleotide repeat polymorphism is associated
with HA temperamental trait in a sample of Caucasian University students. One
hundred ninety healthy subjects were genotyped for ESR1 TA dinucleotide repeat
polymorphism and were administered the Temperament and Character Inventory (TCI).
ESR1 TA repeat lengths were dichotomized into short and long categories. ANOVA
was used to examine the influence of ESR1 variants (short/long) on the means of
the TCI HA scores. HA was significantly associated with age and gender in our
sample, being higher in older and female subjects. In the global sample as well
as in men and women separately, individuals carrying the S/S variant showed
significantly higher HA scores. Further analysis on the HA subscales revealed
that specific differences could exist between men and women. Our results further 
suggest a possible role of ESR1 variants on HA. Further research is needed to
replicate our findings as well as to better explore the neuro-biological
mechanisms of the modulation of ESR1 on HA.

PMID: 19822194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Apr;25(4):901-11. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.091014.

Association with replication between estrogen-related receptor gamma (ESRRgamma) 
polymorphisms and bone phenotypes in women of European ancestry.

Elfassihi L(1), Giroux S, Bureau A, Laflamme N, Cole DE, Rousseau F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche de l'Hôpital St-François d'Assise du Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec, Quebec, Canada.

Osteoporosis is a bone disease characterized by low bone mineral density (BMD), a
highly heritable polygenic trait. Women are more prone than men to develop
osteoporosis owing to a lower peak bone mass and accelerated bone loss at
menopause. Lack of estrogen thus is a major risk factor for osteoporosis. In
addition to having strong similarity to the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), the
orphan nuclear estrogen-related receptor gamma (ESRRgamma) is widely expressed
and shows overlap with ESR1 expression in tissues where estrogen has important
physiologic functions. For these reasons, we have undertaken a study of ESRRgamma
sequence variants in association with bone measurements [heel quantitative
ultrasound (QUS) by measurements of broadband ultrasound attenuation (BUA), speed
of sound (SOS), and stiffness index (SI) and dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry
(DXA) at the femoral neck (FN) and lumbar spine (LS)]. A silent variant was found
to be associated with multiple bone measurements (LS, BUA, SOS, and SI), the p
values ranging from .006 to .04 in a sample of 5144 Quebec women. The region of
this variant was analyzed using the HapMap database and the Gabriel method to
define a block of 20 kb. Using the Tagger method, eight TagSNPs were identified
and genotyped in a sample of 1335 women. Four of these SNPs capture the five
major block haplotypes. One SNP (rs2818964) and one haplotype were significantly 
associated with multiple bone measures. All SNPs involved in the associations
were analyzed in two other sample sets with significant results in the same
direction. These results suggest involvement of ESRRgamma in the determination of
bone density in women.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 19821770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. BMC Res Notes. 2009 Oct 5;2:203. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-2-203.

Variants of ESR1, APOE, LPL and IL-6 loci in young healthy subjects: association 
with lipid status and obesity.

Sertic J(1), Juricic L, Ljubic H, Bozina T, Lovric J, Markeljevic J, Jelakovic B,
Merkler M, Reiner Z.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis, Zagreb University Hospital Centre,
Zagreb, Croatia. jadranka.sertic@kbc-zagreb.hr

FINDINGS: BMI was increased (>25) in 22% of young healthy subjects. Increased
cholesterol values (>5.0 mmol/L) were found in 23% of subjects, LDL-C (>3.0
mmol/L) in 23%, triglycerides (>1.7 mmol/L) in 11% of subjects. We found
statistically significant differences in subjects' weight (p = 0.015), BMI (p =
0.023), and waist-hip ratio (WHR) (p = 0.015) in regard to their diet type;
subjects with Mediterranean diet had the lowest values compared to those on
continental and mixed diet. Significant associations were found for: LPL genetic 
polymorphic variant and abdominal obesity (p = 0.013), APO epsilon4 allele and
hypercholesterolemia (p = 0.003), and ESR1-TA long allele and
hypercholesterolemia (p = 0.011).
BACKGROUND: Human obesity is a multifactorial syndrome influenced also by genetic
factors. Among gene variants found to be involved in body weight regulation and
development of obesity, particular attention has been paid to polymorphisms in
genes associated with obesity-related metabolic disorders. We explored the
association of genetic polymorphisms of: estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1-TA
repeats); interleukin-6 (IL-6 G-174C); apolipoprotein E (APO epsilon2, epsilon3, 
epsilon4); lipoprotein lipase Pvu II (LPL P+/-), with clinical variables: gender,
age, body mass index (BMI), diet type and biological variables: triglycerides,
cholesterol, HDL-C, LDL-C, CRP, homocysteine, urate, and glucose in 105 healthy
young subjects (20-35 yrs) of Croatian origin.
METHODS: Genotyping of IL-6, LPL was performed by PCR-RFLP, of APOE by real-time 
PCR, and of ESR1 by PCR and capillary electrophoresis. Association analyses were 
performed of alleles and genotypes with biological variables.
CONCLUSION: ESR-1, LPL, and APO E genetic polymorphic variants could represent
predictive genetic risk markers for obesity-related metabolic disorders in young 
healthy subjects. Mediterranean type of diet is also an important protective
factor against abdominal obesity.

PMCID: PMC2765961
PMID: 19804633  [PubMed]


166. Nat Genet. 2009 Nov;41(11):1199-206. doi: 10.1038/ng.446. Epub 2009 Oct 4.

Twenty bone-mineral-density loci identified by large-scale meta-analysis of
genome-wide association studies.

Rivadeneira F(1), Styrkársdottir U, Estrada K, Halldórsson BV, Hsu YH, Richards
JB, Zillikens MC, Kavvoura FK, Amin N, Aulchenko YS, Cupples LA, Deloukas P,
Demissie S, Grundberg E, Hofman A, Kong A, Karasik D, van Meurs JB, Oostra B,
Pastinen T, Pols HA, Sigurdsson G, Soranzo N, Thorleifsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U,
Williams FM, Wilson SG, Zhou Y, Ralston SH, van Duijn CM, Spector T, Kiel DP,
Stefansson K, Ioannidis JP, Uitterlinden AG; Genetic Factors for Osteoporosis
(GEFOS) Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Bone mineral density (BMD) is a heritable complex trait used in the clinical
diagnosis of osteoporosis and the assessment of fracture risk. We performed
meta-analysis of five genome-wide association studies of femoral neck and lumbar 
spine BMD in 19,195 subjects of Northern European descent. We identified 20 BMD
loci that reached genome-wide significance (GWS; P < 5 x 10(-8)), of which 13 map
to regions not previously associated with this trait: 1p31.3 (GPR177), 2p21
(SPTBN1), 3p22 (CTNNB1), 4q21.1 (MEPE), 5q14 (MEF2C), 7p14 (STARD3NL), 7q21.3
(FLJ42280), 11p11.2 (LRP4, ARHGAP1, F2), 11p14.1 (DCDC5), 11p15 (SOX6), 16q24
(FOXL1), 17q21 (HDAC5) and 17q12 (CRHR1). The meta-analysis also confirmed at GWS
level seven known BMD loci on 1p36 (ZBTB40), 6q25 (ESR1), 8q24 (TNFRSF11B),
11q13.4 (LRP5), 12q13 (SP7), 13q14 (TNFSF11) and 18q21 (TNFRSF11A). The many SNPs
associated with BMD map to genes in signaling pathways with relevance to bone
metabolism and highlight the complex genetic architecture that underlies
osteoporosis and variation in BMD.

PMCID: PMC2783489
PMID: 19801982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cancer Sci. 2009 Dec;100(12):2341-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01333.x. Epub 
2009 Sep 1.

Predicting invasive phenotype with CDH1, CDH13, CD44, and TIMP3 gene expression
in primary breast cancer.

Celebiler Cavusoglu A(1), Kilic Y, Saydam S, Canda T, Baskan Z, Sevinc AI,
Sakizli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Oncology, Dokuz Eylül University, Izmir, Turkiye.

We aimed to determine changes in the expression of the genes CDH1, CDH13, CD44,
and TIMP3 to look for any relationship between them, HER2 and ESR1 expression at 
the RNA level, and the histopathological properties of tumors. We also analyzed
the expression properties of double-negative (estrogen receptor [ER] and human
epidermal growth factor receptor [HER2] both negative) breast tumors. Expression 
status was studied in fresh tissue at the mRNA level with quantitative PCR using 
hydrolysis probes. Sixty-two cancer patients and four normal controls were
included in the study. When the tumor group was analyzed as a whole, the
correlations of ESR1 with CDH1, CDH13, and TIMP3 were P < 0.05, P < 0.005, and P 
< 0.005, respectively. In ER-positive tumors, CDH1 and CDH13 were correlated
directly (P < 0.005) when HER2 was correlated with CDH1, CDH13, and TIMP3
indirectly (P < 0.005, P < 0.005, and P < 0.05, respectively). CDH1 and CD44 had 
a strong indirect correlation (P < 0.005) in ER-negative tumors. There were
significant differences in the expression levels of the CDH13, TIMP3, and CD44
genes (P < 0.005, P < 0.005, and P < 0.05, respectively) between the ER-positive 
and -negative groups. All four genes were found to be correlated with invasive
properties in both ER-positive and -negative tumors. In double-negative tumor
samples, only CD44 had a significant and strong correlation with stage, lymph
node involvement, and metastasis (P < 0.05, P < 0.005, and P < 0.05,
respectively). As a conclusion, a decrease in CDH1, CDH13, and TIMP3 expression
levels with an increase in CD44 can be used as an indicator for invasion in both 
ER-positive and -negative breast tumors. In double-negative tumor tissues, CD44
can be considered a marker for aggressive properties.

PMID: 19799609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Oct;18(10):2694-700. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-0821. Epub 2009 Sep 29.

Changes in CpG islands promoter methylation patterns during ductal breast
carcinoma progression.

Hoque MO(1), Prencipe M, Poeta ML, Barbano R, Valori VM, Copetti M, Gallo AP,
Brait M, Maiello E, Apicella A, Rossiello R, Zito F, Stefania T, Paradiso A,
Carella M, Dallapiccola B, Murgo R, Carosi I, Bisceglia M, Fazio VM, Sidransky D,
Parrella P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Aberrant promoter methylation of several known or putative tumor suppressor genes
occurs frequently during carcinogenesis, and this epigenetic change has been
considered as a potential molecular marker for cancer. We examined the
methylation status of nine genes (APC, CDH1, CTNNB1, TIMP3, ESR1, GSTP1, MGMT,
THBS1, and TMS1), by quantitative methylation specific PCR. Synchronous
preinvasive lesions (atypical ductal hyperplasia and/or ductal carcinoma in situ)
and invasive ductal breast carcinoma from 52 patients, together with pure lesions
from 24 patients and 12 normal tissues paired to tumor and 20 normal breast
distant from tumor were analyzed. Aberrant promoter methylation was detected in
both preinvasive and invasive lesions for genes APC, CDH1, CTNNB1, TIMP3, ESR1,
and GSTP1. However, hierarchical mixed model and Generalized Estimating Equations
model analyses showed that only APC, CDH1, and CTNNB1 promoter regions showed a
higher frequency and methylation levels in pathologic samples when compared with 
normal breast. Whereas APC and CTNNB1 did not show differences in methylation
levels or frequencies, CDH1 showed higher methylation levels in invasive tumors
as compared with preinvasive lesions (P < 0.04, Mann-Whitney test with
permutation correction). The analysis of APC, CDH1, and CTNNB1 methylation status
was able to distinguish between normal and pathologic samples with a sensitivity 
of 67% (95% confidence interval, 60-71%) and a specificity of 75% (95% confidence
interval, 69-81%). Our data point to the direct involvement of APC, CDH1, and
CTNNB1 promoter methylation in the early stages of breast cancer progression and 
suggest that they may represent a useful tool for the detection of tumor cells in
clinical specimens.

PMCID: PMC4441328
PMID: 19789364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2010 Jan 29;17(1):17-25. doi: 10.1677/ERC-09-0176. Print
2010 Mar.

Association of testicular germ cell tumor with polymorphisms in estrogen receptor
and steroid metabolism genes.

Ferlin A(1), Ganz F, Pengo M, Selice R, Frigo AC, Foresta C.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Clinical Pathology and Centre for Male Gamete Cryopreservation,
Department of Histology, Microbiology and Medical Biotechnologies, University of 
Padova, Via Gabelli 63, 35121 Padova, Italy.

It is generally assumed that the development of testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT)
is under endocrine control. In particular, unbalanced androgen/estrogen levels
and/or activity are believed to represent the key events for TGCT development and
progression. Furthermore, recent evidence has suggested a strong genetic
component for TGCT. In this study, we analyzed whether a genetic variation in
estrogen receptor (ESR) genes and steroid hormone metabolism genes is associated 
with TGCT. We genotyped for 17 polymorphic markers in 11 genes in 234 TGCT cases 
and 218 controls: ESR (ESR1 and ESR2); CYP19A1 (aromatase); 17beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase types 1 and 4 (HSD17B1 and HSD17B4) dehydrogenases that convert
potent androgens and estrogens to weak hormones; cytochrome P450 hydroxylating
enzymes CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1; and the metabolic enzymes COMT, SULT1A1, and 
SULT1E1. We observed a significant association of rs11205 in HSD17B4 with TGCT.
TGCT risk was increased twofold per copy of the minor A allele at this locus
(odds ratios (OR)=2.273, 95% confidence interval (CI)=1.737-2.973). Homozygous
carriage of the minor A allele was associated with an over fourfold increased
risk of TGCT (OR=4.561, 95% CI=2.615-7.955) compared with homozygous carriage of 
the major G allele. The risk was increased both for seminoma (OR=5.327, 95%
CI=2.857-9.931) and for nonseminoma (OR=3.222, 95% CI=1.471-7.059). We found for 
the first time an association of polymorphisms in HSD17B4 gene with TGCT. Our
findings expand the current knowledge on the role of genetic contribution in
testicular cancer susceptibility, and support the hypothesis that variations in
hormone metabolism genes might change the hormonal environment implicated in
testicular carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19776291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2010 Mar 1;166(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2009.09.006.
Epub 2009 Sep 18.

Temporal expression of hepatic estrogen receptor 1, vitellogenin1 and
vitellogenin2 in European silver eels.

Palstra AP(1), Schnabel D, Nieveen MC, Spaink HP, van den Thillart GE.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Einsteinweg
55, 2333 CC Leiden, The Netherlands. a.p.palstra@biology.leidenuniv.nl

Because European silver eels have never been caught during or after their 6000-km
reproductive migration to the Sargasso Sea, all existing knowledge on their
sexual maturation comes from hormonal stimulation. Silver eels that start their
oceanic migration are still immature with pre-vitellogenic oocytes. Hence we
assumed that vitellogenesis should start with the expression of the estrogen
receptor in the liver before the circulating 17beta-estradiol (E2) can have any
effect. In this study we followed the hepatic vitellogenesis upon 4 weekly
injections with carp pituitary extracts (CPE). New molecular primers for the
expression of the estrogen receptor 1 (esr1), vitellogenin1 (vtg1) and
vitellogenin2 (vtg2) in the liver were developed. Sequences of vtg2 and esr1 were
not previously described in Anguilla anguilla. All eels showed weekly increase of
the eye size and pectoral fin length, which are signs of early maturation. The
same occurred with the gonadosomatic index, the oocyte stage and diameter, and
number of deposited fat droplets. Early vitellogenesis appeared as a 3-step
process (1) E2-levels and esr1 expression were significantly increased already
after one injection, (2) vtg1 and vtg2 expression were significantly increased
after one and two injections, respectively, and (3) vtg1 and vtg2 expression
increased further after three and four injections. Then also plasma calcium
(corresponds with plasma vitellogenin) increased and yolk globuli appeared in the
oocytes. These results show that esr1 is the first of the three genes examined
that is expressed during the onset of hepatic vitellogenesis. Furthermore,
ovarian vitellogenesis (appearance of yolk globuli in oocytes) occurs 1-2 weeks
later than the onset of hepatic vitellogenesis.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19766647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 May;121(1):177-84. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0532-9. 
Epub 2009 Sep 17.

Potentially functional polymorphisms in ESR1 and breast cancer risk: a
meta-analysis.

Li N(1), Dong J, Hu Z, Shen H, Dai M.

Author information: 
(1)National Office of Cancer Prevention and Control, Cancer Hospital/Institute,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.

Estrogen exposure is a central risk factor in the development of breast cancer.
Estrogen receptor alpha (coded by ESR1) is the key mediator of estrogen response 
in mammary tissue. Genetic changes altering the expression of ESR1 is likely to
affect breast cancer susceptibility. Since the identification of several
potentially functional polymorphisms in ESR1 (rs2234693, rs9340799, rs1801132,
rs3798577, rs2228480), molecular epidemiological studies were conducted in recent
years to evaluate the association between polymorphisms and breast cancer risk in
diverse populations. However, the results remain conflicting rather than
conclusive. This current analysis on 10,300 breast cancer cases and 16,620
controls on rs2234693 showed a borderline significant decreased breast cancer
risk for CC and CC/CT carriers (CC vs. TT: OR, 0.92, 95% CI, 0.86-0.99; CC/CT vs.
TT: OR, 0.95, 95% CI, 0.89-1.00). Variant genotypes of the rs1801132 polymorphism
were also associated with a decreased breast cancer risk in a dominant model in
5,649 cases and 6,856 controls (GG/GC vs. CC: OR, 0.92, 95% CI, 0.85-0.99). These
results suggest that potentially functional ESR1 polymorphisms may play a low
penetrance role in breast cancer susceptibility. SNPs rs9340799, rs3798577,
rs2228480, and rs2077647 in ESR1 were not causative SNPs. SNPs rs2747648,
rs1062577, and rs3020314 were recommended in further association studies and
functional evaluations.

PMID: 19760036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jan;82(1):194-201. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.077305. Epub
2009 Sep 16.

Influences of sex, incubation temperature, and environmental quality on gonadal
estrogen and androgen receptor messenger RNA expression in juvenile American
alligators (Alligator mississippiensis).

Moore BC(1), Milnes MR, Kohno S, Katsu Y, Iguchi T, Guillette LJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.
bmoore2@tulane.edu

Gonadal steroid hormone receptors play a vital role in transforming ligand
signals into gene expression. We have shown previously that gonads from
wild-caught juvenile alligators express greater levels of estrogen receptor 1
(ESR1) than estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2). Furthermore, sexually dimorphic ESR2 mRNA
expression (female > male) observed in animals from the reference site (Lake
Woodruff, FL, USA) was lost in alligators from the contaminated Lake Apopka (FL, 
USA). We postulated that environmental contaminant exposure could influence
gonadal steroid hormone receptor expression. Here, we address questions regarding
gonadal estrogen and androgen receptor (AR) mRNA expression in 1-yr-old,
laboratory-raised alligators. What are relative expression levels within gonads? 
Do these levels vary between sexes or incubation temperatures? Can contaminant
exposure change these levels? We observed a similar pattern of expression (ESR1 >
AR > ESR2) in ovary and testis. However, both incubation temperature and
environment modulated expression. Males incubated at 33.5 degrees C expressed
greater AR levels than females incubated at 30 degrees C; dimorphic expression
was not observed in animals incubated at 32 degrees C. Compared to Lake Woodruff 
alligators, Lake Apopka animals of both sexes showed lesser ESR2 mRNA expression 
levels. Employing cluster analyses, we integrated these receptor expression
patterns with those of steroidogenic factors. Elevated ESR2 and CYP19A1
expressions were diagnostic of alligator ovary, whereas elevated HSD3B1, CYP11A1,
and CYP17A1 expressions were indicative of testis. In contrast, AR, ESR1, and
NR5A1 showed variable expressions that were not entirely associated with sex.
These findings demonstrate that the mRNA expression of receptors required for
steroid hormone signaling are modified by exposure to environmental factors,
including temperature and contaminants.

PMCID: PMC2802122
PMID: 19759368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Anim Sci. 2010 Jan;88(1):1-15. doi: 10.2527/jas.2009-1985. Epub 2009 Sep 11.

Association analyses of candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms on reproductive
traits in swine.

Rempel LA(1), Nonneman DJ, Wise TH, Erkens T, Peelman LJ, Rohrer GA.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, US Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, NE 68933-0166, USA.

The ability to identify young females with superior reproduction would have a
large economic impact on commercial swine production. Previous studies have
discovered SNP associated with economically important traits such as litter size,
growth rate, and feed intake. The objective of this study was to test for
association of candidate SNP with sow prolificacy reproductive traits in gilts of
a Landrace-Duroc-Yorkshire composite population. Association analyses regressed
additive (A), dominant (D), and imprinting (I) SNP effects on each trait with an 
animal model. A carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A SNP and a glycogen synthase 1
SNP were associated with age at puberty (AP; D = 10 d; P = 0. 0037 and A = 3.8 d;
P = 0.0078, respectively). Four IGF2 SNP were associated with AP as well, having 
additive or dominant effects (3.2 to 5.8 d; P < or = 0.0052). Two mannosidase 2B2
SNP and 2 prolactin receptor (PRLR) SNP were also associated with AP. Solute
carrier 22, subfamily member 5 SNP was weakly associated with AP (D = 3.9 d; P < 
0.10). Polymorphisms within glycogen synthase 1 and protein kinase AMP-activated,
gamma 3 noncatalytic subunit had associations with ovulation rate. Estrogen
receptor (ESR) 1, ESR2, PPAR gamma coactivator 1, and IGFBP3 SNP were
significantly associated with weaning-to-estrus interval. Two PRLR SNP were
associated with total number of piglets born (A = 0.57 piglets; P = 0.0095 and D 
= 0.61 piglets; P = 0.0016, respectively). A SNP within PRLR was also associated 
with number of piglets born alive (D = 0.61; P = 0.0016). The PPAR gamma
coactivator 1 SNP was associated with total number of piglets born (D = 0.38
piglets; P = 0.0391) and number of piglets born alive (D = 0.53 piglets; P =
0.0032). The SNP within ESR1 (A = 0.65 piglets; P = 0.0950), ESR2 (A = -0.33
piglets; P = 0.0176), IGF2 SNP (A = -0.26 piglets; P = 0.0032), and IGFBP3 SNP (D
= 0.35 piglets; P = 0.0683) were associated with number of piglets born dead. A
leptin SNP was associated with mummified fetuses (D = 0.09 piglets; P = 0.0978). 
Many of the SNP analyzed in this study are from genes involved in regulation of
metabolism, suggesting that there is an important link between physiological
events associated with reproduction and energy utilization. Furthermore, these
production and growth trait SNP may serve to assist in selection of young females
for superior reproductive performance.

PMID: 19749016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2009 Dec;16(4):1241-9. doi: 10.1677/ERC-08-0342. Epub 2009
Sep 11.

Oestrogen receptor 1 mRNA is a prognostic factor in ovarian cancer patients
treated with neo-adjuvant chemotherapy: determination by array and kinetic PCR in
fresh tissue biopsies.

Zamagni C(1), Wirtz RM, De Iaco P, Rosati M, Veltrup E, Rosati F, Capizzi E,
Cacciari N, Alboni C, Bernardi A, Massari F, Quercia S, D'Errico Grigioni A,
Dietel M, Sehouli J, Denkert C, Martoni AA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy.
claudio.zamagni@aosp.bo.it

Oestrogen receptors (ESRs) regulate the growth and differentiation of normal
ovarian epithelia. However, to date their role as biomarkers in the clinical
setting of ovarian cancer remains unclear. In view of potential endocrine
treatment options, we tested the role of ESR1 mRNA expression in ovarian cancer
in the context of a neo-adjuvant chemotherapy trial. Study participants had
epithelial ovarian or peritoneal carcinoma unsuitable for optimal upfront surgery
and were treated with neo-adjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy before surgery.
RNA was isolated from frozen tumour biopsies before treatment. RNA expression of 
ESR1 was determined by microarray and reverse transcriptase kinetic PCR
technologies. The prognostic value of ESR1 was tested using univariate and
multivariate Cox proportional hazards models, Kaplan-Meier survival statistics
and the log-rank test. ESR1 positively correlates with proliferation markers and 
histopathological grading. ESR1 was a significant predictor of survival as a
continuous variable in the univariate Cox regression analysis. In multivariate
analysis, elevated baseline ESR1 mRNA levels predicted prolonged progression-free
survival (P=0.041) and overall survival (P=0.01) after neo-adjuvant chemotherapy,
independently of pathological grade and age. We conclude that pretreatment ESR1
mRNA is associated with tumour growth and is a strong prognostic factor in
ovarian cancer, independent of the strongest clinical parameters used in clinical
routine. We suggest that ESR1 mRNA status should be considered in order to
minimize possible confounding effects in ovarian cancer clinical trials, and that
early treatment with anti-hormonal agents based on reliable hormone receptor
status determination is worth investigating.

PMID: 19749010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jun 15;126(12):2935-46. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24892.

Polymorphisms in genes of the steroid receptor superfamily modify postmenopausal 
breast cancer risk associated with menopausal hormone therapy.

MARIE-GENICA Consortium on Genetic Susceptibility for Menopausal Hormone Therapy 
Related Breast Cancer Risk.

Collaborators: Abbas S, Beckmann L, Chang-Claude J, Hein R, Kropp S, Parthimos M,
Dünnebier T, Hamann U, Brors B, Eils R, Zapatka M, Brauch H, Justenhoven C,
Flesch-Janys D, Braendle W, Brüning T, Pesch B, Spickenheuer A, Baisch C, Ko YD, 
Dahmen N.

Menopausal hormone therapy (HT) is associated with increased breast cancer risk
among postmenopausal women. Nuclear receptors are involved in steroid hormone-
and xenobiotic-mediated signal transduction playing a crucial role in regulating 
gene expression. Therefore, variations within these genes may influence
HT-associated breast cancer risk. We investigated 3,149 postmenopausal breast
cancer patients and 5,489 controls from 2 German population-based case-control
studies. Thirty-three polymorphisms selected on the basis of known or putative
functional relevance located in ESR1, ESR2, PGR, PXR and AR were genotyped.
Conditional logistic regression was used to assess multiplicative statistical
interaction between polymorphisms and duration of estrogen-progestagen therapy
and of estrogen monotherapy with regard to breast cancer risk assuming
log-additive and codominant modes of inheritance. We observed an increased risk
for women carrying short AR_(CAG) alleles of <22 repeats associated with combined
estrogen-progestagen therapy compared with those with long alleles (> or =22
repeats) (p(interaction) = 0.03). Additionally, risk associated with combination 
therapy use was significantly modified by 2 PXR polymorphisms with reduction of
risk effects in carriers of the minor PXR_rs6785049_G and PXR_rs1054191_A alleles
(p(interaction) = 0.04 and 0.05, respectively). Variants in both ESR1 and ESR2
modified risk associated with estrogen monotherapy use. Higher risk were observed
in homozygotes for the major ESR1_rs910416_T allele (p(interaction) < 0.01) and
in homozygotes for the minor ESR2_rs1271572_T, major ESR2_rs4986938_G and minor
ESR2_rs928554_G alleles (p(interaction) = 0.02, 0.05, 0.02, respectively). Risk
effect modification by ESR1_rs910416 and AR_(CAG)n polymorphisms remained
significant after correction for multiple testing. We conclude that genetic
variants in nuclear receptor genes may modify HT-associated postmenopausal breast
cancer risk.

PMID: 19739075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2009 Sep;2(9):814-22. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-09-0054. Epub 2009 Sep 8.

Concordant DNA methylation in synchronous colorectal carcinomas.

Konishi K(1), Shen L, Jelinek J, Watanabe Y, Ahmed S, Kaneko K, Kogo M, Takano T,
Imawari M, Hamilton SR, Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Epigenetic changes have been proposed as mediators of the field defect in
colorectal carcinogenesis, which has implications for risk assessment and cancer 
prevention. As a test of this hypothesis, we evaluated the methylation status of 
eight genes (MINT1, 2, 31, MLH1, p16, p14, MGMT, and ESR1), as well as BRAF and
KRAS mutations, in 57 multiple colorectal neoplasias (M-CRN) and compared these
to 69 solitary colorectal cancers (S-CRC). There were no significant differences 
in methylation between M-CRNs and S-CRCs except for p14 and MGMT that was
significantly higher in M-CRNs than S-CRCs (16.1% versus 9.3%; 26.5% versus
17.3%, respectively; P < 0.05). We found significant (P < 0.05) correlations for 
MINT1 (r = 0.8), p16 (r = 0.8), MLH1 (r = 0.9), and MGMT (r = 0.6) methylation
between tumors pairs of the same site (proximal/proximal and distal/distal). KRAS
showed no concordance in mutations. BRAF mutation showed concordance in proximal 
site pairs but was discordant in different site pairs. Histologically, eight of
10 paired cancers with similar locations were concordant for a cribriform
glandular configuration. We conclude that synchronous colorectal tumors of the
same site are highly concordant for methylation of multiple genes, BRAF
mutations, and a cribriform glandular configuration, all consistent with a
patient-specific predisposition to particular subtypes of colorectal cancers.
Screening for and secondary prevention of colon cancer should take this fact into
account.

PMCID: PMC3544187
PMID: 19737982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Hum Pathol. 2010 Jan;41(1):38-47. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.06.002. Epub 2009
Sep 5.

Methylation status of normal background mucosa is correlated with occurrence and 
development of neoplasia in the distal colon.

Hiraoka S(1), Kato J, Horii J, Saito S, Harada K, Fujita H, Kuriyama M, Takemoto 
K, Uraoka T, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558,
Japan.

The aim of this study is to evaluate the methylation status of normal colonic
mucosa in relation to the stage of neoplasia arising from the mucosa. The
methylation status of 2 age-related loci (ESR1 and MYOD1) and global methylation 
(the mean of Alu and Sat2) in the normal colonic mucosa of 156 patients with and 
without colorectal neoplasia were examined. The distal colon and proximal colon
were analyzed separately because neoplasia is biologically and clinically
different between these sites. The methylation status was determined by
MethyLight using percentage of methylated reference (PMR). In the distal colon,
methylation of the age-related loci decreased as the stage of neoplasia increased
(patients with no neoplasia or with adenoma < or =9 mm versus patients with
advanced adenoma or with invasive cancer: ESR1-PMR median, 21.0 versus 15.7; P = 
.015; MYOD1-PMR median, 5.35 versus 3.80; P = .0037, respectively).
Interestingly, global methylation was inversely correlated with the stage of
neoplasia (59.7 versus 61.5; P = .054). In contrast, the proximal colon showed no
significant correlations. The methylation of MYOD1 in the normal mucosa was
significantly correlated with K-ras mutation in neoplastic tissue arising from
the mucosa. Specific epigenetic changes in normal colonic mucosa may be
correlated with the occurrence and development of neoplasia in the distal colon.

PMID: 19733896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Dev Dyn. 2009 Oct;238(10):2641-51. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22069.

Early regulation of brain aromatase (cyp19a1b) by estrogen receptors during
zebrafish development.

Mouriec K(1), Lareyre JJ, Tong SK, Le Page Y, Vaillant C, Pellegrini E, Pakdel F,
Chung BC, Kah O, Anglade I.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenesis And OEstrogens, UMR CNRS 6026, IFR 140, Université de Rennes 1,
Rennes, France.

Early expression of estrogen receptors (esr) and their role in regulating early
expression of cyp19a1b encoding brain aromatase were examined in the brain of
zebrafish. Using in toto hybridization and quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), a significant increase in the
expression of esr1, esr2a, and esr2b was observed between 24 and 48 hours
postfertilization (hpf). In toto hybridization demonstrated that esr2a and esr2b,
but not esr1, are found in the hypothalamus. Using real-time RT-PCR, an increase 
in cyp19a1b mRNAs occurs between 24 and 48 hpf, indicating that expression of
cyp19a1b is temporally correlated with that of esr. This increase is blocked by
the pure anti-estrogen ICI182,780. Furthermore, E2 treatment of cyp19a1b-GFP
(green fluorescent protein) transgenic embryos results in appearance of GFP
expression in the brain as early as 25 hpf. These results indicate that basal
expression of cyp19a1b expression in the brain of developing zebrafish most
likely relies upon expression of esr that are fully functional before 25 hpf.

PMID: 19718764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. DNA Cell Biol. 2009 Dec;28(12):633-6. doi: 10.1089/dna.2009.0917.

No association between estrogen receptor beta polymorphisms and uterine
leiomyoma.

Zhai XD(1), Ye Y, Yang Y, Wang Z, Mo YN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Forensic Medicine, Hennan University of Science and Technology,
Luoyang 471003, Henan, China.

Numerous candidate genes have been proposed as susceptibility factors for the
development of uterine leiomyoma. Interaction of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1)
and estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) plays a pivotal role in tunica muscularis uteri
cell proliferation, differentiation, and tumorigenesis of myometrium. To our
knowledge, no study has examined the relationship between the ESR2 and uterine
leiomyoma. The aim of the study was to evaluate the association of ESR2
polymorphisms with uterine leiomyoma in Chinese women. We investigated two common
ESR2 polymorphisms, rs1256049 (G1082A) and rs928554 (Cx + 56 A --> G), to find
their association with uterine leiomyoma risk by polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism and DNA sequencing method. A
total of 150 Chinese women with clinically diagnosed uterine leiomyoma and 150
healthy, normal Chinese women were included in the study. The results suggest
that there were no significant differences in the genotype and allele frequencies
of ESR2 polymorphisms between uterine leiomyoma patients and controls in Chinese 
women (p > 0.05). Further studies are still needed to explore the complicated
interaction between environmental factors and ESR2 polymorphisms in the risk of
uterine leiomyoma, particularly in ethnically different populations.

PMID: 19715484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jan;82(1):86-95. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.078543. Epub 2009 
Aug 19.

Effects of neonatal exposure to bisphenol A on steroid regulation of vascular
endothelial growth factor expression and endothelial cell proliferation in the
adult rat uterus.

Bosquiazzo VL(1), Varayoud J, Muñoz-de-Toro M, Luque EH, Ramos JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Endocrinología y Tumores Hormonodependientes, School of
Biochemistry and Biological Sciences, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe,
Argentina.

Hormonally controlled vascular changes play a key role in endometrial development
and in the differentiation process necessary for implantation. Vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has emerged as one of the central regulators of 
the uterine vasculature. Hormonal perturbations during neonatal development may
alter sex steroid-dependent regulation of VEGF and may ultimately affect
fertility later in life. The aim of this study was to determine whether neonatal 
exposure to the environmental estrogenic chemical bisphenol A (BPA) affects the
adult rat uterine response to hormonal stimuli. Newborn female rats were given
s.c. injections of vehicle, BPA (0.05 mg/kg per day or 20 mg/kg per day) or
diethylstilbestrol (0.2 microg/kg per day) on Postnatal Days 1, 3, 5, and 7. To
evaluate the long-term effects, rats were ovariectomized at Postnatal Day 80 and 
submitted to hormonal replacement. Rats neonatally exposed to xenoestrogens
showed a decreased induction of uterine endothelial proliferation and a decreased
Vegf mRNA expression in response to ovarian steroid treatment. Also, although the
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) expression was lower in subepithelial cells than
in controls, a higher expression of silencing mediator of retinoic acid and
thyroid hormone receptor (NCOR1, also known as SMRT) corepressor was evidenced in
the same compartment. The results indicate that disturbed Vegf expression in BPA 
rats could be the result of changes in endocrine pathways, such as an altered
induction of ESR1 and/or NCOR1 expression. Because of the importance of VEGF in
the implantation process, our data suggest that neonatal BPA exposure might have 
negative consequences on female fertility.

PMID: 19696011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Clin Chim Acta. 2009 Nov;409(1-2):28-32. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2009.08.007. Epub
2009 Aug 18.

Genetic determinants of extracellular magnesium concentration: analysis of
multiple candidate genes, and evidence for association with the estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) locus.

Shuen AY(1), Wong BY, Wei C, Liu Z, Li M, Cole DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Serum magnesium concentration is a quantitative trait with
substantial heritability. Although the pool of candidate genes continues to grow,
only the histocompatibility locus has been associated with magnesium levels. To
explore other possibilities, we targeted 6 candidate genes physiologically
relevant to magnesium metabolism.
METHODS: We studied a large cohort (n=471) derived from a well-characterized
population of healthy Caucasian women 18 to 35 years. Total serum magnesium and
calcium were measured by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (aaMg & aaCa).
Genomic DNA was amplified and SNPs in candidate genes (CASR, VDR, ESR1, CLDN16,
EGF1, TRPM6) genotyped by routine methods.
RESULTS: We found a significant association between estrogen receptor alpha
(ESR1) polymorphisms, PvuII and XbaI, and magnesium (r=-0.116, p=0.012 and
r=-0.126, p=0.006, respectively). Stratifying by PvuII genotype (P/p alleles),
the mean adjusted total magnesium (aaMg) concentration was significantly higher
(p=0.01) in the pp group (0.823+/-0.005 mmol/l, n=130) than in PP homozygotes
(0.805+/-0.006 mmol/l, n=70), and the mean in Pp heterozygotes was intermediate
(0.810+/-0.005 mmol/l, n=180). No significant associations were observed with the
other candidate genes tested.
CONCLUSIONS: The significant association between magnesium and ESR1 polymorphisms
supports previous studies linking physiologic changes in serum magnesium to
estrogen status.

PMID: 19695239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2009 Dec;16(4):1229-39. doi: 10.1677/ERC-08-0338. Epub 2009 
Aug 12.

Estrogen receptor 1 mRNA is a prognostic factor in ovarian carcinoma:
determination by kinetic PCR in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue.

Darb-Esfahani S(1), Wirtz RM, Sinn BV, Budczies J, Noske A, Weichert W, Faggad A,
Scharff S, Sehouli J, Oskay-Ozcelik G, Zamagni C, De Iaco P, Martoni A, Dietel M,
Denkert C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
silvia.darb-esfahani@charite.de

Epidemiological and cell culture studies indicate that ovarian carcinoma growth
is dependent on estrogen stimulation. However, possibly due to the lack of a
reliable biomarker that helps to select patients according to prognostically
relevant estrogen receptor (ER) levels, clinical trials using anti-estrogenic
therapeutics in ovarian carcinoma have had inconsistent results. Therefore, we
tested if ER expression analysis by a quantitative method might be useful in this
regard in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. In a study group of 114
primary ovarian carcinomas expression of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) mRNA was
analyzed using a new method for RNA extraction from FFPE tissue that is based on 
magnetic beads, followed by kinetic PCR. The prognostic impact of ESR1 mRNA
expression was investigated and compared to ERalpha protein expression as
determined by immunohistochemistry. In univariate survival analysis the
expression level of ESR1 mRNA was a significant positive prognostic factor for
patient survival (hazard ratio (HR) 0.230 (confidence interval (CI) 0.102-0.516),
P=0.002). ERalpha protein expression was correlated to ESR1 mRNA expression
(P=0.0001); however, ERalpha protein expression did not provide statistically
significant prognostic information. In multivariate analysis, ESR1 mRNA
expression emerged as a prognostic factor, independent of stage, grade, residual 
tumor mass, age, and ERalpha protein expression (HR 0.227 (CI 0.078-0.656),
P=0.006). Our results indicate that the determination of ESR1 levels by kinetic
PCR may be superior to immunohistochemical methods in assessment of biologically 
relevant levels of ER expression in ovarian carcinoma, and is feasible in
routinely used FFPE tissue.

PMID: 19675076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cephalalgia. 2010 Mar;30(3):311-20. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2982.2009.01967.x. Epub
2010 Feb 11.

Role of the oestrogen receptor (ESR1 PvuII and ESR1 325 C->G) and progesterone
receptor (PROGINS) polymorphisms in genetic susceptibility to migraine in a North
Indian population.

Joshi G(1), Pradhan S, Mittal B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow, India.

We aimed to explore the single-locus, haplotype and epistasis patterns and the
contribution of oestrogen receptor [ESR1 PvuII (rs2234693), ESR1 325 C<U+2192>G
(rs1801132)] and progesterone receptor [PROGINS (rs1042838)] polymorphisms in
genetic susceptibility to migraine by analysing 613 subjects consisting of 217
migraine patients, 217 healthy controls (HC) and 179 patients with tension-type
headache (TTH). Entire data were analysed by taking the Bonferroni corrected
P-value into account. We found significant association of TT genotype [odds ratio
(OR) 3.458, confidence interval (CI) 1.757, 6.806; P = 0.0003] and T allele (OR
1.729, CI 1.309, 2.284; P = 0.0001) of ESR1 PvuII single nucleotide polymorphism 
with migraine when compared with HC. Significant association was seen only in
female migraine patients at both genotype (P = 0.002; OR 3.834, CI 1.625, 9.043) 
and allele level (P = 0.002; OR 1.721, CI 1.228, 2.413). Moreover, higher risk
was limited to migraine with aura (MA) (in case of TT genotype, P = 0.002; OR
4.377, CI 1.703, 1.246; in case of T allele, P = 0.001; OR 1.888, CI 1.305,
2.735) rather than migraine without aura (MoA) (P-value of TT genotype = 0.003;
OR 3.082, CI 1.465, 6.483; P-value T allele = 0.002; OR 1.630, CI 1.188, 2.236). 
In case of a recessive model, risk was seen with migraine patients (P = 0.0003;
OR 2.514, CI 1.635, 3.867), MA (P = 0.0001; OR 3.583, CI 1.858, 6.909) and MoA
patients (P = 0.002; OR 2.125, CI 1.304, 3.464) when compared with HC. No risk
was observed when TTH patients were compared with HC. No significance of ESR 325 
G<U+2192>C polymorphism was seen in any of the models under study. Significant
differences in genotypic (P = 0.0001) and allelic frequency (P = 0.0002) were
seen in case of PROGINS polymorphism when migraine patients were compared with
HC, showing a protective effect (for A1A2 genotype, OR 0.292, CI 0.155, 0.549;
for A2 allele, OR 0.320, CI 0.174, 0.589). Moreover, significance was seen only
in case of female migraine patients at genotype (P = 0.002; OR 0.344, CI 0.176,
0.684) as well as allele levels (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004; OR 0.379, CI 0.198, 0.727) in case of
PROGINS polymorphism. ESR1 PvuII TT*ESR1 325 C<U+2192>G CG genotype, PROGINS A1A2*ESR1
325 C<U+2192>G CG genotype and ESR1 PvuII CT*PROGINS A1A2 interacted significantly, but 
significance was lost after Bonferroni correction. In conclusion, ESR1 PvuII
polymorphism is a significant risk factor for migraine particularly in women and 
MA patients, but ESR 325 C<U+2192>G polymorphism is not associated with migraine
susceptibility. PROGINS polymorphism seems to play a protective role in genetic
susceptibility to migraine in the North Indian population.

PMID: 19673915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Anadolu Kardiyol Derg. 2009 Aug;9(4):267-72.

Relationship between two estrogen receptor-alpha gene polymorphisms and
angiographic coronary artery disease.

Karadag B(1), Güven M, Hacioglu Y, Oz E, Batar B, Domaniç N, Ulutin T, Vural VA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University,
Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of estrogen receptor-alpha PvuII and
BtgI polymorphisms with angiographic presence and severity of coronary artery
disease (CAD).
METHODS: Our cross-sectional study included 140 patients with >or=50% coronary
stenoses (CAD group) and 47 patients with normal angiograms (CAD-free group)
(total n=187, age 59.6+/- 13.2 years; 66 women). PvuII and BtgI genotype and
allele distributions were determined by standard method of polymerase chain
reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism. The CAD subgroups by the
number of diseased vessels were also defined. Variable associations and group
differences were analyzed by independent t test, one-way ANOVA, Pearson's
Chi-square, Spearman's correlation tests and logistic regression analyses.
RESULTS: While there was no association between PvuII polymorphism and
angiographic CAD (p=0.384), BtgI polymorphism was more prevalent in CAD-free
group (23.4% vs. 10% (CAD group), OR=2.75, 95% CI=1.150 to 6.579, p=0.019). This 
difference was more pronounced in women (28.6% vs. 4.4%; OR=8.6; 95% CI=1.564 to 
47.303; p=0.005) compared to men (p=0.391). Logistic regression analysis
confirmed BtgI polymorphism as the most important predictor for a normal coronary
angiogram among parameters such as body mass index, diabetes and age (OR 8.13,
95% CI 1.257 to 52.627, p=0.028). However, no significant association between
BtgI polymorphism and the number of stenotic arteries was detected.
CONCLUSION: ESR1 PvuII polymorphism is not associated with angiographically
significant CAD. ESR1 BtgI polymorphism is strongly associated with the presence 
of normal coronary angiograms in women, which suggests protective effect. Further
confirmation of these findings is required.

PMID: 19666427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 5;4(8):e6523. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006523.

Genetic polymorphisms of estrogen receptors alpha and beta and the risk of
developing prostate cancer.

Chae YK(1), Huang HY, Strickland P, Hoffman SC, Helzlsouer K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein Medical Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; United States of America. youngkwang.chae@gmail.com

Estrogen may be involved in the development of prostate cancer. The association
between genetic polymorphisms of estrogen receptors alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) 
and prostate cancer risk was examined in a nested case-control study in
Washington County, Maryland. Incident prostate cancer cases (n = 269) were
matched to one or two controls (n = 440) by age, sex, race, and date of blood
donation. Associations between estrogen receptor genotypes or dietary intake and 
the development of prostate cancer were examined in conditional logistic
regression models. Results from this study showed that six single base-pair
polymorphisms (SNPs) of ESR1 (rs1801132, rs2077647, rs746432, rs2273206,
rs851982, rs2228480) and four SNPs of ESR2 (rs4986938, rs928554, rs8018687, rs
number not available for ESR2 5696 bp 3' of STP A>G) were not significantly
associated with prostate cancer risk, either by allelic or genotypic frequencies.
However, an interactive association with BMI was observed in the relationship
between prostate cancer risk and genotypes of ESR2 38 bp 3' of STP G>A
(rs4986938) (p = 0.031). An interaction between intake level of phytoestrogen and
genotypes of ESR1 Ex1-192G>C (rs746432) and between intake level of phytoestrogen
and genotypes of ESR1 Ex8+229G>A (rs2228480) and risk of prostate cancer was
observed (p = 0.0009 and p = 0.044, respectively). In conclusion, selected
genetic polymorphisms of ESR1 and ESR2, overall, were not associated with
prostate cancer risk. However, a variation in risk by BMI and phytoestrogen
intake was implicated.

PMCID: PMC2715882
PMID: 19654868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2009;2009:753683. doi: 10.1155/2009/753683. Epub 2009 Jul
14.

Genetic polymorphisms in the EGFR (R521K) and estrogen receptor (T594T) genes,
EGFR and ErbB-2 protein expression, and breast cancer risk in Tunisia.

Kallel I(1), Rebai M, Khabir A, Farid NR, Rebaï A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Biotechnology of Sfax, Tunisia.

We evaluated the association of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 142285G>A
(R521K) and estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) 2014G>A (T594T) single nucleotide
polymorphisms with breast cancer risk and prognosis in Tunisian patients. EGFR
142285G>A and ESR1 2014G>A were genotyped in a sample of 148 Tunisian breast
cancer patients and 303 controls using PCR-RFLP method. Immunohistochemitsry was 
used to evaluate the expression levels of EGFR, HER2, ESR1, progesterone receptor
and BCL2 in tumors. We found no evidence for an association between EGFR R521K
polymorphism and breast cancer risk. However, we found that the homozygous GG
(Arg) genotype was more prevalent in patients with lymph node metastasis (P =
.03) and high grade tumors (P = .011). The ESR1 2014G allele showed significant
association with breast cancer risk (P = .025). The GG genotype was associated
with HER2 overexpression and this association withstood univariate and
multivariate analyses (P = .009; P = .021, resp.). These data suggest that the
R521K might be a prognostic factor, because it correlates with both tumor grade
and nodule status. The higher expression of HER2 in ESR1 T594T GG patients
suggests the possibility that ESR1 gene polymorphisms accompanied by HER2
expression might influence the pathogenesis of breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC2711625
PMID: 19636371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Endocrinol. 2009 Oct;203(1):87-97. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0065. Epub 2009 Jul 27.

Regulation of GNRH production by estrogen and bone morphogenetic proteins in
GT1-7 hypothalamic cells.

Otani H(1), Otsuka F, Takeda M, Mukai T, Terasaka T, Miyoshi T, Inagaki K, Suzuki
J, Ogura T, Lawson MA, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho,
Kitaku, Okayama City 700-8558, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are important
regulators in the pituitary-gonadal endocrine axis. We here investigated the
effects of BMPs on GNRH production controlled by estrogen using murine GT1-7
hypothalamic neuron cells. GT1-7 cells expressed estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha; ESR1 as listed in MGI Database), ERbeta (ESR2 as listed in MGI
Database), BMP receptors, SMADs, and a binding protein follistatin. Treatment
with BMP2 and BMP4 had no effect on Gnrh mRNA expression; however, BMP6 and BMP7 
significantly increased Gnrh mRNA expression as well as GnRH production by GT1-7 
cells. Notably, the reduction of Gnrh expression caused by estradiol (E(2)) was
restored by cotreatment with BMP2 and BMP4, whereas it was not affected by BMP6
or BMP7. E(2) activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 and
stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK) signaling 
but did not activate p38-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling in
GT1-7 cells. Inhibition of ERK1/ERK2 reversed the inhibitory effect of estrogen
on Gnrh expression, whereas SAPK/JNK inhibition did not affect the E(2) actions. 
Expression levels of Eralpha and Erbeta were reduced by BMP2 and BMP4, but were
increased by BMP6 and BMP7. Treatment with an ER antagonist inhibited the E(2)
effects on Gnrh suppression including reduction of E(2)-induced ERK
phosphorylation, suggesting the involvement of genomic ER actions in Gnrh
suppression. BMP2 and BMP4 also suppressed estrogen-induced phosphorylation of
ERK1/ERK2 and SAPK/JNK signaling, suggesting that BMP2 and BMP4 downregulate
estrogen effects by attenuating ER-MAPK signaling. Considering that BMP6 and BMP7
increased the expression of alpha1E-subunit of R-type calcium channel (Cacna1e), 
which is critical for GNRH secretion, it is possible that BMP6 and BMP7 directly 
stimulate GNRH release by GT1-7 cells. Collectively, a newly uncovered
interaction of BMPs and ER may be involved in controlling hypothalamic GNRH
production and secretion via an autocrine/paracrine mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2768486
PMID: 19635757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(4):R51. doi: 10.1186/bcr2340. Epub 2009 Jul 27.

Sex steroid metabolism polymorphisms and mammographic density in pre- and early
perimenopausal women.

Crandall CJ(1), Sehl ME, Crawford SL, Gold EB, Habel LA, Butler LM, Sowers MR,
Greendale GA, Sinsheimer JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University
of California, Los Angeles, UCLA Medicine/GIM, 911 Broxton Ave, 1st floor, Los
Angeles, CA 90024, USA. ccrandall@mednet.ucla.edu

INTRODUCTION: We examined the association between mammographic density and
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes encoding CYP1A1, CYP1B1,
aromatase, 17beta-HSD, ESR1, and ESR2 in pre- and early perimenopausal white,
African-American, Chinese, and Japanese women.
METHODS: The Study of Women's Health Across the Nation is a longitudinal
community-based cohort study. We analyzed data from 451 pre- and early
perimenopausal participants of the ancillary SWAN Mammographic Density study for 
whom we had complete information regarding mammographic density, genotypes, and
covariates. With multivariate linear regression, we examined the relation between
percentage mammographic breast density (outcome) and each SNP (primary
predictor), adjusting for age, race/ethnicity, parity, cigarette smoking, and
body mass index (BMI).
RESULTS: After multivariate adjustment, the CYP1B1 rs162555 CC genotype was
associated with a 9.4% higher mammographic density than the TC/TT genotype (P =
0.04). The CYP19A1 rs936306 TT genotype was associated with 6.2% lower
mammographic density than the TC/CC genotype (P = 0.02). The positive association
between CYP1A1 rs2606345 and mammographic density was significantly stronger
among participants with BMI greater than 30 kg/m2 than among those with BMI less 
than 25 kg/m2 (Pinteraction = 0.05). Among white participants, the ESR1 rs2234693
CC genotype was associated with a 7.0% higher mammographic density than the CT/TT
genotype (P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: SNPs in certain genes encoding sex steroid metabolism enzymes and
ESRs were associated with mammographic density. Because the encoded enzymes and
ESR1 are expressed in breast tissue, these SNPs may influence breast cancer risk 
by altering mammographic density.

PMCID: PMC2750112
PMID: 19630952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(18):4949-58. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00383-09. Epub 2009 Jul 
20.

Repression of ESR1 through actions of estrogen receptor alpha and Sin3A at the
proximal promoter.

Ellison-Zelski SJ(1), Solodin NM, Alarid ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McArdle Laboratories for Cancer Research, University
of Wisconsin-Madison, 6151 Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research, Madison, WI
53706, USA.

Gene expression results from the coordinated actions of transcription factor
proteins and coregulators. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) is a
ligand-activated transcription factor that can both activate and repress the
expression of genes. Activation of transcription by estrogen-bound ERalpha has
been studied in detail, as has antagonist-induced repression, such as that which 
occurs by tamoxifen. How estrogen-bound ERalpha represses gene transcription
remains unclear. In this report, we identify a new mechanism of estrogen-induced 
transcriptional repression by using the ERalpha gene, ESR1. Upon estrogen
treatment, ERalpha is recruited to two sites on ESR1, one distal (ENH1) and the
other at the proximal (A) promoter. Coactivator proteins, namely, p300 and AIB1, 
are found at both ERalpha-binding sites. However, recruitment of the Sin3A
repressor, loss of RNA polymerase II, and changes in histone modifications occur 
only at the A promoter. Reduction of Sin3A expression by RNA interference
specifically inhibits estrogen-induced repression of ESR1. Furthermore, an
estrogen-responsive interaction between Sin3A and ERalpha is identified. These
data support a model of repression wherein actions of ERalpha and Sin3A at the
proximal promoter can overcome activating signals at distal or proximal sites and
ultimately decrease gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2738295
PMID: 19620290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Clin Chem. 2009 Sep;55(9):1719-27. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2008.122572. Epub 2009
Jul 17.

RNA extraction from archival formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue: a
comparison of manual, semiautomated, and fully automated purification methods.

Bohmann K(1), Hennig G, Rogel U, Poremba C, Mueller BM, Fritz P, Stoerkel S,
Schaefer KL.

Author information: 
(1)Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics Products, Molecular Research Germany, Cologne, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor material represents a
valuable resource for the analysis of RNA-based biomarkers, both in research
laboratories and in routine clinical testing. A robust and automated
RNA-extraction method with a high sample throughput is required.
METHODS: We evaluated extraction performance for 4 silica-based RNA-extraction
protocols: (a) a fully automated, bead-based RNA-isolation procedure; (b) its
manual counterpart; (c) a semiautomated bead-based extraction system; and (d) a
manual column-based extraction kit. RNA from 360 sections (90 sections per
extraction method) of 30 FFPE tumor blocks up to 20 years of age was purified and
analyzed by quantitative reverse-transcription PCR for ESR1 (estrogen receptor
1), PGR (progesterone receptor), ERBB2 [v-erb-b2 erythroblastic leukemia viral
oncogene homolog 2, neuro/glioblastoma derived oncogene homolog (avian)], and
RPL37A (ribosomal protein L37a).
RESULTS: The semiautomated protocol gave the best yield. The 3 bead-based methods
showed good across-method correlations in both yield and relative mRNA amounts (r
= 0.86-0.95 and 0.98, respectively). In contrast, correlations between any of the
bead-based methods and the manual column-based method were worse (r = 0.77-0.95
and 0.96, respectively). The fully automated method showed the lowest variation
from section to section (root mean square error, 0.32-0.35 Cq, where Cq is the
quantification cycle) and required the least hands-on time (1 h).
CONCLUSIONS: The fully automated RNA-purification method showed the best
reproducibility in gene expression analyses of neighboring sections of tissue
blocks between 3 and 20 years of age and required the least overall and hands-on 
times. This method appears well suited for high-throughput RNA analyses in both
routine clinical testing and translational research studies with archived FFPE
material.

PMID: 19617290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Dec;207(2):480-6. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.05.038. Epub 2009 Jun 18.

Qualitative assessment of previous evidence and an updated meta-analysis confirms
lack of association between the ESR1 rs2234693 (PvuII) variant and coronary heart
disease in men and women.

Lluís-Ganella C(1), Lucas G, Subirana I, Escurriol V, Tomás M, Sentí M, Sala J,
Marrugat J, Elosua R.

Author information: 
(1)Grup d'Epidemiologia i Genètica Cardiovascular (EGEC-ULEC), Institut Municipal
d'Investigació Mèdica (IMIM-Hospital del Mar), Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of mortality
worldwide. CHD clusters in families but this familial aggregation remains largely
unexplained. ESR1 is a candidate gene for CHD although recent meta-analyses of
the rs2234693 variant reported inconsistent evidence for association with
myocardial infarction (MI) in men. The objectives of this study were to perform a
qualitative and a quantitative assessment of all evidence to date regarding this 
association.
METHODS: We performed structured literature searches for studies addressing the
association between the ESR1 rs2234693 and CHD. We assessed the quality of these 
studies collectively and individually according to recently published guidelines 
on the reporting and interpretation of genetic association studies. We also
performed a meta-analysis of all studies to date, including a sample of MI cases 
and controls from our region.
RESULTS: The qualitative assessment indicated that many studies met a low
proportion of the criteria proposed by the current guidelines. No significant
association between ESR1 rs2234693 and MI was observed in our sample or in the
meta-analysis (16 studies; N approximately 32,000; OR approximately 1). Strong
between-study heterogeneity was largely explained by a quality score based on the
quality criteria. Studies that reported significant associations were generally
of poorer quality.
CONCLUSION: We confirm the lack of association between the ESR1 rs223469 and CHD,
and show that inconsistencies between previous studies is explained by
differences in their quality.

PMID: 19608186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Biol Reprod. 2009 Nov;81(5):956-65. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.077206. Epub 2009
Jul 15.

Aromatase promoter I.f is regulated by estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) in mouse
hypothalamic neuronal cell lines.

Yilmaz MB(1), Wolfe A, Cheng YH, Glidewell-Kenney C, Jameson JL, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Aromatase (CYP19A1) catalyzes the conversion of C(19) steroids to estrogens.
Aromatase and its product estradiol (E(2)) are crucial for the sexually dimorphic
development of the fetal brain and the regulation of gonadotropin secretion and
sexual interest in adults. The regulation of aromatase expression in the brain is
not well understood. The aromatase (Cyp19a1) gene is selectively expressed in
distinct neurons of the hypothalamus through a distal brain-specific promoter I.f
located approximately 36 kb upstream of the coding region. Here, we investigated 
a short feedback effect of E(2) on aromatase mRNA expression and enzyme activity 
using estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1; also known as ER alpha)-positive or
ESR1-negative mouse embryonic hypothalamic neuronal cell lines that express
aromatase via promoter I.f. Estradiol regulated aromatase mRNA expression and
enzyme activity in a time- and dose-dependent manner, whereas an E(2) antagonist 
reversed these effects. The nucleotide -200/-1 region of promoter I.f conferred
E(2) responsiveness. Two activator protein 1 (AP-1) elements in this region were 
essential for induction of promoter activity by E(2). ESR1 and JUN (c-Jun) bound 
to these AP-1 motifs in intact cells and under cell-free conditions. The addition
of an ESR1 mutant that interacts with JUN but not directly with DNA enhanced
E(2)-dependent promoter I.f activity. Independently, we demonstrated an
interaction between ESR1 and JUN in hypothalamic cells. Knockdown of ESR1
abolished E(2)-induced aromatase mRNA and enzyme activity. Taken together, E(2)
regulates Cyp19a1 expression via promoter I.f by enhanced binding of an ESR1/JUN 
complex to distinct AP-1 motifs in hypothalamic cells. We speculate that this
mechanism may, in part, regulate gonadotropin secretion and sexual activity.

PMID: 19605792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Nov;1791(11):1037-47. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.06.006. Epub 2009 Jul 6.

New insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying effects of estrogen on
cholesterol gallstone formation.

Wang HH(1), Liu M, Clegg DJ, Portincasa P, Wang DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Liver Center and Gastroenterology Division, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School and Harvard Digestive
Diseases Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Epidemiological and clinical studies have found that at all ages women are twice 
as likely as men to form cholesterol gallstones, and this gender difference
begins since puberty and continues through the childbearing years, which
highlight the importance of female sex hormones. Estrogen is a crucial hormone in
human physiology and regulates a multitude of biological processes. The actions
of estrogen have traditionally been ascribed to two closely related classical
nuclear hormone receptors, estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and ESR2. Recent studies
have revealed that the increased risk for cholesterol gallstones in women vs. men
is related to differences in how the liver metabolizes cholesterol in response to
estrogen. A large number of human and animal studies have proposed that estrogen 
increases the risk of developing cholesterol gallstones by increasing the hepatic
secretion of biliary cholesterol, which, in turn, leads to an increase in
cholesterol saturation of bile. Furthermore, it has been identified that hepatic 
ESR1, but not ESR2, plays a major role in cholesterol gallstone formation in mice
in response to high doses of 17beta-estradiol. The mechanisms mediating
estrogen's action have become more complicated with the recent identification of 
a novel estrogen receptor, G protein-coupled receptor 30 (GPR30), a member of the
seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. In this review, we
provide an overview of the evidence for the lithogenic actions of estrogen
through ESR1 and discuss the cellular and physiological actions of GPR30 in
estrogen-dependent processes and the relationship between GPR30 and classical
ESR1 on gallstone formation.

PMCID: PMC2756670
PMID: 19589396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Int Psychogeriatr. 2009 Oct;21(5):977-86. doi: 10.1017/S1041610209990068. Epub
2009 Jul 9.

Polymorphisms of the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene and the risk of
Alzheimer's disease in a southern Chinese community.

Ma SL(1), Tang NL, Tam CW, Lui VW, Lau ES, Zhang YP, Chiu HF, Lam LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
Hong Kong SAR, China.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease with a higher
prevalence in women. Expression of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene has been
identified throughout the brain. Owing to the putative neuroprotective effects of
estrogen, estrogen receptor gene is a potential candidate modulating the
development of AD. Preliminary associations between two polymorphisms of ESR1
(PvuII and XbaI) gene and AD have been reported.
METHODS: In this study, 16 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the ESR1
gene (including four commonly studied ESR1 SNPs and 12 other tagging SNPs
selected from the HapMap database) were investigated to further evaluate the
association between ESR1 polymorphisms and the risk of AD in the Chinese
population.
RESULTS: A total of 233 Chinese AD patients and 245 age-matched elderly control
subjects were recruited. Genetic associations were analyzed by chi-square test
and interaction effect was analysed by logistic regression analysis. Five SNPs
(clustered between intron 3 and intron 7) were associated with the risk of AD
(p-value ranges from 0.001 to 0.035); another two SNPs (located on exon 2 and
intron 2) were shown to modulate the age-at-onset (AAO) in AD (p-value = 0.036
and 0.011).
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 gene polymorphisms may be associated with the AAO in AD. The
present results provided information for possible associations between certain
polymorphisms of ESR1 gene and the risk of AD.

PMID: 19586561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Int J Mol Med. 2009 Aug;24(2):253-60.

Growth inhibition of estrogen receptor positive human breast cancer cells by
Taheebo from the inner bark of Tabebuia avellandae tree.

Mukherjee B(1), Telang N, Wong GY.

Author information: 
(1)Strang Cancer Prevention Center, New York, NY, USA.

Selective estrogen receptor (ER) modulators are used as a therapy for ER+
clinical breast cancer, but they exhibit adverse effects. Herbal medicines may
provide an alternative or complementary approach. Taheebo, extracted from the
inner bark of the Tabebuia avellandae tree found in the Brazilian Amazon,
exhibits selective anti-proliferative effects in carcinoma cell lines. The
present study identifies the mechanistic leads for the inhibitory effects of
Taheebo. Human breast carcinoma derived ER+MCF-7 cells were used as the model.
Aqueous extract of Taheebo was the test compound. Cell cycle analysis, clonogenic
assay, and global gene expression profiles were the quantitative parameters.
Taheebo treatment resulted in a dose/time-dependent growth inhibition (S phase
arrest, reduced clonogeneticity) and initiation of apoptosis (chromatin
condensation). A 6-h treatment with 1.5 mg/ml Taheebo modulated the gene
expression of G2 specific cyclin B1 (-2.0-fold); S phase specific PCNA
(-2.0-fold) and OKL38 (+11.0-fold); apoptosis specific GADD-45 family
(+1.9-5.4-fold), Caspases (+1.6-1.7-fold), BCL-2 family (-1.5-2.5-fold), estrogen
responsive ESR1 (-1.5-fold), and xeno-biotic metabolism specific CYP 1A1 (+19.8
fold) and CYP 1B1 (+7.9-fold). The anti-proliferative effects of Taheebo
correlate with down-regulated cell cycle regulatory and estrogen responsive
genes, and up-regulated apoptosis specific and xeno-biotic metabolism specific
genes. These data validate a rapid mechanistic approach to prioritize efficacious
herbal medicines, thereby complementing the existing endocrine therapy for breast
cancer.

PMID: 19578798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Oct 1;18(19):3749-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp302. Epub 2009 Jul 
2.

Quantitative trait loci predicting circulating sex steroid hormones in men from
the NCI-Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium (BPC3).

Ahn J(1), Schumacher FR, Berndt SI, Pfeiffer R, Albanes D, Andriole GL, Ardanaz
E, Boeing H, Bueno-de-Mesquita B, Chanock SJ, Clavel-Chapelon F, Diver WR,
Feigelson HS, Gaziano JM, Giovannucci E, Haiman CA, Henderson BE, Hoover RN,
Kolonel LN, Kraft P, Ma J, Le Marchand L, Overvad K, Palli D, Stattin P, Stampfer
M, Stram DO, Thomas G, Thun MJ, Travis RC, Trichopoulos D, Virtamo J, Weinstein
SJ, Yeager M, Kaaks R, Hunter DJ, Hayes RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Twin studies suggest a heritable component to circulating sex steroid hormones
and sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG). In the NCI-Breast and Prostate Cancer
Cohort Consortium, 874 SNPs in 37 candidate genes in the sex steroid hormone
pathway were examined in relation to circulating levels of SHBG (N = 4720),
testosterone (N = 4678), 3 alpha-androstanediol-glucuronide (N = 4767) and
17beta-estradiol (N = 2014) in Caucasian men. rs1799941 in SHBG is highly
significantly associated with circulating levels of SHBG (P = 4.52 x 10(-21)),
consistent with previous studies, and testosterone (P = 7.54 x 10(-15)), with
mean difference of 26.9 and 14.3%, respectively, comparing wild-type to
homozygous variant carriers. Further noteworthy novel findings were observed
between SNPs in ESR1 with testosterone levels (rs722208, mean difference = 8.8%, 
P = 7.37 x 10(-6)) and SRD5A2 with 3 alpha-androstanediol-glucuronide (rs2208532,
mean difference = 11.8%, P = 1.82 x 10(-6)). Genetic variation in genes in the
sex steroid hormone pathway is associated with differences in circulating SHBG
and sex steroid hormones.

PMCID: PMC2742399
PMID: 19574343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Pathol. 2009 Sep;219(1):131-40. doi: 10.1002/path.2581.

Genome-wide transcriptomic profiling of microdissected human breast tissue
reveals differential expression of KIT (c-Kit, CD117) and oestrogen
receptor-alpha (ERalpha) in response to therapeutic radiation.

Westbury CB(1), Reis-Filho JS, Dexter T, Mahler-Araujo B, Fenwick K, Iravani M,
Grigoriadis A, Parry S, Robertson D, Mackay A, Ashworth A, Yarnold JR, Isacke CM.

Author information: 
(1)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research,
London, UK.

The pathogenesis of late normal tissue fibrosis after high-dose ionizing
radiation involves multiple cell types and signalling pathways but is not well
understood. To identify the molecular changes occurring after radiotherapy,
paired normal tissue samples were collected from the non-irradiated breast and
from the treated breast of women who had undergone curative radiotherapy for
early breast cancer months or years previously. As radiation may induce distinct 
transcriptional changes in the different components of the breast, laser capture 
microdissection and gene expression microarray profiling were performed
separately for epithelial and stromal components and selected genes were
validated using immunohistochemistry. In the epithelial compartment, a reduction 
of KIT (c-Kit; CD117) and a reciprocal increase in ESR1 (oestrogen
receptor-alpha, ERalpha) mRNA and protein levels were seen in irradiated compared
to non-irradiated samples. In the stromal compartment, extracellular matrix genes
including FN1 (fibronectin 1) and CTGF (connective tissue growth factor; CCN2)
were increased. Further investigation revealed that c-Kit and ERalpha were
expressed in distinct subpopulations of luminal epithelial cells. Interlobular
c-Kit-positive mast cells were also increased in irradiated cases not showing
features of post-radiation atrophy. Pathway analysis revealed 'cancer,
reproductive system disease and tumour morphology' as the most significantly
enriched network in the epithelial compartment, whereas in the stromal component,
a significant enrichment for 'connective tissue disorders, dermatological
diseases and conditions, genetic disorder' and 'cancer, tumour morphology,
infection mechanism' networks was observed. These data identify previously
unreported changes in the epithelial compartment and show altered expression of
genes implicated in late normal tissue injury in the stromal compartment of
normal breast tissue. The findings are relevant to both fibrosis and atrophy
occurring after radiotherapy for early breast cancer.

PMID: 19562735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Int J Cancer. 2009 Dec 1;125(11):2687-96. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24678.

Common germline polymorphisms in COMT, CYP19A1, ESR1, PGR, SULT1E1 and STS and
survival after a diagnosis of breast cancer.

Udler MS(1), Azzato EM, Healey CS, Ahmed S, Pooley KA, Greenberg D, Shah M,
Teschendorff AE, Caldas C, Dunning AM, Ostrander EA, Caporaso NE, Easton D,
Pharoah PD.

Author information: 
(1)Strangeways Research Laboratory, Departments of Public Health and Primary Care
and Oncology, University of Cambridge, Worts Causeway, Cambridge CB1 8RN, United 
Kingdom.

Although preliminary evidence suggests that germline variation in genes involved 
in steroid hormone metabolism may alter breast cancer prognosis, this has not
been systematically evaluated. We examined associations between germline
polymorphisms in 6 genes involved in the steroid hormone metabolism and signaling
pathway (COMT, CYP19A1, ESR1, PGR, SULT1E1, STS) and survival among women with
breast cancer participating in SEARCH, a population-based case-control study.
Blood samples from up to 4,470 women were genotyped for 4 possible functional
SNPs in CYP19A1 and 106 SNPs tagging the common variation in the remainder of the
genes. The genotypes of each polymorphism were tested for association with
survival after breast cancer diagnosis using Cox regression analysis. Significant
evidence of an association was observed for a COMT polymorphism (rs4818 p =
0.016) under the codominant model. This SNP appeared to fit a dominant model
better (HR = 0.80 95% CI: 0.69-0.95, p = 0.009); however, the result was only
marginally significant after permutation analysis adjustment for multiple
hypothesis tests (p = 0.047). To further evaluate this finding, somatic
expression microarray data from 8 publicly available datasets were used to test
the association between survival and tumor COMT gene expression; no statistically
significant associations were observed. A correlated SNP in COMT, rs4860, has
recently been associated with breast cancer prognosis in Chinese women in a
dominant model. These results suggest that COMT rs4818, or a variant it tags, is 
associated with breast cancer prognosis. Further study of COMT and its putative
association with breast cancer prognosis is warranted.

PMID: 19551860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Physiol Genomics. 2009 Aug 7;38(3):261-80. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00069.2009. Epub 2009 Jun 23.

Stimulation of growth and changes in the hepatic transcriptome by
17beta-estradiol in the yellow perch (Perca flavescens).

Goetz FW(1), Rise ML, Rise M, Goetz GW, Binkowski F, Shepherd BS.

Author information: 
(1)Great Lakes WATER Institute, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, USA. rick@uwm.edu

The effects of dietary 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) on growth and liver
transcriptomics were investigated in the yellow perch (Perca flavescens). After a
3-mo treatment, E(2) significantly stimulated an increase in length and weight of
juvenile male and female perch relative to control animals. The increase was
significantly greater in females compared with males. Separate, unnormalized cDNA
libraries were constructed from equal quantities of RNA from 6 male and 6 female 
livers of E(2)-treated and control perch, and 3,546 and 3,719 expressed sequence 
tags (ESTs) were obtained, respectively. To characterize E(2)-regulated
transcripts, EST frequencies between libraries were calculated within contiguous 
sequences that were assembled from the combined ESTs of both libraries.
Frequencies were also determined in EST transcript groupings produced by aligning
all of the ESTs from both libraries at the nucleotide level. From these analyses,
there were 28 annotated transcripts that were regulated by 75% between libraries 
and for which there were at least 5 ESTs of the same transcript between
libraries. Regulation of a subset (14) of these transcripts was confirmed by
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (QPCR). Transcripts 
that were upregulated by E(2) included reproduction-related proteins, binding
proteins, and proteases and protease inhibitors. While not part of the transcript
frequency analysis, QPCR showed significant upregulation of estrogen receptor
esr1 and of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) in E(2) livers.
E(2)-downregulated transcripts represented a variety of functional categories
including components of the respiratory chain, lipid transport and metabolism,
glycolysis, amino acid and nitrogen metabolism, binding proteins, a hydrolytic
enzyme, and a transcriptional regulator. In perch it appears that exogenous
estrogen drastically shifts liver metabolism toward the production of
lipoproteins and carbohydrate binding proteins, and that the growth-promoting
action may involve an increase in hepatic IGF-I production.

PMID: 19549814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Int J Cancer. 2009 Oct 15;125(8):1985-91. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24431.

TGFbetaR2 aberrant methylation is a potential prognostic marker and therapeutic
target in multiple myeloma.

de Carvalho F(1), Colleoni GW, Almeida MS, Carvalho AL, Vettore AL.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Hematology and Hemotherapy, Universidade Federal de São Paulo,
UNIFESP/EPM, São Paulo, Brazil.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is an incurable hematological malignancy. Different studies
demonstrated the occurrence of genetic and epigenetic alterations in MM. The
aberrant methylation is one of the most frequent epigenetic alterations in human 
genome. This study evaluated the aberrant methylation status of 20 genes in 51 MM
samples by quantitative methylation-specific PCR (QMSP) and compared the
methylation profile with clinicopathological characteristics of the patients. The
QMSP analyses showed that PTGS2 (100.0%), SFN (100.0%), CDKN2B (90.2%), CDH1
(88.2%), ESR1 (72.5%), HIC1 (70.5%), CCND2 (62.7%), DCC (45.1%) and TGFbetaR2
(39.2%) are frequently hypermethylated in MM while aberrant methylation of
RARbeta (16.6%), MGMT (12.5%), AIM1 (12.5%), CDKN2A (8.3%), SOCS1 (8.3%), CCNA1
(8.3%) and THBS1 (4.1%) are rare events. There was no methylation of GSTP1,
MINT31, p14ARF and RB1 in the samples tested. Hypermethylation of ESR1 was
correlated positively with isotype IgA, while aberrant methylation of THBS1
correlated negatively with isotype IgG. Furthermore, hypermethylation of DCC and 
TGFbetaR2 were correlated with poor survival. The multivariate analysis showed
ISS and TGFbetaR2 hypermethylation strongly correlated with poor outcome. This
study represents the first quantitative evaluation of promoter methylation in MM 
and our data provide evidence that TGFbetaR2 hypermethylation, besides ISS, may
be useful as prognostic indicator in this disease.

PMID: 19548309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Biol Reprod. 2009 Oct;81(4):690-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.078261. Epub 2009 
Jun 17.

Neonatal bisphenol-a exposure alters rat reproductive development and ovarian
morphology without impairing activation of gonadotropin-releasing hormone
neurons.

Adewale HB(1), Jefferson WN, Newbold RR, Patisaul HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina, USA.

Developmental exposure to endocrine-disrupting compounds is hypothesized to
adversely affect female reproductive physiology by interfering with the
organization of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. Here, we compared the
effects of neonatal exposure to two environmentally relevant doses of the
plastics component bisphenol-A (BPA; 50 microg/kg and 50 mg/kg) with the ESR1
(formerly known as ERalpha)-selective agonist
4,4',4''-(4-propyl-[(1)H]pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl)trisphenol (PPT; 1 mg/kg) on the
development of the female rat hypothalamus and ovary. An oil vehicle and
estradiol benzoate (EB; 25 microg) were used as negative and positive controls.
Exposure to EB, PPT, or the low dose of BPA advanced pubertal onset. A total of
67% of females exposed to the high BPA dose were acyclic by 15 wk after vaginal
opening compared with 14% of those exposed to the low BPA dose, all of the EB-
and PPT-treated females, and none of the control animals. Ovaries from the
EB-treated females were undersized and showed no evidence of folliculogenesis,
whereas ovaries from the PPT-treated females were characterized by large
antral-like follicles, which did not appear to support ovulation. Severity of
deficits within the BPA-treated groups increased with dose and included large
antral-like follicles and lower numbers of corpora lutea. Sexual receptivity,
examined after ovariectomy and hormone replacement, was normal in all groups
except those neonatally exposed to EB. FOS induction in hypothalamic gonadotropic
(GnRH) neurons after hormone priming was impaired in the EB- and PPT-treated
groups but neither of the BPA-treated groups. Our data suggest that BPA disrupts 
ovarian development but not the ability of GnRH neurons to respond to
steroid-positive feedback.

PMCID: PMC2754884
PMID: 19535786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Asia Pac J Public Health. 2008 Oct;20 Suppl:173-9.

Comparative study of polymorphisms on genes associated with lifestyle related
diseases in Asian and Pacific populations.

Nakayama K(1), Lkhagvasuren M, Yanagisawa Y, Utsumi N, Kumada M, Gotoh T, Iwamoto
S, Kagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Center for Community Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, Japan.

An increase in prevalence of lifestyle related diseases becomes one of the main
threats to human health in Asia-Pacific regions. Especially Pacific countries
face the marked epidemic of obesity and related disorders. Understanding of the
genetic basis for these diseases is awaited. We investigated frequencies of 106
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes associated with lifestyle related
diseases in 1,878 individuals from five Asia-Pacific countries including Japan,
China, Mongolia, Thailand, and Palau. Population genetic analyses revealed that
disease susceptible variants of SNPs in TRIB3, PTGS2, ADIPOR1, DGAT1, UCP2,
FOXC2, and ESR1 were overrepresented in the Palau population in comparison with
the Asian populations. These gene variants likely contribute to the high
prevalence of obesity and related diseases in Pacific populations. The present
results would be helpful in coping with the lifestyle related diseases and may
provide a new insight into the human dispersal in Asia-Pacific regions.

PMID: 19533878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Sep;30(9):1581-90. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp132. Epub 2009 Jun
11.

Disruption of estrogen receptor signaling enhances intestinal neoplasia in
Apc(Min/+) mice.

Cleveland AG(1), Oikarinen SI, Bynoté KK, Marttinen M, Rafter JJ, Gustafsson JA, 
Roy SK, Pitot HC, Korach KS, Lubahn DB, Mutanen M, Gould KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.

Estrogen receptors (ERs) [ERalpha (Esr1) and ERbeta (Esr2)] are expressed in the 
human colon, but during the multistep process of colorectal carcinogenesis,
expression of both ERalpha and ERbeta is lost, suggesting that loss of ER
function might promote colorectal carcinogenesis. Through crosses between an
ERalpha knockout and Apc(Min) mouse strains, we demonstrate that ERalpha
deficiency is associated with a significant increase in intestinal tumor
multiplicity, size and burden in Apc(Min/+) mice. Within the normal intestinal
epithelium of Apc(Min/+) mice, ERalpha deficiency is associated with an
accumulation of nuclear beta-catenin, an indicator of activation of the
Wnt-beta-catenin-signaling pathway, which is known to play a critical role in
intestinal cancers. Consistent with the hypothesis that ERalpha deficiency is
associated with activation of Wnt-beta-catenin signaling, ERalpha deficiency in
the intestinal epithelium of Apc(Min/+) mice also correlated with increased
expression of Wnt-beta-catenin target genes. Through crosses between an ERbeta
knockout and Apc(Min) mouse strains, we observed some evidence that ERbeta
deficiency is associated with an increased incidence of colon tumors in
Apc(Min/+) mice. This effect of ERbeta deficiency does not involve modulation of 
Wnt-beta-catenin signaling. Our studies suggest that ERalpha and ERbeta signaling
modulate colorectal carcinogenesis, and ERalpha does so, at least in part, by
regulating the activity of the Wnt-beta-catenin pathway.

PMCID: PMC2736300
PMID: 19520794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2009;29(2):113-8. doi: 10.1080/10799890902845682.

Association of polymorphisms in estrogen and thyroid hormone receptors with
thyroid cancer risk.

Rebaï M(1), Kallel I, Charfeddine S, Hamza F, Guermazi F, Rebaï A.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Bioinformatics, Biostatistics and Signalling, Centre de Biotechnologie
de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.

The receptors for thyroid hormone (THR) and oestrogen (ESR) are prototypes of
nuclear transcription factors that regulate the expression of target genes.
Genetic alterations in the genes of these receptors were found to be involved in 
cancer development. In this study we investigated the association of one SNP
(rs2228480, T594T) and one microsatellite marker (D6S440) within the ESR1 gene
and a dinucleotide repeat (D17S2189) within the THRA gene, with thyroid cancer
risk. A case-control association study was conducted with 299 healthy individuals
and 106 patients with thyroid cancer. Genotypic and allelic frequencies for the
dinucleotide repeat in the ESR1 gene were similar between thyroid cancer patients
and controls. For the AC repeat in the THRA gene, a slightly significant
difference was found for the genotype 18/20 between the two groups (P = 0.034),
which suggests that alleles with less than 20 repeats might have a protective
effect in thyroid cancer risk. For the SNP T594T, the A allele was much more
prevalent in patients than in controls and was highly associated with the risk of
thyroid cancer (OR: 4,56; IC: 3.23-6.44; P < 10(-18)) and seems to have an
additive mode of action. In conclusion, our data suggest that the SNP T594T but
not the D6S440 and D17S189 is associated with thyroid cancer risk.

PMID: 19519176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2009 Dec;135(12):1675-84. doi:
10.1007/s00432-009-0614-4. Epub 2009 Jun 9.

RASSF1A, APC, ESR1, ABCB1 and HOXC9, but not p16INK4A, DAPK1, PTEN and MT1G genes
were frequently methylated in the stage I non-small cell lung cancer in China.

Lin Q(1), Geng J, Ma K, Yu J, Sun J, Shen Z, Bao G, Chen Y, Zhang H, He Y, Luo X,
Feng X, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)The First Hospital Affiliated to Suzhou University,215006 Suzhou, Jiangsu,
China.

Erratum in
    J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010 Jan;136(1):171.

PURPOSE: To identify the DNA methylation biomarkers for the detection of the
stage I non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The methylated state of p16INK4A, ESR1, HOX9, RASSF1A,
DAPK1, PTEN, ABCB1, MGMT, APC and MT1G genes that have been reported frequently
methylated in lung cancer was determined using methylation-specific PCR in four
lung cancer cell lines, 124 cancer tissues of the stage I NSCLC and 26
non-cancerous disease tissues.
RESULT: The RASSF1A (53/124, 42.74%), APC (49/123, 39.52%), ESR1 (37/124,
29.84%), ABCB1 (31/124, 24.19%, MT1G (25/124, 20.16%) and HOXC9 (17/124, 13.71%) 
genes were more frequently methylated in the lung tissue from the stage I NSCLC
than the non-cancerous lesion patients (2/26, 7.69%, P < 0.01; 2/26, 7.69%, P <
0.01; 2/26, 7.69%, P < 0.05; 1/26, 3.85% P < 0.01; 0/26 0%, P value: <0.01; 0/26,
0%, P < 0.05, respectively). p16INK4A was methylated in 28/124 (22.56%) of cancer
tissues and 2/26 (7.69%) of non-cancerous tissues (P value >0.05). No significant
association between the methylated state of the genes and the smoking, age or the
pathologic types (squamous carcinoma, adenoma and the mixed types) was found.
However, p16INK4A methylation was more frequently detected in the male (23/80,
28.75%) than the female (5/44, 11.36%, P > 0.05) patients. MGMT was barely
methylated: 1/67, 1.49%), while DAPK1 and PTEN were not at all methylated in the 
cancer groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Methylation analysis in tissue of RASSF1A, APC, ESR1, ABCB1 and
HOXC9 genes confirmed 79.8% of the existing diagnosis for the stage I NSCLC at
specificity: 73.1%. The insufficiency of predicting disease onset in China, using
the previously recommended targets (MGMT, DAPK1 and PTEN) in the United States
reflects a potential disease disparity between these two populations.
Alternatively, methylated state of this set of genes may be more specific to the 
late rather than the early stage of NSCLC.

PMID: 19506903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Jun;18(6):1869-80. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0076.

Single and multigenic analysis of the association between variants in 12 steroid 
hormone metabolism genes and risk of prostate cancer.

Beuten J(1), Gelfond JA, Franke JL, Weldon KS, Crandall AC, Johnson-Pais TL,
Thompson IM, Leach RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, The University of Texas Health 
Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78229-3900, USA.

To estimate the prostate cancer risk conferred by individual single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), SNP-SNP interactions, and/or cumulative SNP effects, we
evaluated the association between prostate cancer risk and the genetic variants
of 12 key genes within the steroid hormone pathway (CYP17, HSD17B3, ESR1, SRD5A2,
HSD3B1, HSD3B2, CYP19, CYP1A1, CYP1B1, CYP3A4, CYP27B1, and CYP24A1). A total of 
116 tagged SNPs covering the group of genes were analyzed in 2,452 samples (886
cases and 1,566 controls) in three ethnic/racial groups. Several SNPs within
CYP19 were significantly associated with prostate cancer in all three ethnicities
(P = 0.001-0.009). Genetic variants within HSD3B2 and CYP24A1 conferred increased
risk of prostate cancer in non-Hispanic or Hispanic Caucasians. A significant
gene-dosage effect for increasing numbers of potential high-risk genotypes was
found in non-Hispanic and Hispanic Caucasians. Higher-order interactions showed a
seven-SNP interaction involving HSD17B3, CYP19, and CYP24A1 in Hispanic
Caucasians (P = 0.001). In African Americans, a 10-locus model, with SNPs located
within SRD5A2, HSD17B3, CYP17, CYP27B1, CYP19, and CYP24A1, showed a significant 
interaction (P = 0.014). In non-Hispanic Caucasians, an interaction of four SNPs 
in HSD3B2, HSD17B3, and CYP19 was found (P < 0.001). These data are consistent
with a polygenic model of prostate cancer, indicating that multiple interacting
genes of the steroid hormone pathway confer increased risk of prostate cancer.

PMID: 19505920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Aug;90(2):255-62. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2009.25914. Epub 2009
Jun 2.

Severe obesity is associated with novel single nucleotide polymorphisms of the
ESR1 and PPARgamma locus in Han Chinese.

Chen HH(1), Lee WJ, Fann CS, Bouchard C, Pan WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, Chang Jung Christian University, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: A large number of potential obesity loci have been reported. At least
18 genes have been replicated in a minimum of 5 studies on obesity-related
phenotypes. Fourteen additional genes have been associated with obesity in
Asians.
OBJECTIVES: Our objectives were to examine how many common variants of these
candidate genes are associated with severe obesity in Han Chinese and how they
are combined to exert their effects.
DESIGN: In total, 304 severely obese patients [body mass index (BMI; in kg/m(2)) 
> or =39] and 304 control subjects (BMI < or = 24) participated in a 2-staged
association study. Subsequently, 220 additional severely obese patients (BMI > or
= 35) and 338 controls (BMI < or = 24) were recruited to replicate the results.
All of the controls were age-, sex-, education- and residence-matched. Finally, a
pooled analysis was carried out based on all 514 cases and 606 controls with
complete information.
RESULTS: The first-stage association analysis in 94 cases and 94 controls found
18 potentially associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (P = 0.01-0.1). 
The significance of 3 novel common SNPs, 1 on ESR1 and 2 on PPARgamma, were
confirmed in the second stage and replicated further with odds ratios ranging
from 1.89 to 2.24. The combined effect of these 3 genes was stronger (odds ratio:
5.27; 95% CI: 2.25, 12.32) than that from any individual gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Severe obesity in Han Chinese was associated with 3 novel common
SNPs for ESR1 and PPARgamma. These 2 genes collectively result in a >5-fold risk 
of severe obesity. This information may contribute to the assessment of risk of
severe obesity.

PMID: 19491387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2010 Feb;72(2):169-75. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2009.03644.x. Epub 2009 May 29.

Association of polymorphisms in genes involved in lipoprotein metabolism with
plasma concentrations of remnant lipoproteins and HDL subpopulations before and
after hormone therapy in postmenopausal women.

Lamon-Fava S(1), Asztalos BF, Howard TD, Reboussin DM, Horvath KV, Schaefer EJ,
Herrington DM.

Author information: 
(1)Lipid Metabolism Laboratory, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center
on Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

OBJECTIVE: A high degree of inter-individual variability in plasma lipid level
response to hormone therapy (HT) has been reported. Variations in the oestrogen
receptor alpha gene (ESR1) and in genes involved in lipid metabolism may explain 
some of the variability in response to HT. Subjects Postmenopausal Caucasian
women (n = 208) participating in a placebo-controlled randomized trial of 3.2
years of hormone therapy (HT).
METHODS: Plasma triglyceride (TG), remnant lipoprotein cholesterol (RLP-C), and
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels and HDL subpopulations were
assessed at baseline and at follow up. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
ESR1 and in the ATP binding cassette A1 (ABCA1), cholesteryl ester transfer
protein (CETP), hepatic lipase (LIPC), lipoprotein lipase (LPL), and scavenger
receptor class B type I (SRB1) genes were assessed for their association with
baseline plasma levels and HT-related changes in levels of RLP-C and HDL
subpopulations.
RESULTS: Carriers of the ESR1 PvuII or IVS1-1505 variants had lower plasma TG
concentrations and higher plasma HDL-C and alpha-1 and prealpha-1 HDL particle
levels at baseline and showed greater increases in HDL-C, apo A-I and alpha-1
particle levels after HT than wild-type carriers. Carriers of the N291S and D9N
variants in the LPL gene had significantly higher remnant lipoproteins and lower 
alpha-2 HDL particle levels at baseline. The CETP TaqIB SNP was a significant
determinant of baseline plasma HDL-C and HDL subpopulation profile.
CONCLUSIONS: Single nucleotide polymorphisms in ESR1, CETP and LPL had
significant effects on baseline plasma levels of TG-rich and HDL subpopulations. 
With the exception of ESR1 SNPs, variation in genes involved in lipid metabolism 
has a very modest effect on lipoprotein response to HT.

PMCID: PMC2866027
PMID: 19489872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2009 Jun;13(3):339-42. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2008.0129.

Estrogen receptor beta gene variant is associated with vascular dementia in
elderly women.

Dresner-Pollak R(1), Kinnar T, Friedlander Y, Sharon N, Rosenmann H, Pollak A.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Service, Department of Medicine, Hadassah-Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. rivkap@hadassah.org.il

OBJECTIVE: Alzheimer's disease (AD) and vascular dementia (VaD) are the main
causes of dementia. Postmenopausal estrogen deficiency was suggested as a
contributor to cognitive decline; however, replacement therapy failed to prove
beneficial in its prevention or therapy. Sequence variants in the estrogen
receptor alpha gene (ESR1) and beta gene (ESR2) may alter the effects of
estrogen.
METHODS: This is a case-control association study of sporadic AD, VaD, and
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in ESR1 (rs2234693 and rs9340799), the TA
dinucleotide repeat in the ESR1 promoter, and the rs4986938 single-nucleotide
polymorphism in ESR2. Two hundred forty-six women (118 AD, age 83 +/- 7; 60 VaD, 
age 82 +/- 6; and 68 cognitively intact, age 81 +/- 7) residing in nursing homes 
were studied. The association of genotypes and AD or VaD was determined by
logistic regression analysis adjusted for age and ethnic origin.
RESULTS: An association of VaD and ESR2 rs4986938 was found. Carriers of each A
allele had a 1.7 increased risk compared to carriers of the G allele (odds ratio 
1.71, 95% confidence interval 1-2.95). The ApoE epsilon 4 allele was associated
with AD (odds ratio 3.35, confidence interval 1.44-7.82), but not with VaD. No
association of AD or VaD with ESR1 genotypes or haplotypes was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: The ESR2 rs4986938 polymorphism is associated with susceptibility
for VaD in elderly Jewish women. These results need to be confirmed in replicate 
studies in other populations.

PMID: 19473078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. PLoS One. 2009 May 20;4(5):e5624. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005624.

Characterization of a novel small molecule subtype specific estrogen-related
receptor alpha antagonist in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Chisamore MJ(1), Cunningham ME, Flores O, Wilkinson HA, Chen JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, Merck Research Laboratories, West
Point, Pennsylvania, USA. michael_chisamore@merck.com

BACKGROUND: The orphan nuclear receptor estrogen-related receptor alpha
(ERRalpha) is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily. It was identified
through a search for genes encoding proteins related to estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha). An endogenous ligand has not been found. Novel ERRalpha antagonists
that are highly specific for binding to the ligand binding domain (LBD) of
ERRalpha have been recently reported. Research suggests that ERRalpha may be a
novel drug target to treat breast cancer and/or metabolic disorders and this has 
led to an effort to characterize the mechanisms of action of
N-[(2Z)-3-(4,5-dihydro-1,3-thiazol-2-yl)-1,3-thiazolidin-2-yl idene]-5H
dibenzo[a,d][7]annulen-5-amine, a novel ERRalpha specific antagonist.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We demonstrate this ERRalpha ligand inhibits
ERRalpha transcriptional activity in MCF-7 cells by luciferase assay but does not
affect mRNA levels measured by real-time RT-PCR. Also, ERalpha (ESR1) mRNA levels
were not affected upon treatment with the ERRalpha antagonist, but other ERRalpha
(ESRRA) target genes such as pS2 (TFF1), osteopontin (SPP1), and aromatase
(CYP19A1) mRNA levels decreased. In vitro, the ERRalpha antagonist prevents the
constitutive interaction between ERRalpha and nuclear receptor coactivators.
Furthermore, we use Western blots to demonstrate ERRalpha protein degradation via
the ubiquitin proteasome pathway is increased by the ERRalpha-subtype specific
antagonist. We demonstrate by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) that the
interaction between ACADM, ESRRA, and TFF1 endogenous gene promoters and ERRalpha
protein is decreased when cells are treated with the ligand. Knocking-down
ERRalpha (shRNA) led to similar genomic effects seen when MCF-7 cells were
treated with our ERRalpha antagonist.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We report the mechanism of action of a novel ERRalpha
specific antagonist that inhibits transcriptional activity of ERRalpha, disrupts 
the constitutive interaction between ERRalpha and nuclear coactivators, and
induces proteasome-dependent ERRalpha protein degradation. Additionally, we
confirmed that knocking-down ERRalpha lead to similar genomic effects
demonstrated in vitro when treated with the ERRalpha specific antagonist.

PMCID: PMC2680043
PMID: 19462000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Transl Res. 2009 Jun;153(6):288-95. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2009.02.006. Epub 2009
Mar 14.

Lipid profile and inflammatory markers associated with estrogen receptor alpha
PvuII and XbaI gene polymorphisms.

Boroumand M(1), Ghaedi M, Mohammadtaghvaei N, Pourgholi L, Anvari MS, Davoodi G, 
Amirzadegan A, Saadat S, Sheikhfathollahi M, Goodarzynejad H.

Author information: 
(1)Tehran Heart Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
maboroumand@yahoo.com

Estrogen is established to influence lipoprotein metabolism and inflammatory
markers. Alternations in estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) expression and function
may affect the role of estrogen in this regard. The aim of this study was to
determine whether ESR1 PvuII and XbaI gene polymorphisms have effects on
lipoprotein (a) as well as inflammatory variables in an Iranian population. Three
hundred and ninety seven consecutive participants (228 men, 57.4%) who were
admitted at our center for elective coronary angiography because of symptoms
related to coronary artery disease (CAD) were enrolled in our study. Total
cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol, and triglyceride levels 
were determined by standard methods using commercial kits. Low-density
lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol was calculated according to the Friedewald formula.
The lipoprotein (a) levels were measured by ELISA method using Biopool kit, and
the CRP concentrations were determined by Latex Immunoturbidometry. The presence 
of PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms within the ESR gene were analyzed using
polymerase chain reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism
(PCR-RFLP). The frequency of homozygous and heterozygous were 25.9% and 50.1%,
for PvuII genotypes, and the frequency was 23.7% and 48.6%, for XbaI genotypes,
respectively. After adjusting for CAD and age, no impacts of ESR1 PvuII and XbaI 
polymorphisms were found on lipid profile, lipoprotein (a) level, and
quantitative CRP either in total population or in subgroups stratified by gender.
In conclusion, our data demonstrate that ESR1 PvuII and XbaI gene polymorphisms
did not seem to have an effect on lipoprotein metabolism or on inflammatory
variables such as CRP.

PMID: 19446283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Biol Reprod. 2009 Sep;81(3):488-96. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.075259. Epub 2009
May 13.

Impaired estrogen feedback and infertility in female mice with pituitary-specific
deletion of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1).

Singh SP(1), Wolfe A, Ng Y, DiVall SA, Buggs C, Levine JE, Wondisford FE,
Radovick S.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

Mice lacking estrogen receptor alpha in the pituitary gonadotroph (PitEsr1KO)
were generated to determine the physiologic role of pituitary estrogen signaling 
in the reproductive axis. PitEsr1KO female mice are subfertile or infertile and
have elevated levels of serum luteinizing hormone (LH) and LH beta subunit gene
expression, reflecting a lack of estrogen negative feedback effect on the
gonadotroph. While serum LH values are elevated in PitEsr1KO mice, the degree of 
elevation is much less than that observed in ESR1-null mice, indicating that the 
hypothalamus must also have an important role in estrogen negative feedback.
PitEsr1KO mice also demonstrate a defect in estrogen positive feedback, as surge 
LH values and estrous cyclicity are absent in these mice. Although sex steroid
feedback in the reproductive axis is thought to involve discrete anatomic regions
that mediate either a positive or negative estrogen effect, PitEsr1KO mice
demonstrate novel evidence that localizes both estrogen positive feedback and
estrogen negative feedback to the gonadotroph, which suggests that they may be
mechanistically related.

PMCID: PMC2731984
PMID: 19439729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. BJOG. 2009 Jul;116(8):1053-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2009.02185.x. Epub 2009
May 11.

Estrogen receptor polymorphisms and the risk of endometrial cancer.

Ashton KA(1), Proietto A, Otton G, Symonds I, McEvoy M, Attia J, Gilbert M,
Hamann U, Scott RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Medical Genetics, School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of
Health, University of Newcastle; and the Hunter Medical Research Institute,
Newcastle, NSW, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: There is evidence that estrogens and some of their metabolites are
involved in endometrial cancer pathogenesis. As estrogens mediate their effects
via the estrogen receptors, ESR1 and ESR2, the objective of this investigation
was to determine whether six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these two 
genes were over-represented in a population of endometrial cancer patients
compared with a healthy matched control population, thereby associating
differences in these genes with endometrial cancer.
DESIGN: The study is a case-control investigation large enough to detect a
two-fold increased risk, assuming a dominant genetic model, with P = 0.05 and 80%
power.
SETTING: The study and control populations were all from the Hunter-New England
region of New South Wales, Australia collected between the years 1992 and 2005.
POPULATION: The study consisted of 191 endometrial cancer patients and 291
healthy controls matched for gender and age.
METHODS: Two SNPs in ESR1 and four SNPs in ESR2 were genotyped using PCR-based
restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and real-time PCR. Odds ratios 
were calculated using unconditional logistic regression and SIMHAP was used for
haplotype analysis, adjusting for potential endometrial cancer risk factors.
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis, Cox regression and t tests were used to examine
the patient's age of diagnosis of endometrial cancer and genotype.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Over-representation of ESR1 and ESR2 polymorphisms in the 
endometrial cancer population compared with the control population indicates an
involvement in the development and/or progression of disease.
RESULTS: Two ESR1 (rs2234693 and rs9340799) and two ESR2 (rs1255998 and rs944050)
polymorphisms were associated with an increased risk of endometrial cancer.
Following adjustment for risk factors, the association with the ESR1 and ESR2
polymorphisms (rs2234693, rs1255998 and rs944050) remained highly significant.
Haplotype analysis revealed that carriers of the ESR1 haplotype (variant alleles;
rs2234693 and rs9340799) and the ESR2 haplotype (variant allele; rs1255998 and
wild-type alleles; rs944050, rs4986938 and rs1256049) were at an increased risk
(OR 1.862, P = 0.013 and OR 1.918, P = 0.046 respectively). This risk was even
greater in women carrying both risk haplotypes (OR 5.041, P = 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the ESR1 (rs2234693 and rs9340799) and the
ESR2 (rs1255998 and rs944050) polymorphisms may be associated with an increased
risk of developing endometrial cancer.

PMID: 19438492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jul;29(14):3832-44. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00032-09. Epub 2009 May 
11.

RelB NF-kappaB represses estrogen receptor alpha expression via induction of the 
zinc finger protein Blimp1.

Wang X(1), Belguise K, O'Neill CF, Sánchez-Morgan N, Romagnoli M, Eddy SF, Mineva
ND, Yu Z, Min C, Trinkaus-Randall V, Chalbos D, Sonenshein GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry K615, Boston University School of Medicine, 72 E.
Concord Street, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Aberrant constitutive expression of NF-kappaB subunits, reported in more than 90%
of breast cancers and multiple other malignancies, plays pivotal roles in
tumorigenesis. Higher RelB subunit expression was demonstrated in estrogen
receptor alpha (ERalpha)-negative breast cancers versus ERalpha-positive ones,
due in part to repression of RelB synthesis by ERalpha signaling. Notably, RelB
promoted a more invasive phenotype in ERalpha-negative cancers via induction of
the BCL2 gene. We report here that RelB reciprocally inhibits ERalpha synthesis
in breast cancer cells, which contributes to a more migratory phenotype.
Specifically, RelB is shown for the first time to induce expression of the zinc
finger repressor protein Blimp1 (B-lymphocyte-induced maturation protein), the
critical mediator of B- and T-cell development, which is transcribed from the
PRDM1 gene. Blimp1 protein repressed ERalpha (ESR1) gene transcription.
Commensurately higher Blimp1/PRDM1 expression was detected in ERalpha-negative
breast cancer cells and primary breast tumors. Induction of PRDM1 gene expression
was mediated by interaction of Bcl-2, localized in the mitochondria, with Ras.
Thus, the induction of Blimp1 represents a novel mechanism whereby the RelB
NF-kappaB subunit mediates repression, specifically of ERalpha, thereby promoting
a more migratory phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2704748
PMID: 19433448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Endocrinology. 2009 Aug;150(8):3855-62. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1774. Epub 2009 May 
7.

Theca-specific estrogen receptor-alpha knockout mice lose fertility prematurely.

Lee S(1), Kang DW, Hudgins-Spivey S, Krust A, Lee EY, Koo Y, Cheon Y, Gye MC,
Chambon P, Ko C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Sciences, Department of Clinical Sciences, University
of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Estrogen receptor-alpha (Esr1) mediates estrogen action in regulating at all
levels of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis. Whereas the importance of Esr1
in hypothalamus and pituitary has been demonstrated by loss of fertility in the
neuron- and pituitary-specific Esr1 knockout mice, whether Esr1 plays a critical 
role in the ovary remains to be determined. In the ovary, Esr1 is mainly
expressed in the theca/interstitial cells and germinal epithelium and thus is
believed to mediate estrogen action in these cells. In this study, we assessed
the importance of Esr1 in the ovarian theca cells in regulating female
reproduction. The Cre-LoxP approach was used to selectively delete the Esr1 gene 
in the theca cells, and the reproductive consequence of the deletion was
measured. Adolescent theca-specific Esr1 knockout (thEsr1KO) mice (<4 months of
age) are fertile and cycling. However, they begin to display an erratic pattern
of estrous cycles and become infertile before they reach the age of 6 months. The
ovaries of thEsr1KOmice (>or=4 months) have fewer corpora lutea but more antral
follicles than the age-matching wild-type mice. The numbers of
17-hydroxylase-expressing cells are largely increased in the interstitium of the 
thEsr1KO mouse ovary. Interestingly, whereas basal levels of serum testosterone
and FSH were mildly elevated, LH level was either markedly lower or undetectable 
in the thEsr1KO mice. When superstimulated by exogenous gonadotropins, thEsr1KO
mice released significantly fewer oocytes that wild-type littermates and
developed multiple hemorrhagic cysts. Taken together, this study demonstrates
that theca Esr1 plays a critical role in regulating female reproduction.

PMCID: PMC2718777
PMID: 19423761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Biol Reprod. 2009 Aug;81(2):378-87. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.076117. Epub 2009
May 6.

Estrogen rapidly activates the PI3K/AKT pathway and hypoxia-inducible factor 1
and induces vascular endothelial growth factor A expression in luminal epithelial
cells of the rat uterus.

Kazi AA(1), Molitoris KH, Koos RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

We have previously shown that 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) increases vascular
endothelial growth factor A (Vegfa) gene expression in the rat uterus, resulting 
in increased microvascular permeability, and that this involves the simultaneous 
recruitment of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1) and estrogen receptor alpha
(ESR1) to the Vegfa gene promoter. Both events require the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (AKT) pathway. However, those studies were
carried out using whole uterine tissue, and while most evidence indicates that
the likely site of E(2)-induced Vegfa expression is luminal epithelial (LE)
cells, other studies have identified stromal cells as the site of that
expression. To address this question, the pathway regulating Vegfa expression was
reexamined using LE cells rapidly isolated after E(2) treatment. In addition, we 
further characterized the nature of the receptor through which E(2) triggers the 
signaling events that lead to Vegfa expression using the specific ESR1 antagonist
ICI 182,780. In agreement with previous results in the whole uterus, E(2)
stimulated Vegfa mRNA expression in LE cells, peaking at 1 h (4- to 14-fold) and 
returning to basal levels by 4 h. Treatment with E(2) also increased
phosphorylation of AKT in LE cells, as well as of the downstream mediators FRAP1 
(mTOR), GSK3B, and MDM2. The alpha subunit of HIF1 (HIF1A) was present in LE
cells before E(2) treatment, was unchanged 1 h after E(2), but was >2-fold higher
by 4 h. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that HIF1A was recruited to
the Vegfa promoter by 1 h and was absent again by 4 h. The E(2) activation of the
PI3K/AKT pathway, HIF1A recruitment to the Vegfa promoter, and Vegfa expression
were all blocked by ICI 182,780. In summary, the rapid E(2)-induced signaling
events that lead to the expression of Vegfa observed previously using the whole
uterus occur in LE cells and appear to be initiated via a membrane form of ESR1.

PMCID: PMC2849827
PMID: 19420388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Int J Cancer. 2009 Aug 15;125(4):837-43. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24434.

Genetic polymorphisms of estrogen metabolizing enzyme and breast cancer risk in
Thai women.

Sangrajrang S(1), Sato Y, Sakamoto H, Ohnami S, Laird NM, Khuhaprema T, Brennan
P, Boffetta P, Yoshida T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, National Cancer Institute, Ratchathewi, Bangkok, Thailand.

Estrogen and its metabolites are believed to play important roles in breast
cancer, and its determinants include both genetic and lifestyle factors. The
objective of the study is to investigate the association of breast cancer risk in
Thailand with genetic polymorphisms in several genes involved in estrogen
synthesis and metabolism. Five hundred and seventy patients with
histopathologically confirmed breast cancer and 497 controls were included in the
present study. Forty single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CYP1A1,
CYP1A2, CYP1B1, CYP17, CYP19, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, AhR, ESR1, PGR, ERRG, COMT,
HSD17B1, HSD17B2, EPHX1 and NQO1 genes were genotyped. Association of genotypes
with breast cancer risk was evaluated using multivariate logistic regression,
which suggested an altered risk for the following SNPs [gene, odds ratio (OR) and
95% confidence interval are shown]: heterozygote carriers of rs4917623 [CYP2C19, 
OR = 1.38 (1.04-1.84)], rs2066853 [AhR, OR = 1.34 (1.02-1.76)] and rs1857407
[ERRG, (OR = 0.72 (0.55-0.96)]; homozygote carriers of rs762551 [CYP1A2, OR =
2.75 (1.47-5.14)], rs4917623 [CYP2C19, OR = 1.48 (1.00-2.19) and rs945453 [ERRG, 
OR = 1.66 (1.04-2.65)]. In addition, a stratified analysis by menopausal status
indicated that the association of the CYP1A2 (rs762551) and CYP17 (rs743572)
polymorphisms with breast cancer risk were mainly evident in premenopausal, while
ERRG (rs1857407) was significant in postmenopausal women. These findings suggest 
that CYP1A2, CYP2C19, AhR, ERRG and CYP17 polymorphisms may play an important
role in estrogen metabolism and modify individual susceptibility to breast cancer
in Thai women.

PMID: 19415745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Obes Rev. 2009 Jul;10(4):383-92. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2009.00595.x. Epub 2009
Apr 21.

Individuality and epigenetics in obesity.

Campión J(1), Milagro FI, Martínez JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Sciences, Physiology and Toxicology, University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain.

Excessive weight gain arises from the interactions among environmental factors,
genetic predisposition and the individual behavior. However, it is becoming
evident that interindividual differences in obesity susceptibility depend also on
epigenetic factors. Epigenetics studies the heritable changes in gene expression 
that do not involve changes to the underlying DNA sequence. These processes
include DNA methylation, covalent histone modifications, chromatin folding and,
more recently described, the regulatory action of miRNAs and polycomb group
complexes. In this review, we focus on experimental evidences concerning dietary 
factors influencing obesity development by epigenetic mechanisms, reporting
treatment doses and durations. Moreover, we present a bioinformatic analysis of
promoter regions for the search of future epigenetic biomarkers of obesity,
including methylation pattern analyses of several obesity-related genes
(epiobesigenes), such as FGF2, PTEN, CDKN1A and ESR1, implicated in adipogenesis,
SOCS1/SOCS3, in inflammation, and COX7A1 LPL, CAV1, and IGFBP3, in intermediate
metabolism and insulin signalling. The identification of those individuals that
at an early age could present changes in the methylation profiles of specific
genes could help to predict their susceptibility to later develop obesity, which 
may allow to prevent and follow-up its progress, as well as to research and
develop newer therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 19413700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(2):R23. doi: 10.1186/bcr2249. Epub 2009 Apr 30.

Association of GATA3, P53, Ki67 status and vascular peritumoral invasion are
strongly prognostic in luminal breast cancer.

Jacquemier J(1), Charafe-Jauffret E, Monville F, Esterni B, Extra JM,
Houvenaeghel G, Xerri L, Bertucci F, Birnbaum D.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Oncologie Moléculaire Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de
Marseille, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, UMR891 Inserm, IFR137, 232 Bd sainte
Marguerite Marseille, France. jacquemierj@marseille.fnclcc.fr

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancers are traditionally divided into hormone-receptor
positive and negative cases. This classification helps to guide patient
management. However, a subgroup of hormone-receptor positive patients relapse
irrespective of hormonal therapy. Gene expression profiling has classified breast
tumours into five major subtypes with significant different outcome. The two
luminal subtypes, A and B, show high expression of ESR1, GATA3 and FOXA1 genes.
Prognostic biomarkers for oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive cases include
progesterone receptor (PR) and androgen receptor (AR), and proteins related to
proliferation or apoptotic resistance. The aim of this study was to identify the 
best predictors of success of hormonal therapy.
METHODS: By immunohistochemistry we studied 10 markers in a consecutive series of
832 cases of breast carcinoma treated at the Paoli-Calmettes Institute from 1990 
to 2002 and deposited onto tissue microarrays (TMA). These markers were
luminal-related markers ER, PR, AR, FOXA1 and GATA3 transcription factors,
proliferation-related Ki67 and CCND1, ERBB2, anti-apoptotic BCL2 and P53. We also
measured vascular peritumoural invasion (VPI), size, grade and lymph node
involvement. For 143 cases, gene expression profiles were available. Adjuvant
chemotherapy and hormonal therapy were given to high- and low-risk patients,
respectively. The 162 events observed and taken into account were metastases.
RESULTS: Molecular expression of the 10 parameters and subtype with ER status
were strongly correlated. Of the 67 luminal A cases of this series, 63 were
ER-positive. Multivariate analyses showed the highly significant prognostic value
of VPI (hazard ratio (HR) = 2.47), Ki67 (HR = 2.9), P53 (HR = 2.9) and GATA3 (HR 
= 0.5) for the 240 patients who received hormonal therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: A panel of three antibodies (Ki67, P53 and GATA3) associated with
VPI can significantly improve the traditional prognosticators in predicting
outcome for ER-positive breast cancer patients receiving hormonal therapy.

PMCID: PMC2688952
PMID: 19405945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Mol Med (Berl). 2009 Jun;87(6):633-44. doi: 10.1007/s00109-009-0467-y. Epub
2009 Apr 28.

An expression module of WIPF1-coexpressed genes identifies patients with
favorable prognosis in three tumor types.

Staub E(1), Groene J, Heinze M, Mennerich D, Roepcke S, Klaman I, Hinzmann B,
Castanos-Velez E, Pilarsky C, Mann B, Brümmendorf T, Weber B, Buhr HJ, Rosenthal 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. eike.staub@nucleolus.net

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) predisposes patients to leukemia and lymphoma. WAS
is caused by mutations in the protein WASP which impair its interaction with the 
WIPF1 protein. Here, we aim to identify a module of WIPF1-coexpressed genes and
to assess its use as a prognostic signature for colorectal cancer, glioma, and
breast cancer patients. Two public colorectal cancer microarray data sets were
used for discovery and validation of the WIPF1 co-expression module. Based on
expression of the WIPF1 signature, we classified more than 400 additional tumors 
with microarray data from our own experiments or from publicly available data
sets according to their WIPF1 signature expression. This allowed us to separate
patient populations for colorectal cancers, breast cancers, and gliomas for which
clinical characteristics like survival times and times to relapse were analyzed. 
Groups of colorectal cancer, breast cancer, and glioma patients with low
expression of the WIPF1 co-expression module generally had a favorable prognosis.
In addition, the majority of WIPF1 signature genes are individually correlated
with disease outcome in different studies. Literature gene network analysis
revealed that among WIPF1 co-expressed genes known direct transcriptional targets
of c-myc, ESR1 and p53 are enriched. The mean expression profile of WIPF1
signature genes is correlated with the profile of a proliferation signature. The 
WIPF1 signature is the first microarray-based prognostic expression signature
primarily developed for colorectal cancer that is instrumental in other tumor
types: low expression of the WIPF1 module is associated with better prognosis.

PMCID: PMC2688022
PMID: 19399471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2009 Aug 1;33(5):895-8. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2009.04.008. Epub 2009 Apr 19.

A functional polymorphism in estrogen receptor alpha gene is associated with
Japanese methamphetamine induced psychosis.

Kishi T(1), Ikeda M, Kitajima T, Yamanouchi Y, Kinoshita Y, Kawashima K, Okochi
T, Tsunoka T, Okumura T, Inada T, Ujike H, Yamada M, Uchimura N, Sora I, Iyo M,
Ozaki N, Iwata N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Fujita Health University School of Medicine,
Toyoake, Aichi 470-1192, Japan. tarok@fujita-hu.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: A recent study reported an association between rs2234693, which
influences enhancer activity levels in estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1), and
schizophrenia. This study reported that schizophrenic patients with the CC
genotype have significantly lower ESR1 mRNA levels in the prefrontal cortex than 
patients with other genotypes. The symptoms of methamphetamine induced psychosis 
are similar to those of paranoid type schizophrenia. Therefore, we conducted an
association analysis of rs2234693 with Japanese methamphetamine induced psychosis
patients.
METHOD: Using rs2234693, we conducted a genetic association analysis of
case-control samples (197 methamphetamine induced psychosis patients and 197
healthy controls). The age and sex of the control subjects did not differ from
those of the methamphetamine induced psychosis patients.
RESULTS: We detected a significant association between ESR1 and methamphetamine
induced psychosis patients in allele/genotype-wise analysis. For further
interpretation of these associations, we performed single marker analysis of
subjects divided by sex. Rs2234693 was associated with male methamphetamine
induced psychosis.
DISCUSSION: Our results suggest that rs2234693 in ESR1 may play a role in the
pathophysiology of Japanese methamphetamine induced psychosis patients.

PMID: 19386276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 Apr 22;7:32. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-32.

Age-specific effects of estrogen receptors' polymorphisms on the bone traits in
healthy fertile women: the BONTURNO study.

Massart F(1), Marini F, Bianchi G, Minisola S, Luisetto G, Pirazzoli A, Salvi S, 
Micheli D, Masi L, Brandi ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Skeletal characteristics such as height (Ht), bone mineral density
(BMD) or bone turnover markers are strongly inherited. Common variants in the
genes encoding for estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) are proposed as
candidates for influencing bone phenotypes at the population level.
METHODS: We studied 641 healthy premenopausal women aged 20-50 years (yrs)
participating into the BONTURNO study. Exclusion criteria were irregular cyclic
menses, low trauma fracture, metabolic bone or chronic diseases. Serum
C-telopeptide of type I collagen (CTX), osteocalcin (OC), and N-terminal
propeptide of type I procollagen (P1NP) were measured in all enrolled subjects,
who underwent to lumbar spine (LS), total hip (TH) and femoral neck (FN) BMD
evaluation by DXA. Five hundred seventy Caucasian women were genotyped for ESR1
rs2234693 and rs9340799 and ESR2 rs4986938 polymorphisms.
RESULTS: Although no genotype differences were found in body parameters, subjects
with combined ESR1 CCGG plus ESR2 AA-AG genotype were taller than those with
opposite genotype (P = 0.044). Moreover, ESR1 rs2234693 genotypes correlated with
family history of osteoporosis (FHO) and hip fracture (FHF) (P < 0.01), while
ESR2 AA-AC genotypes were strongly associated with FHF (OR 2.387, 95% CI
1.432-3.977; P < 0.001).When clustered by age, 20-30 yrs old subjects, having at 
least one ESR1 rs2234693 C allele presented lower LS- (P = 0.008) and TH-BMD (P =
0.047) than TT genotypes. In 41-50 yrs age, lower FN-BMD was associated with ESR2
AA (P = 0.0180) subjects than in those with the opposite genotype. ESR1 rs2234693
and rs9340799 and ESR2 rs4986938 polymorphisms did not correlate with
age-adjusted values of OC, CTX and P1NP.
CONCLUSION: These findings support the presence of age-specific effects of ESR1
and ESR2 polymorphisms on various skeletal traits in healthy fertile women.

PMCID: PMC2679035
PMID: 19386104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Metabolism. 2009 Jun;58(6):759-64. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2009.01.003.

Estrogen receptor 1 gene polymorphisms and decreased risk of obesity in women.

Goulart AC(1), Zee RY, Rexrode KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. agoulart@hu.usp.br

Estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) polymorphisms have been associated with
several diseases, but whether they are associated with obesity is uncertain. To
elucidate the role of genetic variation in the ESR1 gene with body mass index
(BMI), 543 white women (median age, 63 years) from the Women's Health Study were 
examined. Most were postmenopausal (99.3%). The relationships between rs2234693
and rs9340799 genotypes and their associated haplotypes with obesity (BMI > or
=30 kg/m(2)) and overweight (BMI > or =25 kg/m(2)) were evaluated. Among women
with the rs2234693 TT genotype, 18.3% were obese, whereas only 8.2% of those with
the CC genotype were obese (P = .04). In a logistic regression model assuming
additive inheritance, rs2234693 was associated with decreased odds of obesity
(BMI > or =30 kg/m(2)) (crude odds ratio = 0.63, 95% confidence interval =
0.44-0.90, P = .01). For rs9340799, only an inverse trend was observed for BMI (P
= .08). Haplotypes that included the variant C allele were associated with a
reduced risk of obesity (crude odds ratio = 0.65, 95% confidence interval =
0.44-0.94, P = .02 for C-G). The rs2234693 C allele of ESR1 and its associated
genotypes and haplotypes were inversely and consistently associated with obesity.
One or more copies of the C allele were associated with decreased risk of obesity
in white postmenopausal women.

PMCID: PMC2730211
PMID: 19375130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Development. 2009 May;136(10):1643-51. doi: 10.1242/dev.032177. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

DORNROSCHEN is a direct target of the auxin response factor MONOPTEROS in the
Arabidopsis embryo.

Cole M(1), Chandler J, Weijers D, Jacobs B, Comelli P, Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, University of Cologne, Gyrhofstrasse 17,
50931 Cologne, Germany.

DORNROSCHEN (DRN), which encodes a member of the AP2-type transcription factor
family, contributes to auxin transport and perception in the Arabidopsis embryo. 
Live imaging performed with transcriptional or translational GFP fusions shows
DRN to be activated in the apical cell after the first zygotic division, to act
cell-autonomously and to be expressed in single cells extending laterally from
the apical shoot stem-cell zone at the position of incipient leaf primordia.
Here, we show that the Auxin response factor (ARF) MONOPTEROS (MP) directly
controls DRN transcription in the tips of the embryonic cotyledons, which depends
on the presence of canonical Auxin response elements (AuxREs), potential
ARF-binding sites flanking the DRN transcription unit. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments show that MP binds in vivo to two AuxRE-spanning 
fragments in the DRN promoter, and that MP is required for expression of DRN in
cotyledon tips. Hence, DRN represents a direct target of MP and functions
downstream of MP in cotyledon development.

PMID: 19369397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Br J Cancer. 2009 Apr 21;100(8):1277-86. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605013.

The presence of circulating total DNA and methylated genes is associated with
circulating tumour cells in blood from breast cancer patients.

Van der Auwera I(1), Elst HJ, Van Laere SJ, Maes H, Huget P, van Dam P, Van Marck
EA, Vermeulen PB, Dirix LY.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Cancer Research Group, Laboratory of Pathology, University of
Antwerp/University Hospital Antwerp, Oncology Centre, General Hospital
St-Augustinus, Wilrijk, Belgium.

Circulating tumour cells (CTC) and tumour-related methylated DNA in blood have
been separately assessed for their utility as a marker for subclinical metastasis
in breast cancer. However, no studies have looked into the relation between the
both molecular markers in this type of cancer. In this study, we investigated the
correlations between total/methylated DNA and CTC in the blood from metastatic
breast cancer patients. We simultaneously obtained whole blood, plasma and serum 
samples from 80 patients and 20 controls. The CellSearch System was used to
enumerate CTC in blood samples. Plasma total DNA levels were determined by a QPCR
method. Sera were analysed by methylation-specific QPCR for three markers:
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), ras association domain family protein 1A
(RASSF1A) and oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1). Total DNA levels in patients were
significantly increased when compared with controls (P<0.001) and correlated with
the number of CTC (r=0.418, P<0.001). Hypermethylation of one or more genes was
detected in 42 (53%) serum samples from breast cancer patients and in three (16%)
serum samples from controls (P=0.003). APC was hypermethylated in 29%, RASSF1A in
35% and ESR1 in 20% of breast cancer cases. Detection of a methylated gene in
serum was associated with the detection of CTC in blood (P=0.03). The detection
of large amounts of circulating total/methylated DNA correlated with the presence
of CTC in the blood from patients with breast cancer. This can be interpreted in 
two ways: (a) CTC are a potential source of circulating tumour-specific DNA; (b) 
high numbers of CTC and circulating methylated DNA are both a phenotypic feature 
of more aggressive tumour biology.

PMCID: PMC2676551
PMID: 19367284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Physiol Genomics. 2009 Jun 10;38(1):98-111. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.90372.2008. Epub 2009 Apr 14.

Microarray gene expression profiles of fasting induced changes in liver and
adipose tissues of pigs expressing the melanocortin-4 receptor D298N variant.

Lkhagvadorj S(1), Qu L, Cai W, Couture OP, Barb CR, Hausman GJ, Nettleton D,
Anderson LL, Dekkers JC, Tuggle CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011-3150,
USA.

Transcriptional profiling coupled with blood metabolite analyses were used to
identify porcine genes and pathways that respond to a fasting treatment or to a
D298N missense mutation in the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) gene. Gilts (12
homozygous for D298 and 12 homozygous for N298) were either fed ad libitum or
fasted for 3 days. Fasting decreased body weight, backfat, and serum urea
concentration and increased serum nonesterified fatty acid. In response to
fasting, 7,029 genes in fat and 1,831 genes in liver were differentially
expressed (DE). MC4R genotype did not significantly affect gene expression, body 
weight, backfat depth, or any measured serum metabolite concentration. Pathway
analyses of fasting-induced DE genes indicated that lipid and steroid synthesis
was downregulated in both liver and fat. Fasting increased expression of genes
involved in glucose sparing pathways, such as oxidation of amino acids and fatty 
acids in liver, and in extracellular matrix pathways, such as cell adhesion and
adherens junction in fat. Additionally, we identified DE transcription factors
(TF) that regulate many DE genes. This confirms the involvement of TF, such as
PPARG, SREBF1, and CEBPA, which are known to regulate the fasting response, and
implicates additional TF, such as ESR1. Interestingly, ESR1 controls several
fasting induced genes in fat that are involved in cell matrix morphogenesis. Our 
findings indicate a transcriptional response to fasting in two key metabolic
tissues of pigs, which was corroborated by changes in blood metabolites, and the 
involvement of novel putative transcriptional regulators in the immediate
adaptive response to fasting.

PMID: 19366786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cancer Inform. 2009;7:29-40. Epub 2008 Dec 23.

Quantitative assessment of tissue biomarkers and construction of a model to
predict outcome in breast cancer using multiple imputation.

Emerson JW(1), Dolled-Filhart M, Harris L, Rimm DL, Tuck DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Missing data pose one of the greatest challenges in the rigorous evaluation of
biomarkers. The limited availability of specimens with complete clinical
annotation and quality biomaterial often leads to underpowered studies. Tissue
microarray studies, for example, may be further handicapped by the loss of data
points because of unevaluable staining, core loss, or the lack of tumor in the
histospot. This paper presents a novel approach to these common problems in the
context of a tissue protein biomarker analysis in a cohort of patients with
breast cancer. Our analysis develops techniques based on multiple imputation to
address the missing value problem. We first select markers using a training
cohort, identifying a small subset of protein expression levels that are most
useful in predicting patient survival. The best model is obtained by including
both protein markers (including COX6C, GATA3, NAT1, and ESR1) and lymph node
status. The use of either lymph node status or the four protein expression levels
provides similar improvements in goodness-of-fit, with both significantly better 
than a baseline clinical model. Using the same multiple imputation strategy, we
then validate the results out-of-sample on a larger independent cohort. Our
approach of integrating multiple imputation with each stage of the analysis
serves as an example that may be replicated or adapted in future studies with
missing values.

PMCID: PMC2664700
PMID: 19352457  [PubMed]


228. Cancer. 2009 Feb 25;117(1):32-9. doi: 10.1002/cncy.20008.

Fine-needle aspiration for nucleic acid-ased molecular analyses in breast cancer.

Uzan C(1), Andre F, Scott V, Laurent I, Azria E, Suciu V, Balleyguier C, Lacroix 
L, Delaloge S, Vielh P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Translational Laboratory, Histocytopathology Unit, Gustave Roussy
Institute, 39 rue Camille Desmoulins, Villejuif, France. catherine.uzan@igr.fr

BACKGROUND: With the widespread development of genomic analysis, an accurate and 
quick method for obtaining high-quality nucleic acids is needed. The objective of
the current study was to evaluate the quality and potential use of material
obtained from fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC).
METHODS: Ultrasound- or palpation-guided FNAC was performed in 124 consecutive
patients who had nodular breast lesions. The authors evaluated the amount of
messenger RNA (mRNA) obtained, its quality through the RNA Integrity (RIN) score,
and the factors that influenced both. For malignant lesions, the authors
attempted to correlate estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and HER-2 (c-erb-B2) mRNA
expression measured by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction with
estrogen receptor and HER-2 detection obtained by immunohistochemistry (IHC)
and/or fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) on the surgical specimen.
RESULTS: The amount of mRNA obtained was >1 microg in 89.5% of 124 samples (43
benign lesions and 81 adenocarcinomas). Overall, 59.3% of samples yielded >1
microg RNA with a RIN score >6. The most significant predictors of quality and
quantity of mRNA were the cytopathologist who sampled the tumors and a diagnosis 
of cancer versus benign lesion. The median ESR1 expression level, which was
expressed as the polymerase chain reaction cycle threshold (CT) level minus the
average 18S value (dct), was 17.7 dct in patients with estrogen receptor-negative
tumors and 11.1 dct in patients with estrogen receptor-positive tumors. The
median HER-2 expression level was 15.1 dct in patients with HER-2-negative tumors
and 10.7 dct in patients with HER-2-positive tumors. mRNA expression was
concordant with the IHC/FISH evaluation in 90.3% of patients for estrogen
receptor status and in 98.5% of patients for HER-2 status.
CONCLUSIONS: In 70% of cases, FNAC of breast lesions in well trained hands
allowed the extraction of mRNA suitable for gene expression analysis.

(c) 2009 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 19347827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Nutr. 2009 May;139(5):993-1001. doi: 10.3945/jn.108.101691. Epub 2009 Mar 25.

The protective association of high plasma enterolactone with breast cancer is
reasonably robust in women with polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha and 
beta genes.

Sonestedt E(1), Ivarsson MI, Harlid S, Ericson U, Gullberg B, Carlson J, Olsson
H, Adlercreutz H, Wirfält E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Nutrition Epidemiology, Lund University,
SE-20502 Malmö, Sweden. Emily.Sonestedt@med.lu.se

It is plausible that polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha and beta genes 
(ESR1 and ESR2) may modulate the association between enterolactone and breast
cancer. Seven polymorphisms in ESR1 (rs827422, rs1709184, rs2347867, rs3020328,
rs72207, rs2982896, and rs2234693) and 5 polymorphisms in ESR2 (rs915057,
rs1269056, rs1256033, rs3020450, and rs3020443) were selected. The risk of breast
cancer for these polymorphisms was estimated among 542 cases and 1076 matched
controls from the population-based Malmö Diet and Cancer cohort. The joint effect
of these polymorphisms and enterolactone was estimated among those individuals
about whom we had information on enterolactone blood concentration (365 cases and
728 controls). Breast cancer risk was not significantly associated with any of
the selected polymorphisms. We found a tendency for an interaction between a
polymorphism in intron 3 of ESR1 (rs2347867) and enterolactone concentration (P =
0.07). Breast cancer and enterolactone concentration were not associated among
those homozygous for the major allele (A) (P = 0.93), whereas we found an inverse
association among carriers of the minor allele (G) (P = 0.007). None of the other
polymorphisms seem to modify the association between enterolactone and breast
cancer. This study suggests that the protective association of enterolactone is
reasonably robust across the investigated genotypes. The suggested interaction
between enterolactone concentration and rs2347867 needs to be confirmed in larger
samples.

PMID: 19321582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cancer Sci. 2009 Jun;100(6):1012-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01145.x. Epub
2009 Feb 25.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene ESR1 amplification may predict endocrine therapy
responsiveness in breast cancer patients.

Tomita S(1), Zhang Z, Nakano M, Ibusuki M, Kawazoe T, Yamamoto Y, Iwase H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Estrogen receptor (ER) alpha plays a crucial role in normal breast development
and has also been linked to mammary carcinogenesis and clinical outcome in breast
cancer patients. However, the molecular mechanisms controlling the expression of 
ERalpha are as yet not fully understood. Gene amplification is one of the
important factors regulating protein expression. Recent studies on the
amplification of the ESR1 gene, which encodes ERalpha, have presented conflicting
data. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization and real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction analysis, we examined the ESR1 status in a series of
breast cancer tissues and analyzed its clinical importance. ESR1 gene
amplification and gain were found in 22.6 and 11.3% of samples, respectively, as 
determined by three-dimensional fluorescence in situ hybridization assay.
Moreover, ESR1 amplification and amplification plus gain were significantly
negatively correlated with tumor size, number of positive lymph nodes, negative
ERalpha, and positive human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 status. It has
also been shown that ESR1 amplification strongly correlates with higher
expression levels of ER protein and that patients with ESR1 amplification in
their tumors apparently experience longer disease-free survival than those
without. Our data suggest that ESR1 amplification might prove to be helpful in
selecting patients who may potentially benefit from endocrine therapy.

PMID: 19320640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Br J Cancer. 2009 Apr 21;100(8):1358-64. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604984. Epub 2009
Mar 24.

Common genetic variability in ESR1 and EGF in relation to endometrial cancer risk
and survival.

Einarsdóttir K(1), Darabi H, Czene K, Li Y, Low YL, Li YQ, Bonnard C, Wedrén S,
Liu ET, Hall P, Liu J, Humphreys K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Health Services Research, School of Population Health, University
of Western Australia, Crawley, Perth, Western Australia, Australia.

We investigated common genetic variation in the entire ESR1 and EGF genes in
relation to endometrial cancer risk, myometrial invasion and endometrial cancer
survival. We genotyped a dense set of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
both genes and selected haplotype tagging SNPs (tagSNPs). The tagSNPs were
genotyped in 713 Swedish endometrial cancer cases and 1567 population controls
and the results incorporated into logistic regression and Cox proportional
hazards models. We found five adjacent tagSNPs covering a region of 15 kb at the 
5' end of ESR1 that decreased the endometrial cancer risk. The ESR1 variants did 
not, however, seem to affect myometrial invasion or endometrial cancer survival. 
For the EGF gene, no association emerged between common genetic variants and
endometrial cancer risk or myometrial invasion, but we found a five-tagSNP region
that covered 51 kb at the 5' end of the gene where all five tagSNPs seemed to
decrease the risk of dying from endometrial cancer. One of the five tagSNPs in
this region was in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) with the untranslated A61G 
(rs4444903) EGF variant, earlier shown to be associated with risk for other forms
of cancer.

PMCID: PMC2676544
PMID: 19319135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Clin Biochem. 2009 Jun;42(9):835-9. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2009.01.005. Epub 
2009 Jan 24.

Association of estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphism with the presence of
coronary artery disease documented by coronary angiography.

Boroumand M(1), Ghaedi M, Mohammadtaghvaei N, Pourgholi L, Anvari MS, Davoodi G, 
Amirzadegan A, Saadat S, Sheikhfathollahi M, Goodarzynejad H.

Author information: 
(1)Tehran Heart Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, North Karegar
Avenue, Tehran, Iran. maboroumand@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVES: To examine the relationship between PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms,
with the presence of angiographically determined CAD in an Iranian population.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Patients having angiographic evidence of atherosclerosis
(Gensini score > 6) in their epicardial coronary tree (CAD(+) case group) were
compared with Patients with Gensini score < or = 6 (CAD(-) control group). The
presence of PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms was analyzed using polymerase chain
reaction-based restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).
RESULTS: The PvuIIota genotype distributions were not statistically different in 
CAD groups, and subgroups stratified by gender. For the XbaI polymorphism, after 
controlling for age, male sex, cigarette smoking and hyperlipidemia, XbaI GG
genotype was not also found to be an independent predictor for CAD occurrence
(OR=1.65; 95% CI: 0.90-3.03; P=0.10).
CONCLUSIONS: We did not observe an association between ESR1 PvuII and XbaI gene
polymorphisms with CAD in the risk of CAD in an Iranian population.

PMID: 19318036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cancer Sci. 2009 Jun;100(6):1005-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01140.x. Epub 
2009 Mar 16.

Methylation of estrogen receptor 1 in colorectal adenomas is not age-dependent,
but is correlated with K-ras mutation.

Horii J(1), Hiraoka S, Kato J, Saito S, Harada K, Fujita H, Kaji E, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.

The promoter region of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) has been shown to be methylated
in normal colorectal mucosa in an age-dependent manner. However, the methylation 
of this region in colorectal tumors has not sufficiently been investigated. The
methylation status of ESR1 in 105 colorectal adenoma tissues was examined by
MethyLight and presented as the percentage of methylated references (PMR).
Factors that affect the PMR of ESR1 in adenomas were determined using parameters 
including patient age, sex, past history of malignancy, family history of
colorectal cancer, smoking and drinking habits, clinical characteristics of
adenomas (location, size, macroscopic appearance, and histology), and K-ras
mutation. Multiple linear regression revealed that the PMR was not correlated
with patient age. K-ras mutation was significantly correlated with the higher
methylation status of ESR1 in adenoma (t-value = 3.21, P = 0.0018), whereas
alcohol exposure was significantly correlated with lower methylation status
(t-value = -2.37, P = 0.02). Because methylation of O6-methylguanine DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT) has been reported to be correlated with K-ras G-to-A
transition, methylation of ESR1 was compared with that of MGMT with regard to
K-ras mutation. Contrary to expectations, methylation of MGMT was not
significantly correlated with K-ras G-to-A transition, but that of ESR1 was
strongly correlated with K-ras G-to-A transition. Thus, the methylation status of
ESR1 in adenomas was not correlated with patient age, but was associated with
K-ras mutation, suggesting that methylation of ESR1 in tumors functions
differently from that in normal colon mucosa.

PMID: 19302287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Endocrinol. 2009 Jun;201(3):397-406. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0060. Epub 2009 Mar
17.

Inner ear pathology and loss of hearing in estrogen receptor-beta deficient mice.

Simonoska R(1), Stenberg AE, Duan M, Yakimchuk K, Fridberger A, Sahlin L,
Gustafsson JA, Hultcrantz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. rusana.simonoska@karolinska.se

There are well known differences between males and females in hearing. In the
present study, the role of estrogen receptor-beta (ER-beta; listed as ESR2 in the
MGI Database) in hearing was investigated by comparing hearing and morphology of 
the inner ear in ER-beta knock-out mice (ER-beta(-/-)) with that of wild-type
(WT) littermates. Hearing was analyzed with auditory brainstem response
audiometry at 3 and 12 months. The ER-beta(-/-) mice were deaf at 1 year of age, 
and the morphological analysis showed absence of hair cells and loss of the whole
organ of Corti initiated in the basal turn of the cochlea. Furthermore, in
ER-beta(-/-), but not in WT mice, the spiral ganglion was lacking many of its
neurons. Immunostaining showed the presence of both ER-alpha (listed as ESR1 in
the MGI Database) and ER-beta in the nuclei of some neurons in the inner ear in
WT mice, but no ER-beta was found in the ER-beta(-/-) mice as expected. ER-alpha 
staining was predominant in the nuclei of large neurons and ER-beta in nuclei of 
small neurons and fibroblasts. These results reveal that both ERs are present in 
the inner ear at specific localizations suggesting subtype-specific functions. It
is concluded that ER-beta is important for the prevention of age-related hearing 
loss. These findings strengthen the hypothesis that estrogen has a direct effect 
on hearing functions.

PMID: 19293293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2009;47(4):391-7. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2009.096.

Genotype distribution of estrogen receptor alpha polymorphisms in pregnant women 
from healthy and preeclampsia populations and its relation to blood pressure
levels.

Zhang J(1), Bai H, Liu X, Fan P, Liu R, Huang Y, Wang X, He G, Liu Y, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Laboratory Medicine, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan University,
Sichuan, PR China.

BACKGROUND: The estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) seems to be a potential
candidate in altering risk for preeclampsia due to important estrogenic
biological effects. Despite its previously reported association with severe
preeclampsia in combined genotype in one selected ethnic group, further studies
in other populations are required. The objective of this study was to investigate
the relationship of the gene polymorphisms of the estrogen receptor alpha with
preeclampsia in a southwest Chinese population.
METHODS: We genotyped two polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene (PvuII and XbaI) by
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis in a 
Chinese population.
RESULTS: In the case-control study which included 204 preeclampsia case subjects 
and 236 normal control subjects, the frequencies of allele T for the PvuII site
and allele G for the XbaI site in the patients (41.67% and 23.53%, respectively) 
were similar to those observed in controls (43.01% and 19.70%, respectively).
Furthermore, the combined genotype analysis of ESR1 PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms 
showed no increased risk of either severe or total preeclampsia in our study
populations. However, it showed that the CC homozygotes and CT heterozygotes in
control pregnant women had higher systolic blood pressure levels than TT
homozygotes for the PvuII site after adjustment for age and body mass index
(p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our work does not provide evidence in favor of ESR1 PvuII and XbaI
being associated with preeclampsia but with increased blood pressure levels in
normal pregnant women, in a southwest Chinese population.

PMID: 19284296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2009 Jun;162(2):203-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2009.02.010.
Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Cloning and expression of the estrogen receptor-alpha (Esr1) from the Harderian
gland of the sea turtle (Lepidochelys olivacea).

Chávez B(1), Ramos L, Merchant-Larios H, Vilchis F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y
Nutrición S.Z., México D.F., Mexico.

The effects of estradiol on the Harderian gland (HG) are believed to be partially
regulated by the transcriptional regulation of the estrogen-related genes via
estrogen receptor (ER). In reptiles, however, it has not been well established
whether the HG contains or expresses steroid nuclear receptors. As a first step
toward investigating the molecular mechanisms of estrogen signalling in the HG,
we isolated the cDNA for ERalpha in the sea turtle Lepidochelys olivacea. ERalpha
was cloned using RT-PCR coupled with 5' and 3' RACE procedures. The cDNA contains
a complete open reading frame encoding 588 amino acid residues. Comparative
analysis of this amino acid sequence showed moderate to strong conservation of
the ERalpha (Esr1) gene within divergent vertebrate groups. In transfection
studies, the cloned ER displayed high affinity K(d)=0.25nM and high specificity
for 17beta-estradiol. Binding assays using sucrose density gradients demonstrated
a specific 7-7.5 S binding component in the HG cytosolic fractions. RT-qPCR
analysis showed significant ERalpha mRNA expression in the liver, HG, lung and
brain. Altogether, these results provide evidence for the expression of
intracellular ERs in the HG of the sea turtle and suggest that ERalpha may be an 
important modulator of the estrogen-mediated response in the HG of reptiles.

PMID: 19272391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Reproduction. 2009 May;137(5):865-77. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0491. Epub 2009 Mar 4.

Developmental programming: prenatal androgen excess disrupts ovarian steroid
receptor balance.

Ortega HH(1), Salvetti NR, Padmanabhan V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological Sciences, National University of Litoral,
Esperanza 3800, Santa Fe, Argentina.

Steroid hormones play an important role in reproduction and the receptors through
which they signal change in a developmental time, follicle stage, and
cell-specific manner. Disruption in steroid receptor expression affects follicle 
formation and differentiation. In this study, using prenatal testosterone (T) and
dihydrotestosterone (DHT)-treated female sheep as model systems, we tested the
hypothesis that prenatal androgen excess disrupts the developmental ontogeny of
ovarian steroid receptor protein expression. Pregnant Suffolk ewes were injected 
twice weekly with T propionate or DHT propionate (a non-aromatizable androgen) in
cottonseed oil from days 30 to 90 of gestation. Changes in ovarian estrogen
receptors (ER; ESR1, ESR2), androgen receptor (AR) and progesterone receptor
(PGR) proteins were determined at fetal (days 90 and 140), postpubertal (10
months), and adult (21 months; only prenatal T-treated sheep studied) ages by
immunohistochemistry. Prenatal T and DHT treatment induced selective increase in 
AR but not ER or PGR expression in the stroma and granulosa cells of fetal days
90 and 140 ovaries. An increase in ESR1 and decrease in ESR2 immunostaining
coupled with increased AR expression were evident in granulosa cells of antral
follicles of 10- and 21-month-old prenatal T but not DHT-treated females
(analyzed only at 10 months). These findings provide evidence that an early
increase in ovarian AR is the first step in the altered ovarian developmental
trajectory of prenatal T-treated females, and manifestations of postnatal ovarian
dysfunction are likely facilitated via altered equilibrium of antral follicular
granulosa cell ER/AR protein expression.

PMCID: PMC3968529
PMID: 19261835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Mar;18(3):901-14. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-0875. Epub 2009 Mar 3.

CpG island tumor suppressor promoter methylation in non-BRCA-associated early
mammary carcinogenesis.

Vasilatos SN(1), Broadwater G, Barry WT, Baker JC Jr, Lem S, Dietze EC, Bean GR, 
Bryson AD, Pilie PG, Goldenberg V, Skaar D, Paisie C, Torres-Hernandez A, Grant
TL, Wilke LG, Ibarra-Drendall C, Ostrander JH, D'Amato NC, Zalles C, Jirtle R,
Weaver VM, Seewaldt VL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Box 2628, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

BACKGROUND: Only 5% of all breast cancers are the result of BRCA1/2 mutations.
Methylation silencing of tumor suppressor genes is well described in sporadic
breast cancer; however, its role in familial breast cancer is not known.
METHODS: CpG island promoter methylation was tested in the initial random
periareolar fine-needle aspiration sample from 109 asymptomatic women at high
risk for breast cancer. Promoter methylation targets included RARB (M3 and M4),
ESR1, INK4a/ARF, BRCA1, PRA, PRB, RASSF1A, HIN-1, and CRBP1.
RESULTS: Although the overall frequency of CpG island promoter methylation events
increased with age (P<0.0001), no specific methylation event was associated with 
age. In contrast, CpG island methylation of RARB M4 (P=0.051), INK4a/ARF
(P=0.042), HIN-1 (P=0.044), and PRA (P=0.032), as well as the overall frequency
of methylation events (P=0.004), was associated with abnormal Masood cytology.
The association between promoter methylation and familial breast cancer was
tested in 40 unaffected premenopausal women in our cohort who underwent BRCA1/2
mutation testing. Women with BRCA1/2 mutations had a low frequency of CpG island 
promoter methylation (15 of 15 women had <or=4 methylation events), whereas women
without a mutation showed a high frequency of promoter methylation events (24 of 
25 women had 5-8 methylation events; P<0.0001). Of women with a BRCA1/2 mutation,
none showed methylation of HIN-1 and only 1 of 15 women showed CpG island
methylation of RARB M4, INK4a/ARF, or PRB promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first evidence of CpG island methylation of tumor
suppressor gene promoters in non-BRCA1/2 familial breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2667866
PMID: 19258476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Atherosclerosis. 2009 Sep;206(1):186-92. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.01.027. Epub 2009 Jan 29.

Association between estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms and early
restenosis after eversion carotid endarterectomy and carotid stenting.

Hirschberg K(1), Gombos T, Dósa E, Somorjai A, Szilágyi A, Szabó G, Füst G, Entz 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Semmelweis University, Városmajor utca
68, Budapest, Hungary. hirschbergkristof@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Our aim was to identify the role of PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms of
the ESR1 (estrogen receptor alpha) gene in the occurrence of early restenosis
after carotid endarterectomy and carotid artery stenting.
METHODS: In a non-randomized prospective study we analysed blood samples from 172
patients (105 men) with severe stenosis of the internal carotid artery, using the
PCR-RFLP method. Patients were treated either by carotid endarterectomy (n=82) or
carotid artery stenting (n=90), and were followed-up by ultrasonography with a
median follow-up time of 12 months (7.32-14.65 months). Conventional laboratory
parameters were also recorded. Restenosis (>50%) rates were compared between
patients carrying different genotypes and risk factors were calculated by using
multivariate logistic regression.
RESULTS: Allelic frequencies were similar between sexes (C/T allele, 0.40/0.60
and 0.43/0.57; p=0.67; G/A allele, 0.35/0.65 and 0.32/0.68; p=0.65; in men and
women, respectively). Significantly higher restenosis rate was observed in
patients homozygous for the A-allele of the XbaI polymorphism as compared to
carriers of AG and GG genotypes (23.4% vs. 10.5%, p=0.02). TT and TC genotypes of
the PvuII polymorphism were also associated with greater restenosis rate, as
compared with genotype CC (19.3% vs. 3.1%, p=0.02). Associations for both
polymorphisms were more expressed in women and in CEA patients. At multivariate
analysis, T-A haplotype was a predictor of restenosis in the whole patient cohort
(adjusted odds ratio, 7.85; 95% CI, 1.01-60.98).
CONCLUSION: Presence of A and T alleles (of the XbaI and PvuII polymorphisms,
respectively) were associated with higher incidence of carotid restenosis, while 
the presence of G and C alleles (of the XbaI and PvuII polymorphisms,
respectively) were associated with lower incidence of carotid restenosis.

PMID: 19233358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Dev Neurobiol. 2009 Apr;69(5):299-313. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20705.

Age-dependent differential expression of genes involved in steroid signalling
pathway in the brain of protandrous black porgy, Acanthopagrus schlegeli.

Tomy S(1), Wu GC, Huang HR, Chang CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung 202,
Taiwan.

The mechanisms underlying brain sex differentiation in animals are poorly
understood. In the present study, using black porgy, Acanthopagrus schlegeli, as 
primary experimental model, we investigated the temporal expression patterns of
receptors for androgen (ar) and estrogen (esr1 and esr2a) in the brain during
posthatching ages and analyzed them against the timing of gonadal germ cell
development. We hypothesized that endogenous estrogens naturally masculinize the 
brain of black porgy. The expression of sex steroid receptors was studied in
relation to a wider suite of other related genes (nr5a2, nr0b1, star, and
cyp19a1b) to provide some insight into the monomale sex differentiation pattern
observed in this species. Our results revealed a highly significant increase in
esr1 together with the increase in esr2a at 120 dph (days posthatching),
suggesting a significant role for esr in sex differentiation in this species.
Temporal expression patterns of nr5a2, nr0b1, star, sex steroid receptors, and
cyp19a1b in the brain provided evidence for their physiological roles in the
monomale sex differentiation in this species. The expression of nr5a2, star, ar, 
esr1, esr2a, and cyp19a1b increased at 120 dph, a period when brain sex
differentiation probably occurs in this species. The study also suggests that
neurosteroidogenesis in black porgy may be regulated by both nr5a2-dependent and 
nr5a2-independent mechanisms. The results demonstrated striking differences in
the abundance of the gene transcripts in discrete brain region throughout
ontogeny. In addition, the sex steroid hormone levels and aromatase activity in
brain at different developmental states and the changes in the gene expression
patterns in response to aromatase inhibitor treatment are also discussed.

Copyright 2009 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Develop Neurobiol 2009.

PMID: 19224561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Nat Genet. 2009 Mar;41(3):324-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.318. Epub 2009 Feb 15.

Genome-wide association study identifies a new breast cancer susceptibility locus
at 6q25.1.

Zheng W(1), Long J, Gao YT, Li C, Zheng Y, Xiang YB, Wen W, Levy S, Deming SL,
Haines JL, Gu K, Fair AM, Cai Q, Lu W, Shu XO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology Center, Vanderbilt-Ingram
Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee
37232, USA. wei.zheng@vanderbilt.edu

We carried out a genome-wide association study among Chinese women to identify
risk variants for breast cancer. After analyzing 607,728 SNPs in 1,505 cases and 
1,522 controls, we selected 29 SNPs for a fast-track replication in an
independent set of 1,554 cases and 1,576 controls. We further investigated four
replicated loci in a third set of samples comprising 3,472 cases and 900
controls. SNP rs2046210 at 6q25.1, located upstream of the gene encoding estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1), showed strong and consistent association with breast
cancer across all three stages. Adjusted odds ratio (95% CI) were 1.36
(1.24-1.49) and 1.59 (1.40-1.82), respectively, for genotypes A/G and A/A versus 
G/G (P for trend 2.0 x 10(-15)) in the pooled analysis of samples from all three 
stages. We also found a similar, albeit weaker, association in an independent
study comprising 1,591 cases and 1,466 controls of European ancestry (P(trend) = 
0.01). These results strongly implicate 6q25.1 as a susceptibility locus for
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2754845
PMID: 19219042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Blood. 2009 Jun 18;113(25):6411-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-07-170589. Epub 2009
Feb 11.

MicroRNA-29b induces global DNA hypomethylation and tumor suppressor gene
reexpression in acute myeloid leukemia by targeting directly DNMT3A and 3B and
indirectly DNMT1.

Garzon R(1), Liu S, Fabbri M, Liu Z, Heaphy CE, Callegari E, Schwind S, Pang J,
Yu J, Muthusamy N, Havelange V, Volinia S, Blum W, Rush LJ, Perrotti D, Andreeff 
M, Bloomfield CD, Byrd JC, Chan K, Wu LC, Croce CM, Marcucci G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Ohio State University, Columbus, 43210, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Jun 18;113(25):6269-70.

Aberrant DNA hypermethylation contributes to myeloid leukemogenesis by silencing 
structurally normal genes involved in hematopoiesis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
noncoding RNAs that regulate gene expression by targeting protein-coding mRNAs.
Recently, miRNAs have been shown to play a role as both targets and effectors in 
gene hypermethylation and silencing in malignant cells. In the current study, we 
showed that enforced expression of miR-29b in acute myeloid leukemia cells
resulted in marked reduction of the expression of DNA methyltransferases DNMT1,
DNMT3A, and DNMT3B at both RNA and protein levels. This in turn led to decrease
in global DNA methylation and reexpression of p15(INK4b) and ESR1 via promoter
DNA hypomethylation. Although down-regulation of DNMT3A and DNMT3B was the result
of a direct interaction of miR-29b with the 3' untranslated regions of these
genes, no predicted miR-29b interaction sites were found in the DNMT1 3'
untranslated regions. Further experiments revealed that miR-29b down-regulates
DNMT1 indirectly by targeting Sp1, a transactivator of the DNMT1 gene.
Altogether, these data provide novel functional links between miRNAs and aberrant
DNA hypermethylation in acute myeloid leukemia and suggest a potentially
therapeutic use of synthetic miR-29b oligonucleotides as effective
hypomethylating compounds.

PMCID: PMC2710934
PMID: 19211935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Semin Reprod Med. 2009 Jan;27(1):90-102. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1108013. Epub 2009
Feb 5.

Interferons and uterine receptivity.

Bazer FW(1), Spencer TE, Johnson GA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, Department of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-2471, USA. fbazer@cvm.tamu.edu

This article focuses on the potential roles of interferons (IFNs) in establishing
uterine receptivity to implantation. A common feature of the peri-implantation
period of pregnancy in most mammals is production of type I and/or type II IFNs
by trophoblasts that induce and/or stimulate expression of an array of
IFN-stimulate genes (ISGs). These effects range from pregnancy recognition
signaling in ruminants through IFN tau to effects on cellular functions of the
uterus and uterine vasculature. For actions of IFNs, progesterone (P4) is
permissive to the expression of many effects and to the expression of ISGs that
are induced directly by an IFN or induced by P4 and stimulated by an IFN in a
temporal and/or cell-specific manner. Uterine receptivity to implantation is P4
dependent; however, implantation events are preceded by loss of expression of
progesterone (PGR) and estrogen (ESR1) receptors by uterine epithelia. Therefore,
P4 likely acts via PGR-positive stromal cells to induce expression of fibroblast 
growth factors-7 and -10 and/or hepatocyte growth factor (progestamedins) that
then act via their respective receptors on uterine epithelia and trophectoderm to
affect expression of ISGs. The permissive effects of P4 on the expression of ISGs
and the effects of P4 to induce and IFNs to stimulate gene expression raise the
question of whether uterine receptivity to implantation requires P4 and IFN to
activate unique, but complementary, cell signaling pathways. Uterine receptivity 
to implantation, depending on species, involves changes in the expression of
genes for the attachment of trophectoderm to the uterine lumenal epithelium (LE) 
and superficial glandular epithelium (sGE), modification of the phenotype of
uterine stromal cells, the silencing of PGR and ESR1 genes, the suppression of
genes for immune recognition, alterations in membrane permeability to enhance
conceptus-maternal exchange of factors, increased vascularity of the endometrium,
activation of genes for transport of nutrients into the uterine lumen, and
enhanced signaling for pregnancy recognition. Differential expression of genes by
uterine LE/sGE, mid- to deep-glandular epithelia (GE), and stromal cells in
response to P4 and IFNs is likely to influence uterine receptivity to
implantation in most mammals. Understanding the roles of IFNs in uterine
receptivity for implantation is necessary to develop approaches to enhance
reproductive health and fertility in humans and domestic animals.

PMID: 19197808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Hum Hypertens. 2009 Oct;23(10):636-44. doi: 10.1038/jhh.2009.1. Epub 2009 Feb
5.

Association between arterial stiffness and variations in oestrogen-related genes.

Peter I(1), Kelley-Hedgepeth A, Huggins GS, Housman DE, Mendelsohn ME, Vita JA,
Vasan RS, Levy D, Benjamin EJ, Mitchell GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine of
New York University, New York, NY 10029, USA. inga.peter@mssm.edu

Increased arterial stiffness and wave reflection have been identified as
cardiovascular disease risk factors. In light of significant sex differences and 
the moderate heritability of vascular function measures, we hypothesized that
variation in the genes coding for oestrogen receptors alpha (ESR1) and beta
(ESR2) and aromatase (CYP19A1) is associated with aortic stiffness and pressure
wave reflection as measured by non-invasive arterial tonometry. In all, 1261
unrelated Framingham Offspring Study participants who attended the seventh
examination cycle (mean age 62+/-10 years, 52% women) and had arterial tonometry 
and genotyping data were included in the study. Analysis of covariance was used
to assess the association of polymorphisms with forward wave amplitude, augmented
pressure, augmentation index (AI), carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity and mean
arterial pressure with adjustment for potential confounders. In the sex-pooled
analysis, those homozygous for the minor allele at any of four ESR1 variants that
were in strong linkage disequilibrium ((TA)(n), rs2077647, rs2234693 and
rs9340799) had on an average 18% higher augmented pressure and 16% greater AI
compared with carriers of one or two major alleles (P=0.0002-0.01). A similar
magnitude of association was detected in those homozygous for the common allele
at two ESR2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (P=0.007-0.02). Our results are
consistent with the hypothesis that variation in ESR1 and ESR2, but not CYP19A1, 
is associated with an increased wave reflection that may contribute to
associations between these variants and adverse clinical events demonstrated
earlier. Our findings will need to be replicated in additional cohorts.

PMCID: PMC2746260
PMID: 19194457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Prenat Diagn. 2009 Mar;29(3):217-22. doi: 10.1002/pd.2072.

PCR/LDR/capillary electrophoresis for detection of single-nucleotide differences 
between fetal and maternal DNA in maternal plasma.

Yi P(1), Chen Z, Zhao Y, Guo J, Fu H, Zhou Y, Yu L, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Research Institute of Surgery, Daping
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, PR China.

BACKGROUND: The discovery of fetal DNA in maternal plasma has opened up an
approach for noninvasive diagnosis. We have now assessed the possibility of
detecting single-nucleotide differences between fetal and maternal DNA in
maternal plasma by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)/ligase detection
reaction((LDR)/capillary electrophoresis.
METHODS: PCR/LDR/capillary electrophoresis was applied to detect the genotype of 
c.454-397T>gene (ESR1) from experimental DNA models of maternal plasma at
different sensitivity levels and 13 maternal plasma samples.alphaC in estrogen
receptor.
RESULTS: (1) Our results demonstrated that the technique could discriminate low
abundance single-nucleotide mutation with a mutant/normal allele ratio up to 1:10
000. (2) Examination of ESR1 c.454-397T>C genotypes by using the method of
restriction fragment length analysis was performed in 25 pregnant women, of whom 
13 pregnant women had homozygous genotypes. The c.454-397T>C genotypes of
paternally inherited fetal DNA in maternal plasma of these 13 women were detected
by PCR/LDR/capillary electrophoresis, which were accordant with the results of
umbilical cord blood.
CONCLUSIONS: PCR/LDR/capillary electrophoresis has very high sensitivity to
distinguish low abundance single nucleotide differences and can discriminate
point mutations and single-nucleotide polymorphisms(SNPs) of paternally inherited
fetal DNA in maternal plasma.

PMID: 19177453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Eur J Neurol. 2009 Mar;16(3):413-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02499.x.

Lack of association of hormone receptor polymorphisms with migraine.

Corominas R(1), Ribasés M, Cuenca-León E, Cormand B, Macaya A.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Recerca en Neurologia Infantil i Psiquiatria Genètica, Hospital
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Previous studies concerning the role of hormone receptor 
genetic variants in migraine have provided conflicting results. The aim of this
study was to investigate the role of common polymorphisms in the estrogen
receptor gene (ESR1) and the progesterone receptor gene (PGR) in the risk for
migraine in a Spanish population.
METHODS: In a case-control study, including 210 Caucasoid migraine patients and
210 controls, we examined association between three single nucleotide
polymorphisms in the coding region of ESR1, rs2077642, rs1801132, and rs2228480, 
and an Alu insertion in PGR, and migraine, migraine without aura or migraine with
aura. Genotypic, allelic and reconstructed haplotype distributions were compared.
RESULTS: We found no significant differences between cases and controls in the
distribution of genotypes or alleles for either polymorphism. No haplotype was
over-represented in patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study does not support a major contribution of ESR1 and PGR to
the pathogenesis of migraine.

PMID: 19175383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biol Reprod. 2009 Jun;80(6):1152-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.073189. Epub 2009
Jan 21.

Estrogen receptor immunoreactivity in late-gestation fetal lambs.

Gorton LM(1), Mahoney MM, Magorien JE, Lee TM, Wood RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Neurobiology, Keck School of Medicine at the University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

Prenatal androgens masculinize postnatal reproductive neuroendocrine function and
behavior in sheep. Testosterone treatment of pregnant ewes during midgestation
masculinizes sexual behavior and luteinizing hormone secretion in female lambs,
presumably in part via aromatization and estrogen receptor (ESR) binding in the
brain. We hypothesized that male and female sheep also differ in the number and
distribution of ESR-containing neurons. If so, ESR expression should be sensitive
to prenatal hormones delivered exogenously or in situ. ESR alpha (ESR1) was
compared by immunocytochemistry in male and female lambs at the end of gestation,
as well as in fetal females exposed prenatally to testosterone or
dihydrotestosterone. ESR1-positive neurons were abundant in the posteromedial bed
nucleus of the stria terminalis (BSTpm), medial preoptic area (MPOA), posterior
medial amygdaloid nucleus (MeP), amygdalohippocampal area (AHi), ventromedial
hypothalamic nuclei (VMH), and arcuate hypothalamic nuclei (ARC). In females, the
ARC had the largest number of stained cells (mean +/- SEM, 475.6 +/- 57.4
cells/0.173 mm(2)), while staining intensity was greatest in the MPOA (mean +/-
SEM gray level, 31.3 +/- 5.3). The mean +/- SEM integrated gray level (IGL) was
high in the ARC (0.63 +/- 0.13) and in the MPOA (0.51 +/- 0.08). The mean +/- SEM
IGL was low in the MeP (0.31 +/- 0.10) and in the BSTpm (0.21 +/- 0.06), while it
was intermediate in the AHi (0.36 +/- 0.10) and in the VMH (0.37 +/- 0.07). ESR
immunostaining was not significantly different in male and female fetal lambs,
nor in females fetuses exposed prenatally to androgens (P > 0.05). However, ESR1 
staining was significantly increased in the ARC, MPOA, and AHi of adult rams vs. 
adult ewes. These results suggest that brain ESR immunoreactivity in fetal lambs 
is unlikely to account for postnatal sex differences in reproductive function.
Instead, sex differences in ESR emerge postnatally.

PMCID: PMC2804801
PMID: 19164175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biol Reprod. 2009 May;80(5):954-64. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.073791. Epub 2009
Jan 21.

Variation in the ovarian reserve is linked to alterations in intrafollicular
estradiol production and ovarian biomarkers of follicular differentiation and
oocyte quality in cattle.

Ireland JJ(1), Zielak-Steciwko AE, Jimenez-Krassel F, Folger J, Bettegowda A,
Scheetz D, Walsh S, Mossa F, Knight PG, Smith GW, Lonergan P, Evans AC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture Food Science and Veterinary Medicine and Conway
Institute, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

The mechanisms whereby the high variation in numbers of morphologically healthy
oocytes and follicles in ovaries (ovarian reserve) may have an impact onovarian
function, oocyte quality, and fertility are poorly understood. The objective was 
to determine whether previously validated biomarkers for follicular
differentiation and function, as well as oocyte quality differed between cattle
with low versus a high antral follicle count (AFC). Ovaries were removed (n = 5
per group) near the beginning of the nonovulatory follicular wave, before
follicles could be identified via ultrasonography as being dominant, from heifers
with high versus a low AFC. The F1, F2, and F3 follicles were dissected and
diameters determined. Follicular fluid and thecal, granulosal, and cumulus cells 
and the oocyte were isolated and subjected to biomarker analyses. Although the
size and numerous biomarkers of differentiation, such as mRNAs for the
gonadotropin receptors, were similar, intrafollicular concentrations of estradiol
and the abundance of mRNAs for CYP19A1 in granulosal cells and ESR1, ESR2, and
CTSB in cumulus cells were greater, whereas mRNAs for AMH in granulosal cells and
TBC1D1 in thecal cells were lower for animals with low versus a high AFC during
follicle waves. Hence, variation in the ovarian reserve may have an impact on
follicular function and oocyte quality via alterations in intrafollicular
estradiol production and expression of key genes involved in follicle-stimulating
hormone action (AMH) and estradiol (CYP19A1) production by granulosal cells,
function and survival of thecal cells (TBC1D1), responsiveness of cumulus cells
to estradiol (ESR1, ESR2), and cumulus cell determinants of oocyte quality
(CTSB).

PMID: 19164170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Apr 1;18(7):1332-42. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp033. Epub 2009 Jan
19.

Gene-body hypermethylation of ATM in peripheral blood DNA of bilateral breast
cancer patients.

Flanagan JM(1), Munoz-Alegre M, Henderson S, Tang T, Sun P, Johnson N, Fletcher
O, Dos Santos Silva I, Peto J, Boshoff C, Narod S, Petronis A.

Author information: 
(1)CR-UK Viral Oncology Group, UCL Cancer Institute, London, UK.
j.flanagan@ucl.ac.uk

Bilaterality of breast cancer is an indicator of constitutional cancer
susceptibility; however, the molecular causes underlying this predisposition in
the majority of cases is not known. We hypothesize that epigenetic misregulation 
of cancer-related genes could partially account for this predisposition. We have 
performed methylation microarray analysis of peripheral blood DNA from 14 women
with bilateral breast cancer compared with 14 unaffected matched controls
throughout 17 candidate breast cancer susceptibility genes including BRCA1,
BRCA2, CHEK2, ATM, ESR1, SFN, CDKN2A, TP53, GSTP1, CDH1, CDH13, HIC1, PGR, SFRP1,
MLH1, RARB and HSD17B4. We show that the majority of methylation variability is
associated with intragenic repetitive elements. Detailed validation of the tiled 
region around ATM was performed by bisulphite modification and pyrosequencing of 
the same samples and in a second set of peripheral blood DNA from 190 bilateral
breast cancer patients compared with 190 controls. We show significant
hypermethylation of one intragenic repetitive element in breast cancer cases
compared with controls (P = 0.0017), with the highest quartile of methylation
associated with a 3-fold increased risk of breast cancer (OR 3.20, 95% CI
1.78-5.86, P = 0.000083). Increased methylation of this locus is associated with 
lower steady-state ATM mRNA level and correlates with age of cancer patients but 
not controls, suggesting a combined age-phenotype-related association. This
research demonstrates the potential for gene-body epigenetic misregulation of ATM
and other cancer-related genes in peripheral blood DNA that may be useful as a
novel marker to estimate breast cancer risk. ACCESSION NUMBERS: The microarray
data and associated .BED and .WIG files can be accessed through Gene Expression
Omnibus accession number: GSE14603.

PMCID: PMC2655767
PMID: 19153073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2009 Sep;280(3):395-400. doi: 10.1007/s00404-009-0927-1.
Epub 2009 Jan 18.

Polymorphisms in estrogen metabolism and estrogen pathway genes and the risk of
miscarriage.

Cupisti S(1), Fasching PA, Ekici AB, Strissel PL, Loehberg CR, Strick R, Engel J,
Dittrich R, Beckmann MW, Goecke TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Erlangen University Hospital,
Erlangen, Bavaria, Germany.

PURPOSE: This study investigated genetic variations in the estrogen pathway and
their association with miscarriages.
METHODS: A total of 483 patients were recruited from a comprehensive control
group for case-control studies. Three variants of the CYP19A1 gene (rs10046,
rs4646 and rs700519) and one variant each of the estrogen (ESR1) and progesterone
(PGR) receptor genes (rs3020314 and rs1042838) were investigated using
polymorphism genotyping. The chi-squared test and one-way analysis of variation
(ANOVA) were used for statistical analysis.
RESULTS: For rs10046 (CYP19A1), the C/C genotype was associated with a greater
frequency of miscarriages (P = 0.017). The other genotypes were not found to be
associated with recurrent miscarriage.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study that has identified a single-nucleotide
polymorphism in the aromatase gene that suggests a significant association
between genotypes and miscarriage. As aromatase is an essential enzyme in the
estrogen pathway, it may be speculated that variations in the aromatase gene in
some way give rise to different conditions in the endocrine environment that can 
lead to impaired fertility.

PMID: 19152063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2009 Apr;48(4):342-6. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ken473.
Epub 2009 Jan 16.

Genetics of bone loss in rheumatoid arthritis--role of vitamin D receptor
polymorphisms.

Ranganathan P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA. prangana@im.wustl.edu

RA is a systemic inflammatory arthritis that leads to local and systemic bone
loss. Osteoporosis or the systemic bone loss associated with RA increases the
risk for fragility fractures, which can affect quality of life dramatically in RA
patients. Although traditional and RA-related risk factors have been defined and 
studied for osteoporosis associated with RA, genetic factors such as polymorphic 
variants in the traditional candidate genes for osteoporosis, such as the vitamin
D receptor (VDR), type 1 collagen A1 (COLIA1) and oestrogen receptor-alpha
(ESR1), have not been well elucidated in RA patients. This review summarizes the 
currently available literature on the association of VDR polymorphisms with local
and systemic bone loss in RA. It also discusses potential targets for genetic
research in this area, such as polymorphisms in genes, such as IL-6 (IL6) and TNF
receptor type 2 (TNFRSF1B), which control the inflammatory response in RA and may
influence bone loss in RA. Defining such genetic factors, in addition to
traditional and RA-related risk factors for osteoporosis in RA, may facilitate
early identification of patients at high risk for fractures who can then be
targeted for treatment.

PMCID: PMC2722799
PMID: 19151030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mamm Genome. 2009 Feb;20(2):92-108. doi: 10.1007/s00335-008-9168-z. Epub 2009 Jan
15.

Disruption of Supv3L1 damages the skin and causes sarcopenia, loss of fat, and
death.

Paul E(1), Cronan R, Weston PJ, Boekelheide K, Sedivy JM, Lee SY, Wiest DL,
Resnick MB, Klysik JE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Medicine, Department of Molecular Biology, Cell
Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University, 70 Ship St., Providence, RI 02903,
USA.

Supv3L1 is a conserved and ubiquitously expressed helicase found in numerous
tissues and cell types of many species. In human cells, SUPV3L1 was shown to
suppress apoptotic death and sister chromatid exchange, and impair mitochondrial 
RNA metabolism and protein synthesis. In vitro experiments revealed binding of
SUPV3L1 to BLM and WRN proteins, suggesting a role in genome maintenance
processes. Disruption of the Supv3L1 gene in the mouse has been reported to be
embryonic lethal at early developmental stages. We generated a conditional mouse 
in which the phenotypes associated with the removal of exon 14 can be tested in a
variety of tissues. Disruption mediated by a Mx1 promoter-driven Cre displayed a 
postnatal growth delay, reduced lifespan, loss of adipose tissue and muscle mass,
and severe skin abnormalities manifesting as ichthyosis, thickening of the
epidermis, and atrophy of the dermis and subcutaneous tissue. Using a
tamoxifen-activatable Esr1/Cre driver, Supv3L1 disruption resulted in growth
retardation and aging phenotypes, including loss of adipose tissue and muscle
mass, kyphosis, cachexia, and premature death. Many of the abnormalities seen in 
the Mx1-Cre mice, such as hyperkeratosis characterized by profound scaling of
feet and tail, could also be detected in tamoxifen-inducible Cre mice.
Conditional ablation of Supv3L1 in keratinocytes confirmed atrophic changes in
the skin and ichthyosis-like changes. Together, these data indicate that Supv3L1 
is important for the maintenance of the skin barrier. In addition, loss of
Supv3L1 function leads to accelerated aging-like phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC2667228
PMID: 19145458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Mar 15;18(6):1131-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn429. Epub 2009 Jan
6.

Association of ESR1 gene tagging SNPs with breast cancer risk.

Dunning AM(1), Healey CS, Baynes C, Maia AT, Scollen S, Vega A, Rodríguez R,
Barbosa-Morais NL, Ponder BA; SEARCH, Low YL, Bingham S; EPIC, Haiman CA, Le
Marchand L; MEC, Broeks A, Schmidt MK; ABCS, Hopper J, Southey M; ABCFS, Beckmann
MW, Fasching PA; BBCC, Peto J, Johnson N; BBCS, Bojesen SE, Nordestgaard B; CGPS,
Milne RL, Benitez J; CNIO-BCS, Hamann U, Ko Y; GENICA, Schmutzler RK, Burwinkel
B; GC-HBOC, Schürmann P, Dörk T; HABCS, Heikkinen T, Nevanlinna H; HEBCS,
Lindblom A, Margolin S; KARBAC, Mannermaa A, Kosma VM; KBCS, Chen X, Spurdle A;
kConFab and the AOCS Management Group, Change-Claude J, Flesch-Janys D; MARIE,
Couch FJ, Olson JE; for MCBCS, Severi G, Baglietto L; MCCS, Børresen-Dale AL,
Kristensen V; NBCS, Hunter DJ, Hankinson SE; NHS, Devilee P, Vreeswijk M; ORIGO, 
Lissowska J, Brinton L; PBCS, Liu J, Hall P; SASBAC, Kang D, Yoo KY; SEBCS, Shen 
CY, Yu JC; TWBCS, Anton-Culver H, Ziogoas A; UCIBCS, Sigurdson A, Struewing J;
USRTS, Easton DF, Garcia-Closas M, Humphreys MK, Morrison J, Pharoah PD, Pooley
KA, Chenevix-Trench G; BCAC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
alisond@srl.cam.ac.uk

We have conducted a three-stage, comprehensive single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP)-tagging association study of ESR1 gene variants (SNPs) in more than 55,000 
breast cancer cases and controls from studies within the Breast Cancer
Association Consortium (BCAC). No large risks or highly significant associations 
were revealed. SNP rs3020314, tagging a region of ESR1 intron 4, is associated
with an increase in breast cancer susceptibility with a dominant mode of action
in European populations. Carriers of the c-allele have an odds ratio (OR) of 1.05
[95% Confidence Intervals (CI) 1.02-1.09] relative to t-allele homozygotes, P =
0.004. There is significant heterogeneity between studies, P = 0.002. The
increased risk appears largely confined to oestrogen receptor-positive tumour
risk. The region tagged by SNP rs3020314 contains sequence that is more highly
conserved across mammalian species than the rest of intron 4, and it may subtly
alter the ratio of two mRNA splice forms.

PMCID: PMC2722230
PMID: 19126777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Br J Haematol. 2009 Mar;144(6):838-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2008.07523.x.
Epub 2008 Dec 19.

Methylation of tumour suppressor gene promoters in the presence and absence of
transcriptional silencing in high hyperdiploid acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Paulsson K(1), An Q, Moorman AV, Parker H, Molloy G, Davies T, Griffiths M, Ross 
FM, Irving J, Harrison CJ, Young BD, Strefford JC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Medical Oncology Centre, Barts and the London School of
Medicine, Queen Mary College, London, UK. kajsa.paulsson@med.lu.se

Promoter methylation is a common phenomenon in tumours, including haematological 
malignancies. In the present study, we investigated 36 cases of high hyperdiploid
(>50 chromosomes) acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) with methylation-specific
multiplex ligase-dependent probe amplification to determine the extent of
aberrant methylation in this subgroup. The analysis, which comprised the
promoters of 35 known tumour suppressor genes, showed that 16 genes displayed
abnormal methylation in at least one case each. The highest number of methylated 
gene promoters seen in a single case was thirteen, with all but one case
displaying methylation for at least one gene. The most common targets were ESR1
(29/36 cases; 81%), CADM1 (IGSF4, TSLC1; 25/36 cases; 69%), FHIT (24/36 cases;
67%) and RARB (22/36 cases; 61%). Interestingly, quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction showed that although methylation of the
CADM1 and RARB promoters resulted in the expected pattern of downregulation of
the respective genes, no difference could be detected in FHIT expression between 
methylation-positive and -negative cases. Furthermore, TIMP3 was not expressed
regardless of methylation status, showing that aberrant methylation does not
always lead to gene expression changes. Taken together, our findings suggest that
aberrant methylation of tumour suppressor gene promoters is a common phenomenon
in high hyperdiploid ALL.

PMID: 19120349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(6):R108. doi: 10.1186/bcr2213. Epub 2008 Dec 18.

The influence of genetic variation in 30 selected genes on the clinical
characteristics of early onset breast cancer.

Tapper W(1), Hammond V, Gerty S, Ennis S, Simmonds P, Collins A; Prospective
study of Outcomes in Sporadic versus Hereditary breast cancer (POSH) Steering
Group, Eccles D.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics and Cancer Sciences Divisions, School of Medicine, Southampton 
General Hospital, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO16 6YD, UK.
wjt@soton.ac.uk

INTRODUCTION: Common variants that alter breast cancer risk are being discovered.
Here, we determine how these variants influence breast cancer prognosis, risk and
tumour characteristics.
METHODS: We selected 1,001 women with early onset nonfamilial invasive breast
cancer from the Prospective study of Outcomes in Sporadic versus Hereditary
breast cancer (POSH) cohort and genotyped 206 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) across 30 candidate genes. After quality control, 899 cases and 133 SNPs
remained. Survival analyses were used to identify SNPs associated with prognosis 
and determine their interdependency with recognized prognostic factors. To
identify SNPs that alter breast cancer risk, association tests were used to
compare cases with controls from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. To
search for SNPs affecting tumour biology, cases were stratified into subgroups
according to oestrogen receptor (ER) status and grade and tested for association.
RESULTS: We confirmed previous associations between increased breast cancer risk 
and SNPs in CASP8, TOX3 (previously known as TNRC9) and ESR1. Analysis of
prognosis identified eight SNPs in six genes (MAP3K1, DAPK1, LSP1, MMP7, TOX3 and
ESR1) and one region without genes on 8q24 that are associated with survival. For
MMP7, TOX3 and MAP3K1 the effects on survival are independent of the main
recognized clinical prognostic factors. The SNP in 8q24 is more weakly associated
with independent effects on survival. Once grade and pathological nodal status
(pN stage) were taken into account, SNPs in ESR1 and LSP1 showed no independent
survival difference, whereas the effects of the DAPK1 SNP were removed when
correcting for ER status. Interestingly, effects on survival for SNPs in ESR1
were most significant when only ER-positive tumours were examined. Stratifying
POSH cases by tumour characteristics identified SNPs in FGFR2 and TOX3 associated
with ER-positive disease and SNPs in ATM associated with ER-negative disease.
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated that several SNPs are associated with survival.
In some cases this appears to be due to an effect on tumour characteristics known
to have a bearing on prognosis; in other cases the effect appears to be
independent of these prognostic factors. These findings require validation by
further studies in similar patient groups.

PMCID: PMC2656905
PMID: 19094228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Headache. 2008 Nov-Dec;48(10):1438-50.

Multilocus analyses reveal involvement of the ESR1, ESR2, and FSHR genes in
migraine.

Oterino A(1), Toriello M, Cayón A, Castillo J, Colas R, Alonson-Arranz A,
Ruiz-Alegria C, Quintela E, Monton F, Ruiz-Lavilla N, Gonzalez F, Pascual J.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla-Neurology, Santander, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Female hormone genes have been investigated in migraine in recent
years. Research in this field has been controversial, especially in regard to
ESR1 gene findings. None of the reports have yet to approach the problem from a
multigenic point of view.
METHODS: We investigated 5 polymorphisms implicated in female hormone metabolism 
(FSHR, CYP19A1, ESR1, NRIP1, and ESR2) in a cohort of 730 subjects matched for
age and sex. The effect of gene-gene interaction was assessed using the set
association approach, and the corresponding haplotypes were studied with PM Plus 
software. To corroborate initial results, we analyzed the selected markers using 
a cohort of 134 families in which 168 trios were suitable for
transmission-disequilibrium test (TDT) analysis under the migraine with aura (MA)
phenotype.
RESULTS: A total of 356 consecutive migraine patients (198 with MA [76% females] 
and 158 migraine without aura [MO, 74% females], and 374 matched controls [71%
females]) were genotyped. In the 2-point analyses, the ESR1 and ESR2
polymorphisms showed nominal association under MA/MO phenotype, and this
association was higher with the FSHR polymorphism in MA females (P = .004,
uncorrected). Using the SUMSTAT program, we observed ESR2-ESR1-FSHR significant
gene-gene interaction, suggesting association with the MA/MO phenotype (P = .005;
P = .003 in females), and with MA alone (P = .021; P = .030 for females).We
corroborated that ESR2-ESR1-FSHR haplotypes interacted for migraine under a
model-free hypothesis (empirical P = .010 for the whole sample; P = .001 for
females), and the association was stronger for the MA phenotype alone (empirical 
P = 5.0e-4, under the heterogeneity model; P = .001 for females). These results
were corroborated using family-based association approaches. We observed nominal 
association for ESR2 and ESR1 (P = .031 and .034, respectively) in the TDT study,
and significant association for ESR1 using family-based association test
statistics. Haplotype-TDT analyses showed further significant gene-gene
interaction for ESR1-ESR2 (global P = .009), ESR2-FSHR (global P = .011), and
nominally significant interaction for ESR2-ESR1-FSHR genes (global P = .037).
CONCLUSION: We found significant association of female hormone metabolism
polymorphisms under the perspective of multigene approach.

PMID: 19093296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Reprod Biol. 2008 Nov;8(3):179-211.

Interferons and progesterone for establishment and maintenance of pregnancy:
interactions among novel cell signaling pathways.

Bazer FW(1), Burghardt RC, Johnson GA, Spencer TE, Wu G.

Author information: 
(1)Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-2471, USA. fbazer@cvm.tamu.edu

Type I and/or type II interferons (IFNs) are important in establishing uterine
receptivity to implantation in mammals. Gene expression effected by IFNs may be
induced, stimulated or inhibited, but most are IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs).
Effects of IFNs range from pregnancy recognition signaling in ruminants by IFN
tau (IFNT) to effects on cellular functions of the uterus and uterine
vasculature. For most, if not all, actions of IFNs on the uterus, progesterone
(P(4)) is permissive to ISG expression, with genes being induced by IFN or
induced by P(4) and stimulated by IFN. Uterine receptivity to implantation is
P(4)-dependent; however, implantation events are preceded by loss of expression
of progesterone (PGR) and estrogen (ESR1) receptors by uterine epithelia. Thus,
P4 likely stimulates PGR-positive stromal cells to express one or more
progestamedins, e.g., fibroblast growth factors-7 and -10, and/or hepatocyte
growth factor, that act via their respective receptors on uterine epithelia and
trophectoderm to regulate expression of ISGs. FGF10 appears to be the most
important progestamedin in sheep uteri during pregnancy. Sequential effects of
P(4) to induce and IFNs to stimulate gene expression suggest that P(4) and IFNs
activate complimentary cell signaling pathways to modulate expression of genes
for attachment of trophectoderm to uterine lumenal and superficial glandular
epithelia (LE/sGE), modify phenotype of uterine stromal cells, silence PGR and
ESR1 genes, signal pregnancy recognition, suppress genes for immune recognition, 
alter membrane permeability to enhance conceptus-maternal exchange of factors,
increase endometrial vascularity and activate genes for transport of nutrients
into the uterine lumen. In ewes, IFNT abrogrates the uterine luteolytic mechanism
and stimulates expression of classical ISGs by GE and stromal cells, whereas
LE/sGE express P(4)-induced and IFNT-stimulated genes important for uterine
receptivity to implantation and conceptus development. These include
wingless-type MMTV (mouse mammary tumor virus) integration site family member 7A 
(WNT7A) induced by IFNT, as well as galectin, proteases, protease inhibitors,
transporters for glucose and amino acids, gastrin releasing polypeptide,
insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1 and a hypoxia inducible factor. The 
specific functions of IFNs and ISGs induced in primates, pigs and other mammals
during pregnancy are not known, but likely are important in establishment of
pregnancy. Understanding the roles of IFNs and ISGs in uterine receptivity for
implantation is necessary to develop strategies to enhance reproductive health
and fertility in humans and domestic animals. The magnitude of the LH surge was
reduced in cows receiving endotoxin.

PMID: 19092983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Jun;115(3):643-50. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-0264-2. 
Epub 2008 Dec 12.

Estrogen receptor genotype is associated with risk of venous thromboembolism
during tamoxifen therapy.

Onitilo AA(1), McCarty CA, Wilke RA, Glurich I, Engel JM, Flockhart DA, Nguyen A,
Li L, Mi D, Skaar TC, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Marshfield Clinic Weston Center, 3501
Cranberry Boulevard, Weston, WI 54476, USA. onitilo.adedayo@marshfieldclinic.org

Thromboembolism is a serious complication of tamoxifen therapy in women with
breast cancer. Banked DNA from tamoxifen-treated individuals with breast cancer
from the Marshfield Clinic Personalized Medicine Research Project, a
population-based DNA repository, was tested for association between incidence of 
tamoxifen-associated thromboembolic events (TTE) and single nucleotide
polymorphisms encoding the estrogen receptors 1,2 (ESR1, ESR2) or drug metabolism
enzymes cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) and aromatase (CYP19). TTE were experienced 
by 16/220 subjects with risk association noted for XbaI (rs9340799) genotype and 
ESR1 Xbal/PvuII diplotype (rs9340799 and rs2234693) (hazard ratio 3.47, 95% CI
0.97-12.44, P = 0.035). Association persisted after adjusting for classical risk 
factors including age at diagnosis and body mass index at enrollment. Initial
evidence of association between increased risk for TTE and ESR1 genotype and ESR1
diplotype is presented. Determination of estrogen receptor genotype may identify 
a subset of women at increased risk for thromboembolism with tamoxifen exposure.

PMID: 19082882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Sep 16;88(35):2452-6.

[Is calmodulin 1 gene/estrogen receptor-alpha gene polymorphisms correlated with 
double curve pattern of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis?].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao D(1), Qiu GX, Wang YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing
100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between calmodulin1 (CALM1) gene or
estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) polymorphisms and double curve of adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis (AIS).
METHODS: 67 double curve patients (30 degrees < Cobb angle < 90 degrees ), 100
controls. There were 4 polymorphic loci, rs12885713 (-16C > T) and rs5871 locus
in CALM1 gene, rs2234693 (PvuII) and rs9340799 (XbaI) in ESR1 gene analyzed
sequence by ABI3730 genetic analyzer.
RESULTS: There were 60 patients with Cobb angle > or = 40 degrees . According to 
the apical location of major curve, there were 40 thoracic curve patients.
Furthermore, 1) there are statistical differences on the polymorphic distribution
of ESR1 gene rs2234693 site between the double curve, Cobb angle > or = 40
degrees or thoracic curve patients and the controls, respectively (chi(2) =
6.081, 5.554, 6.1935; P = 0.014, 0.0128, 0.0184); 2) between the double curve
cases and the controls, there is difference on the polymorphic distribution of
rs12885713 site in CALM1 gene (chi(2) = 4.478; P = 0.034); 3) Between the
thoracic curve patients and the controls, there is difference on the distribution
of rs5871 allele polymorphism in CALM1 gene (chi(2) = 6.6061; P = 0.0102).
CONCLUSION: Double curve patterns might be related to ESR1 gene rs2234693 (PvuII)
site polymorphism. It is necessary to clarify the association between the
polymorphisms of ESR1 gene and CALM1 gene and different subtypes of adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis in the further study.

PMID: 19080622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008 Dec;17(12):3621-7. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-0742.

Lack of association between the functional polymorphisms in the
estrogen-metabolizing genes and risk for hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yuan X(1), Zhou G, Zhai Y, Xie W, Cui Y, Cao J, Zhi L, Zhang H, Yang H, Zhang X, 
Qiu W, Peng Y, Zhang X, Yu L, Xia X, He F.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center,
Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China.

Estrogens have been proposed to act as tumor promoters and induce
hepatocarcinogenesis. Recently, we observed a significant association between the
risk for hepatocellular carcinoma and the polymorphisms of the estrogen receptor 
(ESR) alpha (ESR1) gene, supporting the hypothesis of involvement for the
estrogen-ESR axis in the estrogen-induced hepatocarcinogenesis. In this study,
based on another hypothesis in which estrogen metabolites can directly cause DNA 
damage and affect tumor initiation, we examined whether the polymorphisms of the 
estrogen-metabolizing enzymes (EME), which are involved in biogenesis (CYP17,
CYP19), bioavailability (CYP1A1, CYP1B1), and degradation
(catechol-O-methyltransferase) of the estrogens, have any bearing on the risk for
hepatocellular carcinoma. Seven functional polymorphisms in five EMEs (CYP17
MspAI site, CYP19 Trp39Arg, Ile462Val and MspI site in CYP1A1, CYP1B1 Val432Leu, 
and Ala72Ser and Val158Met in catechol-O-methyltransferase) were genotyped in 434
patients with hepatocellular carcinoma and 480 controls by PCR-RFLP analysis. The
associations between the polymorphisms and hepatocellular carcinoma risk were
evaluated while controlling for confounding factors. No significant association
with the risk for hepatocellular carcinoma was observed with the seven
polymorphisms in hepatitis B virus carriers and non-hepatitis B virus carriers
after correction for multiple comparisons. After stratification by common
confounding factors of hepatocellular carcinoma, the EME polymorphism remained no
significant association with the hepatocellular carcinoma risk. Furthermore, no
signs of gene-gene interactions were observed for each combination of the seven
polymorphisms. Our findings suggest that the polymorphisms of EMEs may not
contribute significantly to the risk for hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMID: 19064581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2009 Jan;28(1):63-75. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e31817d9c61.

DNA hypermethylation profiles in squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva.

Stephen JK(1), Chen KM, Raitanen M, Grénman S, Worsham MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Research, Henry Ford Hospital,
Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA.

Gene silencing through promoter hypermethylation is a growing concept in the
development of human cancers. In this study, we examined the contribution of
aberrant methylation of promoter regions in methylation-prone tumor suppressors
to the pathogenesis of vulvar cancer. Thirteen cell lines from 12 patients with
squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva were evaluated for aberrant methylation
status and gene copy number alterations, concomitantly, using the
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assay. Of
the 22 tumor suppressor genes examined, aberrant methylation was observed for 9
genes: tumor protein p73 (TP73), fragile histidine triad (FHIT), von
Hippel-Lindau (VHL), adenomatosis polyposis coli (APC), estrogen receptor 1
(ESR1), cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2B (CDKN2B), death-associated protein
kinase 1 (DAPK1), glutathione S-transferase pi (GSTP1), and immunoglobin
superfamily, member 4 (IGSF4). The most frequently methylated genes included TP73
in 9 of 13 cell lines, and IGSF4, DAPK1, and FHIT in 3 of 13 cell lines.
Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was performed for TP73 and FHIT to
confirm aberrant methylation by methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent
probe amplification. In the context of gene copy number and methylation status,
both copies of the TP73 gene were hypermethylated. Loss or decreased mRNA
expression of TP73 and IGSF4 by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
confirmed aberrant methylation. Frequent genetic alterations of loss and gain of 
gene copy number included gain of GSTP1 and multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
(MEN1), and loss of malignant fibrous histiocytoma amplified sequence 1 (MFHAS1) 
and IGSF4 in over 50% of the squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva cell lines.
These findings underscore the contribution of both genetic and epigenetic events 
to the underlying pathogenesis of squamous cell carcinoma of the vulva.

PMCID: PMC2605778
PMID: 19047905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2009 Jun;17(6):782-9. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2008.09.019. 
Epub 2008 Nov 1.

Attempt to replicate published genetic associations in a large, well-defined
osteoarthritis case-control population (the GOAL study).

Limer KL(1), Tosh K, Bujac SR, McConnell R, Doherty S, Nyberg F, Zhang W, Doherty
M, Muir KR, Maciewicz RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Epidemiology, Nottingham University Medical
School, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Published studies have tested over 90 genes for association with
osteoarthritis (OA), but few positives reported have been independently
replicated. Using a new case-control study, our aim was to attempt the
replication of findings from 12 genes reported to have significant genetic
association with OA and to further examine the role of genetic variation in six
of these genes.
METHODS: A case-control study was undertaken in Nottingham, UK. Hospital-referred
index cases with symptomatic, radiographic OA (ROA) of the knee (n=1040) or hip
(n=1004) were recruited. Asymptomatic controls (n=1123) were recruited from
intravenous urography waiting lists and screened for radiographic hip and knee
OA. Sixty-eight polymorphisms were genotyped in IL1A, IL1B, IL1RN, IL4R, IL6,
COL2A1, ADAM12, ASPN, IGF1, TGFB1, ESR1 and VDR. Statistical analysis compared
allele or genotype frequencies of these polymorphisms in all asymptomatic
controls and the subset of controls without ROA vs all OA, knee OA and hip OA.
The analyses were adjusted for age, gender and body mass index.
RESULTS: We were unable to replicate any of the published genetic associations
investigated. Our extended exploratory analyses identified some associations
between polymorphisms in TGFB1, IGF1 and IL1RN and OA; but the strength of
evidence varied with the control group used.
CONCLUSION: Lack of replication is common and could be due to differences in
study design, phenotype, populations examined or the occurrence of false
positives in the initial study. Variants within TGFB1, IGF1 and IL1RN could have 
a role in OA susceptibility; however, replication of these findings is required
in an independent study.

PMID: 19036616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Metab Syndr Relat Disord. 2009 Apr;7(2):111-7. doi: 10.1089/met.2008.0030.

Associations of the estrogen receptors 1 and 2 gene polymorphisms with the
metabolic syndrome in women.

Goulart AC(1), Zee RY, Pradhan A, Rexrode KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. alecgoulart@yahoo.com.br

BACKGROUND: Genetic variation of the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta
(ESR2) has been associated with components of the metabolic syndrome.
METHODS: The relationships of two ESR1 (rs2234693 and rs9340799) and three ESR2
(rs1271572, rs1256049, and rs4986938) polymorphisms with the metabolic syndrome
were examined in 532 Caucasian female participants (median age 63.1 years) in the
Women's Health Study. Most women (99.1%) were postmenopausal. The associations
between ESR1 and ESR2 genotypes and haplotypes with the metabolic syndrome were
evaluated. Effect modification by hormone therapy was also assessed.
RESULTS: Genotype and haplotype distributions were similar between women with and
without metabolic syndrome. We found no consistent associations between the
genotypes and haplotypes tested and the metabolic syndrome, or its components, in
logistic regression models. No effect modification by hormone therapy use was
noted.
CONCLUSIONS: No association between these genetic variants in ESR1 and ESR2 and
the metabolic syndrome was observed among these Caucasian women. Further
investigation regarding the potential involvement of estrogen receptor genes and 
the metabolic syndrome may be warranted in other ethnic groups.

PMCID: PMC2674981
PMID: 19032032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2008 Oct;41(10):872-6.

Estrogen receptor 1 gene polymorphisms in premenopausal women: interaction
between genotype and smoking on lipid levels.

Almeida S(1), Hutz MH.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brasil.

Estrogen has multiple effects on lipid and lipoprotein metabolism. We
investigated the association between the four common single nucleotide
polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene locus, -1989T>G, +261G>C,
IVS1-397T>C and IVS1-351A>G, and lipid and lipoprotein levels in southern
Brazilians. The sample consisted in 150 men and 187 premenopausal women. The
women were considered premenopausal if they had regular menstrual bleeding within
the previous 3 months and were 18-50 years of age. Exclusion criteria were
pregnancy, secondary hyperlipidemia due to renal, hepatic or thyroid disease, and
diabetes. Smoking status was self-reported; subjects were classified as never
smoked and current smokers. DNA was amplified by PCR and was subsequently
digested with the appropriate restriction enzymes. Statistical analysis was
carried out for men and women separately. In the study population, major allele
frequencies were _1989*T (0.83), +261*G (0.96), IVS1-397*T (0.58), and IVS1-351*A
(0.65). Multiple linear regression analyses indicated that an interaction between
+261G>C polymorphism and smoking was a significant factor affecting high-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels (P = 0.028) in women. Nonsmoking women
with genotype G/C of +261G>C polymorphism had mean HDL-C levels higher than those
with G/G genotype (1.40 +/- 0.33 vs 1.22 +/- 0.26 mmol/L; P = 0.033). No
significant associations with lipid and lipoprotein levels in women and men were 
detected for other polymorphisms. In conclusion, the +261G>C polymorphism might
influence lipoprotein and lipid levels in premenopausal women, but these effects 
seem to be modulated by smoking, whereas in men ESR1 polymorphisms were not
associated with high lipoprotein levels.

PMID: 19030709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Jan;30(1):59-64. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn253. Epub 2008 Nov
20.

A variant affecting a putative miRNA target site in estrogen receptor (ESR) 1 is 
associated with breast cancer risk in premenopausal women.

Tchatchou S(1), Jung A, Hemminki K, Sutter C, Wappenschmidt B, Bugert P, Weber
BH, Niederacher D, Arnold N, Varon-Mateeva R, Ditsch N, Meindl A, Schmutzler RK, 
Bartram CR, Burwinkel B.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-University Group Molecular Epidemiology, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. s.tchatchou@dkfz.de

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) negatively regulate expression of target transcripts by
hybridization to complementary sites of their messenger RNA targets. Chen et al. 
have described several putative functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
in miRNA target sites. Here, we selected 11 miRNA target site SNPs located in 3' 
untranslated regions of genes involved in cancer and breast cancer to analyze
their impact on breast cancer risk using a large familial study population.
Whereas no association was observed for 10 SNPs, a significant association was
revealed for the variant affecting a miRNA target site in the estrogen receptor
(ESR) 1. Age stratification showed that the association was stronger in
premenopausal women [C versus T: odds ratio (OR) = 0.60, confidence interval (CI)
= 0.41-0.89, P = 0.010]. Furthermore, the effect was stronger in high-risk
familial cases (C versus T: OR = 0.42, CI = 0.25-0.71, P = 0.0009). Clinical
studies have shown that elimination of ESR1 significantly reduces breast cancer
risk. Thus, therapies that inhibit ESR1 are used for breast cancer treatment.
According to in silico analysis, ESR1_rs2747648 affects the binding capacity of
miR-453, which is stronger when the C allele is present. In contrast, the T
allele attenuates the binding of miR-453, which might lead to a reduced
miRNA-mediated ESR1 repression, in consequence higher ESR1 protein levels and an 
increased breast cancer risk. Thus, the breast cancer protective effect observed 
for the C allele in premenopausal women is biologically reasonable. The analysis 
of large study populations in multicentre collaboration will be needed to verify 
the association and answer questions regarding the possible impact of this
variant on therapeutic and clinical outcome.

PMID: 19028706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Oct;22(5):723-35. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2008.08.007.

Human genetics of osteoporosis.

Ferrari S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation and Geriatrics, WHO Collaborating Center for
Osteoporosis Prevention, Geneva University Hospital and Faculty of Medicine,
Genève 14, Switzerland. serge.ferrari@medecine.unige.ch

A family history of hip fracture carries a twofold increased risk of fracture
among descendants. Genetic factors indeed play a major role in the determination 
of bone mineral density (BMD) and osteoporosis risk. Multiple chromosomal loci
have been mapped by linkage approaches which potentially carry hundreds of genes 
involved in the determination of bone mass and quality. Association studies based
on candidate gene polymorphisms and subsequent meta-analyses, and the more recent
genome-wide association studies (GWAS), have clearly identified a handful of
genes associated with BMD and/or fragility fractures. Among them are genes coding
for the LDL-receptor related protein 5 (LRP5), estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and
osteoprotegerin, OPG (TNFRSf11b). However, the percentage of osteoporosis risk
explained by any of these polymorphisms is small, indicating that most genetic
risk factors remain to be discovered and/or that interaction with environmental
factors needs further consideration.

PMID: 19028354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Gastroenterology. 2009 Feb;136(2):683-93. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.10.029. Epub
2008 Nov 1.

MicroRNA-18a prevents estrogen receptor-alpha expression, promoting proliferation
of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Liu WH(1), Yeh SH, Lu CC, Yu SL, Chen HY, Lin CY, Chen DS, Chen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine,
Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Men have a higher incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
than women, which is believed to partly be because of protective effects of
estrogen. We sought to determine whether there were differences in levels of
microRNA (miRNA) molecules between male and female HCC samples.
METHODS: The expression profiles of a panel of candidate miRNAs were compared
between male and female HCC tissues using the TaqMan miRNA assay. A luciferase
reporter assay was used to identify mRNA targets recognized by specific miRNAs.
The levels of pri- and pre-miRNA for each specific miRNA were assayed by
quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction to delineate the
step deregulated in the biogenesis process. Finally, a colorimetric assay was
used to determine the effect of specific miRNAs on hepatoma cell proliferation.
RESULTS: The miR-18a miRNA increased specifically in samples from female HCC
patients (female/male ratio, 4.58; P = .0023). The gene ESR1, which encodes the
estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha), was identified as a target of miR-18a. miR-18a
can repress ERalpha translation by binding to its mRNA at the 3' untranslated
region. Increased levels of miR-18a in female HCC tissues correlated with reduced
ERalpha expression; the level of pre-miR-18a changed in concordance with that of 
mature miR-18a in these tissues. Overexpression of miR-18a decreased ERalpha
levels but stimulated the proliferation of hepatoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a novel miRNA-mediated regulatory mechanism for 
controlling ERalpha expression in hepatocytes. miR-18a prevents translation of
ERalpha, potentially blocking the protective effects of estrogen and promoting
the development of HCC in women.

PMID: 19027010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. BMC Biochem. 2008 Oct 21;9 Suppl 1:S2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-9-S1-S2.

The UPS: a promising target for breast cancer treatment.

Sato K(1), Rajendra E, Ohta T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, St Marianna University School of
Medicine, Kawasaki, 216-8511, Japan.

During the past decade, progress in endocrine therapy and the use of trastuzumab 
has significantly contributed to the decline in breast cancer mortality for
hormone receptor-positive and ERBB2 (HER2)-positive cases, respectively. As a
result of these advances, a breast cancer cluster with poor prognosis that is
negative for the estrogen receptor (ESR1), the progesterone receptor (PRGR) and
ERBB2 (triple negative) has come to the forefront of medical therapeutic
attention. DNA microarray analyses have revealed that this cluster is
phenotypically most like the basal-like breast cancer that is caused by
deficiencies in the BRCA1 pathways. To gain further improvements in breast cancer
survival, new types of drugs might be required, and small molecules targeting the
ubiquitin proteasome system have moved into the spotlight. The success of
bortezomib in the treatment of multiple myeloma has sent encouraging signals that
proteasome inhibitors could be used to treat other types of cancers. In addition,
ubiquitin E3s involved in ESR1, ERBB2 or BRCA1 pathways could be ideal targets
for therapeutic intervention. This review summarizes the ubiquitin proteasome
pathways related to these proteins and discusses the possibility of new drugs for
the treatment of breast cancers. PUBLICATION HISTORY : Republished from Current
BioData's Targeted Proteins database (TPdb; http://www.targetedproteinsdb.com).

PMCID: PMC2582803
PMID: 19007432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Jun;129(6):1527-38. doi: 10.1038/jid.2008.371. Epub 2008 
Nov 20.

Development of alopecia areata is associated with higher central and peripheral
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal tone in the skin graft induced C3H/HeJ mouse
model.

Zhang X(1), Yu M, Yu W, Weinberg J, Shapiro J, McElwee KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2009 Jun;129(6):1324-6.

The relationship of the stress response to the pathogenesis of alopecia areata
(AA) was investigated by subjecting normal and skin graft-induced, AA-affected
C3H/HeJ mice to light ether anesthesia or restraint stress. Plasma corticosterone
(CORT), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and estradiol (E2) levels were
determined by RIA, whereas gene expression in brains, lymphoid organs, and skin
was measured by quantitative RT-PCR for corticotropin-releasing hormone (Crh),
arginine vasopressin (Avp), proopiomelanocortin (Pomc), glucocorticoid receptor
(Nr3c1), mineralocorticoid receptor (Nr3c2), corticotropin-releasing hormone
receptor types 1 and 2 (Crhr1, Crhr2), interleukin-12 (Il12), tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (Tnf alpha), and estrogen receptors type-1 (Esr1) and type-2 (Esr2).
AA mice had a marked increase in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) tone and
activity centrally, and peripherally in the skin and lymph nodes. There was also 
altered interaction between the adrenal and gonadal axes compared with that in
normal mice. Stress further exacerbated changes in AA mouse HPA activity both
centrally and peripherally. AA mice had significantly blunted CORT and ACTH
responses to acute ether stress (physiological stressor) and a deficit in
habituation to repeated restraint stress (psychological stressor). The positive
correlation of HPA hormone levels with skin Th1 cytokines suggests that altered
HPA activity may occur as a consequence of the immune response associated with
AA.

PMID: 19020552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Dec 20;26(36):5849-54. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.16.8377. Epub
2008 Nov 17.

Estrogen receptor genotypes influence hot flash prevalence and composite score
before and after tamoxifen therapy.

Jin Y(1), Hayes DF, Li L, Robarge JD, Skaar TC, Philips S, Nguyen A, Schott A,
Hayden J, Lemler S, Storniolo AM, Flockhart DA, Stearns V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2008 Dec 20;26(36):5841-2.

PURPOSE: Hot flashes are common and frequently lead to drug discontinuation among
women prescribed tamoxifen. We determined whether genetic polymorphisms in
estrogen receptors (ESRs) alpha and beta (ESR1 and ESR2, respectively) are
associated with tamoxifen-induced hot flashes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We determined ESR1 PvuII and XbaI and ESR2-02 genotypes in 
297 women who were initiating tamoxifen. One-week hot flash diaries were
collected to calculate a hot flash score (frequency x severity) before and 1, 4, 
8, and 12 months after starting tamoxifen.
RESULTS: Approximately 80% of 297 participants reported hot flashes before or
during the first year of tamoxifen. After 4 months of tamoxifen, premenopausal
women who did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy had a four-fold increase in hot
flash score (from 5.9 to 23.6; P = .003) compared with a 1.17-fold increase (from
19.6 to 23; P = .34) in those who received chemotherapy. In premenopausal women, 
increased number of ESR1 PvuII and XbaI CG alleles was associated with higher
baseline hot flash scores compared with those who had other haplotypes (P =
.0026). At 4 months, postmenopausal women with ESR1 PvuII CC and ESR2-02 GG
genotypes had 4.6 times increases in hot flash scores than other postmenopausal
women (56 v 12; P = .0007). Women who had the ESR2-02 AA genotype were
significantly less likely to experience tamoxifen-induced hot flashes than women 
who carried at least one ESR-02 G allele (hazard ratio, 0.26; 95% CI, 0.10 to
0.63; P = .001).
CONCLUSION: Knowledge of menopausal status, prior chemotherapy, and ESR genotype 
may help predict which women are most likely to suffer hot flashes during
tamoxifen treatment.

PMCID: PMC2645113
PMID: 19018086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Nov;118(2):323-31. doi: 10.1007/s10549-008-0241-9. 
Epub 2008 Nov 15.

The promoter C specific ERalpha isoform is associated with tamoxifen outcome in
breast cancer.

Amaral S(1), Schroth W, Kugler S, Fritz P, Simon W, Brauch H.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart and 
University Tuebingen, Auerbachstrasse 112, 70376, Stuttgart, Germany.

Endocrine breast cancer treatment relies on estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha)
assessment, which does not predict response in all cases. We investigated whether
ESR1 promoter C driven (ESR1_C) gene expression may shed light on endocrine
responsiveness. We investigated archived tumor tissues of 211 patients.
Transcript levels of ESR1_C and ESR1_exon3 (all transcripts) were quantified by
real-time PCR. mRNA stability was assessed in actinomycin D treated MCF-7 cells. 
ERalpha protein was quantified using transiently transfected breast cancer cells.
Low ESR1_C transcript levels were associated with better overall survival (P =
0.017). High levels of ESR1_C transcript were associated with non-favorable
response in tamoxifen treated patients (HR = 2.48; CI 95% 1.24-4.99), an effect
that was more pronounced in patients with ERalpha/PgR double-positive tumors (HR 
= 3.41; CI 95% 1.45-8.04). The ESR1_C isoform had a prolonged mRNA half-life and 
a more relaxed 5'-UTR structure compared to ESR1_A isoform. ESR1_C levels may aid
in the discrimination of patients' endocrine responsiveness.

PMID: 19011961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 15;68(22):9532-40. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3082.

Genome-wide functional synergy between amplified and mutated genes in human
breast cancer.

Nikolsky Y(1), Sviridov E, Yao J, Dosymbekov D, Ustyansky V, Kaznacheev V, Dezso 
Z, Mulvey L, Macconaill LE, Winckler W, Serebryiskaya T, Nikolskaya T, Polyak K.

Author information: 
(1)GeneGo, Inc., St. Joseph, Michigan, USA.

A single cancer cell contains large numbers of genetic alterations that in
combination create the malignant phenotype. However, whether amplified and
mutated genes form functional and physical interaction networks that could
explain the selection for cells with combined alterations is unknown. To
investigate this issue, we characterized copy number alterations in 191 breast
tumors using dense single nucleotide polymorphism arrays and identified 1,747
genes with copy number gain organized into 30 amplicons. Amplicons were
distributed unequally throughout the genome. Each amplicon had distinct
enrichment pattern in pathways, networks, and molecular functions, but genes
within individual amplicons did not form coherent functional units. Genes in
amplicons included all major tumorigenic pathways and were highly enriched in
breast cancer-causative genes. In contrast, 1,188 genes with somatic mutations in
breast cancer were distributed randomly over the genome, did not represent a
functionally cohesive gene set, and were relatively less enriched in breast
cancer marker genes. Mutated and gained genes did not show statistically
significant overlap but were highly synergistic in populating key tumorigenic
pathways including transforming growth factor beta, WNT, fibroblast growth
factor, and PIP3 signaling. In general, mutated genes were more frequently
upstream of gained genes in transcription regulation signaling than vice versa,
suggesting that mutated genes are mainly regulators, whereas gained genes are
mostly regulated. ESR1 was the major transcription factor regulating amplified
but not mutated genes. Our results support the hypothesis that multiple genetic
events, including copy number gains and somatic mutations, are necessary for
establishing the malignant cell phenotype.

PMID: 19010930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. BMC Cancer. 2008 Nov 6;8:322. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-322.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphism and endometrial cancer risk--a
case-control study.

Wedrén S(1), Lovmar L, Humphreys K, Magnusson C, Melhus H, Syvänen AC, Kindmark
A, Landegren U, Fermér ML, Stiger F, Persson I, Baron JA, Weiderpass E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
sara.wedren@ki.se

BACKGROUND: Estrogen is an established endometrial carcinogen. One of the most
important mediators of estrogenic action is the estrogen receptor alpha. We have 
investigated whether polymorphic variation in the estrogen receptor alpha gene
(ESR1) is associated with endometrial cancer risk.
METHODS: In 702 cases with invasive endometrial cancer and 1563 controls, we
genotyped five markers in ESR1 and used logistic regression models to estimate
odds ratios (OR) and 95 percent confidence intervals (CI).
RESULTS: We found an association between rs2234670, rs2234693, as well as
rs9340799, markers in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD), and endometrial cancer 
risk. The association with rs9340799 was the strongest, OR 0.75 (CI 0.60-0.93)
for heterozygous and OR 0.53 (CI 0.37-0.77) for homozygous rare compared to those
homozygous for the most common allele. Haplotype models did not fit better to the
data than single marker models.
CONCLUSION: We found that intronic variation in ESR1 was associated with
endometrial cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC2613912
PMID: 18990228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;42(1):19-33. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0088. Epub 2008 Oct
24.

Role of SP transcription factors in hormone-dependent modulation of genes in
MCF-7 breast cancer cells: microarray and RNA interference studies.

Wu F(1), Ivanov I, Xu R, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843, USA.

17beta-estradiol (E(2)) binds estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) in MCF-7 cells and
increases cell proliferation and survival through induction or repression of
multiple genes. ESR1 interactions with DNA-bound specificity protein (SP)
transcription factors is a nonclassical genomic estrogenic pathway and the role
of SP transcription factors in mediating hormone-dependent activation or
repression of genes in MCF-7 cells was investigated by microarrays and RNA
interference. MCF-7 cells were transfected with a nonspecific oligonucleotide or 
a cocktail of small inhibitory RNAs (iSP), which knockdown SP1, SP3, and SP4
proteins, and treated with dimethylsulfoxide or 10 nM E(2) for 6 h. E(2) induced 
62 and repressed 134 genes and the induction or repression was reversed in
approximately 62% of the genes in cells transfected with iSP (ESR1/SP dependent),
whereas hormonal activation or repression of the remaining genes was unaffected
by iSP (SP independent). Analysis of the ESR1/SP-dependent and SP-independent
genes showed minimal overlap with respect to the GO terms (functional processes) 
in genes induced or repressed, suggesting that the different genomic pathways may
contribute independently to the hormone-induced phenotype in MCF-7 cells.

PMCID: PMC2642616
PMID: 18952783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Eur J Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;160(1):101-6. doi: 10.1530/EJE-08-0321. Epub 2008 Oct 
24.

Association between estrogen and androgen receptor genes and prostate cancer
risk.

Nicolaiew N(1), Cancel-Tassin G, Azzouzi AR, Grand BL, Mangin P, Cormier L,
Fournier G, Giordanella JP, Pouchard M, Escary JL, Valeri A, Cussenot O.

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de Médecine, Institut Mondor de Médecine Moléculaire (IFR10),
Université Paris 12, Créteil, France.

OBJECTIVE: Prostate cancer (PC) is one of the principal causes of death among
men. Steroid hormones are involved in normal prostate growth and carcinogenesis. 
The purpose of our study was to investigate the effects on PC risk of
polymorphisms from three steroid hormone receptor genes: the androgen (AR), and
the alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) estrogen receptors.
DESIGN AND METHODS: The study was performed on a Caucasian population of 1045 PC 
patients and 814 controls. Using a logistic regression model, the different
alleles and genotypes from those polymorphisms were analyzed according to
case/control status, the tumor aggressiveness, and the age at onset.
RESULTS: A significant association between PC risk and the pooled 4/5, 5/6, and
6/6 genotypes of the GGGA repeat located in the first intron of ESR1 (odds ratio 
(OR)=3.00, 95% CI=1.32-6.82, P=0.008) was observed. When we stratified the cases,
this association was confined to patients with a Gleason score of 2-4 (OR=8.34,
95% CI=2.91-23.91, P<0.0001) or late onset PC (OR=2.91, 95% CI=1.22-6.93,
P=0.016). An association between a short AR CAG repeat (less than 17 repeats) was
also observed among patients with late onset PC (OR=2.34, 95% CI=1.15-4.76,
P=0.019).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the GGGA repeat from ESR1 and the CAG
repeat from AR may be associated with risk of late onset PC.

PMID: 18952763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Oncol Rep. 2008 Nov;20(5):1137-42.

Quantitative p16 and ESR1 methylation in the peripheral blood of patients with
non-small cell lung cancer.

Suga Y(1), Miyajima K, Oikawa T, Maeda J, Usuda J, Kajiwara N, Ohira T, Uchida O,
Tsuboi M, Hirano T, Kato H, Ikeda N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tokyo Medical University Hospital,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Inactivation of the p16 and ESR1 tumor suppressor genes by promoter lesion
methylation has been reported in many tumor types, including lung cancer. We
examined the blood of 95 non-small cell lung cancer patients (66 cases of
adenocarcinoma, 23 of squamous cell carcinoma and 6 of large cell carcinoma) and 
30 controls consisting of normal subjects and benign disease patients to
determine the methylation ratios of p16 and ESR1 using real-time PCR. For both
genes, there was a statistically significant difference in the methylation ratio 
between non-small cell lung cancer patients and controls (p16; p<0.01, ESR1;
p<0.001). In addition, there was a strong correlation between the methylation
ratio of each gene and old age (p16; p<0.01, ESR1; p<0.001 and p16 or ESR1;
p<0.001), and between p16 or ESR1 methylation rate and smoking history (p<0.01). 
Moreover in Stage I cases, the methylation positive rate of each gene (p16, ESR1 
and p16 or ESR1) was higher than the CEA positive rate (p<0.05, p<0.001,
p<0.001). Evaluation of p16 and ESR1 promoter methylation in blood using
real-time PCR appears to be very useful for lung cancer diagnosis and there is
some possibility that these methylated genes might come to represent useful
biomarkers for the early detection of lung cancer. Our study results also
suggested that comparative evaluation of the methylation ratio before and after
surgery might be a powerful tool to predict the prognosis of lung cancer
patients.

PMID: 18949413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;200(1):75-84. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0199. Epub 2008 Oct 17.

Estradiol increases angiotensin II type 1 receptor in hearts of ovariectomized
rats.

Ricchiuti V(1), Lian CG, Oestreicher EM, Tran L, Stone JR, Yao T, Seely EW,
Williams GH, Adler GK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA. vricchiuti@partners.org

We tested the hypothesis that 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) has dual effects on the
heart, increasing levels of proteins thought to have beneficial cardiovascular
effects (e.g. endothelial nitric oxide (NO) synthase (eNOS)) as well as those
thought to have detrimental cardiovascular effects (e.g. type 1 angiotensin II
(AngII) receptor (AT(1)R)). Ovariectomized Wistar rats consuming a high-sodium
diet received one of four treatments (n=7 per group): group 1, placebo pellets;
group 2, E(2) (0 x 5 mg/pellet, 21-day release); group 3, NOS inhibitor,
N(omega)-nitro-L-arginine-methyl-ester (L-NAME; 40 mg/kg per day for 14 days)
plus Ang II (0 x 225 mg/kg per day on days 11-14); group 4, E(2) plus L-NAME/Ang 
II. E(2) increased cardiac levels of estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2, an
ESR-associated membrane protein caveolin-3, eNOS, and phosphorylated (p)eNOS,
thus, exerting potentially beneficial cardiovascular effects on NO. However, E(2)
also increased cardiac levels of proteins associated with cardiovascular injury
and inflammation including, AT(1)R, protein kinase C delta (PRKCD),
phosphorylated PRKC, and phosphorylated extracellular signal regulated kinase
(pMAPK)3/1, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), osteopontin and ED-1, a
monocyte/macrophage-specific protein. E(2) treatment led to similar protein
changes in the hearts of L-NAME/Ang II-treated rats except that the increase in
peNOS was prevented, and L-NAME/Ang II and E(2) had additive effects in
increasing cardiac PRKCD and PAI-1. Thus, the highest levels of cardiac PAI-1 and
PRKCD occurred in L-NAME/Ang II-treated rats receiving E(2). In summary, E(2)
treatment increased cardiac expression of AT(1)R as well as the expression of
pro-inflammatory and prothrombotic factors.

PMCID: PMC2927364
PMID: 18931023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(5):R88. doi: 10.1186/bcr2158. Epub 2008 Oct 17.

A candidate molecular signature associated with tamoxifen failure in primary
breast cancer.

Vendrell JA(1), Robertson KE, Ravel P, Bray SE, Bajard A, Purdie CA, Nguyen C,
Hadad SM, Bieche I, Chabaud S, Bachelot T, Thompson AM, Cohen PA.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, Faculté de Pharmacie de Lyon, France.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(6):115.

INTRODUCTION: Few markers are available that can predict response to tamoxifen
treatment in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers. Identification of
such markers would be clinically useful. We attempted to identify molecular
markers associated with tamoxifen failure in breast cancer.
METHODS: Eighteen initially ER-positive patients treated with tamoxifen requiring
salvage surgery (tamoxifen failure [TF] patients) were compared with 17 patients 
who were disease free 5 years after surgery plus tamoxifen adjuvant therapy
(control patients). cDNA microarray, real-time quantitative PCR, and
immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays were used to generate and confirm a
gene signature associated with tamoxifen failure. An independent series of 33
breast tumor samples from patients who relapsed (n = 14) or did not relapse (n = 
19) under tamoxifen treatment from a different geographic location was
subsequently used to explore the gene expression signature identified.
RESULTS: Using a screening set of 18 tumor samples (from eight control patients
and 10 TF patients), a 47-gene signature discriminating between TF and control
samples was identified using cDNA arrays. In addition to ESR1/ERalpha, the
top-ranked genes selected by statistical cross-analyses were MET, FOS, SNCG,
IGFBP4, and BCL2, which were subsequently validated in a larger set of tumor
samples (from 17 control patients and 18 TF patients). Confirmation at the
protein level by tissue microarray immunohistochemistry was observed for
ER-alpha, gamma-synuclein, and insulin-like growth factor binding protein 4
proteins in the 35 original samples. In an independent series of breast tumor
samples (19 nonrelapsing and 14 relapsing), reduced expression of ESR1/ERalpha,
IGFBP4, SNCG, BCL2, and FOS was observed in the relapsing group and was
associated with a shorter overall survival. Low mRNA expression levels of
ESR1/ERalpha, BCL2, and FOS were also associated with a shorter relapse-free
survival (RFS). Using a Cox multivariate regression analysis, we identified BCL2 
and FOS as independent prognostic markers associated with RFS. Finally, the
BCL2/FOS signature was demonstrated to have more accurate prognostic value for
RFS than ESR1/ERalpha alone (likelihood ratio test).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified molecular markers including a BCL2/FOS signature
associated with tamoxifen failure; these markers may have clinical potential in
the management of ER-positive breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2614524
PMID: 18928543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Biol Reprod. 2009 Feb;80(2):375-83. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.107.065375. Epub 2008
Oct 15.

Characterization of antiestrogenic activity of the Chinese herb, prunella
vulgaris, using in vitro and in vivo (Mouse Xenograft) models.

Collins NH(1), Lessey EC, DuSell CD, McDonnell DP, Fowler L, Palomino WA, Illera 
MJ, Yu X, Mo B, Houwing AM, Lessey BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Greenville Hospital System,
Greenville, South Carolina 29605, USA.

Erratum in
    Biol Reprod. 2009 Jun;80(6):1306.

Prunella vulgaris (PV), a commonly used Chinese herb, also known as Self-heal,
has a wide range of reported medicinal activities. By screening multiple herbs
using the endometrial cancer cell line, ECC-1, and an alkaline phosphatase
detection assay, we found that PV displayed significant antiestrogenic activity. 
We investigated the possible usefulness of antiestrogenic activity using both in 
vitro and in vivo models of endometrial function. Using the well-differentiated, 
hormone-responsive endometrial cell line, ECC-1, PV extract, at concentrations
that were not toxic to the cells, significantly reduced alkaline phosphatase
activity and cell proliferation in response to estrogen in a dose-dependent
manner. The expression of CYR61, an estrogen-induced protein, was blocked in
ECC-1 cells by both the antiestrogen ICI 182,780 and PV extract. Interestingly,
PV extract did not appear to directly inhibit estrogen signaling. Rather, we
found that its activities were probably related to an ability to function as an
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) agonist in ECC-1 cells. In support of this
hypothesis, we noted that PV induced CYP1A1, CYP1B1, and AHR repressor expression
in a dose-dependent manner--responses that were blocked by small interfering RNA 
treatment to reduce AHR and specific AHR antagonists. Ovariectomized
immunodeficient RAG-2/gamma(c) knockout mice implanted with human endometrial
xenografts developed implants only when treated with estrogen. Mice treated with 
estrogen and PV tea in their drinking water had fewer and smaller xenograft
implants compared with their estrogen-treated counterparts that drank only water 
(P < 0.05). Analysis of the resulting implants by immunohistochemistry
demonstrated persistent estrogen receptor (ER), but reduced proliferation and
CYR61 expression. Mouse uterine tissue weight in PV-treated mice was not
different from controls, and cycle fecundity of intact C57 female mice was
unaffected by PV tea treatment. PV, or Self-heal, exhibits significant
antiestrogenic properties, both in vitro and in vivo. This activity is likely due
to the ability of PV-activated AHR to interfere with estrogen. This herb may be
useful as an adjunct for the treatment of estrogen-dependent processes like
endometriosis and breast and uterine cancers. Full characterization of this herb 
will likely provide new insights into the crosstalk between AHR and ESR1, with
potential for therapeutic applications in women.

PMCID: PMC2746405
PMID: 18923163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Biol Reprod. 2009 Feb;80(2):272-8. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.072496. Epub 2008 
Oct 15.

Endometriosis is associated with progesterone resistance in the baboon (Papio
anubis) oviduct: evidence based on the localization of oviductal glycoprotein 1
(OVGP1).

Wang C(1), Mavrogianis PA, Fazleabas AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The People's Hospital, Beijing
University, Beijing 10004, China.

Endometriosis has been associated with a reduced response to progesterone in both
the eutopic and ectopic endometrium. In this study we evaluated OVGP1 and steroid
receptor expression in oviducts of baboons with endometriosis during the
midsecretory phase and determined whether progesterone resistance associated with
endometriosis also occurs in the oviduct. Oviducts obtained during the window of 
uterine receptivity (Day 10 postovulation [PO]) from animals with induced and
spontaneous disease were compared to control animals during the proliferative
stage and in the implantation window as well as animals treated with the
progesterone receptor (PGR) antagonist ZK 137.299 (ZK). OVGP1 was significantly
higher in animals with endometriosis compared with Day 10 PO controls and was
similar to that seen in the late proliferative phase and in ZK-treated animals.
Baboons with spontaneous endometriosis also showed a similar persistence of
OVGP1, which was correlated with the maintenance of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) in
the epithelial cells of animals with endometriosis. However, epithelial cell
height and the percentage of ciliation were not affected by endometriosis. These 
data imply that the normal antagonism of progesterone on ESR and OVGP1, which
results in their downregulation during the window of implantation, is absent in
animals with endometriosis. This was confirmed further when the action of PGR was
antagonized in animals without disease, which also resulted in the persistence of
ESR1 and OVGP1. These studies suggest that an aberrant oviductal environment may 
be an additive factor that contributes to endometriosis-associated infertility.

PMCID: PMC2662730
PMID: 18923157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2008 Nov;18(11):967-75. doi:
10.1097/FPC.0b013e32831101ef.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene variants associate with type 2 diabetes and fasting 
plasma glucose.

Dahlman I(1), Vaxillaire M, Nilsson M, Lecoeur C, Gu HF, Cavalcanti-Proença C,
Efendic S, Ostenson CG, Brismar K, Charpentier G, Gustafsson JA, Froguel P,
Dahlman-Wright K, Steffensen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Stockholm.

OBJECTIVE: Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) mediates effects of estrogens on glucose
homeostasis. Polymorphisms in intron 1, 2, and 4 of the ESR1 gene have been found
to be associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in Hungarian, Chinese, and
African-American and European-American cohorts. The aim of this study was to
investigate the association between ESR1 polymorphisms and T2D as well as
quantitative phenotypes related to glucose homeostasis in French and Swedish
Caucasians.
METHODS: The French cohort included 941 normoglycemic controls and 988 T2D
patients. The Swedish cohort consisted of 1045 controls with normal glucose
tolerance, 324 participants with impaired glucose tolerance, and 276 T2D
patients. A total of 20 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) distributed across
the ESR1 gene were genotyped.
RESULTS: SNPs in introns 3 and 4 of the ESR1 gene associated significantly with
T2D in the French cohort (rs3020314, rs985694, P = 0.0009-0.001) and with fasting
plasma glucose in Swedish men (rs9397456, rs3020314 rs3020317, P = 0.0002-0.0022)
after Bonferroni correction for the analysis of 20 SNPs. In addition, nominal
association of ESR1 rs1884051 (P=0.011) with T2D in the French cohort replicates 
a previously observed association in Finns (empirical P=0.024)
(http://www.broad.mit.edu/diabetes/).
CONCLUSION: This study provides further evidence that ESR1 genetic polymorphisms 
are associated with T2D and with fasting plasma glucose. No current evidence that
the investigated SNPs are functional is present, thus, we suggest that the
association between T2D and ESR1 variants may be because of other unidentified
ESR1 polymorphisms that regulate glucose homeostasis.

PMID: 18854778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008 Sep;1138:95-107. doi: 10.1196/annals.1414.015.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphism and breast cancer.

Siddig A(1), Mohamed AO, Awad S, Hassan AH, Zilahi E, Al-Haj M, Bernsen R, Adem
A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medical Laboratory Technology, Sudan University for Science and
Technology, Khartoum, Sudan.

Estrogen and estrogen receptors play important roles in the proliferation and
development of breast cancer. Several genetic alterations identified in the
estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) are thought to influence the expression or
function of this protein, and many have been evaluated for their role in breast
cancer predisposition. The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of the
C325G single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the ESR1 in predisposition to
breast cancer. The candidate SNP C325G in ESR1, exon 4 was genotyped in breast
cancer patients and in healthy controls that were age and sex matched. Genotyping
was performed using both single-stranded conformational polymorphism (SSCP) and a
higher throughput allelic discrimination method using real-time PCR. Data on
clinical features and demographic details were collected. Significant association
of breast cancer risk was shown in the subgroup of women 50 years and younger who
had the C allele (OR: 2.28, 95% CI: 1.10-4.72) (P= 0.03). However, the overall
susceptibility to breast cancer was not significant, although all estimates were 
in the direction of a higher risk in women with CC genotypes. This study found
significant evidence that polymorphism within the low penetrance ESR1 is
associated with breast cancer susceptibility in women of 50 years or younger.
There is also an indication that G allele is protective (compared to C allele).

PMID: 18837889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Endocrinol. 2009 Jan;200(1):63-73. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0383. Epub 2008 Oct 3.

Nuclear receptor co-regulator Krüppel-like factor 9 and prohibitin 2 expression
in estrogen-induced epithelial cell proliferation in the mouse uterus.

Pabona JM(1), Velarde MC, Zeng Z, Simmen FA, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences and Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, Little Rock, Arkansas 72202,
USA.

Estrogen, acting through its cognate receptor estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1), is 
a critical regulator of uterine endometrial epithelial proliferation. Although
the dynamic communication between endometrial stromal (ST) and epithelial cells
is considered to be an important component in this process, key molecular players
in particular compartments remain poorly defined. Here, we used mice null for
Krüppel-like factor 9 (KLF9) to evaluate the contribution of this nuclear protein
in ST-epithelial interactions underlying proliferative effects of estrogen. We
found that in ovariectomized mice administered estradiol-17beta (E(2)) for 24 h, 
Klf9 null mutation resulted in lack of E(2)-induced proliferative response in all
endometrial compartments. We demonstrated a negative association between Klf9
expression and nuclear levels of ESR1 transcriptional corepressor prohibitin
(PHB) 2 in uterine ST and epithelial cells of E(2)-treated wild-type (WT) and
Klf9 null mice. In early pregnancy uteri of WT mice, the temporal pattern of Klf9
transcript levels was inversely associated with that of Phb2. Deletion of Klf9
up-regulated uterine Phb2 expression and increased PHB2 nuclear localization in
endometrial ST and epithelial cells, with no effects on the expression of the
related Phb1. In the human endometrial ST cell line treated with E(2) for 24 h,
Klf9 siRNA targeting augmented PHB2 transcript and increased nuclear PHB2 protein
levels, albeit this effect was not to the extent seen in vivo with Klf9 null
mutants. Our findings suggest a novel mechanism for control of estrogen-induced
luminal epithelial proliferation involving ST KLF9 regulation of paracrine
factor(s) to repress epithelial expression of corepressor PHB2.

PMCID: PMC2612732
PMID: 18835980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Clin Biochem. 2008 Dec;41(18):1440-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2008.08.089.
Epub 2008 Sep 20.

Age-related methylation in normal colon mucosa differs between the proximal and
distal colon in patients who underwent colonoscopy.

Horii J(1), Hiraoka S, Kato J, Harada K, Kuwaki K, Fujita H, Toyooka S, Yamamoto 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the difference in the methylation status in normal colon
mucosa between the proximal and distal colon, in relation to the correlation
between the methylation status of normal mucosa and characteristics of neoplasia.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Paired biopsy specimens of normal mucosa from the proximal
and distal colon of 82 patients who underwent colonoscopy were obtained. The
methylation status of the promoter region of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and
myogenic differentiation 1 (MYOD1) was examined.
RESULTS: Normal mucosa was more highly methylated in the distal than in the
proximal colon in both ESR1 and MYOD1 loci (p<0.0001 and p=0.0009, respectively).
Advanced characteristics of polyps in the distal colon were frequently observed
in patients with lower methylation of ESR1 in the distal colon normal mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: Methylation levels in normal mucosa differ between the proximal and 
distal colon, and lower methylation of ESR1 in the distal colon normal mucosa may
correlate with advanced features of neoplasia in the distal colon.

PMID: 18835263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Plant Mol Biol. 2009 Jan;69(1-2):57-68. doi: 10.1007/s11103-008-9405-6. Epub 2008
Oct 2.

BIM1, a bHLH protein involved in brassinosteroid signalling, controls Arabidopsis
embryonic patterning via interaction with DORNROSCHEN and DORNROSCHEN-LIKE.

Chandler JW(1), Cole M, Flier A, Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, University of Cologne, Gyrhofstrasse 17,
50923 Cologne, Germany. john.chandler@uni-koeln.de

The BIM1 protein which has been implicated in brassinosteroid (BR) signal
transduction was identified from a two hybrid screen using the N-terminus,
including the AP2 domain, of the transcription factors DORNROESCHEN (DRN) and
DORNROESCHEN-LIKE (DRNL) which control embryonic patterning. The protein-protein 
interaction between BIM1 and DRN or DRNL was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation 
and for DRN also in vivo by bimolecular fluorescence complementation. BIM1 can
also physically interact with PHAVOLUTA (PHV), another interaction partner of DRN
and DRNL. Loss of BIM1 function results in embryo patterning defects at low
penetrance, including cell division defects in the hypophyseal region and apical 
domain defects such as cotyledon fusion and polycotyledony, in addition to
polyembryony. BIM1 expression overlaps with that of DRN and DRNL from early
globular embryo stages onwards. Higher order mutants between bim1, drn, drnl and 
phv suggest that although BIM1 may act partially redundantly with DRN in early
embryo development, all genes function within the same pathway determining
cotyledon development, supporting the hypothesis that they participate in a
multimeric transcription factor complex. A role of BIM1 in embryonic development 
not only implicates a function for brassinosteroids in this process, but the
interaction of BIM1 with DRN, involved with auxin signalling, represents a
possible point of hormonal crosstalk in embryonic patterning and the first
example of an interaction of components of the auxin and BR signalling pathways.

PMID: 18830673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Anim Genet. 2009 Feb;40(1):110-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2008.01794.x. Epub
2008 Sep 26.

Polymorphisms in eggshell organic matrix genes are associated with eggshell
quality measurements in pedigree Rhode Island Red hens.

Dunn IC(1), Joseph NT, Bain M, Edmond A, Wilson PW, Milona P, Nys Y, Gautron J,
Schmutz M, Preisinger R, Waddington D.

Author information: 
(1)The Roslin Institute and R(D)SVS, University of Edinburgh, Roslin, Midlothian 
EH25 9PS, UK. ian.dunn@bbsrc.ac.uk

Novel and traditional eggshell quality measurements were made from up to 2000
commercial pedigree hens for a candidate gene association analysis with organic
eggshell matrix genes: ovocleidin-116, osteopontin (SPP1), ovocalyxin-32
(RARRES1), ovotransferrin (LTF), ovalbumin and ovocalyxin-36, as well as key
genes in the maintenance and function of the shell gland [estrogen receptor
(ESR1) and carbonic anhydrase II (CAII)]. Associations were found for (i)
ovalbumin with breaking strength and shell thickness; (ii) ovocleidin-116 with
elastic modulus, shell thickness and egg shape; (iii) RARRES1 with mammillary
layer thickness; (iv) ESR1 with dynamic stiffness; (v) SPP1 with fracture
toughness and (vi) CAII with egg shape. The marker effects are as large as 17% of
trait standard deviations and could be used to improve eggshell quality.

PMID: 18828860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Dec 12;36(1):24-34. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00258.2007. Epub 2008 Sep 30.

Network analysis of temporal effects of intermittent and sustained hypoxia on rat
lungs.

Wu W(1), Dave NB, Yu G, Strollo PJ, Kovkarova-Naumovski E, Ryter SW, Reeves SR,
Dayyat E, Wang Y, Choi AM, Gozal D, Kaminski N.

Author information: 
(1)Dorothy P. and Richard P. Simmons Center for Interstitial Lung Disease, Div.
of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine, University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA. wuw2@upmc.edu

The molecular networks underlying the lung response to hypoxia are not fully
understood. We employed systems biology approaches to study temporal effects of
intermittent or sustained hypoxia on gene expression in rat lungs. We obtained
gene expression profiles from rats exposed to intermittent or sustained hypoxia
lasting 0-30 days and identified differentially expressed genes, their patterns, 
biological processes, and regulatory networks critical for lung response to
intermittent or sustained hypoxia. We validated selected genes with quantitative 
real-time PCR. Intermittent and sustained hypoxia induced two distinct sets of
genes in rat lungs that displayed different temporal expression patterns.
Intermittent hypoxia induced genes mostly involved in ion transport and
homeostasis, neurological processes, and steroid hormone receptor activity, while
sustained hypoxia induced genes principally participating in immune responses.
The intermittent hypoxia-activated network suggested a role for cross talk
between estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and other key proteins in hypoxic responses.
The sustained hypoxia-activated network was indicative of vascular remodeling and
pulmonary hypertension. We confirmed the temporal expression changes of 12 genes 
(including the Esr1 gene and 4 ESR1 target genes) in intermittent hypoxia and 8
genes in sustained hypoxia with quantitative real-time PCR.CONCLUSIONS:
intermittent and sustained hypoxia induced distinct gene expression patterns in
rat lungs. The functional characteristics of genes activated by these two
distinct perturbations suggest their roles in the downstream physiological
effects of intermittent and sustained hypoxia. Our results demonstrate the
discovery potential of applying systems biology approaches to the understanding
of mechanisms underlying hypoxic lung response.

PMCID: PMC2604785
PMID: 18826996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2008 Dec;15(4):985-1002. doi: 10.1677/ERC-07-0240. Epub 2008
Sep 29.

ERBB2 influences the subcellular localization of the estrogen receptor in
tamoxifen-resistant MCF-7 cells leading to the activation of AKT and RPS6KA2.

Pancholi S(1), Lykkesfeldt AE, Hilmi C, Banerjee S, Leary A, Drury S, Johnston S,
Dowsett M, Martin LA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, 
237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK.

Acquired resistance to endocrine therapies remains a major clinical obstacle in
hormone-sensitive breast tumors. We used an MCF-7 breast tumor cell line
(Tam(R)-1) resistant to tamoxifen to investigate this mechanism. We demonstrate
that Tam(R)-1 express elevated levels of phosphorylated AKT and MAPK3/1-activated
RPS6KA2 compared with the parental MCF-7 cell line (MCF-7). There was no change
in the level of total ESR between the two cell lines; however, the Tam(R)-1 cells
had increased phosphorylation of ESR1 ser(167). SiRNA blockade of AKT or MAPK3/1 
had little effect on ESR1 ser(167) phosphorylation, but a combination of the two 
siRNAs abrogated this. Co-localization studies revealed an association between
ERBB2 and ESR1 in the Tam(R)-1 but not MCF-7 cells. ESR1 was redistributed to
extranuclear sites in Tam(R)-1 and was less transcriptionally competent compared 
with MCF-7 suggesting that nuclear ESR1 activity was suppressed in Tam(R)-1.
Tamoxifen resistance in the Tam(R)-1 cells could be partially overcome by the
ERBB2 inhibitor AG825 in combination with tamoxifen, and this was associated with
re-localization of ESR1 to the nucleus. These data demonstrate that
tamoxifen-resistant cells have the ability to switch between ERBB2 or ESR1
pathways promoting cell growth and that pharmacological inhibition of ERBB2 may
be a therapeutic strategy for overcoming tamoxifen resistance.

PMID: 18824559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Int J Cancer. 2008 Dec 15;123(12):2970-2. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23786.

Absence of ESR1 amplification in a series of breast cancers.

Adélaïde J, Finetti P, Charafe-Jauffret E, Wicinski J, Jacquemier J, Sotiriou C, 
Bertucci F, Birnbaum D, Chaffanet M.

PMID: 18816632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Mar Biotechnol (NY). 2009 Mar-Apr;11(2):210-22. doi: 10.1007/s10126-008-9136-3.
Epub 2008 Sep 23.

Seasonal and sex-specific mRNA levels of key endocrine genes in adult yellow
perch (Perca flavescens) from Lake Erie.

Lynn SG(1), Powell KA, Westneat DF, Shepherd BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0225, USA. 
sglynn@msu.edu

To better understand the endocrine mechanisms that underlie sexually dimorphic
growth (females grow faster) in yellow perch (Perca flavescens), real-time
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was used to measure pituitary,
liver, and ovary mRNA levels of genes related to growth and reproduction-sex in
this species. Adult perch were collected from Lake Erie and body mass, age,
gonadosomatic index (I (G)), hepatosomatic index (I (H)), and gene expression for
growth hormone (GH), prolactin, somatolactin, insulin-like growth factor Ib
(IGF-Ib), estrogen receptor alpha (esr1), estrogen receptor betaa (esr2a), and
aromatase (cyp19a1a) were measured. Females had higher body mass, I (H), and
liver esr1 mRNA level than males, while males had higher liver IGF-Ib, liver
esr2a, and liver cyp19a1a mRNA levels. In both sexes, season had a significant
effect on GH and liver IGF-Ib mRNAs with higher levels occurring in spring, which
also corresponded with higher liver cyp19a1a mRNA levels. For females, I (G),
liver esr1, and ovary cyp19a1a mRNA levels were higher in autumn than the spring,
and ovary cyp19a1a mRNA levels showed a significant negative correlation with
pituitary GH and liver IGF-Ib mRNA levels. The most significant (p </= 0.001)
relationships across the parameters measured were positive correlations between
liver IGF-Ib and esr2a mRNA levels and liver IGF-Ib and cyp19a1a mRNA levels.
This study shows significant effects of season and sex on adult yellow perch
endocrine physiology.

PMID: 18810549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Biol Reprod. 2009 Jan;80(1):34-41. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.071175. Epub 2008 
Sep 17.

GPR30 does not mediate estrogenic responses in reproductive organs in mice.

Otto C(1), Fuchs I, Kauselmann G, Kern H, Zevnik B, Andreasen P, Schwarz G,
Altmann H, Klewer M, Schoor M, Vonk R, Fritzemeier KH.

Author information: 
(1)Therapeutic Research Group Women's Healthcare, Bayer Schering Pharma AG, 13353
Berlin, Germany. christiane.otto@bayerhealthcare.com

The G protein-coupled receptor Gpr30 (Gper) was recently claimed to bind to
estradiol and to activate cytoplasmic signal transduction pathways in response to
estradiol. However, there are conflicting data regarding the role of Gpr30 as an 
estrogen receptor (ER): several laboratories were unable to demonstrate estradiol
binding to GPR30 or estradiol-activated signal transduction in Gpr30-expressing
cells. To clarify the potential role of Gpr30 as an ER, we generated
Gpr30-deficient mice. Although Gpr30 was expressed in all reproductive organs,
histopathological analysis did not reveal any abnormalities in these organs in
Gpr30-deficient mice. Mutant male and female mice were as fertile as their
wild-type littermates, indicating normal function of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. Moreover, we analyzed estrogenic responses
in two major estradiol target organs, the uterus and the mammary gland. For that 
purpose, we examined different readout paradigms such as morphological measures, 
cellular proliferation, and target gene expression. Our data demonstrate that in 
vivo Gpr30 is dispensable for the mediation of estradiol effects in reproductive 
organs. These results are in clear contrast to the phenotype of mice lacking the 
classic ER alpha (Esr1) or aromatase (Cyp19a1). We conclude that the perception
of Gpr30 (based on homology related to peptide receptors) as an ER might be
premature and has to be reconsidered.

PMID: 18799753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Horm Metab Res. 2008 Nov;40(11):779-86. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1083780. Epub 2008
Sep 15.

Influence of sex hormones on adiponectin expression in human adipocytes.

Horenburg S(1), Fischer-Posovszky P, Debatin KM, Wabitsch M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Adiponectin is an adipokine with profound antidiabetic and antiatherogenic
effects. Circulating adiponectin concentrations are higher in women than in men. 
In order to study the molecular aspects of this sex-specific dimorphism, we
examined the expression of adiponectin in human fat cells under the influence of 
sex hormones, using SGBS cells as an in vitro model. Androgen and estradiol
receptor 1 and 2 (AR, ESR1, ESR2) mRNA expression increased dramatically during
adipogenic differentiation. Stimulation with human male and female serum led to a
downregulation of adiponectin expression, with male serum exerting significantly 
stronger inhibitory properties than female serum (p<0.05). Increasing
concentrations of testosterone or estradiol influenced neither adiponectin mRNA
expression and secretion nor intracellular protein expression of high-, middle-, 
and low-molecular-weight (HMW, MMW, LMW) adiponectin multimers. These data have
been verified in in vitro-differentiated primary human adipocytes. We conclude
that although human adipocytes express AR, ESR1, and ESR2 and respond to
testosterone treatment with a decrease in leptin expression, expression and
secretion of adiponectin is unaffected by sex steroids. We hypothesize,
therefore, the existence of a serum factor that is differently regulated by sex
steroids and subsequently causes the sex dimorphism in circulating adiponectin
levels.

PMID: 18792884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Pathol. 2008 Nov;216(3):271-4. doi: 10.1002/path.2432.

ESR1 amplification in endometrial carcinomas: hope or hyperbole?

Tan DS(1), Lambros MB, Marchiò C, Reis-Filho JS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Laboratory, The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research
Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, London, SW3 6JB, UK.

The ESR1 gene maps 6q25 and encodes for oestrogen receptor alpha, which has been 
shown to play a pivotal role in the development of breast and endometrial cancer.
It has recently been reported that oestrogen receptor alpha expression may be
driven in some cases by ESR1 gene amplification and that this phenomenon may be
an early event in breast and endometrial carcinogenesis. Although copy number
gains of 6q have been reported by several groups, their prevalence, association
with oestrogen receptor alpha expression, and clinical implications have been a
matter of controversy. Here we discuss the key issues regarding the methods
employed in the identification of ESR1 amplification, and briefly review the
current literature and recent controversies on the subject of ESR1 amplification 
in endometrial and breast cancers.

(c) 2008 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 18788074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Calcif Tissue Int. 2008 Sep;83(3):155-66. doi: 10.1007/s00223-008-9165-y. Epub
2008 Sep 12.

Genetic variation in candidate osteoporosis genes, bone mineral density, and
fracture risk: the study of osteoporotic fractures.

Tranah GJ(1), Taylor BC, Lui LY, Zmuda JM, Cauley JA, Ensrud KE, Hillier TA,
Hochberg MC, Li J, Rhees BK, Erlich HA, Sternlicht MD, Peltz G, Cummings SR;
Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF) Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)CPMC Research Institute, San Francisco, CA 94120, USA. gtranah@psg.ucsf.edu

Candidate osteoporosis gene variants were examined for associations with fracture
risk and bone mineral density (BMD). A total of 9,704 white women were recruited 
at four U.S. clinical centers and enrolled into the Study of Osteoporotic
Fractures, a longitudinal cohort study. Genotyping of 31 polymorphisms from 18
candidate osteoporosis genes was performed in 6,752 women. Incident radiographic 
fractures were identified at the third and eighth examinations compared with the 
baseline examination. BMD was measured at the total hip by dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry. Analyses were adjusted for age, clinic site, and self-reported
ethnicity. During a mean follow-up of 14.5 years, a total of 849 hip, 658
vertebral, and 2,496 nonhip/nonvertebral fractures occurred in 6,752 women. Women
carrying the ALOX15_G48924T T/T genotype had a higher rate of hip fracture
(hazard ratio [HR] = 1.33;95% confidence interval [95% CI] = 1.00-1.77) compared 
with the G/G genotype. Compared with those carrying the PRL_T228C T/T genotype,
women with either the C/C (HR = 0.80; 95% CI = 0.67-0.95) or C/T (HR = 0.81; 95% 
CI = 0.68-0.97) genotype had a lower rate of nonvertebral/nonhip fractures. Women
carrying the BMP2_A125611G G/G genotype had a higher rate of vertebral fracture
(odds ratio [OR] = 1.51; 95% CI = 1.03-2.23) compared with the A/A genotype.
Women with the ESR1_C1335G G/G genotype had a higher rate of vertebral fracture
(OR = 1.64; 95% CI = 1.07-2.50) compared with the C/C genotype. Compared with
those with the MMP2_C595T C/C genotype, women with the C/T (OR = 0.79; 95% CI =
0.65-0.96) or T/T (OR = 0.44; 95% CI = 0.27-0.72) genotype had a lower rate of
vertebral fracture. In conclusion, polymorphisms in several candidate genes were 
associated with hip, vertebral, and nonhip/nonvertebral fractures but not with
total hip BMD in this large population based cohort study.

PMCID: PMC2699257
PMID: 18787887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Genesis. 2008 Sep;46(9):499-505. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20428.

Generation of Cyp17iCre transgenic mice and their application to conditionally
delete estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1) from the ovary and testis.

Bridges PJ(1), Koo Y, Kang DW, Hudgins-Spivey S, Lan ZJ, Xu X, DeMayo F, Cooney
A, Ko C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical and Reproductive Sciences, Department of Clinical
Sciences, University of Kentucky, Kentucky 40536, USA.

A transgenic mouse line that expresses iCre under regulation of the Cytochrome
P(450) 17alpha-hydroxylase/17, 20-lyase (Cyp17) promoter was developed as a novel
transgenic mouse model for the conditional deletion of genes specifically in the 
theca/interstitial cells of the ovary and Leydig cells of the testis. In this
report, we describe the development of Cyp17iCre mice and the application of
these mice for conditional deletion of the estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1) gene in
the theca/interstitial and Leydig cells of the female and male gonad,
respectively. These mice will prove a powerful tool to inactivate genes in the
gonad in a cell-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC2637183
PMID: 18781648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Endocrinol. 2008 Dec;199(3):445-55. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0226. Epub 2008 Sep 9.

Bone morphogenetic protein 6 (BMP6) and BMP7 inhibit estrogen-induced
proliferation of breast cancer cells by suppressing p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase activation.

Takahashi M(1), Otsuka F, Miyoshi T, Otani H, Goto J, Yamashita M, Ogura T,
Makino H, Doihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer and Thoracic Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama
City 700-8558, Japan.

Estrogen is involved in the development and progression of breast cancer. Here,
we investigated the effects of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) on breast
cancer cell proliferation caused by estrogen using human breast cancer MCF-7
cells. MCF-7 cells express estrogen receptors (ESR1 and ESR2), BMP receptors, and
SMAD signaling molecules. Estradiol and membrane-impermeable estradiol stimulated
MCF-7 cell proliferation. Estradiol also reduced mRNA levels of ESR1, aromatase, 
and steroid sulfatase. Treatment with BMPs and activin had no effects on MCF-7
cell proliferation. However, BMP2, BMP4, BMP6, BMP7, and activin suppressed
estradiol-induced cell mitosis, with the effects of BMP6, BMP7, and activin being
more prominent than those of BMP2 and BMP4. Activin decreased ESR1 mRNA
expression, while BMP6 and BMP7 impaired steroid sulfatase expression in MCF-7
cells. Interestingly, SMAD1,5,8 activation elicited by BMP6 and BMP7, but not by 
BMP2 and BMP4, was preserved even under the exposure of a high concentration of
estradiol. The difference of BMP responsiveness was likely due to the
differential modulation of BMP receptor expression induced by estradiol. In this 
regard, estradiol decreased the expression levels of BMPR1A, BMPR1B, ACVR2A, and 
ACVR2B but did not affect ACVR1 and BMPRII, leading to the sustained effects of
BMP6 and BMP7 in estrogen-treated MCF-7 cells. Estradiol rapidly activated MAPK
phosphorylation including extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2, p38, and
stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase pathways and BMP6,
BMP7, and activin preferentially inhibited estradiol-induced p38 phosphorylation.
SB203580, a selective p38 MAPK inhibitor effectively suppressed estradiol-induced
cell mitosis, suggesting that p38 MAPK plays a key role in estrogen-sensitive
breast cancer cell proliferation. Thus, a novel interrelationship between
estrogen and the breast cancer BMP system was uncovered, in which inhibitory
effects of BMP6 and BMP7 on p38 signaling and steroid sulfatase expression were
functionally involved in the suppression of estrogen-induced mitosis of breast
cancer cells.

PMID: 18780779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2008 Dec;46(12):1045-50. doi:
10.1016/j.plaphy.2008.07.007. Epub 2008 Jul 25.

The Arabidopsis transcription factor ESR1 induces in vitro shoot regeneration
through transcriptional activation.

Matsuo N(1), Banno H.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biology Research Center, Chubu University, Kasugai, Aichi 487-8501,
Japan.

The Arabidopsis Enhancer of Shoot Regeneration 1 (ESR1) gene regulates initiation
of in vitro shoot regeneration. In this study, we investigated the
transcription-modulating potential of ESR1. ESR1 induced reporter gene expression
when overexpressed transiently in Arabidopsis leaf cells. Experiments using a
fusion protein with the GAL4 DNA-binding domain located a transactivating domain 
of ESR1 within the C-terminal region. A nuclear localization signal was also
located within the AP2/ERF domain. These results demonstrated that ESR1 functions
as a transcriptional activator. Furthermore, we examined whether transcriptional 
modulation by ESR1 affects the in vitro shoot regeneration efficiency.
Overexpression of ESR1 fused with the VP16 transactivating domain enhanced in
vitro shoot regeneration as well as overexpressed wild-type ESR1 did, while
overexpression of ESR1 fused with a strong repression domain, SRDX, inhibited
shoot regeneration. These results suggest that ESR1 induces shoot regeneration
through its transactivating ability.

PMID: 18771931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Bone Miner Res. 2009 Feb;24(2):314-23. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.080912.

Genetic variation in sex hormone genes influences heel ultrasound parameters in
middle-aged and elderly men: results from the European Male Aging Study (EMAS).

Limer KL(1), Pye SR, Thomson W, Boonen S, Borghs H, Vanderschueren D, Huhtaniemi 
IT, Adams JE, Ward KA, Platt H, Payne D, John SL, Bartfai G, Casanueva F, Finn
JD, Forti G, Giwercman A, Han TS, Kula K, Lean ME, Pendleton N, Punab M, Silman
AJ, Wu FC, O'Neill TW; EMAS Study Group.

Collaborators: Forti G, Petrone L, Cilotti A, Vanderschueren D, Boonen S, Borghs 
H, Kula K, Slowikowska-Hilczer J, Walczak-Jedrzejowska R, Huhtaniemi I, Giwercman
A, Wu F, Silman A, O'Neill T, Finn J, Steer P, Tajar A, Lee D, Pye S, Casanueva
F, Ocampo M, Lage M, Bartfai G, Földesi I, Fejes I, Punab M, Korrovitz P, Jiang
M.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Epidemiology Unit, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom. kate.limer@manchester.ac.uk

Genes involved in sex hormone pathways are candidates for influencing bone
strength. Polymorphisms in these genes were tested for association with heel
quantitative ultrasound (QUS) parameters in middle-aged and elderly European men.
Men 40-79 yr of age were recruited from population registers in eight European
centers for the European Male Aging Study (EMAS). Polymorphisms were genotyped in
AR, ESR1, ESR2, CYP19A1, CYP17A1, SHBG, SRD5A2, LHB, and LHCGR. QUS parameters
broadband ultrasound attenuation (BUA) and speed of sound (SOS) were measured in 
the heel and used to derive BMD. The relationships between QUS parameters and
polymorphisms were assessed using linear regression adjusting for age and center.
A total of 2693 men, with a mean age of 60.1 +/- 11.1 (SD) yr were included in
the analysis. Their mean BUA was 80.0 +/- 18.9 dB/Mhz, SOS was 1550.2 +/- 34.1
m/s, and BMD was 0.542 +/- 0.141 g/cm(2). Significant associations were observed 
between multiple SNPs in a linkage disequilibrium (LD) block within CYP19A1,
peaking at the TCT indel with the deletion allele associating with reduced
ultrasound BMD in heterozygotes (beta =-0.016, p = -0.005) and homozygotes (beta 
= -0.029, p = 0.001). The results for BUA and SOS were similar. Significant
associations with QUS parameters were also observed for the CAG repeat in AR and 
SNPs in CYP17A1, LHCGR, and ESR1. Our data confirm evidence of association
between bone QUS parameters and polymorphisms in CYP19A1, as well as modest
associations with polymorphisms in CYP17A1, ESR1, LHCGR, and AR in a population
sample of European men; this supports a role for genetically determined sex
hormone actions in influencing male bone health.

PMID: 18767927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Endocrinol. 2008 Nov;199(2):267-73. doi: 10.1677/JOE-07-0292. Epub 2008 Aug 27.

Differential regulation of the inducible nitric oxide synthase gene by estrogen
receptors 1 and 2.

Tsutsumi S(1), Zhang X, Takata K, Takahashi K, Karas RH, Kurachi H, Mendelsohn
ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yamagata University School of
Medicine, 2-2-2 Iida-Nishi, Yamagata 990-9585, Japan.

Estrogen has both rapid and longer term direct effects on cardiovascular tissues 
mediated by the two estrogen receptors, ESR1 and ESR2. Previous work identified
that estrogen regulates the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS2A)
in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC). ESR2 knockout mice have vascular
dysfunction due to dysregulation of NOS2A expression and these mice are
hypertensive (Zhu et al. Science 2002 295 505-508). Here, we report studies to
examine the differential regulation of NOS2A gene expression by ESR1 and 2.
Immunoblotting and RT-PCR studies revealed that different VSMC lines expressed
different levels of ESR1 and ESR2 protein and mRNA. VSMC from different vascular 
beds were studied, including aortic VSMC expressing ESR1 and radial (Rad) VSMC
expressing ESR2. E(2) inhibited NO production and NOS2A protein expression in
aortic VSMC. Human NOS2A promoter-reporter studies revealed suppression of NOS2A 
reporter activity by E(2) in aortic VSMC, and stimulation of NOS2A reporter
activity by E(2) in Rad arterial VSMC. In heterologous expression studies of
COS-7 cells lacking endogenous ER, E(2) treatment of COS-7 cells did not alter
NOS2A reporter activity in the presence of ESR1, while reporter activity
increased 2.3-fold in the presence of ESR2. Similar experiments in COS-7 cells
using the selective estrogen receptor modulator raloxifene showed that raloxifene
caused a reduction in NOS2A reporter activity with ESR1 coexpression and an
increase with ESR2 coexpression. Rat VSMC expressing ESR2 but not ESR1 also
showed increased NOS2A reporter activity with E(2) treatment, an effect lost when
ESR1 was introduced into the cells. Taken together, these data support that
hNOS2A transcription is regulated positively by ESR2 and negatively by ESR1 in
VSMC, supporting differential actions of these two estrogen receptors on a
physiologically relevant gene in VSMC.

PMCID: PMC2773690
PMID: 18753331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Pathol. 2008 Oct;216(2):151-7. doi: 10.1002/path.2405.

Oestrogen receptor gene (ESR1) amplification is frequent in endometrial carcinoma
and its precursor lesions.

Lebeau A(1), Grob T, Holst F, Seyedi-Fazlollahi N, Moch H, Terracciano L,
Turzynski A, Choschzick M, Sauter G, Simon R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Centre Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, 
Germany.

Oestrogen receptor alpha (ER) plays a critical, diverse and not fully understood 
role in endometrial carcinoma. Most endometrial carcinomas express ER and some of
these tumours respond favourably to anti-oestrogen therapy. On the other hand,
tamoxifen therapy constitutes a major risk factor for endometrial carcinoma
development. Amplification of the ESR1 gene encoding ER was recently shown to
constitute a mechanism for ER over-expression in breast carcinoma. This study was
designed to determine the potential role of ESR1 amplifications in endometrial
carcinoma. Tissue microarrays of 368 endometrial carcinomas and large sections of
43 cases of endometrial hyperplasia were analysed for ESR1 gene amplification and
ER protein expression by means of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and
immunohistochemistry. FISH revealed ESR1 amplification in 40/176 (23%) cancers,
6/19 (32%) atypical complex hyperplasias, 3/10 (30%) complex hyperplasias without
atypia and 2/14 (14%) simple hyperplasias without atypia. Strong ER protein
expression was significantly linked to ESR1 amplification in endometrial
carcinoma (p = 0.0036). These data indicate that ESR1 amplification might be one 
mechanism for ER over-expression in endometrial carcinoma, and suggest an early
role for ESR1 amplification in the development of a significant fraction of
endometrial carcinoma. Given the predictive role of ESR1 amplification for
tamoxifen response in breast carcinoma, it will be interesting to investigate the
response of ESR1-amplified endometrial cancers to anti-oestrogenic drugs.

PMID: 18720455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2008;29(4):313-20.

Genetic polymorphisms, the metabolism of estrogens and breast cancer: a review.

Bugano DD(1), Conforti-Froes N, Yamaguchi NH, Baracat EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
diogobugano@gmail.com

Breast cancer is the most common female cancer and the second cause of cancer
death in women. Despite recent breakthroughs, much of the etiology of this
disease is unknown and the most important risk factor, i.e., exposure to
endogenous and exogenous estrogen throughout life cannot explain the
heterogeneity of prognosis nor clinical features of patients. Recently, many gene
polymorphisms in the metabolism of breast cancer have been described as possible 
neoplasm etiologic factors. This review is an attempt to summarize the current
knowledge about these polymorphisms and to determine new target genes for
diagnosis and treatment of the disease. Polymorphisms in the genes CYP17, CYP19, 
CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, UGT1A1, SULT1A1, 17-hydroxysteroid-dehydrogenase, COMT,
GST, ESR1, and ESR2 are described.

PMID: 18714561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008 Aug;17(8):1884-90. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-07-2696.

ESR1 promoter hypermethylation does not predict atypia in RPFNA nor persistent
atypia after 12 months tamoxifen chemoprevention.

Baker JC Jr(1), Ostrander JH, Lem S, Broadwater G, Bean GR, D'Amato NC,
Goldenberg VK, Rowell C, Ibarra-Drendall C, Grant T, Pilie PG, Vasilatos SN,
Troch MM, Scott V, Wilke LG, Paisie C, Rabiner SM, Torres-Hernandez A, Zalles CM,
Seewaldt VL.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

PURPOSE: Currently, we lack biomarkers to predict whether high-risk women with
mammary atypia will respond to tamoxifen chemoprevention.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Thirty-four women with cytologic mammary atypia from the
Duke University High-Risk clinic were offered tamoxifen chemoprevention. We
tested whether ESR1 promoter hypermethylation and/or estrogen receptor (ER)
protein expression by immunohistochemistry predicted persistent atypia in 18
women who were treated with tamoxifen for 12 months and in 16 untreated controls.
RESULTS: We observed a statistically significant decrease in the Masood score of 
women on tamoxifen chemoprevention for 12 months compared with control women.
This was a significant interaction effect of time (0, 6, and 12 months) and
treatment group (tamoxifen versus control) P = 0.0007. However, neither ESR1
promoter hypermethylation nor low ER expression predicted persistent atypia in
Random Periareolar Fine Needle Aspiration after 12 months tamoxifen prevention.
CONCLUSIONS: Results from this single institution pilot study provide evidence
that, unlike for invasive breast cancer, ESR1 promoter hypermethylation and/or
low ER expression is not a reliable marker of tamoxifen-resistant atypia.

PMCID: PMC2717700
PMID: 18708376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Genome Res. 2008 Nov;18(11):1752-62. doi: 10.1101/gr.080663.108. Epub 2008 Aug 5.

Evolution of the mammalian transcription factor binding repertoire via
transposable elements.

Bourque G(1), Leong B, Vega VB, Chen X, Lee YL, Srinivasan KG, Chew JL, Ruan Y,
Wei CL, Ng HH, Liu ET.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Mathematical Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore,
Singapore 138672, Singapore. bourque@gis.a-star.edu.sg

Identification of lineage-specific innovations in genomic control elements is
critical for understanding transcriptional regulatory networks and phenotypic
heterogeneity. We analyzed, from an evolutionary perspective, the binding regions
of seven mammalian transcription factors (ESR1, TP53, MYC, RELA, POU5F1, SOX2,
and CTCF) identified on a genome-wide scale by different chromatin
immunoprecipitation approaches and found that only a minority of sites appear to 
be conserved at the sequence level. Instead, we uncovered a pervasive association
with genomic repeats by showing that a large fraction of the bona fide binding
sites for five of the seven transcription factors (ESR1, TP53, POU5F1, SOX2, and 
CTCF) are embedded in distinctive families of transposable elements. Using the
age of the repeats, we established that these repeat-associated binding sites
(RABS) have been associated with significant regulatory expansions throughout the
mammalian phylogeny. We validated the functional significance of these RABS by
showing that they are over-represented in proximity of regulated genes and that
the binding motifs within these repeats have undergone evolutionary selection.
Our results demonstrate that transcriptional regulatory networks are highly
dynamic in eukaryotic genomes and that transposable elements play an important
role in expanding the repertoire of binding sites.

PMCID: PMC2577865
PMID: 18682548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Pharmacogenomics. 2008 Aug;9(8):1163-5. doi: 10.2217/14622416.9.8.1163.

Is pharmacogenomics our future? Metformin, ovulation and polymorphism of the
STK11 gene in polycystic ovary syndrome.

Goldenberg N(1), Glueck CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cholesterol Center, Jewish Hospital of Cincinnati, ABC Builiding, 3200 Burnet 
Ave, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Evaluation of: Legro RS, Barnhart HX, Schlaff WD et al.: Ovulatory response to
treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome is associated with a polymorphism in the
STK11 gene. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 93(3), 792-800 (2008). The current study 
by Legro et al. is a substudy of the recent multicenter, double-blinded,
prospective study Pregnancy in Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. Legro et al. randomly
assigned 626 infertile women with polycystic ovary syndrome to receive 50 mg
clomiphene citrate plus placebo (n = 209), 2 g extended-release metformin plus
placebo (n = 208), or a combination of metformin and clomiphene (n = 209) for up 
to six cycles. Of 626 patients in the original study, 312 women participated in
the pharmacogenetic substudy; 98 received metformin XR (2 g/day), 102 clomiphene 
and 112 combined clomiphene-metformin XR treatment. This study was designed "to
identify predictive genetic polymorphism and other determinants of ovulatory
response" in prospective fashion. Candidate genes tested included estrogen
receptor 1 (ESR1), CYP genes (CYP2C9 and CYP2D6) and STK11. STK11, formerly known
as LKB1, is a serine-threonine kinase gene expressed in the liver, which
phosphorylates and activates AMP-activated protein kinase. It was shown to be a
site of metformin action. The C allele of a SNP in the STK11 gene was associated 
with a significantly decreased chance of ovulation in polycystic ovary syndrome
women treated with metformin. In analysis of ovulation per cycle, the adjusted
odds ratio for CC versus GG (wild-type normal) was 0.30 (95% CI: 0.14-0.66) and
the odds ratio for CG versus GG was 0.30 (95% CI: 0.14-0.66). This elegant study 
is of great importance because despite treatment, many women with polycystic
ovary syndrome fail to ovulate, 24.9% in the clomiphene group, 44.7% in the
metformin group and 16.7% in the clomiphene-metformin group.

PMID: 18681789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2009 Apr 5;150B(3):434-8. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30834.

Do the estrogen receptors 1 gene variants influence the temperament and character
inventory scores in suicidal attempters and healthy subjects?

Giegling I(1), Chiesa A, Calati R, Hartmann AM, Möller HJ, De Ronchi D, Rujescu
D, Serretti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany.

Several studies investigated possible associations between single nucleotide
polymorphisms and the temperament and character inventory (TCI) scores. The
possible association between TCI scores and the estrogen receptors 1 (ESR1)
polymorphisms, which are expressed in cerebral regions that are involved in the
development of temperament and character, has not been investigated yet. The aim 
of the present study is to investigate possible associations between specific
ESR1 polymorphisms and TCI scores. Two hundred eighty-nine healthy subjects and
111 suicide attempters were enrolled in the study. All subjects compiled TCI.
Rs827421, rs1913474, rs1801132, rs722207, rs974276, and rs910416 in ESR1 were
genotyped. Rs722207 was associated with Harm Avoidance (HA) in the healthy sample
(P = 0.003). Further associations have been found for two HA subscales, HA2 and
HA3, in the healthy sample. Additionally, the haplotype rs722207-rs974276 showed 
an association with HA (P = 0.0003) and HA2 (P = 0.0002) in the global sample and
in healthy volunteers and HA3 showed an association in the global sample. Our
study showed a moderate association between ESR1 variants and TCI scores. The
main finding concerns the association between rs722207 and HA in the healthy
sample. Further research is needed to replicate our findings and to investigate
further ESR1 polymorphisms.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18680103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Bone. 2008 Nov;43(5):910-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2008.07.001. Epub 2008 Jul 15.

Polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor genes are associated with hip fractures in
Chinese.

Wang JT(1), Guo Y, Yang TL, Xu XH, Dong SS, Li M, Li TQ, Chen Y, Deng HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, PR China.

INTRODUCTION: Hip fractures (HF) are a major cause of public health burden with
strong genetic determination. However, the true causal genes remain largely
unknown.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Based on the important biological role of estrogens in
bone homeostasis, this study aimed to investigate whether the estrogen receptor
genes, ESR1 and ESR2, affect the onset of HF in 700 elderly Chinese subjects (350
with osteoporotic HF and 350 healthy controls). We genotyped 32 SNPs in total and
examined their associations both by the single-SNP and haplotype tests.
RESULTS: We identified two novel SNPs of ESR1, rs3020314 and rs1884051, were
significantly associated with HF (rs3020314: P=0.0004, OR=1.66, 95%CI: 1.25-2.18;
rs1884051: P=0.0004, OR=1.46, 95%CI: 1.19-1.81). We firstly detected significant 
association of ESR2 with HF (rs960070: P=0.0070, OR=1.43, 95%CI: 1.10-1.86).
Haplotype analyses corroborated our single-SNP results.
CONCLUSION: Our findings have important implications for understanding the
pathology of osteoporotic fractures. Independent replication studies are needed
to validate our results and explore the most possible functional variants for
molecular studies.

PMID: 18678289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Toxicol Sci. 2008 Nov;106(1):113-23. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn151. Epub 2008 Jul
24.

Altered sexual development in roach (Rutilus rutilus) exposed to environmental
concentrations of the pharmaceutical 17alpha-ethinylestradiol and associated
expression dynamics of aromatases and estrogen receptors.

Lange A(1), Katsu Y, Ichikawa R, Paull GC, Chidgey LL, Coe TS, Iguchi T, Tyler
CR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon EX4 4PS, UK.
a.lange@exeter.ac.uk

Wild roach (Rutilus rutilus) inhabiting UK rivers contaminated with estrogenic
effluents from wastewater treatment works show altered sexual development,
including intersex, and this can impact negatively on their reproductive
capabilities. The molecular events underlying these disruptions in gender
assignment, however, are still poorly understood. In this study, two isoforms of 
aromatase (cyp19a1a and cyp19a1b) were cloned from the roach, and effects of
exposure to 17alpha-ethinylestradiol (EE(2)) during early life were determined on
the expression of both aromatases and on the estrogen receptors (ERs) (subtypes
esr1 and esr2b) and analyzed against effects on the progression of gonadal sex
differentiation. Exposure to environmentally relevant concentrations of EE(2)
during the critical period of sex differentiation resulted in gonadal
feminization and all roach exposed to 4 ng EE(2)/l were females. These effects on
gonadal development were associated with alterations in the expression of both
esr and cyp19a1 genes in bodies and heads of exposed fish with the most marked
effects on the expression of esr1 and cyp19a1b. Our findings show that both
aromatase isoforms and both ER subtypes are associated with sexual
differentiation in roach, and alterations in their expression can signal for
disruptions in sexual development.

PMID: 18653663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Endocrinol. 2008 Oct;199(1):137-46. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0257. Epub 2008 Jul 24.

Preserved tissue structure of efferent ductules in aromatase-deficient mice.

Toda K(1), Okada T, Hayashi Y, Saibara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Kochi University, Nankoku,
Kochi 783-8505, Japan. todak@kochi-u.ac.jp

Estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1) is proposed to play a critical role in the
regulation of testicular fluid reabsorption at efferent ductules, and disruption 
of the Esr1 gene (Esr1(-/-)) resulted in marked dilation of the lumens of
efferent ductules. This study was aimed to clarify whether disruption of the gene
for aromatase (Ar), an enzyme responsible for estrogen biosynthesis, results in
morphological and transcriptional alterations at efferent ductules as observed in
Esr1(-/-) mice. Histology demonstrated structural preservation of the ducts in
aromatase-deficient (Ar(-/-)) mice. Electron microscopic examinations reveal that
endocytic apparatus and tubule-cisternal endoplasmic reticulum are present in
non-ciliated cells irrespective of the genotypes. However, electron-dense and
acid phosphatase-negative granules and apical tubules, which are components
thought to be related to membrane recycling of endosomes, are observed only in
wild-type (WT) and Ar(-/-) mice. By contrast, the Golgi complex is highly
developed in Esr1(-/-) mice when compared with WT and Ar(-/-) mice. RT-PCR
analysis reveals no significant differences in the expression levels of a subset 
of genes involved in ion transportation. Thus, from the structural and
transcriptional points of view, the efferent ductules of Ar(-/-) mice are
indistinguishable from those of WT mice. Moreover, data from electron microscopic
examinations indicate the possible involvement of Esr1 in the regulation of
vesicle recycling processes.

PMID: 18653624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Reprod Domest Anim. 2008 Jul;43 Suppl 2:104-12. doi:
10.1111/j.1439-0531.2008.01149.x.

Corpus luteum-endometrium-embryo interactions in the dairy cow: underlying
mechanisms and clinical relevance.

Robinson RS(1), Hammond AJ, Wathes DC, Hunter MG, Mann GE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, Sutton
Bonington Campus, Loughborough, Leics, UK. bob.robinson@nottingham.ac.uk

Conception rates of dairy cows are currently declining at an estimated 1% every
year. Approximately, 35% of embryos fail to prevent luteolysis during the first
three weeks of gestation. Interactions between the corpus luteum, endometrium and
embryo are critical to the successful establishment of pregnancy and inadequacies
will result in the mortality of the embryo. For example, as little as a one day
delay in the post-ovulatory rise of progesterone has serious consequences for
embryo development and survival. Recently, we found that LH support, degree of
vascularization and luteal cell steroidogenic capacity were not the major factors
responsible for this luteal inadequacy, but are nevertheless essential for luteal
development and function. Progesterone acting on its receptor in the endometrium 
stimulates the production of endometrial secretions on which the free-living
embryo is dependent. However, their exact composition and effects of inadequate
progesterone remains to be determined. The embryo is recognized through its
secretion of interferon tau (IFNT), which suppresses luteolytic pulses of
prostaglandin F(2 alpha). In the cow, it is most likely that IFNT inhibits
oxytocin receptor up-regulation directly and does not require the prior
inhibition of oestrogen receptor alpha (ESR1). Unravelling the precise
luteal-endometrium and embryo interactions is essential for us to understand
pregnancy establishment and development of strategies to reverse the declining
fertility of dairy cows.

PMID: 18638111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Ann Oncol. 2008 Nov;19(11):1870-4. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdn409. Epub 2008 Jul 22.

Methylation is less abundant in BRCA1-associated compared with sporadic breast
cancer.

Suijkerbuijk KP(1), Fackler MJ, Sukumar S, van Gils CH, van Laar T, van der Wall 
E, Vooijs M, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Promoter methylation is a common epigenetic mechanism to silence
tumor suppressor genes during breast cancer development. We investigated whether 
BRCA1-associated breast tumors show cancer-predictive methylation patterns
similar to those found in sporadic tumors.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Quantitative multiplex methylation-specific PCR of 11 genes
involved in breast carcinogenesis (RARB, RASSF1, TWIST1, CCND2, ESR1, SCGB3A1,
BRCA1, BRCA2, CDKN2A, APC, CDH1) was carried out on 32 BRCA1-associated and 46
sporadic breast carcinomas and on normal breast tissue from seven BRCA1 mutation 
carriers and 13 non-carriers.
RESULTS: The extent of cumulative methylation increased with age (P < 0.001). The
median cumulative methylation index (CMI) of all studied genes was significantly 
higher in tumors (89) than in normal tissue (13, P < 0.001). The median CMI was
significantly lower in BRCA1-associated (59) than in sporadic breast tumors (122,
P = 0.001), in estrogen receptor (ER)-negative tumors (73) than in ER-positive
tumors (122, P = 0.005) and in lymph node-negative (77) compared with lymph
node-positive tumors (137, P = 0.007). In subgroup analysis, the effect of a
BRCA1 germline mutation on methylation proved to be independent of ER status,
lymph node status and age.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that BRCA1-associated breast cancers show less
promoter methylation compared with sporadic breast carcinomas indicating a
difference in disease etiology.

PMCID: PMC2733079
PMID: 18647968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2008 Jun 30;3(7):e2816. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002816.

Polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor 1 and vitamin C and matrix
metalloproteinase gene families are associated with susceptibility to lymphoma.

Skibola CF(1), Bracci PM, Halperin E, Nieters A, Hubbard A, Paynter RA, Skibola
DR, Agana L, Becker N, Tressler P, Forrest MS, Sankararaman S, Conde L, Holly EA,
Smith MT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health Sciences, University
of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA. chrisfs@berkeley.edu

BACKGROUND: Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is the fifth most common cancer in the
U.S. and few causes have been identified. Genetic association studies may help
identify environmental risk factors and enhance our understanding of disease
mechanisms.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: 768 coding and haplotype tagging SNPs in 146
genes were examined using Illumina GoldenGate technology in a large
population-based case-control study of NHL in the San Francisco Bay Area (1,292
cases 1,375 controls are included here). Statistical analyses were restricted to 
HIV- participants of white non-Hispanic origin. Genes involved in
steroidogenesis, immune function, cell signaling, sunlight exposure, xenobiotic
metabolism/oxidative stress, energy balance, and uptake and metabolism of
cholesterol, folate and vitamin C were investigated. Sixteen SNPs in eight
pathways and nine haplotypes were associated with NHL after correction for
multiple testing at the adjusted q<0.10 level. Eight SNPs were tested in an
independent case-control study of lymphoma in Germany (494 NHL cases and 494
matched controls). Novel associations with common variants in estrogen receptor 1
(ESR1) and in the vitamin C receptor and matrix metalloproteinase gene families
were observed. Four ESR1 SNPs were associated with follicular lymphoma (FL) in
the U.S. study, with rs3020314 remaining associated with reduced risk of FL after
multiple testing adjustments [odds ratio (OR) = 0.42, 95% confidence interval
(CI) = 0.23-0.77) and replication in the German study (OR = 0.24, 95% CI =
0.06-0.94). Several SNPs and haplotypes in the matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP3) 
and MMP9 genes and in the vitamin C receptor genes, solute carrier family 23
member 1 (SLC23A1) and SLC23A2, showed associations with NHL risk.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings suggest a role for estrogen, vitamin C and
matrix metalloproteinases in the pathogenesis of NHL that will require further
validation.

PMCID: PMC2474696
PMID: 18636124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Endocrinology. 2008 Dec;149(12):6300-10. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0670. Epub 2008 Jul
17.

Molecular cloning, characterization, and evolutionary analysis of estrogen
receptors from phylogenetically ancient fish.

Katsu Y(1), Kohno S, Hyodo S, Ijiri S, Adachi S, Hara A, Guillette LJ Jr, Iguchi 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic
Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji,
Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan.

Estrogens are necessary for ovarian differentiation during a critical
developmental stage in many vertebrates, and they promote the growth and
differentiation of the adult female reproductive system. To understand the
evolution of vertebrate estrogen receptors (ESRs) and to evaluate estrogen
receptor-ligand interactions in phylogenetically ancient fish, we used PCR
techniques to isolate the cDNA encoding ESRs from lungfish, sturgeon, and gar.
Sequence analyses indicate that these fishes have two ESRs, ESR1 (ERalpha) and
ESR2 (ERbeta), as previously reported for other vertebrate species, but a second 
type of ESR2 (ERbeta2) was not found as has been reported in a number of teleost 
fishes. Phylogenetic analysis of the ESR sequences indicated that the lungfish
ESRs are classified to the tetrapod ESR group, not with the teleost fish ESRs as 
are the ESRs from gar and sturgeon. Using transient transfection assays of
mammalian cells, ESR proteins from these three ancient fishes displayed
estrogen-dependent activation of transcription from an
estrogen-responsive-element containing promoter. We also examined the estrogenic 
potential of o,p'-dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane (o,p'-DDT) and p,p'-DDT as
well as one of its common metabolites, p,p'-dichloro-diphenyl-ethylene (p,p'-DDE)
on the ESRs from these fishes. Lungfish ESR1 was less sensitive to DDT/DDE than
the ESR1 from the other two fishes. The response of lungfish ESR1 to these
pesticides is similar to the pattern obtained from salamander ESR1. These data
provide a basic tool allowing future studies examining the receptor-ligand
interactions and endocrine-disrupting mechanisms in three species of
phylogenetically ancient fish and also expands our knowledge of ESR evolution.

PMCID: PMC2734497
PMID: 18635653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Aug;45(2):217-22. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2008.05.016. Epub
2008 Jul 9.

Sex hormone receptor gene variation associated with phenotype in male
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients.

Lind JM(1), Chiu C, Ingles J, Yeates L, Humphries SE, Heather AK, Semsarian C.

Author information: 
(1)Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology, Centenary Institute, Sydney,
Australia.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a clinically heterogeneous disease, which
suggests that a number of factors exist which modify disease outcome. Gender may 
be one such factor as more males present with the disease compared with females. 
The aim of the present study was to determine if an association exists between
genetic variation in sex hormone receptors and the development of left
ventricular hypertrophy in HCM. The study population included 200 unrelated
individuals from an Australian HCM cohort. Clinical evaluation was performed.
Genetic analysis of the androgen receptor (AR), estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1),
estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2), and aromatase (CYP19A1) genes, was carried out in all
patients. Fewer (CAG)n repeats within the AR gene were significantly associated
with higher maximal left ventricular wall thickness (LVWT) in males (P=0.008),
adjusting for age. Male carriers of the A allele at SNP rs6915267, located in the
promoter region of ESR1, had an 11% decrease in mean LVWT compared to male GG
homozygotes (P=0.047). We report for the first time that variation at the AR gene
is associated with left ventricular hypertrophy in males with HCM. Understanding 
the impact of sex hormones on phenotype will be helpful in the risk
stratification and clinical management of HCM patients.

PMID: 18617186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Endocrinol. 2008 Sep;198(3):625-34. doi: 10.1677/JOE-08-0121. Epub 2008 Jul 2.

Maternal malnutrition during lactation alters the folliculogenesis and
gonadotropins and estrogen isoforms ovarian receptors in the offspring at
puberty.

Faria Tda S(1), Brasil Fde B, Sampaio FJ, Ramos Cda F.

Author information: 
(1)Urogenital Research Unit-UERJ, State University of Rio de Janeiro, Avenue 28
de Setembro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

In this study, we aimed to evaluate whether maternal malnutrition during
lactation alters the folliculogenesis and the expression of the gonadotropins and
estrogen isoforms ovarian receptors in the offspring at puberty. At parturition, 
dams were randomly assigned to the following groups: control (C) group, with free
access to a standard laboratory diet containing 23% protein and
protein-energy-restricted (PER) group, with free access to an isoenergy and
protein-restricted diet containing 8% protein. After weaning, the female pups had
free access to standard laboratory diet. The maternal malnutrition caused a
significant increase in the number of preantral (C=13.72+/-2.87;
PER=26.36+/-3.03, P<0.01) and small antral follicles (C=9.32+/-1.35;
PER=17.64+/-2.33, P<0.01) and decrease in the number of primordial
(C=11.72+/-1.37; PER=3.92+/-0.60, P<0.01) and Graafian follicles (C=1.84+/-0.21; 
PER=0.96+/-0.11, P<0.01), and corpus luteum (C=2.00+/-0.28; PER=0.80+/-0.31,
P<0.01). The estradiol serum concentration was significantly higher
(C=67.86+/-4.39; PER=83.29+/-2.68, P<0.05) while testosterone serum concentration
did not show statistical difference (C=0.09+/-0.02; PER=0.11+/-0.01, P>0.05) in
the PER group. In relation to the receptors expression, maternal malnutrition led
to a significant increase in the amount of Fshr (C=0.89+/-0.04; PER=1.07+/-0.03, 
P<0.05) and Lhcqr (C=0.87+/-0.15; PER=1.33+/-0.08, P<0.05) transcripts and a
significant decrease in the amount of Ar (C=0.59+/-0.006; PER=0.13+/-0.080,
P<0.05), ER alpha (Esr1) (C=3.33+/-0.71; PER=0.74+/-0.50, P<0.05), ER beta 1
(Esr2) (C=1.33+/-0.06; PER=0.49+/-0.36, P<0.05), and ER beta 2 (Esr2)
(C=3.28+/-0.60; PER=0.62+/-0.34, P<0.05) transcripts. In conclusion, perinatal
maternal malnutrition can directly affect folliculogenesis at puberty probably as
a consequence of changes in the ovarian expression of gonadotropins, androgen and
estrogens isoforms receptors. Long-term sexual alterations could be expected in
this experimental model, since a reduction in the primordial follicle number is
observed, which can result in a decrease in the reproductive lifetime and an
earlier termination of breeding capacity.

PMID: 18596125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):821-2. doi: 10.1038/ng0708-821.

Conflicting evidence on the frequency of ESR1 amplification in breast cancer.

Albertson DG.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):806-7; author reply 810-2.
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):809; author reply 810-2.
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):809-10; author reply 810-2.
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):807-8; author reply 810-2.

PMID: 18583976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):809; author reply 810-2. doi: 10.1038/ng0708-809a.

ESR1 gene amplification in breast cancer: a common phenomenon?

Vincent-Salomon A, Raynal V, Lucchesi C, Gruel N, Delattre O.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):821-2.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2007 May;39(5):655-60.

PMID: 18583967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):809-10; author reply 810-2. doi: 10.1038/ng0708-809b.

ESR1 gene amplification in breast cancer: a common phenomenon?

Reis-Filho JS, Drury S, Lambros MB, Marchio C, Johnson N, Natrajan R, Salter J,
Levey P, Fletcher O, Peto J, Ashworth A, Dowsett M.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):821-2.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2007 May;39(5):655-60.

PMID: 18583966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):807-8; author reply 810-2. doi: 10.1038/ng0708-807.

ESR1 gene amplification in breast cancer: a common phenomenon?

Horlings HM, Bergamaschi A, Nordgard SH, Kim YH, Han W, Noh DY, Salari K, Joosse 
SA, Reyal F, Lingjaerde OC, Kristensen VN, Børresen-Dale AL, Pollack J, van de
Vijver MJ.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):821-2.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2007 May;39(5):655-60.

PMID: 18583965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):806-7; author reply 810-2. doi: 10.1038/ng0708-806.

ESR1 gene amplification in breast cancer: a common phenomenon?

Brown LA, Hoog J, Chin SF, Tao Y, Zayed AA, Chin K, Teschendorff AE, Quackenbush 
JF, Marioni JC, Leung S, Perou CM, Neilsen TO, Ellis M, Gray JW, Bernard PS,
Huntsman DG, Caldas C.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):821-2.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2007 May;39(5):655-60.

PMCID: PMC2846830
PMID: 18583964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Leuk Lymphoma. 2008 Jun;49(6):1132-41. doi: 10.1080/10428190802035990.

Concurrent methylation of promoters from tumor associated genes predicts outcome 
in acute myeloid leukemia.

Hess CJ(1), Errami A, Berkhof J, Denkers F, Ossenkoppele GJ, Nygren AO,
Schuurhuis GJ, Waisfisz Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.

By assessment of the methylation status of 25 candidate tumor suppressor genes
(TSGs) in 119 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients and 5 controls, we aimed to
determine whether simultaneous methylation of multiple TSGs exerts prognostic
impact. Methylation-specific multiplex ligation probe amplification (MS-MLPA)
revealed methylation of at least one TSG in 59/119 patients, while no methylation
was found in controls. Methylation of different TSGs within patients was
substantially correlated (intra-class correlation; 0.38). ESR1 methylation
(34/119) strongly predicted concurrent methylation of other genes, OR 7.33 (95%CI
4.13-12.99). A Cox regression model that included the three most frequently
methylated TSGs ESR1, CDKN2B/p15 and IGSF4, showed ESR1 to have opposite effects 
on overall survival (OS) compared with the other two, HR 0.22 (95% CI 0.09-0.53) 
and HR 1.66 (95% CI 0.73-3.79), HR 1.61 (95%CI 0.66-3.93). By assessment of
CDKN2B/p15 and IGSF4 methylation, patients with methylation at multiple loci can 
be identified. Accumulation of methylation aberrancies is much more pronounced in
ESR1 methylated patients. When combined, the methylation status of ESR1,
CDKN2B/p15 and IGSF4 enable identification of patient subgroups with large
differences in OS (p <0.0001). This study shows that methylation profiling allows
risk stratification in AML. In addition, ESR1 methylation may reflect a
biological pathway that leads to hypermethylation of multiple genes, which is
reflected by methylation of IGSF4 and/or CDKN2B/p15.

PMID: 18569637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2008;28(3):285-93. doi: 10.1080/10799890802084614 
.

Estrogen receptors alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) are expressed in circulating
human lymphocytes.

Scariano JK(1), Emery-Cohen AJ, Pickett GG, Morgan M, Simons PC, Alba F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical Laboratory Sciences, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131-0001, USA. Jscariano@salud.unm.edu

Bone marrow thymocytes in part mediate the bone-preserving effects of estrogen by
decreasing their production of osteoclast growth factors such as interleukin-1
and -6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha in the presence of physiological amounts
of estradiol. Although several in vitro studies implicate the T-lymphocyte as a
candidate mediator of estrogen signaling in the skeleton, whether these cells or 
any lymphocytes ordinarily express one or both nuclear estrogen receptors was
previously unresolved. The purpose of our investigation was therefore to
ascertain, by using real-time PCR, immmunoblotting, and cytometric techniques, if
any of the nuclear estrogen receptors could be detected in normal peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMNC) collected from healthy volunteers. The results of
immunoblotting experiments revealed that both estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and 
beta (ESR2) proteins are expressed in nuclei, but not in the cytoplasm of PBMNC
harvested from all of the 15 healthy male and female volunteers (aged 23-50
years) we tested. PBMNCs contained mRNA coding for the two major full-length
isoforms of ESR2 and the expression of ESR2 protein was localized within a
lymphocyte subpopulation by cytometric analysis. Our data provide further
evidence that lymphocytes and monocytes are responsive to estrogen and underscore
its importance in modulating the immune response, as well as the vascular and
skeletal health of men and women.

PMID: 18569528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Hum Genet. 2008 Aug;124(1):63-71. doi: 10.1007/s00439-008-0523-7. Epub 2008 Jun
17.

Evaluation of a SNP map of 6q24-27 confirms diabetic nephropathy loci and
identifies novel associations in type 2 diabetes patients with nephropathy from
an African-American population.

Leak TS(1), Mychaleckyj JC, Smith SG, Keene KL, Gordon CJ, Hicks PJ, Freedman BI,
Bowden DW, Sale MM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC, USA.

Previously, we performed a genome scan for type 2 diabetes (T2DM) using 638
African-American (AA) affected sibling pairs from 247 families; non-parametric
linkage analysis suggested evidence of linkage at 6q24-27 (LOD 2.26). To
comprehensively evaluate this region, we performed a two-stage association study 
by first constructing a SNP map of 754 SNPs selected from HapMap on the basis of 
linkage disequilibrium (LD) in 300 AAT2DM end-stage renal disease (ESRD)
subjects, 311 AA controls, 43 European American controls and 45 Yoruba Nigerian
samples (Set 1). Replication analyses were conducted in an independent population
of 283 AA T2DM-ESRD subjects and 282 AA controls (Set 2). In addition, we
adjusted for the impact of admixture on association results by using ancestry
informative markers (AIMs). In Stage 1, 137 (18.2%) SNPs showed nominal evidence 
of association (P < 0.05) in one or more of tests of association: allelic (n =
33), dominant (n = 36), additive (n = 29), or recessive (n = 34) genotypic
models, and 2- (n = 47) and 3-SNP (n = 43) haplotypic analyses. These SNPs were
selected for follow-up genotyping. Stage 2 analyses confirmed association with a 
predicted 2-SNP "risk" haplotype in the PARK2 gene. Also, two intergenic SNPs
showed consistent genotypic association with T2DM-ESRD: rs12197043 and rs4897081.
Combined analysis of all subjects from both stages revealed nominal associations 
with 17 SNPs within genes, including suggestive associations in ESR1 and PARK2.
This study confirms known diabetic nephropathy loci and identifies potentially
novel susceptibility variants located within 6q24-27 in AA.

PMCID: PMC2728933
PMID: 18560894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cancer Res. 2008 Jun 15;68(12):4597-605. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6645.

Epigenetic signatures of familial cancer are characteristic of tumor type and
family category.

Joensuu EI(1), Abdel-Rahman WM, Ollikainen M, Ruosaari S, Knuutila S, Peltomäki
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Finland.
emmi.joensuu@helsinki.fi

Tumor suppressor genes (TSG) may be inactivated by methylation of critical CpG
sites in their promoter regions, providing targets for early detection and
prevention. Although sporadic cancers, especially colorectal carcinoma (CRC),
have been characterized for epigenetic changes extensively, such information in
familial/hereditary cancer is limited. We studied 108 CRCs and 63 endometrial
carcinomas (EC) occurring as part of hereditary nonpolyposis CRC, as separate
familial site-specific entities or sporadically, for promoter methylation of 24
TSGs. Eleven genes in CRC and 6 in EC were methylated in at least 15% of tumors
and together accounted for 89% and 82% of promoter methylation events in CRC and 
EC, respectively. Some genes (e.g., CDH13, APC, GSTP1, and TIMP3) showed frequent
methylation in both cancers, whereas promoter methylation of ESR1, CHFR, and RARB
was typical of CRC and that of RASSF1(A) characterized EC. Among CRCs, sets of
genes with methylation characteristic of familial versus sporadic tumors
appeared. A TSG methylator phenotype (methylation of at least 5 of 24 genes)
occurred in 37% of CRC and 18% of EC (P = 0.013), and the presence versus absence
of MLH1 methylation divided the tumors into high versus low methylation groups.
In conclusion, inactivation of TSGs by promoter methylation followed patterns
characteristic of tumor type (CRC versus EC) and family category and was strongly
influenced by MLH1 promoter methylation status in all categories. Paired normal
tissues or blood displayed negligible methylation arguing against a
constitutional methylation abnormality in familial cases.

PMID: 18559504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Br J Cancer. 2008 Jul 8;99(1):136-42. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604432. Epub 2008 Jun 
10.

Profiling CpG island field methylation in both morphologically normal and
neoplastic human colonic mucosa.

Belshaw NJ(1), Elliott GO, Foxall RJ, Dainty JR, Pal N, Coupe A, Garg D, Bradburn
DM, Mathers JC, Johnson IT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park, Colney, Norwich NR4 7UA,
UK. nigel.belshaw@bbsrc.ac.uk

Aberrant CpG island (CGI) methylation occurs early in colorectal neoplasia.
Quantitative methylation-specific PCR profiling applied to biopsies was used to
quantify low levels of CGI methylation of 18 genes in the morphologically normal 
colonic mucosa of neoplasia-free subjects, adenomatous polyp patients, cancer
patients and their tumours. Multivariate statistical analyses distinguished
tumour from mucosa with a sensitivity of 78.9% and a specificity of 100% (P=3 x
10(-7)). In morphologically normal mucosa, age-dependent CGI methylation was
observed for APC, AXIN2, DKK1, HPP1, N33, p16, SFRP1, SFRP2 and SFRP4 genes, and 
significant differences in CGI methylation levels were detected between groups.
Multinomial logistic regression models based on the CGI methylation profiles from
normal mucosa correctly identified 78.9% of cancer patients and 87.9% of
non-cancer (neoplasia-free+polyp) patients (P=4.93 x 10(-7)) using APC, HPP1,
p16, SFRP4, WIF1 and ESR1 methylation as the most informative variables.
Similarly, CGI methylation of SFRP4, SFRP5 and WIF1 correctly identified 61.5% of
polyp patients and 78.9% of neoplasia-free subjects (P=0.0167). The apparently
normal mucosal field of patients presenting with neoplasia has evidently
undergone significant epigenetic modification. Methylation of the genes selected 
by the models may play a role in the earliest stages of the development of
colorectal neoplasia.

PMCID: PMC2453007
PMID: 18542073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Biol Reprod. 2008 Sep;79(3):432-41. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.107.067413. Epub 2008
May 21.

Effects of the antiestrogen fulvestrant (ICI 182,780) on gene expression of the
rat efferent ductules.

Yasuhara F(1), Gomes GR, Siu ER, Suenaga CI, Maróstica E, Porto CS, Lazari MF.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Escola Paulista de Medicina, São Paulo,
Brazil.

The efferent ductules express the highest amount of estrogen receptors ESR1
(ERalpha) and ESR2 (ERbeta) within the male reproductive tract. Treatment of rats
with the antiestrogen fulvestrant (ICI 182,780) causes inhibition of fluid
reabsorption in the efferent ductules, leading to seminiferous tubule atrophy and
infertility. To provide a more comprehensive knowledge about the molecular
targets for estrogen in the rat efferent ductules, we investigated the effects of
ICI 182,780 treatment on gene expression using a microarray approach. Treatment
with ICI 182,780 increased or reduced at least 2-fold the expression of 263 and
98 genes, respectively. Not surprisingly, several genes that encode ion channels 
and macromolecule transporters were affected. Interestingly, treatment with ICI
182,780 markedly altered the expression of genes related to extracellular matrix 
organization. Matrix metalloproteinase 7 (Mmp7), osteopontin (Spp1), and neuronal
pentraxin 1 (Nptx1) were among the most altered genes in this category.
Upregulation of Mmp7 and Spp1 and downregulation of Nptx1 were validated by
Northern blot. Increase in Mmp7 expression was further confirmed by
immunohistochemistry and probably accounted for the decrease in collagen content 
observed in the efferent ductules of ICI 182,780-treated animals. Downregulation 
of Nptx1 probably contributed to the extracellular matrix changes and decreased
amyloid deposition in the efferent ductules of ICI 182,780-treated animals.
Identification of new molecular targets for estrogen action may help elucidate
the regulatory role of this hormone in the male reproductive tract.

PMID: 18495684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Pathol. 2008 Aug;215(4):398-410. doi: 10.1002/path.2368.

Genomic and immunophenotypical characterization of pure micropapillary carcinomas
of the breast.

Marchiò C(1), Iravani M, Natrajan R, Lambros MB, Savage K, Tamber N, Fenwick K,
Mackay A, Senetta R, Di Palma S, Schmitt FC, Bussolati G, Ellis LO, Ashworth A,
Sapino A, Reis-Filho JS.

Author information: 
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre--Institute of Cancer Research, 
London, UK.

Pure invasive micropapillary carcinoma (MPC) is a special histological type that 
accounts for 0.7-3% of all breast cancers. MPC has a distinctive growth pattern
and a more aggressive clinical behaviour than invasive ductal carcinomas of no
special type (IDC-NSTs). To define the molecular characteristics of MPCs, we
profiled a series of 12 MPCs and 24 grade and oestrogen receptor (ER)-matched
IDC-NSTs using high-resolution microarray comparative genomic hybridization
(aCGH). In addition, we generated a tissue microarray containing a series of 24
MPCs and performed immunohistochemical analysis with ER, PR, Ki-67, HER2, CK5/6, 
CK14, CK17, EGFR, topoisomerase-IIalpha, cyclin D1, caveolin-1, E-cadherin, and
beta-catenin antibodies. In situ hybridization probes were employed to evaluate
the prevalence of amplification of HER2, TOP2A, EGFR, CCND1, MYC, ESR1, and FGFR1
genes. aCGH analysis demonstrated that MPCs significantly differed from IDC-NSTs 
at the genomic level. Gains of 1q, 2q, 4p, 6p, 6q23.2-q27, 7p, 7q, 8p, 8q, 9p,
10p, 11q, 12p, 12q, 16p, 17p, 17q, 19p, 20p, 20q, and 21q, and losses of 1p, 2p, 
6q11.1-q16.3, 6q21-q22.1, 9p, 11p, 15q, and 19q were more prevalent in MPCs.
High-level gains/amplifications of 8p12-p11, 8q12, 8q13, 8q21, 8q23, 8q24, 17q21,
17q23, and 20q13 were significantly associated with MPCs. A comparison between 24
MPCs and a series of 48 grade and ER-matched IDC-NSTs revealed that high cyclin
D1 expression, high proliferation rates, and MYC (8q24) amplification were
significantly associated with MPCs. Our results demonstrate that MPCs have
distinct histological features and molecular genetic profiles supporting the
contention that they constitute a distinct pathological entity.

Copyright (c) 2008 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 18484683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Reproduction. 2008 Aug;136(2):175-86. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0100. Epub 2008 May 15.

Selective estrogen receptor alpha activation disrupts sex organ differentiation
and induces expression of vitellogenin II and very low-density apolipoprotein II 
in Japanese quail embryos.

Mattsson A(1), Olsson JA, Brunström B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, Centre for Reproductive Biology in
Uppsala, Uppsala University, Norbyvägen 18A, SE-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.

The Japanese quail (Coturnix japonica) is a widely used model species for
studying the roles of steroid hormones in avian sex differentiation. The aim of
the present study was to elucidate the significance of estrogen receptors alpha
and beta (ERalpha and ERbeta) in normal sex differentiation of the reproductive
organs in the Japanese quail and in xenoestrogen-induced disruption of
reproductive organ differentiation. Real-time PCR indicated that ERalpha (ESR1)
mRNA is expressed in both right and left gonads and Müllerian ducts (MDs) in both
sexes during early morphological differentiation. ERbeta (ESR2) transcripts were 
also detected in gonads and MDs, but at very low levels. Both receptor subtypes
were expressed in the liver and may therefore mediate the expression of
estrogen-regulated egg-yolk proteins. Aromatase mRNA was expressed at much higher
levels in female than male gonads as early as embryonic day 5, indicating early
sex differences in estrogen synthesis. Treatment with the ERalpha-selective
agonist propyl pyrazole triol showed that frequently reported xenoestrogen
effects, such as ovotestis formation, abnormal MD development, and hepatic
expression of egg-yolk proteins, were induced by selective activation of ERalpha.
Taken together, our results suggest that activation of ERalpha is crucial for
estrogen-dependent sex differentiation of the reproductive organs and that
ERalpha mediates xenoestrogen-induced toxicity during reproductive development in
birds.

PMID: 18483074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2008 Jun;82(6):482-5. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20458.

Analysis of five single nucleotide polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene in
cryptorchidism.

Wang Y(1), Barthold J, Figueroa E, González R, Noh PH, Wang M, Manson J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. wangya@mail.med.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: Recent findings suggest that a specific haplotype, including five
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 3'-terminal region of the estrogen 
receptor alpha gene (ESR1), is associated with the risk for cryptorchidism, but
results have been conflicting in different populations. The goal of this study
was to further define the association between this specific ESR1 haplotype and
the risk for nonsyndromic cryptorchidism in a multiracial American population
including Caucasian, African American, and Asian American subjects.
METHODS: Applied Biosystems TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assays were used to identify
the genotypes of the five SNPs in ESR1 in 152 nonsyndromic cryptorchidism cases
and 160 healthy controls.
RESULTS: For the five SNPs, there were no significant differences in genotype
frequencies between cases and controls. The four estimated haplotypes at the 3'
region of ESR1 gene were also not associated with the occurrence of
cryptorchidism, but the haplotype AGATC was associated with the severity of
cryptorchidism. SNP12 (rs6932902) in ESR1 was not associated with cryptorchidism 
per se, but was associated with increasing severity of cryptorchidism. Severe
cases were more likely to have GG genotype (93%) than moderate (54%) cases (p =
.04), and this association was in recessive mode (p = .02). The allele
distribution of this SNP was also significantly different between moderate and
severe cases: 97% of severe cases had the G allele while only 76% of moderate
cases had the G allele (p = .03).
CONCLUSIONS: SNP12 in ESR1 is not associated with the occurrence of
cryptorchidism but is associated with the severity of cryptorchidism.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18452179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Lipid Res. 2008 Aug;49(8):1701-6. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M700490-JLR200. Epub 2008
Apr 30.

ESR1 polymorphism is associated with plasma lipid and apolipoprotein levels in
Caucasians of the Rochester Family Heart Study.

Klos KL(1), Boerwinkle E, Ferrell RE, Turner ST, Morrison AC.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Center, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
Houston, TX, USA. kathy.klos@uth.tmc.edu

We evaluated six estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) polymorphisms for association with
ten plasma lipid and apolipoprotein traits in 1,847 individuals (941 females and 
906 males) in the multi-generation Rochester Family Heart Study using a
generalized estimating equation approach. Apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I), apoA-II,
and HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) were associated with exon 4 rs1801132 (Pro325Pro)
genotype (P = 0.0044, P = 0.0048, and P = 0.0035, respectively). Positive
correlation between levels of apoA-I, apoA-II, and HDL-C and the number of G
alleles was observed in females (P = 0.0120, P = 0.0032, and P = 0.0030), but not
males (P > 0.05). Because few studies have evaluated the effect of ESR1 gene
polymorphisms on lipid traits in children, we also stratified our sample at the
age of 15 years. There was evidence of association between intron 1
single-nucleotide polymorphisms rs9322331 and rs9340799 and apoC-II, and
triglycerides (TGs) in youths 15 years and younger. In youths, evidence of
association between rs9322331 and rs9340799 and apoC-II was stronger in males (P 
= 0.0036 and P = 0.0124) than in females (P > 0.05), whereas evidence of
association with TG was stronger in females (P = 0.0030 and P = 0.0024) than in
males (P > 0.05). These findings suggest that ESR1 variation plays an age- and
sex-dependent role in determining plasma lipid and apolipoprotein levels.

PMCID: PMC2637157
PMID: 18450649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2008 Oct 5;147B(7):1323-6. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.30751.

Association study of the estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) and childhood-onset 
mood disorders.

Mill J(1), Kiss E, Baji I, Kapornai K, Daróczy G, Vetró A, Kennedy J, Kovacs M,
Barr C; International Consortium for Childhood-Onset Mood Disorders.

Collaborators: Vetró A, Kiss E, Kapornai K, Benák I, Osváth VK, Dombovári E,
Kaczvinszky E, Daróczy G, Mayer L, Gádoros J, Baji I, Tamás Z, Besnyõ M, Székely 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Depressive disorders are heterogeneous psychiatric disorders involving deficits
in cognitive, psychomotor, and emotional processing. Depressive disorders have a 
significant genetic component, with severe, recurrent and early-onset forms
demonstrating elevated heritability. In this study we genotyped eleven single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning the estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) 
in a large family-based childhood-onset mood disorder (COMD) sample. None of the 
individual SNP or global haplotype analyses was significant in the entire COMD
sample, but haplotype analysis of three SNPs in strong linkage disequilibrium
(rs746432, rs2077647, and rs532010) uncovered an association with COMD,
specifically in females. Our data are consistent with previous studies
demonstrating a female-specific association between ESR1 and neurobehavioral
phenotypes. These results suggest the existence of sex-specific etiological
factors in depressive disorders, related to estrogen, with onset in childhood.

PMID: 18449864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. N Engl J Med. 2008 May 29;358(22):2355-65. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0801197. Epub 2008 
Apr 29.

Multiple genetic loci for bone mineral density and fractures.

Styrkarsdottir U(1), Halldorsson BV, Gretarsdottir S, Gudbjartsson DF, Walters
GB, Ingvarsson T, Jonsdottir T, Saemundsdottir J, Center JR, Nguyen TV, Bagger Y,
Gulcher JR, Eisman JA, Christiansen C, Sigurdsson G, Kong A, Thorsteinsdottir U, 
Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2008 May 29;358(22):2403-5.

BACKGROUND: Bone mineral density influences the risk of osteoporosis later in
life and is useful in the evaluation of the risk of fracture. We aimed to
identify sequence variants associated with bone mineral density and fracture.
METHODS: We performed a quantitative trait analysis of data from 5861 Icelandic
subjects (the discovery set), testing for an association between 301,019
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and bone mineral density of the hip and
lumbar spine. We then tested for an association between 74 SNPs (most of which
were implicated in the discovery set) at 32 loci in replication sets of
Icelandic, Danish, and Australian subjects (4165, 2269, and 1491 subjects,
respectively).
RESULTS: Sequence variants in five genomic regions were significantly associated 
with bone mineral density in the discovery set and were confirmed in the
replication sets (combined P values, 1.2x10(-7) to 2.0x10(-21)). Three regions
are close to or within genes previously shown to be important to the biologic
characteristics of bone: the receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand
gene (RANKL) (chromosomal location, 13q14), the osteoprotegerin gene (OPG)
(8q24), and the estrogen receptor 1 gene (ESR1) (6q25). The two other regions are
close to the zinc finger and BTB domain containing 40 gene (ZBTB40) (1p36) and
the major histocompatibility complex region (6p21). The 1p36, 8q24, and 6p21 loci
were also associated with osteoporotic fractures, as were loci at 18q21, close to
the receptor activator of the nuclear factor-kappaB gene (RANK), and loci at 2p16
and 11p11.
CONCLUSIONS: We have discovered common sequence variants that are consistently
associated with bone mineral density and with low-trauma fractures in three
populations of European descent. Although these variants alone are not clinically
useful in the prediction of risk to the individual person, they provide insight
into the biochemical pathways underlying osteoporosis.

Copyright 2008 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMID: 18445777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Jul;93(7):2779-85. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0106. Epub 
2008 Apr 29.

Variation in estrogen-related genes associated with cardiovascular phenotypes and
circulating estradiol, testosterone, and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate levels.

Peter I(1), Kelley-Hedgepeth A, Fox CS, Cupples LA, Huggins GS, Housman DE, Karas
RH, Mendelsohn ME, Levy D, Murabito JM.

Author information: 
(1)Tufts Medical Center, 800 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
ipeter@tuftsmedicalcenter.org

BACKGROUND: Younger age at the onset of menopause and lower circulating levels of
estrogen are risk factors for cardiovascular disease. Several studies have
detected associations between variations in genes encoding estrogen receptors
alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2), and enzyme aromatase (CYP19A1), which regulates the
estrogen to testosterone ratio, and cardiovascular phenotypes in the Framingham
Heart Study. To explore potential mechanisms by which these gene variants may
contribute to cardiovascular disease, we tested the hypothesis that the
polymorphisms were associated with endogenous steroid hormone levels.
METHODS: Multiple regression analysis was used to assess the relation between
reported polymorphisms and total serum estradiol, testosterone, and
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate levels in 834 men and 687 women who attended the
third and fourth Framingham Heart Study examination cycles.
RESULTS: In men, significant associations were detected between CYP19A1
polymorphisms and estradiol and testosterone levels, and the estradiol to
testosterone ratio (P ranges 0.0005-0.01). Specifically, carriers of common
haplotype rs700518[G]-(TTTA)(n) [L]-rs726547[C] had higher estradiol levels (5%
per copy; P = 0.0004), lower testosterone levels (17% per copy; P = 0.036), and a
higher estradiol to testosterone ratio (24% per copy; P < 0.0001) compared with
the rs700518[A]-(TTTA)(n) [S]-rs726547[C] carriers. In addition, postmenopausal
carriers of the ESR2 (CA)(n) long allele and rs1256031 [C] allele had moderately 
higher estradiol levels (P < or = 0.03). No significant associations with the
ESR1 variants were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that variations in CYP19A1 correlate with
steroid hormone levels in men. Knowledge that a specific carrier status may
predispose to altered steroid hormone levels may lead to targeted intervention
strategies to reduce health risks in genetically susceptible individuals.

PMCID: PMC2453049
PMID: 18445666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Bone Miner Res. 2008 May;23(5):644-54. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.080105.

In vivo genome-wide expression study on human circulating B cells suggests a
novel ESR1 and MAPK3 network for postmenopausal osteoporosis.

Xiao P(1), Chen Y, Jiang H, Liu YZ, Pan F, Yang TL, Tang ZH, Larsen JA, Lappe JM,
Recker RR, Deng HW.

Author information: 
(1)Osteoporosis Research Center and Department of Biomedical Sciences, Creighton 
University, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Osteoporosis is characterized by low BMD. Studies have shown that B
cells may participate in osteoclastogenesis through expression of
osteoclast-related factors, such as RANKL, transforming growth factor beta
(TGFB), and osteoprotegerin (OPG). However, the in vivo significance of B cells
in human bone metabolism and osteoporosis is still largely unknown, particularly 
at the systematic gene expression level.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, Affymetrix HG-U133A GeneChip arrays were
used to identify genes differentially expressed in B cells between 10 low and 10 
high BMD postmenopausal women. Significance of differential expression was tested
by t-test and adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini and Hochberg (BH) 
procedure (adjusted p </= 0.05).
RESULTS: Twenty-nine genes were downregulated in the low versus high BMD group.
These genes were further analyzed using Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (Ingenuity
Systems). A network involving estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and mitogen activated
protein kinase 3 (MAPK3) was identified. Real-time RT-PCR confirmed differential 
expression of eight genes, including ESR1, MAPK3, methyl CpG binding protein 2
(MECP2), proline-serine-threonine phosphatase interacting protein 1 (PSTPIP1),
Scr-like-adaptor (SLA), serine/threonine kinase 11 (STK11), WNK lysine-deficient 
protein kinase 1 (WNK1), and zinc finger protein 446 (ZNF446).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first in vivo genome-wide expression study on human B
cells in relation to osteoporosis. Our results highlight the significance of B
cells in the etiology of osteoporosis and suggest a novel mechanism for
postmenopausal osteoporosis (i.e., that downregulation of ESR1 and MAPK3 in B
cells regulates secretion of factors, leading to increased osteoclastogenesis or 
decreased osteoblastogenesis).

PMCID: PMC2674539
PMID: 18433299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Med Genet. 2008 Jul;45(7):420-4. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.056952. Epub 2008 Apr
18.

Identification of a 2244 base pair interstitial deletion within the human ESR1
gene in the Spanish population.

Galan JJ(1), Buch B, Pedrinaci S, Jimenez-Gamiz P, Gonzalez A, Serrano-Rios M,
Salinas A, Rivero Mdel C, Real LM, Royo JL, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Genomics, Neocodex SL, Seville, Spain.
jjgalan@neocodex.es

BACKGROUND: The ESR1 AGATA haplotype is composed of five markers located within
introns 5 and 6 of the human oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene. This haplotype has
been studied in several male urogenital tract anomalies and male infertility. In 
one of these studies, a deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (DHW) was found
for the ESR1 AGATA marker rs3020375 in two groups of healthy controls. In the
present study, we investigated whether the observed DHW is caused by structural
variants present within the ESR1 gene.
PARTICIPANTS: 229 family units achieving pregnancy through assisted reproductive 
technologies (n = 129) or by natural means (n = 100), 2465 general Spanish
population controls and 162 men with idiopathic infertility.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS: Segregation analyses of genetic markers in family
units and case-control genetic association studies.
RESULTS: We identified a new interstitial deletion of 2244 base pairs within
intron 6 of the human ESR1 gene as the cause for the observed DHW. This new
variant presents a 10% allelic frequency in the general Spanish population and it
is associated with idiopathic male infertility (OR = 1.51; p = 0.03). The
percentage of infertile couples in which both members carried the ESR1 deletion
(10.08%) was also a higher than expected value of 6% (p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: We have characterised a novel structural variation in human ESR1
gene. The available data indicate a deleterious action of the ESR1 deletion in
both male and couple fertility. The potential effects of this deletion on other
oestrogen-related diseases need to be determined.

PMID: 18424506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Aug 1;17(15):2293-309. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn130. Epub 2008 Apr
18.

Variants in the estrogen receptor alpha gene and its mRNA contribute to risk for 
schizophrenia.

Weickert CS(1), Miranda-Angulo AL, Wong J, Perlman WR, Ward SE, Radhakrishna V,
Straub RE, Weinberger DR, Kleinman JE.

Author information: 
(1)MiNDS Unit, Section on Neuropathology, GCAP, NIMH, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. cyndi@powmri.edu.au

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Dec 1;21(23):5238.

Estrogen modifies human emotion and cognition and impacts symptoms of
schizophrenia. We hypothesized that the variation in the estrogen receptor alpha 
(ESR1) gene and cortical ESR1 mRNA is associated with schizophrenia. In a small
case-control genetic association analysis of postmortem brain tissue, genotype CC
(rs2234693) and haplotypes containing the C allele of a single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in intron1 (PvuII) were more frequent in African American
schizophrenics (P = 0.01-0.001). In a follow-up family-based association
analysis, we found overtransmission of PvuII allele C and a PvuII C-containing
haplotype (P = 0.01-0.03) to African American and Caucasian patients with
schizophrenia. Schizophrenics with the 'at risk' PvuII genotype had lower ESR1
mRNA levels in the frontal cortex. Eighteen ESR1 splice variants and decreased
frequencies of the wild-type ESR1 mRNA were detected in schizophrenia. In one
patient, a unique ESR1 transcript with a genomic insert encoding a premature stop
codon and a truncated ESR1 protein lacking most of the estrogen binding domain
was the only transcript detected. Using a luciferase assay, we found that mRNA
encoding a truncated ESR1 significantly attenuates gene expression at
estrogen-response elements demonstrating a dominant negative function. An intron 
6 SNP [rs2273207(G)] was associated with an ESR1 splice variant missing exon
seven. The T allele of another intron 6 SNP was part of a 3' haplotype less
common in schizophrenia [rs2273206(T), rs2273207(G), rs2228480(G)]. Thus, the
variation in the ESR1 gene is associated with schizophrenia and the mechanism of 
this association may involve alternative gene regulation and transcript
processing.

PMCID: PMC2465798
PMID: 18424448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Reprod Sci. 2008 Apr;15(3):305-11. doi: 10.1177/1933719107314064.

A digenic combination of polymorphisms within ESR1 and ESR2 genes are associated 
with age at menarche in the Spanish population.

Mendoza N(1), Morón FJ, Quereda F, Vázquez F, Rivero MC, Martínez-Astorquiza T,
Real LM, Sánchez-Borrego R, González-Pérez A, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Ginecología y Obstetricia, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las
Nieves, Granada, Spain.

In the present study, the authors look at an association of genetic variants
within estrogen synthesis and signaling pathways and age at menarche (AAM) in
Spanish women. They analyzed 9 polymorphisms in 6 different genes in 714
well-characterized postmenopausal women from Spain. They performed a quantitative
trait locus study of these markers individually or in digenic combinations in
relation to AAM. None of the studied markers, with the exception of the
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (P = .013), were significantly associated
with AAM in the Spanish population, and no marker demonstrated an association of 
statistical significance after multiple testing corrections (P > .0055). In
contrast, linear regression analysis suggests epistatic interactions including
ESR1 and ESR2 loci in relation to AAM in the series (P = .003). The results
suggest that epistatic interactions of ESR1 and ESR2 alleles could be associated 
with advancing AAM among Spanish women.

PMID: 18421025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2008;25(5):476-82. doi: 10.1159/000126495. Epub 2008 
Apr 14.

Estrogen receptor-alpha variants increase risk of Alzheimer's disease in women
with Down syndrome.

Schupf N(1), Lee JH, Wei M, Pang D, Chace C, Cheng R, Zigman WB, Tycko B,
Silverman W.

Author information: 
(1)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
Columbia University Medical Center, G.H. Sergievsky Center, New York, NY, USA.
ns24@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Genetic variants that affect estrogen activity may influence the risk
of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Two tightly linked polymorphisms (PvuII and XbaI) in
the first intron of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), the gene for ER-alpha, have been 
reported to influence estrogen receptor expression and may influence the risk of 
AD.
METHODS: We examined the relation of polymorphisms in ESR1 to the risk of AD in
women with Down syndrome. The subjects (181 women with DS, 41-78 years of age)
were followed at 14- to 18-month intervals. Information from cognitive
assessments, caregiver interviews, medical record reviews and neurological
examinations was used to classify dementia. Genomic DNA was genotyped for 5
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the upstream region and the first exon/intron 
of the ESR1 gene. Their association with dementia risk was evaluated, adjusting
for covariates.
RESULTS: Women with at least 1 copy of the C allele at rs2234693 (PvuII) and
those homozygous for the C allele at rs2077647 had an almost 3-fold increase in
the risk of AD, compared with women without the C allele. The increased risks
were independent of the apolipoprotein E genotype.
CONCLUSION: These findings support a role for estrogen receptor activity in the
development of AD in women with Down syndrome.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMCID: PMC2430887
PMID: 18408366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Brain Res. 2008 May 19;1210:126-41. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.02.053. Epub
2008 Mar 4.

Distribution of estrogen receptor 2 mRNAs (Esr2a and Esr2b) in the brain and
pituitary of the sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax).

Muriach B(1), Carrillo M, Zanuy S, Cerdá-Reverter JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fish Physiology and Biotechnology, Instituto de Acuicultura de
Torre de la Sal, CSIC, Torre de la Sal, 12595 Ribera de Cabanes, Castellón,
Spain.

Three different estrogen receptors (ERs) have been characterized in teleost fish,
i.e. Esr1, Esr2a and Esr2b. In this study we carried out in situ hybridizations
in the brain and pituitary of the sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax) to study the
putative involvement of Esr2 subtypes in the control of gonadotropin secretion in
fish. Our studies demonstrated that both receptors are expressed within the main 
hypophysiotrophic areas of the sea bass brain thus providing neuroanatomical
basis for the involvement of Esr2 subtypes in the long (or indirect) regulatory
feedbacks on pituitary function in the sea bass. The results revealed that
Esr2b-mRNA distribution was restricted to the preoptic area and tuberal
hypothalamus. On the contrary, Esr2a presented a widespread distribution and
transcripts were detected within the ventral telencephalon, preoptic area,
hypothalamus, thalamus, posterior tubercle, mesencephalon and rhombencephalon.
New Esr2-expressing areas were described in all of the above areas. This paper is
the first demonstration of Esr2a and Esr2b expression in the follicle-stimulating
hormone beta-subunit (betaFSH)- and luteinizing hormone beta-subunit
(betaLH)-expressing cells in the fish pituitary, thus suggesting the
participation of both receptors in the direct effect of estrogen on the control
of gonadotropin hormone synthesis.

PMID: 18407250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Jun 25;288(1-2):22-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.02.026.
Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Hormone and growth factor signaling in endometrial renewal: role of
stem/progenitor cells.

Gargett CE(1), Chan RW, Schwab KE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Women's Health Research, Monash Institute of Medical Research,
Monash University, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Monash Medical
Centre, Clayton, Victoria Australia. Caroline.Gargett@med.monash.edu.au

The human endometrium is a dynamic remodeling tissue undergoing more than 400
cycles of regeneration, differentiation and shedding during a woman's
reproductive years. The co-ordinated and sequential actions of estrogen and
progesterone direct these major remodeling events preparing a receptive
endometrium for blastocyst implantation on a monthly basis. Adult stem/progenitor
cells are likely responsible for endometrial regeneration. Functional approaches 
have been used to identify candidate endometrial stem/progenitor cells, as there 
are no specific stem cell markers. Rare populations of human endometrial
epithelial and stromal colony-forming cells/units (CFU) and side population (SP) 
cells have been identified. Several growth factors are required for CFU activity:
epidermal growth factor (EGF), transforming growth factor alpha (TGFalpha) and
platelet-derived growth factor BB (PDGF-BB) for both epithelial and stromal CFU, 
and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) for stromal, but not epithelial CFU. A 
sub-population of human endometrial stromal cells with mesenchymal stem cell
properties of CFU activity and multilineage (fat, muscle, cartilage and bone)
differentiation have been isolated by their co-expression of CD146 and
PDGF-receptor beta. Candidate epithelial and stromal stem/progenitor cells have
been identified in mouse endometrium as rare label retaining cells (LRCs) in the 
luminal epithelium and as perivascular cells at the endometrial-myometrial
junction, respectively. While epithelial and most stromal LRC do not express
estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1), they rapidly proliferate on estrogen stimulation,
most likely mediated by neighbouring Esr1-expressing niche cells. It is likely
that these newly identified endometrial stem/progenitor cells may play key roles 
in the development of gynecological diseases associated with abnormal endometrial
proliferation such as endometriosis and endometrial cancer.

PMID: 18403104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Sex Dev. 2007;1(3):181-96. doi: 10.1159/000102107.

Steroid signaling system responds differently to temperature and hormone
manipulation in the red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta elegans), a
reptile with temperature-dependent sex determination.

Ramsey M(1), Crews D.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Integrative Biology, University of Texas, Austin, Tex. 78712, USA.

Many reptiles, including the red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta elegans),
exhibit temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD). Temperature determines
gonadal sex during the middle of embryogenesis, or the temperature-sensitive
period (TSP), when gonadal sex is labile to both temperature and
hormones--particularly estrogen. The biological actions of steroid hormones are
mediated by their receptors as defined here as the classic transcriptional
regulation of target genes. To elucidate estrogen action during sex
determination, we examined estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1, hereafter referred to
as ERalpha), estrogen receptor beta (Esr2, hereafter referred to as ERbeta), and 
androgen receptor (Ar, hereafter referred to as AR) expression in slider turtle
gonads before, during and after the TSP, as well as following sex reversal via
temperature or steroid hormone manipulation. ERalpha and AR levels spike at the
female-producing temperature while ovarian sex is determined, but none of the
receptors exhibited sexually dimorphic localization within the gonad prior to
morphological differentiation. All three receptors respond differentially to
sex-reversing treatments. When shifted to female-producing temperatures, embryos 
maintain ERalpha and AR expression while ERbeta is reduced. When shifted to
male-producing temperatures, medullary expression of all three receptors is
reduced. Feminization via estradiol (E(2)) treatment at a male-producing
temperature profoundly changed the expression patterns for all three receptors.
ERalpha and ERbeta redirected to the cortex in E(2)-created ovaries, while AR
medullary expression was transiently reduced. Although warmer incubation
temperature and estrogen result in the same endpoint (ovarian development), our
results indicate different steroid signaling patterns between temperature- and
estrogen-induced feminization.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 18391529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct. 2008 Aug;19(8):1159-63. doi:
10.1007/s00192-008-0603-1. Epub 2008 Apr 3.

Estrogen receptor alpha polymorphism is associated with pelvic organ prolapse
risk.

Chen HY(1), Chung YW, Lin WY, Chen WC, Tsai FJ, Tsai CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, China Medical University Hospital,
School of Chinese Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine, China Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Estrogen and estrogen receptors are known to play important roles in the
pathophysiology of pelvic organ prolapse (POP). We investigated whether estrogen 
receptor alpha (ERalpha) gene polymorphisms were associated with POP risk by
conducting a case-control association study in 88 women with POP and 153 women
without POP. Genotypes of the ERalpha (ESR1) gene polymorphisms (rs17847075,
rs2207647, rs2234693, rs3798577, and rs2228480) were determined by polymerase
chain reaction, followed by restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis.
There was significant difference between women with and those without POP in the 
distribution of the ESR1 rs2228480 genotypes evaluated. By using multivariable
logistic regression, age and ESR1 rs2228480 genotype GA were significantly
associated with POP risk. Although the sample size of women with POP studied is
small, the present study shows that ERalpha genotype may be associated with POP
risk.

PMID: 18385916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008 Jun;7(6):958-65. Epub 2008 Mar 20.

Quantitative detection of methylated ESR1 and 14-3-3-sigma gene promoters in
serum as candidate biomarkers for diagnosis of breast cancer and evaluation of
treatment efficacy.

Martínez-Galán J(1), Torres B, Del Moral R, Muñoz-Gámez JA, Martín-Oliva D,
Villalobos M, Núñez MI, Luna Jde D, Oliver FJ, Ruiz de Almodóvar JM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Oncología Radioterápica, Hospital Virgen de las Nieves, Granada,
Spain.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the association between gene
hypermethylation and main clinicopathological features of breast cancer,
including diagnosis and treatment response. A sensitive SYBR green
methylation-specific PCR technique was used to analyze the utility of circulating
DNA with CpG island hypermethylation of ESR1, APC, RARB, 14-3-3-sigma and E-cad
gene promoter regions as breast cancer biomarkers. Analyses were conducted of
preoperative sera from 106 women with breast cancer, 34 with benign breast
disease and 74 with no evidence of breast disease and of post-treatment sera from
60 of the breast cancer patients. Mean serum values of methylated ESR1 and
14-3-3-sigma gene promoters significantly differed between breast cancer patients
and healthy controls (p = 0.0112 for ESR1 and p = 0.0047 for 14-3-3-sigma). When 
their results were combined, it was found that hypermethylation of these two
genes differentiated between breast cancer patients and healthy controls (p <
0.0001) with a sensitivity of 81% (95% confidence interval: 72-88%) and
specificity of 88% (95% CI: 78-94%). Presence of methylated ESR1 in serum of
breast cancer patients was associated with the ER negative phenotype (p =
0.0179). Serum hypermethylation at ESR1 and 14-3-3-sigma loci was observed in
cancer patients, in situ carcinoma and benign breast disease. No significant
differences in methylated ERS1 or 14-3-3-sigma values were observed between
pre-surgery and post-treatment measurements. Preliminary clinical applications of
this approach have revealed several shortcomings, including a frequent presence
of methylated 14-3-3-sigma in sera from women with breast benign disease. These
findings cast some doubts on the utility for early cancer diagnosis of highly
sensitive techniques to identify hypermethylation of specific gene promoters in
DNA extracted from serum. Although numerous issues remain to be resolved, the
quantitative measurement of circulating methylated DNA remains a promising tool
for cancer risk assessment.

PMID: 18379196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Hum Reprod. 2008 Jun;23(6):1466-71. doi: 10.1093/humrep/den098. Epub 2008 Mar 27.

Genetic polymorphisms of ESR1 and ESR2 that may influence estrogen activity and
the risk of hypospadias.

Ban S(1), Sata F, Kurahashi N, Kasai S, Moriya K, Kakizaki H, Nonomura K, Kishi
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kita 15, Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan. sban@med.hokudai.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The etiology of hypospadias is regarded as a complex disorder with
both genetic and environmental contributions. Although alterations in androgen
activity have been associated with hypospadias, few associations with estrogen
activity have been documented. Here, we assessed genetic polymorphisms in
estrogen receptor genes and their association with hypospadias.
METHODS: Using a case-control study of 59 cases with hypospadias and 286
controls, we examined the association of hypospadias with the following
polymorphisms: PvuII and XbaI in ESR1, and 2681-4A>G in ESR2.
RESULTS: For the cases, we found a negative association with the G allele
containing variants of ESR1 XbaI (OR = 0.52, P < 0.05), and a negative
association with the G allele containing variants of ESR2 2681-4A>G (OR = 0.59, P
< 0.05). For the cases, we also identified a negative association with the CG
haplotype, and a positive association with the CA haplotype, defined by ESR1
PvuII and XbaI (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the G allele containing variants of ESR1
XbaI and the G allele containing variants of ESR2 2681-4A>G may decrease the risk
of hypospadias, whereas the ESR1 C-A haplotype may increase its risk.

PMID: 18375409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Hypertens Res. 2008 Feb;31(2):221-8. doi: 10.1291/hypres.31.221.

Haplotype-based case-control study of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene and
pregnancy-induced hypertension.

Tamura M(1), Nakayama T, Sato I, Sato N, Izawa N, Hishiki M, Mizutani Y, Furuya
K, Yamamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Hypotheses about pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH) have been proposed to
explain the vascular damage that characterizes this disease. Reports indicate
that estrogens and estrogen receptors play important physiological roles in
cardiovascular diseases. There have been studies examining the association
between coronary artery disease and the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene. The 
aim of the present work was to assess the association between PIH and
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human ESR1 gene, by conducting a
haplotype-based case-control study. Based on a database search at the web site of
the National Center of Biotechnology Information, we chose five SNPs in the human
ESR1 gene, and performed an association study using 95 PIH patients and 200
age-matched non-PIH subjects. The frequency of rs2881766 genotypes and alleles
differed significantly between the two groups. There was no significant
difference in overall distribution of genotypes or alleles of the other four
SNPs. The T allele of rs2881766 was significantly more prevalent in the PIH group
than in the non-PIH group. Haplotype-based case-control analysis revealed that
there was a significant difference in overall distribution of the combinations
rs2881766-rs1643821-rs988328 and rs2881766-rs1643821 between the PIH group and
the non-PIH group (all or body mass index [BMI]-matched). One susceptibility
haplotype for PIH and two resistance haplotypes for PIH were revealed by
comparison between the PIH group and the non-PIH (BMI-matched) control group. In 
conclusion, the T allele of rs2881766 could be a useful genetic marker of PIH.
The G-A-T haplotype of rs2881766-rs1643821-rs988328 and the G-A haplotype of
rs2881766-rs1643821 appear to be resistance markers of PIH.

PMID: 18360040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Am J Epidemiol. 2008 May 15;167(10):1217-25. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwn024. Epub 2008
Mar 20.

Estrogen receptor alpha and matrix metalloproteinase 2 polymorphisms and
age-related maculopathy in older women.

Seitzman RL(1), Mahajan VB, Mangione C, Cauley JA, Ensrud KE, Stone KL, Cummings 
SR, Hochberg MC, Hillier TA, Sinsheimer JS, Yu F, Coleman AL; Study of
Osteoporotic Fractures Research Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 92122, USA. seitzman@ucla.edu

In this study, the authors sought to determine whether single nucleotide
polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and matrix metalloproteinase 
2 (MMP2) genes are associated with age-related maculopathy (ARM) in older women. 
Subjects comprised a random sample of Caucasian women aged > or =74 years
participating in the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures year 10 follow-up (n = 906) 
in 1997-1998. Fundus photographs were graded for ARM using a modification of the 
Wisconsin Age-Related Maculopathy Grading System. The prevalences of early ARM
and late ARM were 46% and 4%, respectively. The MMP2 rs2287074 single nucleotide 
polymorphism (G-->A) was associated with ARM. The A allele was present in 47%,
43%, and 30% of subjects with no, early, and late ARM, respectively (p = 0.01),
and was associated with lower odds of any ARM (for AG vs. GG, odds ratio = 0.80, 
95% confidence interval: 0.65, 0.99; for AA vs. GG, odds ratio = 0.64, 95%
confidence interval: 0.42, 0.98). An interaction with use of postmenopausal
hormone therapy was significant (p = 0.02). The MMP2 rs2287074 A allele may be
associated with a lower likelihood of ARM in older Caucasian women, particularly 
those who have never used hormone therapy. The role of MMP2 rs2287074 in ARM
should be further elucidated.

PMID: 18359774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. PLoS One. 2008 Mar 19;3(3):e1819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001819.

Catechol-o-methyltransferase gene polymorphism is associated with skeletal muscle
properties in older women alone and together with physical activity.

Ronkainen PH(1), Pöllänen E, Törmäkangas T, Tiainen K, Koskenvuo M, Kaprio J,
Rantanen T, Sipilä S, Kovanen V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland.
paula.ronkainen@sport.jyu.fi

BACKGROUND: Muscle strength declines on average by one percent annually from
midlife on. In postmenopausal women this decrement coincides with a rapid decline
in estrogen production. The genetics underlying the effects of estrogen on
skeletal muscle remains unclear. In the present study, we examined whether
polymorphisms within COMT and ESR1 are associated with muscle properties and
assessed their interaction and their combined effects with physical activity.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A cross-sectional data analysis was conducted
with 434 63-76-year-old women from the population-based Finnish Twin Study on
Aging. Body anthropometry, muscle cross-sectional area (mCSA), isometric hand
grip and knee extension strengths, and leg extension power were measured. COMT
Val158Met and ESR1 PvuII genotypes were determined by the RFLP method. mCSA
differed by COMT genotypes (p = 0.014) being significantly larger in LL than HL
individuals in unadjusted (p = 0.001) and age- and height-adjusted model (p =
0.004). When physical activity and age were entered into GEE model, COMT genotype
had a significant main effect (p = 0.038) on mCSA. Furthermore, sedentary
individuals with the HH genotype had lower muscle mass, strength and power, but
they also appeared to benefit the most from physical activity. No association of 
ESR1 PvuII polymorphism with any of the muscle outcomes was observed.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The present study suggests that the COMT polymorphism, 
affecting the activity of the enzyme, is associated with muscle mass.
Furthermore, sedentary individuals with potential high enzyme activity were the
weakest group, but they may potentially benefit the most from physical activity. 
This observation elucidates the importance of both environmental and genetic
factors in muscle properties.

PMCID: PMC2265555
PMID: 18350156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. PLoS One. 2008 Mar 19;3(3):e1807. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001807.

Association of the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene with body height in adult
males from two Swedish population cohorts.

Dahlgren A(1), Lundmark P, Axelsson T, Lind L, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Human body height is a complex genetic trait with high heritability. We performed
an association study of 17 candidate genes for height in the Uppsala Longitudinal
Study of Adult Men (ULSAM) that consists of 1153 elderly men of age 70 born in
the central region of Sweden. First we genotyped a panel of 137 single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNPs) evenly distributed across the candidate genes in the ULSAM
cohort. We identified 4 SNPs in the estrogen receptor gene (ESR1) on chromosome
6q25.1 with suggestive signals of association (p<0.05) with standing body height.
This result was followed up by genotyping the same 25 SNPs in the ESR1 gene as in
ULSAM in a second population cohort, the Prospective Investigation of the
Vasculature in Uppsala Seniors (PIVUS) cohort that consist of 507 males and 509
females of age 70 from the same geographical region as ULSAM. One SNP, rs2179922 
located in intron 4 of ESR1 showed and association signal (p = 0.0056) in the
male samples from the PIVUS cohort. Homozygote carriers of the G-allele of the
SNP rs2179922 were on average 0.90 cm taller than individuals with the two other 
genotypes at this SNP in the ULSAM cohort and 2.3 cm taller in the PIVUS cohort. 
No association was observed for the females in the PIVUS cohort.

PMCID: PMC2265544
PMID: 18350145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Mar;7(3):464-73. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-07-2272.

Curcumin (diferuloylmethane) alters the expression profiles of microRNAs in human
pancreatic cancer cells.

Sun M(1), Estrov Z, Ji Y, Coombes KR, Harris DH, Kurzrock R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics (Phase I Program),
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: A major challenge in cancer chemotherapy has been developing safe and
clinically efficacious chemotherapeutic agents. With its low toxicity profile,
curcumin (diferuloylmethane), a naturally occurring flavinoid derived from the
rhizome of Curcuma longa, has great promise. In vitro and in vivo preclinical
studies have shown its inhibitory anticancer, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory,
antiproliferative, and proapoptotic activities. The multiple mechanisms of the
antitumor effect of curcumin putatively include down-regulating the expression of
gene products such as nuclear factor-kappaB, growth suppression, inducing
apoptosis, and modulating various signal transduction pathways and the expression
of many oncogenes. The mechanisms underlying the antitumor activity of curcumin
have not, however, been completely delineated.
METHODS: An oligonucleotide microarray chip was developed and used to profile
microRNA (miRNA) expressions in pancreatic cells treated with curcumin.
Transcripts with regulated expression patterns on the arrays were validated by
real-time PCRs. Additionally, potential mRNA targets were analyzed
bioinformatically and confirmed with flow cytometry experiments.
RESULTS: Curcumin alters miRNA expression in human pancreatic cells,
up-regulating miRNA-22 and down-regulating miRNA-199a*, as confirmed by TaqMan
real-time PCR. Upregulation of miRNA-22 expression by curcumin or by transfection
with miRNA-22 mimetics in the PxBC-3 pancreatic cancer cell line suppressed
expression of its target genes SP1 transcription factor (SP1) and estrogen
receptor 1 (ESR1), while inhibiting miRNA-22 with antisense enhanced SP1 and ESR1
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggest that modulation of miRNA expression may
be an important mechanism underlying the biological effects of curcumin.

PMID: 18347134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Stroke. 2008 Apr;39(4):1324-6. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.494476. Epub 2008 Feb
28.

Variation in the estrogen receptor alpha gene and risk of stroke: the Rotterdam
Study.

Bos MJ, Schuit SC, Koudstaal PJ, Hofman A, Uitterlinden AG, Breteler MM.

Comment in
    Stroke. 2008 Nov;39(11):e172-3; author reply e174.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Variations in the -397T>C (rs2234693) and -351A>G
(rs9340799) single nucleotide polymorphisms of the estrogen alpha receptor (ESR1)
gene were found to be strongly associated with risk of ischemic heart disease,
although not all studies could replicate this finding. One study also reported an
association with stroke. We assessed whether variations in the ESR1 gene are
associated with the risk of stroke in the general population.
METHODS: This prospective population-based study was based on 6229 Rotterdam
Study participants who at baseline (1990-1993) were aged 55 years or older, free 
from stroke, and had assessment of the ESR1 rs2234693 and rs9340799 single
nucleotide polymorphisms. Follow-up for incident stroke was complete until
January 1, 2005. Data were analyzed with Cox proportional hazards models for men 
and women separately with adjustment for age.
RESULTS: During an average follow-up time of 10.1 years, 659 strokes occurred, of
which 386 were ischemic. Three common haplotypes were identified: -397T/-351A
(carried by 78% of all participants), -397C/-351G (carried by 57%), and
-397C/-351A (carried by 22%). Although we had at least 89% power to detect a
relative risk of 1.5 (alpha=0.05) in all subgroups, we did not find any
association between ESR1 haplotype carriership and risk of stroke and ischemic
stroke.
CONCLUSIONS: We have not been able to replicate the previously reported
association between variations in the ESR1 gene and risk of stroke.

PMID: 18309176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Hum Genet. 2008 May;123(4):333-41. doi: 10.1007/s00439-008-0482-z. Epub 2008 Feb 
28.

Comprehensive evaluation of the estrogen receptor alpha gene reveals further
evidence for association with type 2 diabetes enriched for nephropathy in an
African American population.

Keene KL(1), Mychaleckyj JC, Smith SG, Leak TS, Perlegas PS, Langefeld CD,
Herrington DM, Freedman BI, Rich SS, Bowden DW, Sale MM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC, USA.

We previously investigated the estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) as a
positional candidate for type 2 diabetes (T2DM), and found evidence for
association between the intron 1-intron 2 region of this gene and T2DM and/or
nephropathy in an African American (AA) population. Our objective was to
comprehensively evaluate variants across the entire ESR1 gene for association in 
AA with T2DM and end stage renal disease (T2DM-ESRD). One hundred fifty SNPs in
ESR1, spanning 476 kb, were genotyped in 577 AA individuals with T2DM-ESRD and
596 AA controls. Genotypic association tests for dominant, additive, and
recessive models, and haplotypic association, were calculated using a chi(2)
statistic and corresponding P value. Thirty-one SNPs showed nominal evidence for 
association (P < 0.05) with T2DM-ESRD in one or more genotypic model. After
correcting for multiple tests, promoter SNP rs11964281 (nominal P = 0.000291,
adjusted P = 0.0289), and intron 4 SNPs rs1569788 (nominal P = 0.000754, adjusted
P = 0.0278) and rs9340969 (nominal P = 0.00109, adjusted P = 0.0467) remained
significant at experimentwise error rate (EER) P </= 0.05 for the dominant class 
of tests. Twenty-three of the thirty-one associated SNPs cluster within the
intron 4-intron 6 regions. Gender stratification revealed nominal evidence for
association with 35 SNPs in females (352 cases; 306 controls) and seven SNPs in
males (225 cases; 290 controls). We have identified a novel region of the ESR1
gene that may contain important functional polymorphisms in relation to
susceptibility to T2DM and/or diabetic nephropathy.

PMCID: PMC2752813
PMID: 18305958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Med Sci Monit. 2008 Mar;14(3):CR136-43.

Analysis of the ERalpha germline PvuII marker in breast cancer risk.

González-Mancha R(1), Galán JJ, Crespo C, Iglesias Pérez L, González-Perez A,
Morón FJ, Moreno Nogueira JA, Real LM, Pascual MH, Ruiz A, Royo JL.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Service, Hospital Virgen del Rocio, Seville, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Prolonged exposure to estrogens was found to be a risk factor for
breast cancer. The molecular mechanism has been suggested to be the binding of
estrogen receptors in mammary tissue, which promotes the proliferation of breast 
tissue. Different biomarkers mapping estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) have been
associated with breast cancer risk, although the size of the effect is not
consistent among different reports. Variation in the estrogen receptor gene PvuII
has been associated with an increased risk of developing breast cancer. However, 
some studies suggest that its effect might be constrained to a definite subgroup 
of patients.
MATERIAL/METHODS: In this study the involvement of PvuII in breast cancer was
analyzed in an independent sample of 444 unrelated breast cancer cases and 704
controls of Spanish origin. A case-control comparison was performed and the
genotype distributions examined according to different tumor and population
parameters.
RESULTS: A trend towards association was observed in adjusted case-control
association analysis (p=0.07). PvuII was associated with the familial forms of
breast cancer (OR=3.81, p=0.02). T allele frequency was higher among patients
with highly differentiated tumors (p=0.02), positive for steroid receptors
(p=0.06), and negative for p53 (p=0.02). However, the PvuII genetic background
did not affect disease-free survival time (p=0.65).
CONCLUSIONS: The PvuII T allele may be a germline risk factor for familial forms 
of breast cancer and is associated with a specific subset of immunohistochemical 
tumor phenotype.

PMID: 18301357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Genet Test. 2007 Winter;11(4):367-71. doi: 10.1089/gte.2007.0019.

The relationship of the ESR1 gene polymorphisms with the presence of coronary
artery disease determined by coronary angiography.

Yilmaz A(1), Menevse S, Erkan AF, Ergun MA, Ilhan MN, Cengel A, Yalcin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Gazi
University, Ankara, 06510, Turkey.

Effects of estrogen on the cardiovascular system, mediated mainly by estrogen
receptor type alpha (ER alpha), have been well-defined and specific polymorphisms
in the ER alpha gene (ESR1) have been associated with several coronary heart
diseases including coronary artery disease (CAD) in studies covering different
populations. In the present study, we aimed to investigate whether there is an
association between two of the known polymorphisms in the ESR1, named
c.454-397T>C and c.454-351A>G, and CAD in a Turkish population. One hundred sixty
eight patients with CAD and 99 patients without CAD were included in the study.
The ESR1 c.454-397T>C and c.454-351A>G polymorphisms were studied by the
conventional polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism
(PCR-RFLP) method. While no association was found between the c.454-351A>G
polymorphism and CAD, the c.454-397T>C genotype distributions were statistically 
significant independent of known risk factors between CAD-positive (CAD+) and
CAD-negative (CAD-) groups (p = 0.001). TT genotype was more frequent in CAD-
group than in CAD+ group, 22.2% and 4.8%, respectively. CC genotype was
associated with increased risk of CAD (p = 0.001) compared to the TT genotype.
When comparing the distribution of CC + TC genotypes to that of TT genotype in
CAD+ and CAD- groups, the frequency of CC + TC genotypes showed a significant
increase independent of known CAD risk factors in CAD+ subjects (p = 0.001). As a
conclusion, a statistically significant relationship between the ESR1
c.454-397T>C polymorphism and CAD were found independent of known CAD risk
factors in a Turkish population.

PMID: 18294052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Blood. 2008 May 1;111(9):4496-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-11-123885. Epub 2008 Feb
19.

A PAI-1 (SERPINE1) polymorphism predicts osteonecrosis in children with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: a report from the Children's Oncology Group.

French D(1), Hamilton LH, Mattano LA Jr, Sather HN, Devidas M, Nachman JB,
Relling MV; Children's Oncology Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 338105-2794, USA.

As glucocorticoid use increased in acute lymphoblastic leukemia, osteonecrosis
became an increasingly frequent complication. Besides increased age, host risk
factors are poorly defined. We tested whether 12 polymorphisms were associated
with osteonecrosis among patients 10 years and older treated on the CCG1882
protocol. Candidate genes (TYMS, MTHFR, ABCB1, BGLAP, ACP5, LRP5, ESR1, PAI-1,
VDR, PTH, and PTHR) were chosen based on putative mechanisms underlying
osteonecrosis risk. All children received dexamethasone, with doses varying by
treatment arm. A PAI-1 polymorphism (rs6092) was associated with risk of
osteonecrosis in univariate (P = .002; odds ratio = 2.79) and multivariate (P =
.002; odds ratio = 2.89) analyses (adjusting for gender, age, and treatment arm).
Overall, 21 of 78 (26.9%) children with PAI-1 GA/AA genotypes, versus 25 of 214
(11.7%) children with GG genotype, developed osteonecrosis. PAI-1 polymorphisms
and PAI-1 serum levels have previously been associated with thrombosis. We
conclude that PAI-1 genetic variation may contribute to risk of osteonecrosis.

PMCID: PMC2343589
PMID: 18285546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(1):R16. doi: 10.1186/bcr1862. Epub 2008 Feb 14.

1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethylene (p,p'-DDE) disrupts the
estrogen-androgen balance regulating the growth of hormone-dependent breast
cancer cells.

Aubé M(1), Larochelle C, Ayotte P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche en Santé Publique, Centre de Recherche du Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec-CHUL, 2875 boulevard Laurier, Québec, QC G1V 
2M2, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Estrogen and androgen signalling pathways exert opposing influences
on the proliferation of mammary epithelial and hormone-dependent breast cancer
cells. We previously reported that plasma concentrations of
1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethylene (p,p'-DDE), the main metabolite of
the insecticide DDT (1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis [p-chlorophenyl]ethane) and a potent
androgen antagonist, were associated with tumor aggressiveness in women diagnosed
with breast cancer. We sought to examine the biological plausibility of this
association by testing the effect of p,p'-DDE on the proliferation of CAMA-1
cells, a human breast cancer cell line that expresses the estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) and the androgen receptor (AR), in the presence of physiological
concentrations of estrogens and androgens in the cell culture medium.
METHODS: The proliferation of CAMA-1 cells was determined in 96-well plates
following a 9-day treatment with p,p'-DDE alone (0.1 to 10 muM) or in combination
with 17beta-estradiol (E2) (100 pM) and dihydrotestosterone (DHT) (100, 500, or
1,000 pM). We also assessed p,p'-DDE-induced modifications in cell cycle entry
and the expression of the sex-steroid-dependent genes ESR1, AR, CCND1, and TFF1
(pS2) (mRNA and/or protein).
RESULTS: We found that treatment with p,p'-DDE induced a dose-response increase
in the proliferation of CAMA-1 cells when cultivated in the presence of
physiological concentrations of estrogens and androgens, but not in the absence
of sex steroids in the cell culture medium. A similar effect of p,p'-DDE was
noted on the proliferation of MCF7-AR1 cells, an estrogen-responsive cell line
that was genetically engineered to overexpress the AR. DHT added together with E2
to the cell culture medium decreased the recruitment of CAMA-1 cells in the S
phase and the expression of ESR1 and CCND1 by comparison with cells treated with 
E2 alone. These androgen-mediated effects were blocked with similar efficacy by
p,p'-DDE and the potent antiandrogen hydroxyflutamide.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that p,p'-DDE could increase breast cancer
progression by opposing the androgen signalling pathway that inhibits growth in
hormone-responsive breast cancer cells. The potential role of environmental
antiandrogens in breast carcinogenesis deserves further investigation.

PMCID: PMC2374972
PMID: 18275596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(1):R15. doi: 10.1186/bcr1861. Epub 2008 Feb 14.

ESR1 and EGF genetic variation in relation to breast cancer risk and survival.

Einarsdóttir K(1), Darabi H, Li Y, Low YL, Li YQ, Bonnard C, Sjölander A, Czene
K, Wedrén S, Liu ET, Hall P, Humphreys K, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Health Services Research, School of Population Health, University
of Western Australia, 6009 Crawley, Perth, Western Australia.

INTRODUCTION: Oestrogen exposure is a central factor in the development of breast
cancer. Oestrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) is the main mediator of oestrogen effect 
in breast epithelia and has also been shown to be activated by epidermal growth
factor (EGF). We sought to determine if common genetic variation in the ESR1 and 
EGF genes affects breast cancer risk, tumour characteristics or breast cancer
survival.
METHODS: We genotyped 157 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ESR1 and 54
SNPs in EGF in 92 Swedish controls and selected haplotype tagging SNPs (tagSNPs) 
that could predict both single SNP and haplotype variation in the genes with an
R2 of at least 0.8. The tagSNPs were genotyped in 1,590 breast cancer cases and
1,518 controls, and their association with breast cancer risk, tumour
characteristics and survival were assessed using unconditional logistic
regression models, Cox proportional hazard models and haplotype analysis.
RESULTS: The single tagSNP analysis did not reveal association evidence for
breast cancer risk, tumour characteristics, or survival. A multi-locus analysis
of five adjacent tagSNPs suggested a region in ESR1 (between rs3003925 and
rs2144025) for association with breast cancer risk (p = 0.001), but the result
did not withstand adjustment for multiple comparisons (p = 0.086). A similar
region was also implicated by haplotype analyses, but its significance needs to
be verified by follow-up analysis.
CONCLUSION: Our results do not support a strong association between common
variants in the ESR1 and EGF genes and breast cancer risk, tumour characteristics
or survival.

PMCID: PMC2374971
PMID: 18271972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2008 Mar;109(1-2):138-49. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2007.12.012. Epub 2007 Dec 28.

Trophic effect in MCF-7 cells of ERalpha17p, a peptide corresponding to a
platform regulatory motif of the estrogen receptor alpha--underlying mechanisms.

Gallo D(1), Haddad I, Duvillier H, Jacquemotte F, Laïos I, Laurent G, Jacquot Y, 
Vinh J, Leclercq G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire J.-C. Heuson de Cancérologie Mammaire, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Institut Jules Bordet, 1 rue Héger-Bordet, B-1000 Brussels, Belgium.

As yet, estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) inhibitors used in clinical practice
target a unique site, i.e. the hormone-binding pocket. With the aim of
discovering other potential therapeutic targets in the receptor, we studied its
AF-2a domain, a site that proves to be critical for ligand-independent ERalpha
activity. Previous studies from our laboratory highlighted an auto-inhibitory
action associated with a site included in this domain, i.e. the P295-T311
sequence. Accordingly, a deletion of this sequence produces a constitutively
activated receptor mutant. More interestingly, a synthetic peptide with the
P295-T311 sequence (ERalpha17p) elicits in breast cancer cell lines estrogenic
responses that may be ascribed to a competitive mechanism towards the
P295-T311-associated auto-inhibition of ERalpha. In the present study, we show
that ERalpha17p sustains MCF-7 cell growth in estrogen-depleted culture medium by
inducing molecular events promoting G1/S phase transition. We demonstrate,
moreover, that this proliferative activity is associated with receptor down
regulation (acceleration of ERalpha degradation and repression of ESR1 gene
transcription), similar to that induced by estrogen agonists. Complementary
studies suggest that our observations may be, at least in part, relevant to a
competitive inhibition affecting ERalpha-Hsp70 association. Hence, the design of 
drugs able to stabilize ERalpha-Hsp70 complexes - where the receptor is in an
inactive conformation - may be of therapeutic value.

PMID: 18262408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Mol Cancer. 2008 Jan 25;7:15. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-15.

DNMT3b overexpression contributes to a hypermethylator phenotype in human breast 
cancer cell lines.

Roll JD(1), Rivenbark AG, Jones WD, Coleman WB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. risher@email.unc.edu

BACKGROUND: DNA hypermethylation events and other epimutations occur in many
neoplasms, producing gene expression changes that contribute to neoplastic
transformation, tumorigenesis, and tumor behavior. Some human cancers exhibit a
hypermethylator phenotype, characterized by concurrent DNA methylation-dependent 
silencing of multiple genes. To determine if a hypermethylation defect occurs in 
breast cancer, the expression profile and promoter methylation status of
methylation-sensitive genes were evaluated among breast cancer cell lines.
RESULTS: The relationship between gene expression (assessed by RT-PCR and
quantitative real-time PCR), promoter methylation (assessed by
methylation-specific PCR, bisulfite sequencing, and 5-aza-2'deoxycytidine
treatment), and the DNA methyltransferase machinery (total DNMT activity and
expression of DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b proteins) were examined in 12 breast
cancer cell lines. Unsupervised cluster analysis of the expression of 64
methylation-sensitive genes revealed two groups of cell lines that possess
distinct methylation signatures: (i) hypermethylator cell lines, and (ii)
low-frequency methylator cell lines. The hypermethylator cell lines are
characterized by high rates of concurrent methylation of six genes (CDH1,
CEACAM6, CST6, ESR1, LCN2, SCNN1A), whereas the low-frequency methylator cell
lines do not methylate these genes. Hypermethylator cell lines coordinately
overexpress total DNMT activity and DNMT3b protein levels compared to normal
breast epithelial cells. In contrast, most low-frequency methylator cell lines
possess DNMT activity and protein levels that are indistinguishable from normal. 
Microarray data mining identified a strong cluster of primary breast tumors that 
express the hypermethylation signature defined by CDH1, CEACAM6, CST6, ESR1,
LCN2, and SCNN1A. This subset of breast cancers represents 18/88 (20%) tumors in 
the dataset analyzed, and 100% of these tumors were classified as basal-like,
suggesting that the hypermethylator defect cosegregates with poor prognosis
breast cancers.
CONCLUSION: These observations combine to strongly suggest that: (a) a subset of 
breast cancer cell lines express a hypermethylator phenotype, (b) the
hypermethylation defect in these breast cancer cell lines is related to aberrant 
overexpression of DNMT activity, (c) overexpression of DNMT3b protein
significantly contributes to the elevated DNMT activity observed in tumor cells
expressing this phenotype, and (d) the six-gene hypermethylator signature
characterized in breast cancer cell lines defines a distinct cluster of primary
basal-like breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC2246151
PMID: 18221536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Genes Immun. 2008 Mar;9(2):137-52. doi: 10.1038/sj.gene.6364458. Epub 2008 Jan
17.

Estrogen receptor-alpha deficiency attenuates autoimmune disease in (NZB x NZW)F1
mice.

Bynoté KK(1), Hackenberg JM, Korach KS, Lubahn DB, Lane PH, Gould KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5805, USA.

Estrogens promote lupus in humans and some mouse models of this disease.
Nonetheless, little is known about the role of estrogen receptors in lupus
pathogenesis. Here, we report that in females on the lupus-prone (NZB x NZW)F(1) 
background, disruption of estrogen receptor-alpha (ER alpha or Esr1) attenuated
glomerulonephritis and increased survival. ER alpha deficiency also retarded
development of anti-histone/DNA antibodies, suggesting that ER alpha promotes
loss of immunologic tolerance. Furthermore, ER alpha deficiency in (NZB x
NZW)F(1) females attenuated the subsequent development of anti-double-stranded
DNA (dsDNA) IgG antibodies, which are associated with glomerulonephritis in this 
model. We provide evidence that ER alpha may promote lupus, at least in part, by 
inducing interferon-gamma, an estrogen-regulated cytokine that impacts this
disease. ER alpha deficiency in (NZB x NZW)F(1) males increased survival and
reduced anti-dsDNA antibodies, suggesting that ER alpha also modulates lupus in
males. These studies demonstrate that ER alpha, rather than ER beta, plays a
major role in regulating autoimmunity in (NZB x NZW)F(1) mice. Furthermore, our
results suggest for the first time that ER alpha promotes lupus, at least in
part, by impacting the initial loss of tolerance. These data suggest that
targeted therapy disrupting ER alpha, most likely within the immune system, may
be effective in the prevention and/or treatment of lupus.

PMID: 18200028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Arch Ophthalmol. 2008 Jan;126(1):110-4. doi: 10.1001/archopht.126.1.110.

Estrogen receptors alpha and beta and the risk of open-angle glaucoma: the
Rotterdam Study.

de Voogd S(1), Wolfs RC, Jansonius NM, Uitterlinden AG, Pols HA, Hofman A, de
Jong PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha
(ESR1) and beta (ESR2) genes were a risk factor for open-angle glaucoma (OAG).
METHODS: Participants 55 years and older from the population-based Rotterdam
Study underwent, at baseline and at follow-up, the same ophthalmic examination,
including visual field screening and stereo optic disc photography. A diagnosis
of OAG was based on an algorithm using optic disc measures and visual field loss.
Haplotypes of the ESR1 and ESR2 genes were determined.
RESULTS: We diagnosed incident OAG in 87 of 3842 participants (2.3%) at risk
after a mean follow-up of 6.5 years. We could not detect any association with
ESR1 haplotypes. Haplotype 1 of ESR2 showed a 3.6-fold (95% confidence interval, 
1.4-9.2) higher risk of incident OAG in men. In women, no association was found
between ESR2 and incident OAG.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene are unrelated to OAG, but ESR2
polymorphisms seem to lead to increased risk of OAG in men.

PMID: 18195227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Schizophr Res. 2008 Mar;100(1-3):308-15. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2007.11.001. Epub 
2007 Dec 31.

Analyses of variants located in estrogen metabolism genes (ESR1, ESR2, COMT and
APOE) and schizophrenia.

Martorell L(1), Costas J, Valero J, Gutierrez-Zotes A, Phillips C, Torres M,
Brunet A, Garrido G, Carracedo A, Guillamat R, Vallès V, Guitart M, Labad A,
Vilella E.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Psiquiàtric Universitari Institut Pere Mata, Ctra. De l'Institut Pere
Mata s/n, 43206 Reus, Spain. lourdes.martorell@urv.cat

Relationships between gender, age-of-onset of schizophrenia and reproductive age 
strongly suggest a key role for gonadal hormones, and more specifically for
estrogens, in the etiology of the illness. Also, estrogens act as neural growth
and trophic factors influencing neuron and glial cells in many areas of the
central nervous system. Therefore, we investigated the association between
schizophrenia and 4 genes related to estrogen metabolism. These genes are ESR1
(estrogen receptor 1), ESR2 (estrogen receptor 2), APOE (apolipoprotein E) and
COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase). The expression of APOE and COMT, which
contain estrogen response elements, have been demonstrated to be regulated by the
estrogen receptors. In this current association study, we examined 59 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in the ESR1 (26), ESR2 (14), APOE (7) and
COMT (12) loci. Allele frequencies were evaluated in the schizophrenia
(n=585)-control (n=615) sample and no association was found with any of the four 
genes. In conclusion, our data suggest that the four analyzed genes do not play
an important role in susceptibility to schizophrenia.

PMID: 18164902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Endocrinology. 2008 Apr;149(4):1687-96. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

Alterations in micro-ribonucleic acid expression profiles reveal a novel pathway 
for estrogen regulation.

Cohen A(1), Shmoish M, Levi L, Cheruti U, Levavi-Sivan B, Lubzens E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Biology, Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research, 
Haifa, Israel.

Estrogens are steroid hormones that have been implicated in a variety of cellular
and physiological processes in the development of diseases such as cancer and are
also known to be associated with the effects of endocrine disrupting chemicals.
Here we show that 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) alters microRNA (miRNA) expression
profiles in the adult zebrafish (Danio rerio). An association between E(2) and
the expression of 25 miRNAs was found 12 h after treatment. Among the most
up-regulated miRNAs were miR-196b and let-7h, and the most down-regulated miRNAs 
included miR-130c and miR-101a. Tissue-specific changes in the transcripts levels
of estrogen receptors (Esr1, Esr2a, and Esr2b) and miRNAs were found after
hormone treatment. The most up-regulated miR-196b and its precursors are highly
expressed in the skin and showed similar tissue-specific expression patterns
after treatment, indicating a common pattern of regulation by E(2). MiR-196b was 
shown to fine-tune the expression of its target gene Hoxb8a after treatment in
whole-body homogenates. Taken together, our results suggest a novel pathway for
the multifunctional and pleiotropic effects of estrogens and open new directions 
for future investigations of their association with miRNAs involved in
estrogen-regulated physiological processes and diseases.

PMID: 18096665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2007 Dec;5(2):680-5.

Meeting Report:The 7th ESPE Growth Plate Working Group Symposium - EUROGROP June 
27th 2007, Helsinki, Finland.

Miclea RL(1), Phillip M, Sävendahl L, Wit JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Republished in
    J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Mar;21(3):287-94.

Longitudinal bone growth occurs within the epiphyseal growth plate, a highly
organized biological structure located at the distal ends of the long bones, via 
endochondral bone formation. This developmentally regulated process is finely
tuned through the interaction of circulating systemic hormones and locally
produced peptide growth factors, the net result of which is to trigger changes in
gene expression by growth plate chondrocytes. These molecular events lead to
carefully orchestrated alterations in chondrocyte size, extracellular matrix
components, secreted enzymes, growth factors and receptor expression. These
events finally result in calcification of the matrix, chondrocyte death, vascular
invasion and the completion of endochondral bone formation. Although the past
several years have seen important progress in the identification of numerous
important factors, which, in a complex and integrated network, control
longitudinal bone growth, many of the signaling pathways and their interactions
in the growth plate remain poorly understood. The ESPE Growth Plate Working Group
(EUROGROP) was established in 2000 with the aim of bringing together both basic
and clinical European research groups with an interest in the biology and
pathology of the growth plate. The 7th EUROGROP Symposium was held as an official
ESPE working group of the 46th ESPE Annual Meeting held in Helsinki, Finland,
2007. It enabled researchers, coming from all parts of the world to discuss their
ongoing studies and exchange technical information. The program consisted of
three lectures and four original papers, all followed by attractive discussions. 
This report summarizes the data presented and provides some comments on each of
the presentations.ABBREVIATIONS: 11beta-HSD: 11 Beta-Hydroxysteroid
Dehydrogenase; Agc: Aggrecan; Aln: Alendronate; Asb- 4: Ankyrin Repeat and SOCS
Box-Containing Protein 4; Atf6: Activating Transcription Factor6; BSP:
Bisphosphonates; Calca: Calcitonin, Alpha Cdkn2a: Cyclin-Dependent Kinase
Inhibitor 2A; Col1: Collagen 1; Col2: Collagen 2 Col10: Collagen 10; Dex:
Dexamethasone; Elk1: Member of ETS Oncogene Family; Esr1: Estrogen Receptor 1
(Alpha); Fli1: Friend Leukemia Integration 1; Gabp: GA Repeat Binding Protein;
GC: Glucocorticoids; Ghr: Growth Hormone Receptor; Hif-1alpha: Hypoxia-Inducible 
Factor 1 Alpha; hMSCs: Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells; Igf1: Insulin-Like Growth
Factor 1; Igfbp1: Insulin-Like Growth Factor Binding Protein 1; Igf1r:
Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1-Receptor; Igf2: Insulin-Like Growth Factor 2; Igf2r:
Insulin-Like Growth Factor 2-Receptor; Nfe2l2: Nuclear Factor, Erythroid Derived 
2, Like 2; Nrf1: Nuclear Respiratory Factor 1; Pam: Pamidronate; Prss11: HtrA
Serine Peptidase 1; PTU: Propylthiouracil; Pycard: PYD and CARD Domain
Containing; Rxrg: Retinoid X Receptor Gamma; Tam: Tamoxifen.

PMID: 18084163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Urol. 2008 Feb;179(2):529-34; discussion 534-5.

CpG island hypermethylation profile in the serum of men with clinically localized
and hormone refractory metastatic prostate cancer.

Bastian PJ(1), Palapattu GS, Yegnasubramanian S, Rogers CG, Lin X, Mangold LA,
Trock B, Eisenberger MA, Partin AW, Nelson WG.

Author information: 
(1)James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE: We have noted that hypermethylation at GSTP1 in the preoperative serum
of men with localized prostate cancer predicts early prostate specific antigen
failure following surgical treatment. In this study we investigated the
hypermethylation profile of several genes in the serum of men with localized and 
hormone refractory prostate cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We assayed the serum of 192 men with clinically localized 
prostate cancer and 18 with hormone refractory metastatic disease. A total of 35 
serum samples from patients with negative prostate biopsy served as a negative
control. CpG Island hypermethylation status of certain genes was assessed,
including MDR1, EDNRB, CD44, NEP, PTGS2, RASSF1A, RAR-beta and ESR1. The results 
of hypermethylation at GSTP1 were included from a previous study.
RESULTS: CpG island hypermethylation at MDR1 was positive in 38.2% of cases
without PSA recurrence and in 16.1% of those with biochemical recurrence after
radical prostatectomy. DNA hypermethylation at the remaining 7 gene loci was not 
detected in the serum of patients with localized prostate cancer. In serum from
metastatic prostate cancer cases CpG island hypermethylation was detected at MDR1
in 15 (83.3%), EDNRB in 9 (50%), RAR-beta in 7 (38.9%), GTSP1 in 5 (27.8%) and
NEP or RASSF1A in 3 (16.7%). CpG island hypermethylation at CD44, PTGS2 or ESR
was not detected in any samples. All histologically normal cases were negative
for CpG island hypermethylation.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA hypermethylation at MDR1 was detected in cases of localized
prostate cancer. CpG island hypermethylation at several gene loci was detected in
men with advanced disease. No single gene was consistently observed to be
hypermethylated in men with hormone refractory disease. These results suggest
that the CpG island hypermethylation status of a defined panel of genes may be a 
useful biomarker in men with hormone refractory prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2702714
PMID: 18076941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Jan 1;180(1):24-9.

Determination of ancestral allele for possible human cancer-associated
polymorphisms.

Maruta Y(1), Okayama N, Hiura M, Suehiro Y, Hirai H, Hinoda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of
Medicine, 1-1-1, Minami-Kogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505 Japan.

To determine ancestral allele in possible cancer-associated polymorphisms, DNA
samples from 10 chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) were sequenced for alleles
corresponding to 17 polymorphisms: 8 short tandem repeats [IL1RN (alias IL-1RA)
variable number tandem repeat (VNTR); TYMS (previously TS) VNTR; AR CAG repeat;
dinucleotide repeats of UGT1A1, IGF1, IFNG (alias IFN-gamma), ESR1 (alias
ER-alpha), and EGFR] and 9 single nucleotide polymorphisms (MMP1-1607 1G/2G,
MMP3-1171 5A/6A, OGG1 Ser326Cys, ALDH2 Gly487Lys, TP53 Arg72Pro, ABCG2 Gln141Lys,
MGMT Leu84Phe, SOD2 Ala-9Val, and MTHFR Ala222Val). No chimpanzee polymorphism
corresponded to human IL1RN VNTR; the ancestral allele was a repeat lost in
humans. Dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms of IGF1, IFNG, ESR1, and EGFR were
shared by chimpanzees, but the length of repeats tended to be longer in humans
than in chimpanzees. This tendency was particularly evident for IGF1. All of the 
SNPs tested are human-specific nucleotide changes. The ancestral allele 7A was
shown to be lost in MMP3-1171 5A/6A. Thus, all of the possible cancer-associated 
polymorphisms tested have human-specific alleles, and the ancestral allele is
lost in three polymorphisms (IL1RN VNTR, UGT1A1 CA repeat, and MMP3-1171 5A/6A), 
suggesting a possible involvement of human-specific alleles in cancer
susceptibility.

PMID: 18068529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9(6):R85.

Regulator of G-protein signalling 2 mRNA is differentially expressed in mammary
epithelial subpopulations and over-expressed in the majority of breast cancers.

Smalley MJ(1), Iravani M, Leao M, Grigoriadis A, Kendrick H, Dexter T, Fenwick K,
Regan JL, Britt K, McDonald S, Lord CJ, Mackay A, Ashworth A.

Author information: 
(1)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer Research, 
Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, UK. matthew.smalley@icr.ac.uk

INTRODUCTION: To understand which signalling pathways become deregulated in
breast cancer, it is necessary to identify functionally significant gene
expression patterns in the stem, progenitor, transit amplifying and
differentiated cells of the mammary epithelium. We have previously used the
markers 33A10, CD24 and Sca-1 to identify mouse mammary epithelial cell
subpopulations. We now investigate the relationship between cells expressing
these markers and use gene expression microarray analysis to identify genes
differentially expressed in the cell populations.
METHODS: Freshly isolated primary mouse mammary epithelial cells were separated
on the basis of staining with the 33A10 antibody and an alpha-Sca-1 antibody. The
populations identified were profiled using gene expression microarray analysis.
Gene expression patterns were confirmed on normal mouse and human mammary
epithelial subpopulations and were examined in a panel of breast cancer samples
and cell lines.
RESULTS: Analysis of the separated populations demonstrated that Sca-1- 33A10High
stained cells were estrogen receptor alpha (Esr1)- luminal epithelial cells,
whereas Sca-1+ 33A10Low/- stained cells were a mix of nonepithelial cells and
Esr1+ epithelial cells. Analysis of the gene expression data identified the gene 
Rgs2 (regulator of G-protein signalling 2) as being highly expressed in the
Sca-1- 33A10Low/- population, which included myoepithelial/basal cells. RGS2 has 
previously been described as a regulator of angiotensin II receptor signalling.
Gene expression analysis by quantitative real-time RT-PCR of cells separated on
the basis of CD24 and Sca-1 expression confirmed that Rgs2 was more highly
expressed in mouse myoepithelial/basal mammary cells than luminal cells. This
expression pattern was conserved in normal human breast cells. Functional
analysis demonstrated RGS2 to be a modulator of oxytocin receptor signalling. The
potential significance of RGS2 expression in breast cancer was demonstrated by
semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis, data mining and quantitative real-time RT-PCR 
approaches, which showed that RGS2 was expressed in the majority of solid breast 
cancers at much higher levels than in normal human mammary cells.
CONCLUSION: Molecular analysis of prospectively isolated mammary epithelial cells
identified RGS2 as a modulator of oxytocin receptor signalling, which is highly
expressed in the myoepithelial cells. The RGS2 gene, but not the oxytocin
receptor, was also shown to be over-expressed in the majority of breast cancers, 
identifying the product of this gene, or the pathway(s) it regulates, as
potentially significant therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC2246188
PMID: 18067675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Atherosclerosis. 2008 Jul;199(1):162-71. Epub 2007 Dec 11.

Polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha gene and endothelial function in
resistance and conduit arteries in the elderly.

Ingelsson E(1), Syvänen AC, Lind L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala
Science Park, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden. erik.ingelsson@pubcare.uu.se

BACKGROUND: Prior evidence suggests an important role for estrogen in the
regulation of endothelium-dependent vasodilation, but the mechanisms modulating
this are not known. Our aim was to examine the relations of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) to
endothelium-dependent vasodilation.
METHODS: We evaluated 959 70-year-old participants (51% men) of the Prospective
Study of the Vasculature in Uppsala Seniors (PIVUS) study, using invasive forearm
technique with intra-brachial infusion of acetylcholine (EDV; reflecting
vasodilation in resistance arteries), and brachial artery ultrasound to assess
flow-mediated vasodilation (FMD; reflecting vasodilation in conduit arteries). We
genotyped 25 common SNPs in the ESR1 gene, and related them to EDV and FMD using 
multivariable linear regression, adjusting for sex and other potential
confounders, such as major cardiovascular risk factors and medications.
Haplotypes were estimated using the PHASE software.
RESULTS: We observed an association between rs1709183 in the ESR1 gene and EDV
(nominal P=0.0012), with a lower EDV in carriers of the minor allele (C). This
association remained significant after adjustment for multiple testing (empirical
P=0.031, obtained using bootstrap re-sampling). Two ESR1 haplotypes in the block 
containing rs1709183 were associated with EDV (individual haplotype P=0.0015 and 
P=0.025); the directions of effect were consistent with individual SNP analyses. 
FMD was not associated with any of the ESR1 SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS: In our community-based study of elderly, a polymorphism in the
estrogen receptor alpha gene was associated with endothelium-dependent
vasodilation in resistance, but not conduit arteries. Our findings should
stimulate further exploration in other settings.

PMID: 18062975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Dec 4;8:73.

Impact of estrogen receptor gene polymorphisms and mRNA levels on obesity and
lipolysis--a cohort study.

Nilsson M(1), Dahlman I, Jiao H, Gustafsson JA, Arner P, Dahlman-Wright K.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, S-141 57
Huddinge, Sweden. ilsson_anna_maria@yahoo.se

BACKGROUND: The estrogen receptors alpha and beta (ESR1, ESR2) have been
implicated in adiposity, lipid metabolism and feeding behaviour. In this report
we analyse ESR1 and ESR2 gene single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for
association with obesity. We also relate adipose tissue ESR1 mRNA levels and ESR1
SNPs to adipocyte lipolysis and lipogenesis phenotypes.
METHODS: 23 ESR1 and 11 ESR2 tag-SNPs, covering most of the common haplotype
variation in each gene according to HAPMAP data, were analysed by Chi2 for
association with obesity in a cohort comprising 705 adults with severe obesity
and 402 lean individuals. Results were replicated in a cohort comprising 837
obese and 613 lean subjects. About 80% of both cohorts comprised women and 20%
men. Adipose tissue ESR1 mRNA was quantified in 122 women and related to
lipolysis and lipogenesis by multiple regression. ESR1 SNPs were analysed for
association with adipocyte lipolysis and lipogenesis phenotypes in 204 obese
women by simple regression.
RESULTS: No ESR1 SNP was associated with obesity. Five ESR2 SNPs displayed
nominal significant allelic association with obesity in women and one in men. The
two ESR2 SNPs associated with obesity with nominal P value < 0.01 were genotyped 
in a second cohort where no association with obesity was observed. There was an
inverse correlation between ESR1 mRNA levels in abdominal subcutaneous (sc)
adipose tissue and basal lipolysis, as well as responsiveness to adrenoceptor
agonists independent of age and BMI (P value 0.009-0.045). ESR1 rs532010 was
associated with lipolytic sensitivity to noradrenaline (nominal P value 0.012),
and ESR1 rs1884051 with responsiveness to the non-selective beta-adrenoceptor
agonist isoprenaline (nominal P value 0.05). These associations became
non-significant after Bonferroni correction.
CONCLUSION: ESR1 gene alleles are unlikely to be a major cause of obesity in
women. A minor importance of ESR2 on severe obesity cannot be excluded. The
inverse correlation between ESR1 mRNA levels and lipolytic responsiveness to
adrenoceptor agonists implies that low adipose tissue ESR1 levels attenuate
catecholamine resistance in sc fat cells of obese women hereby contributing to
loss of sc and gain of visceral fat. There is no evidence for a genetic impact of
ESR1 on lipolysis or lipogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2238734
PMID: 18053221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. BMC Mol Biol. 2007 Nov 27;8:107.

Evaluation and validation of candidate endogenous control genes for real-time
quantitative PCR studies of breast cancer.

McNeill RE(1), Miller N, Kerin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Clinical Science Institute, National University of
Ireland, Galway, Ireland. roisin.mcneill@nuigalway.ie

BACKGROUND: Real-time quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR) forms the basis of many breast
cancer biomarker studies and novel prognostic assays, paving the way towards
personalised cancer treatments. Normalisation of relative RQ-PCR data is required
to control for non-biological variation introduced during sample preparation.
Endogenous control (EC) genes, used in this context, should ideally be expressed 
constitutively and uniformly across treatments in all test samples. Despite
widespread recognition that the accuracy of the normalised data is largely
dependent on the reliability of the EC, there are no reports of the systematic
validation of genes commonly used for this purpose in the analysis of gene
expression by RQ-PCR in primary breast cancer tissues. The aim of this study was 
to identify the most suitable endogenous control genes for RQ-PCR analysis of
primary breast tissue from a panel of eleven candidates in current use. Oestrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1) was used a target gene to compare the effect of choice of
EC on the estimate of gene quantity.
RESULTS: The expression and validity of candidate ECs (GAPDH, TFRC, ABL, PPIA,
HPRT1, RPLP0, B2M, GUSB, MRPL19, PUM1 and PSMC4) was determined in 6 benign and
21 malignant primary breast cancer tissues. Gene expression data was analysed
using two different statistical models. MRPL19 and PPIA were identified as the
most stable and reliable EC genes, while GUSB, RPLP0 and ABL were least stable.
There was a highly significant difference in variance between ECs. ESR1
expression was appreciably higher in malignant compared to benign tissues and
there was a significant effect of EC on the magnitude of the error associated
with the relative quantity of ESR1.
CONCLUSION: We have validated two endogenous control genes, MRPL19 and PPIA, for 
RQ-PCR analysis of gene expression in primary breast tissue. Of the genes in
current use in this field, the above combination offers increased accuracy and
resolution in the quantitation of gene expression data, facilitating the
detection of smaller changes in gene expression than otherwise possible. The
combination identified here is a good candidate for use as a two-gene endogenous 
control in a broad spectrum of future research and diagnostic applications in
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2211316
PMID: 18042273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Bone. 2008 Feb;42(2):286-93. Epub 2007 Oct 23.

The RIZ Pro704 insertion-deletion polymorphism, bone mineral density and fracture
risk: the Rotterdam study.

Stolk L(1), van Meurs JB, Arp PP, Hofman A, Pols HA, Uitterlinden AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Estrogens play a major role in the maintenance of bone and bone strength, and
they exert their effects via estrogen receptors. Recently, an estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) specific co-activator, retinoblastoma-interacting zinc-finger
protein (RIZ1, 1p36), was shown to strongly enhance ESR1 function in vitro. The
same study showed that a Proline insertion-deletion polymorphism at amino acid
position 704 (Pro704 ins/del) in the RIZ1 gene was associated with heel BMD in
young Swedish women. We tested the relation between the RIZ1 Pro704 ins/del
polymorphism and BMD and fracture risk in Caucasian elderly men and women of the 
Rotterdam study. We also examined whether estradiol levels (measured in a subset)
or genetic variation in ESR1 influenced this relation. In 2424 men and 3517 women
from the Rotterdam study, RIZ1 genotypes were determined and associations with
BMD (lumbar spine and femoral neck) and fracture risk were analysed. We recorded 
374 vertebral fractures at baseline and during 6.4+/-0.4 (SD) years of follow-up,
and 1219 incident non-vertebral fractures during 7.4+/-3.3 (SD) years of
follow-up. The allele frequency of the Pro704 insertion was 41%, the genotype
distribution was in Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (P=0.94). We found no association 
of this polymorphism with BMD or fracture risk. Stratification for gender,
estradiol levels or interaction with ESR1 risk haplotype did not change these
results. In conclusion, in this large study we observed no association of the
RIZ1 Pro704 insertion-deletion polymorphism with BMD or fracture risk. This
suggests this polymorphism to play a minor role, if any, as a genetic determinant
of osteoporosis in elderly subjects.

PMID: 18037365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 Nov;16(11):2233-6.

Prostate cancer risk and ESR1 TA, ESR2 CA repeat polymorphisms.

McIntyre MH(1), Kantoff PW, Stampfer MJ, Mucci LA, Parslow D, Li H, Gaziano JM,
Abe M, Ma J.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
mmcintyr@mail.ucf.edu

BACKGROUND: Experimental evidence has suggested that estrogen receptor alpha
(coded by the gene ESR1) might increase prostate cancer risk, whereas estrogen
receptor beta (coded by the gene ESR2) might reduce prostate cancer risk.
METHODS: We investigated the relationship with prostate cancer risk of both a TA 
repeat polymorphism in the ESR1 5' region, ESR1 (TA)(n), and with a CA repeat
polymorphism in intron 5 of ESR2, ESR2 (CA)(n), in a case-control study (545
cases and 674 controls) nested in the Physicians' Health Study.
RESULTS: Prostate cancer risk was highest for carriers of ESR1 (TA)(24) and ESR1 
(TA)(25). Replacing one modal ESR1 (TA)(14) allele with one ESR1 (TA)(24) allele 
yielded an odds ratio of 1.42 (95% confidence interval, 1.00-2.00; P=0.05).
Replacing one ESR1 (TA)(14) allele with one ESR1 (TA)(25) allele yielded an odds 
ratio of 2.10 (95% confidence interval, 1.15-3.84; P=0.02). ESR2 (CA)(n) showed
no effects on prostate cancer risk.
CONCLUSIONS: The ESR1 (TA)(n) polymorphism might play a role in prostate cancer
risk.

PMID: 18006911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007 Nov 21;99(22):1683-94. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Molecular basis for estrogen receptor alpha deficiency in BRCA1-linked breast
cancer.

Hosey AM(1), Gorski JJ, Murray MM, Quinn JE, Chung WY, Stewart GE, James CR,
Farragher SM, Mulligan JM, Scott AN, Dervan PA, Johnston PG, Couch FJ, Daly PA,
Kay E, McCann A, Mullan PB, Harkin DP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast, 97
Lisburn Rd, Belfast, Northern Ireland, BT9 7BL, UK.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008 May 21;100(10):752-3; author reply 753-4.
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007 Nov 21;99(22):1655-7.

BACKGROUND: BRCA1-mutant breast tumors are typically estrogen receptor alpha (ER 
alpha) negative, whereas most sporadic tumors express wild-type BRCA1 and are ER 
alpha positive. We examined a possible mechanism for the observed ER
alpha-negative phenotype of BRCA1-mutant tumors.
METHODS: We used a breast cancer disease-specific microarray to identify
transcripts that were differentially expressed between paraffin-embedded samples 
of 17 BRCA1-mutant and 14 sporadic breast tumors. We measured the mRNA levels of 
estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) (the gene encoding ER alpha), which was differentially
expressed in the tumor samples, by quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
Regulation of ESR1 mRNA and ER alpha protein expression was assessed in human
breast cancer HCC1937 cells that were stably reconstituted with wild-type BRCA1
expression construct and in human breast cancer T47D and MCF-7 cells transiently 
transfected with BRCA1-specific short-interfering RNA (siRNA). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays were performed to determine if BRCA1 binds the ESR1
promoter and to identify other interacting proteins. Sensitivity to the
antiestrogen drug fulvestrant was examined in T47D and MCF-7 cells transfected
with BRCA1-specific siRNA. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Mean ESR1 gene expression was 5.4-fold lower in BRCA1-mutant tumors than
in sporadic tumors (95% confidence interval [CI] = 2.6-fold to 40.1-fold, P =
.0019). The transcription factor Oct-1 recruited BRCA1 to the ESR1 promoter, and 
both BRCA1 and Oct-1 were required for ER alpha expression. BRCA1-depleted breast
cancer cells expressing exogenous ER alpha were more sensitive to fulvestrant
than BRCA1-depleted cells transfected with empty vector (T47D cells, the mean
concentration of fulvestrant that inhibited the growth of 40% of the cells [IC40]
for empty vector versus ER alpha: >10(-5) versus 8.0 x 10(-9) M [95% CI = 3.1 x
10(-10) to 3.2 x 10(-6) M]; MCF-7 cells, mean IC40 for empty vector versus ER
alpha: >10(-5) versus 4.9 x 10(-8) M [95% CI = 2.0 x 10(-9) to 3.9 x 10(-6) M]).
CONCLUSIONS: BRCA1 alters the response of breast cancer cells to antiestrogen
therapy by directly modulating ER alpha expression.

PMID: 18000219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(21):e144. Epub 2007 Nov 12.

A ligation assay for multiplex analysis of CpG methylation using
bisulfite-treated DNA.

Dahl C(1), Guldberg P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genomics and Danish Centre for Translational Breast Cancer
Research, Institute of Cancer Biology, Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Aberrant methylation of promoter CpG islands is causally linked with a number of 
inherited syndromes and most sporadic cancers, and may provide valuable
diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. In this report, we describe an approach to 
simultaneous analysis of multiple CpG islands, where methylation-specific
oligonucleotide probes are joined by ligation and subsequently amplified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) when hybridized in juxtaposition on
bisulfite-treated DNA. Specificity of the ligation reaction is achieved by (i)
using probes containing CpGpCpG (for methylated sequences) or CpApCpA (for
unmethylated sequences) at the 3' ends, (ii) including three or more probes for
each target, and (iii) using a thermostable DNA ligase. The external probes carry
universal tails to allow amplification of multiple ligation products using a
common primer pair. As proof-of-principle applications, we established duplex
assays to examine the FMR1 promoter in individuals with fragile-X syndrome and
the SNRPN promoter in individuals with Prader-Willi syndrome or Angelman
syndrome, and a multiplex assay to simultaneously detect hypermethylation of
seven genes (ID4, APC, RASSF1A, CDH1, ESR1, HIN1 and TWIST1) in breast cancer
cell lines and tissues. These data show that ligation of oligonucleotide probes
hybridized to bisulfite-treated DNA is a simple and cost-effective approach to
analysis of CpG methylation.

PMCID: PMC2175362
PMID: 17998253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2008 Jan;149(1):126-47. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Molecular characterization and sex-specific tissue expression of estrogen
receptor alpha (esr1), estrogen receptor betaa (esr2a) and ovarian aromatase
(cyp19a1a) in yellow perch (Perca flavescens).

Lynn SG(1), Birge WJ, Shepherd BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0225, USA. 
sglynn@msu.edu

Yellow perch (Perca flavescens) exhibits an estrogen-stimulated sexual size
dimorphism (SSD) wherein females grow faster and larger than males. To aid in the
examination of this phenomenon, the cDNA sequences encoding estrogen
receptor-alpha (esr1), estrogen receptor-betaa (esr2a) and ovarian aromatase
(cyp19a1a) for the teleost yellow perch were obtained. Several tissues were
analyzed from both male and female adult yellow perch for sex-specific tissue
expression. The full length cDNAs of yellow perch esr1, esr2a and cyp19a1a
consist of 3052 bp, 2462 bp and 1859 bp with open reading frames encoding
putative proteins of 576 amino acids, 555 amino acids and 518 amino acids,
respectively. Esr1 and esr2a expression was highest in female ovary and liver
tissues with low to moderate expression in other tissues. Esr2a showed a more
global tissue expression pattern than esr1, particularly in males but also in
females. Cyp19a1a expression was highest in both male and female spleen tissue
and oocytes with moderate expression in male pituitary and gill tissue. Cyp19a1a 
expression was moderately high in female liver tissue with undetectable
expression in male liver tissue, suggesting its involvement in sexually dimorphic
growth. These sequences are valuable molecular tools that can be used in future
studies investigating estrogen mechanisms and actions, such as SSD, in yellow
perch.

PMID: 17988912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Biol Reprod. 2008 Feb;78(2):278-89. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

The kisspeptin/gonadotropin-releasing hormone pathway and molecular signaling of 
puberty in fish.

Filby AL(1), van Aerle R, Duitman J, Tyler CR.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental and Molecular Fish Biology Group, School of Biosciences,
Hatherly Laboratories, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon, EX4 4PS, United
Kingdom. a.l.filby@exeter.ac.uk

The mechanisms underlying the initiation of puberty in fish are poorly
understood, and whether the Kiss1 receptor (Kiss1r; previously designated G
protein-coupled receptor 54; GPR54) and its ligands, kisspeptins, play a
significant role, as has been established in mammals, is not yet known. We
determined (via real-time PCR) temporal patterns of expression in the brain of
kiss1r, gnrh2, and gnrh3 and a suite of related genes in the
hypothalamo-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis and analyzed them against the timing of 
gonadal germ cell development in male and female fathead minnow (Pimephales
promelas). Full- or partial-length cDNAs for kiss1r (736 bp), gnrh2 (698 bp), and
gnrh3 (804 bp) cloned from fathead minnow were found to be expressed only in the 
brain, testis, and ovary of adult fish. Localization of kiss1r, gnrh2, and gnrh3 
within the brain provided evidence for their physiological roles and a likely
hypophysiotropic role for GnRH3 in this species (which, like other cyprinids,
does not appear to express gnrh1). In both sexes, kiss1r expression in the brain 
increased at the onset of puberty and reached maximal expression in males when
spermatagonia type B appeared in the testis and in females when cortical
alveolus-stage oocytes first appeared in the ovary, the timings of which differed
for the two sexes. However, kiss1r expression was considerably lower during more 
advanced stages of spermatogenesis and oogenesis. The expression of kiss1r
closely aligned with that of the gnrh genes (gnrh3 in particular), suggesting the
Kiss1r/kisspeptin system in fish has a similar role in puberty to that occurring 
in mammals, and this hypothesis was supported by the induction of gnrh3
(2.25-fold) and kiss1r (1.5-fold) in early-mid pubertal fish injected with
mammalian kisspeptin-10 (2 nmol/g wet weight). An intriguing finding, and
contrasting that in mammals, was an elevated expression of esr1, ar, and cyp19a2 
(genes involved in sex steroid signaling) in the brain at the onset of puberty,
and in females slightly in advance of the elevation in the expression of kiss1r.

PMID: 17978278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Cancer Lett. 2008 Jan 18;259(1):61-70. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

Identification of differentially expressed genes after PPM1D silencing in breast 
cancer.

Pärssinen J(1), Alarmo EL, Khan S, Karhu R, Vihinen M, Kallioniemi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Tampere University Hospital, FI-33014
University of Tampere, Finland.

Amplification and overexpression of PPM1D (protein phosphatase
magnesium-dependent 1 delta) has been observed in various cancer cell lines and
primary tumors and has also been associated with cancers of poor prognosis. In
addition to the negative feedback regulation of p38-p53 signaling, PPM1D inhibits
other tumor suppressor activities and is involved in the control of DNA damage
and repair pathways. To elucidate the functional significance of PPM1D in breast 
cancer, we employed RNA interference to downregulate PPM1D expression in BT-474, 
MCF7, and ZR-75-1 breast cancer cell lines and then investigated the effects of
PPM1D silencing on global gene expression patterns and signaling pathways using
oligonucleotide microarrays. We identified 1798 differentially expressed (at
least a two-fold change) gene elements with functions related to key cellular
processes, such as regulation of cell cycle, assembly of various intracellular
structures and components, and regulation of signaling pathways and metabolic
cascades. For instance, genes involved in apoptosis (NR4A1, RAB25, PLK1),
formation of nucleosome structure (HIST1H2AC, HIST1H2BF, HIST1H2BO, HIST1H1D),
and hormone related activities (NR4A1, ESR1, STC1) were among the differentially 
expressed genes. Overall, our findings suggest that PPM1D contributes to breast
cancer associated phenotypic characteristics by directly or indirectly affecting 
several important cellular signaling pathways.

PMID: 17977650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Br J Cancer. 2007 Nov 19;97(10):1457-64. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

Sequential gene promoter methylation during HPV-induced cervical carcinogenesis.

Henken FE(1), Wilting SM, Overmeer RM, van Rietschoten JG, Nygren AO, Errami A,
Schouten JP, Meijer CJ, Snijders PJ, Steenbergen RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Unit of Molecular Pathology, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

We aimed to link DNA methylation events occurring in cervical carcinomas to
distinct stages of HPV-induced transformation. Methylation specific-multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) analysis of cervical carcinomas 
revealed promoter methylation of 12 out of 29 tumour suppressor genes analysed,
with MGMT being most frequently methylated (92%). Subsequently, consecutive
stages of HPV16/18-transfected keratinocytes (n=11), ranging from pre-immortal to
anchorage-independent phenotypes, were analysed by MS-MLPA. Whereas no
methylation was evident in pre-immortal cells, progression to anchorage
independence was associated with an accumulation of frequent methylation events
involving five genes, all of which were also methylated in cervical carcinomas.
TP73 and ESR1 methylation became manifest in early immortal cells followed by
RARbeta and DAPK1 methylation in late immortal passages. Complementary
methylation of MGMT was related to anchorage independence. Analysis of nine
cervical cancer cell lines, representing the tumorigenic phenotype, revealed in
addition to these five genes frequent methylation of CADM1, CDH13 and CHFR. In
conclusion, eight recurrent methylation events in cervical carcinomas could be
assigned to different stages of HPV-induced transformation. Hence, our in vitro
model system provides a valuable tool to further functionally address the
epigenetic alterations that are common in cervical carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC2360246
PMID: 17971771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2007;24(6):500-8. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms and first-ever intracerebral
hemorrhage.

Strand M(1), Söderström I, Wiklund PG, Hallmans G, Weinehall L, Söderberg S,
Olsson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Medicine, University, Umeå,
Sweden.

Comment in
    Cerebrovasc Dis. 2008;26(3):338.

BACKGROUND: Signaling through estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha) regulates
vasodilatation and atherogenesis. Since hypertension and atherosclerosis are
major mechanisms in stroke development, we hypothesized that genetic variants of 
the ER alpha gene (ESR1) are determinants of future ischemic stroke or
intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH).
METHODS: In a population-based prospective nested case-control study, the
relationships between ESR1 polymorphisms (c.454-397T>C and c.454-351A>G) and
ischemic stroke and ICH were examined in univariate and multivariate models using
conditional logistic regression, which included established risk
factors.Definitive first-ever stroke events (n = 388), including ischemic stroke 
(n = 320), ICH (n = 61), and unspecified stroke (n = 7) cases, and controls
without cardiovascular disease (n = 773), matched for age, sex, and geographical 
region were included.
RESULTS: Carriers of the c.454-397T/T genotype had a significantly (p = 0.017)
increased risk of ICH (OR 2.31, 95% CI 1.16-4.60) in a univariate analysis. This 
association persisted (OR 3.94, 95% CI 1.54-10.03), after adjustment for stroke
risk determinants. Carriers of c.454-397T/T or c.454-397T/C genotypes had
significantly (p = 0.002 and p = 0.004, respectively) higher mean systolic blood 
pressure (SBP), than carriers of c.454-397C/C, and a similar relationship was
observed for diastolic blood pressure (DBP). The combinations of c.454-397T/T
genotype and hypertension (OR 21.46, 95% CI 5.20-88.51), or high SBP (OR 18.17,
95% CI 4.91-67.31) or DBP (OR 11.94, 95% CI 3.75-38.03), were strongly associated
with increased risk of ICH.
CONCLUSIONS: In this population,the c.454-397T/T genotype associates with
first-ever ICH, particularly in combination with hypertension. This implies that 
alterations in ER alpha-mediated signaling may be involved in the pathophysiology
of this disease, with a putative impact on primary prevention.

(c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17971628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Oct 15;178(2):94-103.

Cytokeratin KRT8/18 expression differentiates distinct subtypes of grade 3
invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast.

Walker LC(1), Harris GC, Holloway AJ, McKenzie GW, Wells JE, Robinson BA, Morris 
CM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Research Group, Department of Pathology, University of Otago
at Christchurch, Christchurch, New Zealand.

Invasive ductal carcinomas of the breast (IDC) are routinely assessed on
hematoxylin and eosin stained paraffin sections, with limited use of
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Most IDC are regarded as a single diagnostic entity, 
IDC of no special type (IDC-NST), which is subdivided further only by grading.
However, recent research suggests that there is high clinical relevance in
differentiating IDC subtypes. Here, we ascertain whether tumor histology alone
can predict basal or luminal cell phenotype in high-grade IDC-NST, and whether
IHC and molecular characteristics are associated with the observed morphologies. 
A total of 29 grade 3 IDC-NST samples were studied, 10 tumors from a selected
pilot cohort A and 19 tumors from an unselected validation cohort B. Along with
histopathological assessment, the expression of ESR1, PGR, ERBB2 (HER-2), the
basal/myoepithelial marker TP73L (p63), cytokeratins 5/6 (KRT5/6) and 14 (KRT14),
and the luminal-specific cytokeratins 8/18 (KRT 8/18) and 19 (KRT19) was assessed
by IHC. Hierarchical cluster analysis of clinicopathological variables and,
separately, microarray expression profiles showed that the phenotypically
distinctive basaloid and luminal tumors of cohort A fell into two main groups,
defined by heterogeneous or uniformly positive expression of KRT8/18. The 38
genes differentially expressed between these two classes included ERBB2, KRT8,
and six other genes previously associated with ERBB2-positive or luminal
phenotypes. Tumor histology was not predictive for validation cohort B, but
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis revealed two 
molecularly defined clusters that again aligned with the KRT8/18 staining
phenotypes. Metaphase comparative genomic hybridization revealed 10q, 16q, and
20q copy-number imbalances that associated recurrently with KRT8/18 staining
patterns.

PMID: 17954264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Sep 19;8 Suppl 1:S4.

Genome-wide association study for subclinical atherosclerosis in major arterial
territories in the NHLBI's Framingham Heart Study.

O'Donnell CJ(1), Cupples LA, D'Agostino RB, Fox CS, Hoffmann U, Hwang SJ,
Ingellson E, Liu C, Murabito JM, Polak JF, Wolf PA, Demissie S.

Author information: 
(1)The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Framingham Heart Study,
Framingham, MA, USA. odonnellc@nhlbi.nih.gov

INTRODUCTION: Subclinical atherosclerosis (SCA) measures in multiple arterial
beds are heritable phenotypes that are associated with increased incidence of
cardiovascular disease. We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) for
SCA measurements in the community-based Framingham Heart Study.
METHODS: Over 100,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped
(Human 100K GeneChip, Affymetrix) in 1345 subjects from 310 families. We
calculated sex-specific age-adjusted and multivariable-adjusted residuals in
subjects tested for quantitative SCA phenotypes, including ankle-brachial index, 
coronary artery calcification and abdominal aortic calcification using
multi-detector computed tomography, and carotid intimal medial thickness (IMT)
using carotid ultrasonography. We evaluated associations of these phenotypes with
70,987 autosomal SNPs with minor allele frequency > or = 0.10, call rate > or =
80%, and Hardy-Weinberg p-value > or = 0.001 in samples ranging from 673 to 984
subjects, using linear regression with generalized estimating equations (GEE)
methodology and family-based association testing (FBAT). Variance components LOD 
scores were also calculated.
RESULTS: There was no association result meeting criteria for genome-wide
significance, but our methods identified 11 SNPs with p < 10(-5) by GEE and five 
SNPs with p < 10(-5) by FBAT for multivariable-adjusted phenotypes. Among the
associated variants were SNPs in or near genes that may be considered candidates 
for further study, such as rs1376877 (GEE p < 0.000001, located in ABI2) for
maximum internal carotid artery IMT and rs4814615 (FBAT p = 0.000003, located in 
PCSK2) for maximum common carotid artery IMT. Modest significant associations
were noted with various SCA phenotypes for variants in previously reported
atherosclerosis candidate genes, including NOS3 and ESR1. Associations were also 
noted of a region on chromosome 9p21 with CAC phenotypes that confirm
associations with coronary heart disease and CAC in two recently reported
genome-wide association studies. In linkage analyses, several regions of
genome-wide linkage were noted, confirming previously reported linkage of
internal carotid artery IMT on chromosome 12. All GEE, FBAT and linkage results
are provided as an open-access results resource at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?id=phs000007 webcite.
CONCLUSION: The results from this GWAS generate hypotheses regarding several SNPs
that may be associated with SCA phenotypes in multiple arterial beds. Given the
number of tests conducted, subsequent independent replication in a staged
approach is essential to identify genetic variants that may be implicated in
atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC1995605
PMID: 17903303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Sep 19;8 Suppl 1:S18.

Genome-wide association to body mass index and waist circumference: the
Framingham Heart Study 100K project.

Fox CS(1), Heard-Costa N, Cupples LA, Dupuis J, Vasan RS, Atwood LD.

Author information: 
(1)The National Heart Lung and Blood Institute's Framingham Heart Study,
Framingham, MA, USA. foxca@nhlbi.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Obesity is related to multiple cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk
factors as well as CVD and has a strong familial component. We tested for
association between SNPs on the Affymetrix 100K SNP GeneChip and measures of
adiposity in the Framingham Heart Study.
METHODS: A total of 1341 Framingham Heart Study participants in 310 families
genotyped with the Affymetrix 100K SNP GeneChip had adiposity traits measured
over 30 years of follow up. Body mass index (BMI), waist circumference (WC),
weight change, height, and radiographic measures of adiposity (subcutaneous
adipose tissue, visceral adipose tissue, waist circumference, sagittal height)
were measured at multiple examination cycles. Multivariable-adjusted residuals,
adjusting for age, age-squared, sex, smoking, and menopausal status, were
evaluated in association with the genotype data using additive Generalized
Estimating Equations (GEE) and Family Based Association Test (FBAT) models. We
prioritized mean BMI over offspring examinations (1-7) and cohort examinations
(10, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26) and mean WC over offspring examinations (4-7) for
presentation. We evaluated associations with 70,987 SNPs on autosomes with minor 
allele frequencies of at least 0.10, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium p > or = 0.001,
and call rates of at least 80%.
RESULTS: The top SNPs to be associated with mean BMI and mean WC by GEE were
rs110683 (p-value 1.22*10(-7)) and rs4471028 (p-values 1.96*10(-7)). Please see
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?id=phs000007 webcite
for the complete set of results. We were able to validate SNPs in known genes
that have been related to BMI or other adiposity traits, including the ESR1 Xba1 
SNP, PPARG, and ADIPOQ.
CONCLUSION: Adiposity traits are associated with SNPs on the Affymetrix 100K SNP 
GeneChip. Replication of these initial findings is necessary. These data will
serve as a resource for replication as more genes become identified with BMI and 
WC.

PMCID: PMC1995618
PMID: 17903300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Sep 19;8 Suppl 1:S14.

Genome-wide association with bone mass and geometry in the Framingham Heart
Study.

Kiel DP(1), Demissie S, Dupuis J, Lunetta KL, Murabito JM, Karasik D.

Author information: 
(1)Hebrew SeniorLife Institute for Aging Research and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. kiel@hrca.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Osteoporosis is characterized by low bone mass and compromised bone
structure, heritable traits that contribute to fracture risk. There have been no 
genome-wide association and linkage studies for these traits using high-density
genotyping platforms.
METHODS: We used the Affymetrix 100K SNP GeneChip marker set in the Framingham
Heart Study (FHS) to examine genetic associations with ten primary quantitative
traits: bone mineral density (BMD), calcaneal ultrasound, and geometric indices
of the hip. To test associations with multivariable-adjusted residual trait
values, we used additive generalized estimating equation (GEE) and family-based
association tests (FBAT) models within each sex as well as sexes combined. We
evaluated 70,987 autosomal SNPs with genotypic call rates > or =80%, HWE p > or =
0.001, and MAF > or =10% in up to 1141 phenotyped individuals (495 men and 646
women, mean age 62.5 yrs). Variance component linkage analysis was performed
using 11,200 markers.
RESULTS: Heritability estimates for all bone phenotypes were 30-66%. LOD scores >
or =3.0 were found on chromosomes 15 (1.5 LOD confidence interval:
51,336,679-58,934,236 bp) and 22 (35,890,398-48,603,847 bp) for femoral shaft
section modulus. The ten primary phenotypes had 12 associations with 100K SNPs in
GEE models at p < 0.000001 and 2 associations in FBAT models at p < 0.000001. The
25 most significant p-values for GEE and FBAT were all less than 3.5 x 10(-6) and
2.5 x 10(-5), respectively. Of the 40 top SNPs with the greatest numbers of
significantly associated BMD traits (including femoral neck, trochanter, and
lumbar spine), one half to two-thirds were in or near genes that have not
previously been studied for osteoporosis. Notably, pleiotropic associations
between BMD and bone geometric traits were uncommon. Evidence for association
(FBAT or GEE p < 0.05) was observed for several SNPs in candidate genes for
osteoporosis, such as rs1801133 in MTHFR; rs1884052 and rs3778099 in ESR1;
rs4988300 in LRP5; rs2189480 in VDR; rs2075555 in COLIA1; rs10519297 and
rs2008691 in CYP19, as well as SNPs in PPARG (rs10510418 and rs2938392) and ANKH 
(rs2454873 and rs379016). All GEE, FBAT and linkage results are provided as an
open-access results resource at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?id=phs000007 webcite.
CONCLUSION: The FHS 100K SNP project offers an unbiased genome-wide strategy to
identify new candidate loci and to replicate previously suggested candidate genes
for osteoporosis.

PMCID: PMC1995606
PMID: 17903296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Biol Reprod. 2008 Jan;78(1):101-14. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

17beta-estradiol induces the translocation of the estrogen receptors ESR1 and
ESR2 to the cell membrane, MAPK3/1 phosphorylation and proliferation of cultured 
immature rat Sertoli cells.

Lucas TF(1), Siu ER, Esteves CA, Monteiro HP, Oliveira CA, Porto CS, Lazari MF.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Pharmacology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Escola Paulista de Medicina, São Paulo,
Brazil.

The aim of the present study was to determine the mechanisms involved in estrogen
actions in cultured rat Sertoli cells. RT-PCR detected transcripts for the
estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2 in cultured immature Sertoli cells and in the
testis of 15-, 28-, and 120-day-old rats. The expression of ESR1 and ESR2 was
confirmed in Sertoli cells by immunofluorescence and Western blot.
Immunohistochemistry with cryosections of testes from immature and adult rats
revealed that ESR1 is present in Sertoli, Leydig, and some peritubular myoid
cells, and ESR2 is present in multiple cell types, including germ cells.
Treatment of Sertoli cells with 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) induced a translocation
of ESR1 and ESR2 to the plasma membrane and a concomitant phosphorylation of
MAPK3/1. Both effects reached a maximum after 10 min and were blocked by PP2, an 
inhibitor of the SRC family of protein tyrosine kinases, and by the antiestrogen 
ICI 182,780 (ICI). MAPK3/1 phosphorylation was also decreased in the presence of 
AG 1478, an inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase, and 
in the presence of MAP2K1/2 inhibitor UO126. Treatment with E(2) for 24 h
increased the incorporation of [methyl-(3)H]thymidine, which was blocked by ICI. 
These results indicate that E(2) activates an SRC-mediated translocation of
estrogen receptors to the plasma membrane, which results in the activation of
EGFR and the mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway. In addition,
activation of ESR1 and/or ESR2 by E(2) is involved in proliferation of immature
Sertoli cells. The estrogen actions in Sertoli cells might be a key step
mediating cellular events important for spermatogenesis and fertility.

PMID: 17928626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Breast. 2008 Apr;17(2):159-66. Epub 2007 Sep 29.

Association of repeat polymorphisms in the estrogen receptors alpha, beta (ESR1, 
ESR2) and androgen receptor (AR) genes with the occurrence of breast cancer.

Tsezou A(1), Tzetis M, Gennatas C, Giannatou E, Pampanos A, Malamis G, Kanavakis 
E, Kitsiou S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Medical School, University 
of Thessalia, University Hospital of Larissa, Larissa, Greece.

Genetic variation in genes involved in estrogen biosynthesis, metabolism and
signal transduction have been suggested to play a role in breast cancer. To
determine the possible contribution of genetic variation in the ESR1 (ER-alpha), 
ESR2 (ER-beta) and AR genes in breast cancer risk the -1174(TA)(7-27), c.
1092+3607(CA)(10-26) and c. 172(CAG)(6-40) repeat variants were studied in a
case-control study of 79 women with sporadic breast cancer and 155 controls. No
significant difference was observed in the frequency distribution of
-1174(TA)(7-27) in the ESR1 gene between patients and controls, while a
significant difference was observed for repeat polymorphisms c.
1092+3607(CA)(10-26) in the ESR2 gene and c. 172(CAG)(6-40) in the AR gene
(p0.0001). A significantly decreased odds ratio (OR) for breast cancer risk was
observed in individuals having the LL and the SL genotypes for both the ESR2
(OR=0.010, 95% CI 0.003-0.036, p<0.001; OR=0.013, 95% CI 0.004-0.040, p<0.0001,
respectively) and the AR gene (OR=0.040, 95% CI 0.011-0.138, p<0.0001; OR=0.189, 
95% CI 0.10-0.359, p<0.0001, respectively), compared to SS genotype. The
protective effect of these genotypes remained evident even after adjustment for
various risk factors (BMI, age, age at menarche and menopause, family history).
In conclusion, an association for breast cancer risk between short (SS) alleles
for the repeat variants of the ESR2 and AR genes was found in women of Greek
descent.

PMID: 17904846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Osteoporos Int. 2008 Apr;19(4):571-9. Epub 2007 Sep 26.

Estrogen receptor alpha CA dinucleotide repeat polymorphism is associated with
rate of bone loss in perimenopausal women and bone mineral density and risk of
osteoporotic fractures in postmenopausal women.

Lai BM(1), Cheung CL, Luk KD, Kung AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

The association between a newly identified CA repeat polymorphism of the estrogen
receptor alpha gene (ESR1) with osteoporosis was investigated. Postmenopausal
women with <18 CA repeats had low BMD, increased rate of bone loss and increased 
fracture risk.INTRODUCTION: Studies have shown that intronic dinucleotide repeat 
polymorphisms in some genes are associated with disease risk by modulating mRNA
splicing efficiency. D6S440 is a newly identified intronic CA repeat polymorphism
located downstream of the 5'-splicing site of exon 5 of ESR1.
METHODS: The associations of D6S440 with bone mineral density (BMD), rate of bone
loss and fracture risk were evaluated in 452 pre-, 110 peri- and 622
postmenopausal southern Chinese women using regression models.
RESULTS: Post- but not premenopausal women with less CA repeats had lower spine
and hip BMD. The number of CA repeats was linearly related to hip BMD in
postmenopausal women (beta=0.008; p=0.004). Postmenopausal women with CA repeats 
<18 had higher risks of having osteoporosis (BMD T-score< -2.5 at the spine: OR
2.46, 95% CI 1.30-4.65; at the hip: OR 3.79(1.64-8.74)) and low trauma fractures 
(OR 2.31(1.29-4.14)) than those with >or= 18 repeats. Perimenopausal women with
<18 CA repeats had significantly greater bone loss in 18 months at the hip than
those with >or= 18 repeats (-1.96% vs. -1.61%, p = 0.029).
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 CA repeat polymorphism is associated with BMD variation, rate
of bone loss and fracture risk, and this may be a useful genetic marker for
fracture risk assessment.

PMID: 17896124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2008 Apr;14(2):180-5. Epub 2007 Sep 25.

Estrogen receptor alpha and beta gene polymorphisms are not risk factors for
recurrent miscarriage in a Brazilian population.

Aléssio AM(1), Siqueira LH, de Carvalho EC, Barini R, Mansur Ade P, Hoehr NF,
Annichino-Bizzacchi JM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Hemotherapy Center, Department of Gynecology, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, State University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of alpha (ESR1:
c.454-397T>C and c.454-351A>G) and beta (ESR2: 1082G>A and 1730G>A) estrogen
receptor gene polymorphisms in 2 Brazilian ethnic groups (Caucasian, African
Brazilian) and to investigate their association with recurrent miscarriage (RM)
in 75 women with a history of 3 or more consecutive pregnancy losses and 139
controls with at least 2 live births and no history of pregnancy loss. Polymerase
chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism were used to identify
gene polymorphisms. Coagulation methods were used to measure protein C, protein
S, and fibrinogen, and a chromogenic method was used for antithrombin
quantification. Significantly higher prevalences of 1082G>A and 1730G>A
polymorphisms were seen in African Brazilian and Caucasian controls,
respectively. There was no association between RM and ESR polymorphisms. There
was a difference in the genotype prevalence in the c.454-39T>C polymorphism
between RM and control Caucasians, but this finding was not associated with an
increased risk of miscarriage. There was no synergistic or additive effect
between ESR polymorphisms and thrombophilia in RM patients. A difference in the
prevalence of ESR polymorphisms was observed, according to ethnic origin. ESR
polymorphisms could not be considered a risk factor for RM.

PMID: 17895504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Neurobiol Aging. 2009 Apr;30(4):607-14. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

Estrogen receptor genotype and risk of cognitive impairment in elders: findings
from the Health ABC study.

Yaffe K(1), Lindquist K, Sen S, Cauley J, Ferrell R, Penninx B, Harris T, Li R,
Cummings SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurology, School of Medicine, San Francisco, CA 
94121, USA. Kristine.yaffe@ucsf.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether variants in the estrogen receptors 1 (alpha) and 
2 (beta) (ESR1 and ESR2) genes are associated with cognitive impairment in
non-demented elderly men and women.
BACKGROUND: Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on ESR1 and ESR2 genes
have been associated with a range of hormone sensitive diseases such as breast
cancer and osteoporosis. Genetic variations in ESR may also influence cognitive
aging but are less studied, especially among men.
METHODS: We studied 2527 participants enrolled in an ongoing prospective study of
community-dwelling elders. Four SNPs from ESR1 and four from ESR2 were analyzed. 
We measured cognitive function with the Modified Mini-Mental Status Examination
(3MS) at baseline and biannually; cognitive impairment was defined as a decline
of five or more points over 4 years. We calculated odds of developing cognitive
impairment across SNPs using gender-stratified logistic regression and adjusted
analyses for age, education, baseline 3MS score and in addition for race.
RESULTS: One thousand three hundred and forty-three women (mean age 73.4) and
1184 men (mean age 73.7) comprised our cohort. Among women, after multivariate
adjustment, two of the ESR1 SNPs (rs8179176, rs9340799) and two of the ESR2 SNPs 
(rs1256065, rs1256030) were associated with likelihood of developing cognitive
impairment, although the association for rs8179176 was of trend level
significance. In men, one of the ESR1 SNPs (rs728524) and two of the ESR2
(rs1255998, rs1256030) were associated with cognitive impairment. Further
adjustment for race attenuated the results somewhat. There was no association
between any ESR SNP and level of bioavailable estradiol but testosterone level
did vary among two of the SNPs (p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: We found that among non-demented community elders, several SNPs in
the ESR1 and ESR2 genes were associated with risk of developing cognitive
impairment. These findings suggest that estrogen receptor genetic variants may
play a role in cognitive aging.

PMCID: PMC2826192
PMID: 17889406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Mod Pathol. 2007 Dec;20(12):1253-62. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Chromosomal and methylation alterations in sporadic and familial adenomatous
polyposis-related duodenal carcinomas.

Berkhout M(1), Nagtegaal ID, Cornelissen SJ, Dekkers MM, van de Molengraft FJ,
Peters WH, Nagengast FM, van Krieken JH, Jeuken JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, Netherlands.

Primary carcinomas of the small intestine are rare and the mechanism of their
pathogenesis is poorly understood. Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis
(FAP) have a high risk of developing duodenal carcinomas. The aim of this study
is to gain more insight into the development of duodenal carcinomas. Therefore,
five FAP-related duodenal carcinomas were characterized for chromosomal and
methylation alterations, which were compared to those observed in sporadic
duodenal carcinomas. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA)
was performed in 10 primary sporadic and five primary FAP-related duodenal
carcinomas. In the FAP-related carcinomas, frequent gains were observed on
chromosomes 8, 17 and 19, whereas in sporadic carcinomas they occurred on
chromosomes 8, 12, 13 and 20. In 60% of the sporadic carcinomas, gains in the
regions of chromosome 12 were observed which were absent in the FAP-related
carcinomas (P=0.04). Hypermethylation was observed in the immunoglobulin
superfamily genes member 4 (IGSF4), TIMP metallopeptidase inhibitor 3 (TIMP3),
Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), H-cadherin (CDH13) 
and paired box gene 6 (PAX6) genes. Hypermethylation of PAX6 was only observed in
FAP-related carcinomas (3/5) and not in sporadic carcinomas (P=0.02). In
conclusion, in contrast to sporadic duodenal carcinomas, gains on chromosome 12
were not observed in duodenal carcinomas of patients with FAP. Identification of 
the genes in these regions of chromosome 12 could lead to a better understanding 
of the carcinogenesis pathways leading to sporadic and FAP-related duodenal
carcinomas. Furthermore, hypermethylation seems to be a general feature of both
FAP-related duodenal carcinomas as well as sporadic duodenal carcinomas with the 
exception of the PAX6 gene, which is methylated only in FAP-related carcinomas.

PMID: 17873900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Med Genet. 2008 Feb;45(2):81-6. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Identification of novel candidate genes associated with cleft lip and palate
using array comparative genomic hybridisation.

Osoegawa K(1), Vessere GM, Utami KH, Mansilla MA, Johnson MK, Riley BM, L'Heureux
J, Pfundt R, Staaf J, van der Vliet WA, Lidral AC, Schoenmakers EF, Borg A,
Schutte BC, Lammer EJ, Murray JC, de Jong PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genetics, Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute (CHORI),
5700 Martin Luther King Jr. Way Oakland, CA 94609, USA. kosoegawa@chori.org

AIM AND METHOD: We analysed DNA samples isolated from individuals born with cleft
lip and cleft palate to identify deletions and duplications of candidate gene
loci using array comparative genomic hybridisation (array-CGH).
RESULTS: Of 83 syndromic cases analysed we identified one subject with a
previously unknown 2.7 Mb deletion at 22q11.21 coinciding with the DiGeorge
syndrome region. Eighteen of the syndromic cases had clinical features of Van der
Woude syndrome and deletions were identified in five of these, all of which
encompassed the interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) gene. In a series of 104
non-syndromic cases we found one subject with a 3.2 Mb deletion at chromosome
6q25.1-25.2 and another with a 2.2 Mb deletion at 10q26.11-26.13. Analyses of
parental DNA demonstrated that the two deletion cases at 22q11.21 and 6q25.1-25.2
were de novo, while the deletion of 10q26.11-26.13 was inherited from the mother,
who also has a cleft lip. These deletions appear likely to be causally associated
with the phenotypes of the subjects. Estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) and fibroblast
growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) genes from the 6q25.1-25.2 and 10q26.11-26.13,
respectively, were identified as likely causative genes using a gene
prioritization software.
CONCLUSION: We have shown that array-CGH analysis of DNA samples derived from
cleft lip and palate subjects is an efficient and productive method for
identifying candidate chromosomal loci and genes, complementing traditional
genetic mapping strategies.

PMCID: PMC3732463
PMID: 17873121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Acta Neurol Scand. 2008 Mar;117(3):186-90. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Association of estrogen receptor-alpha gene polymorphisms with stroke risk in
patients with metabolic syndrome.

Lazaros L(1), Markoula S, Xita N, Giannopoulos S, Gogou P, Lagos G, Kyritsis AP, 
Georgiou I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Medical School, University of Ioannina,
Ioannina, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: The vascular protective effects of estrogens are mediated by their
binding to the two known estrogen receptors. In this study, we examine the
association of stroke with two common polymorphisms of the ESR1 gene in patients 
with metabolic syndrome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DNA from 130 patients hospitalized for ischemic stroke and
240 healthy controls were genotyped for ESR1 PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms.
Results - Comparing female and male patients, it was found that CCGG diplotype is
more frequent in male patients (P = 0.03). In addition, the AA genotype is
associated with the onset of stroke at a younger age in the male patient group (P
< 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms may affect 
the age at onset of the first stroke and the probability of developing
cerebrovascular disease.

PMID: 17854418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9(5):R59.

Aging impacts transcriptomes but not genomes of hormone-dependent breast cancers.

Yau C(1), Fedele V, Roydasgupta R, Fridlyand J, Hubbard A, Gray JW, Chew K,
Dairkee SH, Moore DH, Schittulli F, Tommasi S, Paradiso A, Albertson DG, Benz CC.

Author information: 
(1)Buck Institute for Age Research, 8001 Redwood Boulevard, Novato, CA 94945,
USA.

INTRODUCTION: Age is one of the most important risk factors for human
malignancies, including breast cancer; in addition, age at diagnosis has been
shown to be an independent indicator of breast cancer prognosis. Except for
inherited forms of breast cancer, however, there is little genetic or epigenetic 
understanding of the biological basis linking aging with sporadic breast cancer
incidence and its clinical behavior.
METHODS: DNA and RNA samples from matched estrogen receptor (ER)-positive
sporadic breast cancers diagnosed in either younger (age <or= 45 years) or older 
(age >or= 70 years) Caucasian women were analyzed by array comparative genomic
hybridization and by expression microarrays. Array comparative genomic
hybridization data were analyzed using hierarchical clustering and supervised age
cohort comparisons. Expression microarray data were analyzed using hierarchical
clustering and gene set enrichment analysis; differential gene expression was
also determined by conditional permutation, and an age signature was derived
using prediction analysis of microarrays.
RESULTS: Hierarchical clustering of genome-wide copy-number changes in 71
ER-positive DNA samples (27 younger women, 44 older women) demonstrated two
age-independent genotypes; one with few genomic changes other than 1q gain/16q
loss, and another with amplifications and low-level gains/losses. Age cohort
comparisons showed no significant differences in total or site-specific genomic
breaks and amplicon frequencies. Hierarchical clustering of 5.1 K genes variably 
expressed in 101 ER-positive RNA samples (53 younger women, 48 older women)
identified six transcriptome subtypes with an apparent age bias (P < 0.05).
Samples with higher expression of a poor outcome-associated proliferation
signature were predominantly (65%) younger cases. Supervised analysis identified 
cancer-associated genes differentially expressed between the cohorts; with
younger cases expressing more cell cycle genes and more than threefold higher
levels of the growth factor amphiregulin (AREG), and with older cases expressing 
higher levels of four different homeobox (HOX) genes in addition to ER (ESR1). An
age signature validated against two other independent breast cancer datasets
proved to have >80% accuracy in discerning younger from older ER-positive breast 
cancer cases with characteristic differences in AREG and ESR1 expression.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that epigenetic transcriptome changes, more
than genotypic variation, account for age-associated differences in sporadic
breast cancer incidence and prognosis.

PMCID: PMC2216076
PMID: 17850661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Dec;21(12):2907-18. Epub 2007 Aug 30.

The transcription factor snail mediates epithelial to mesenchymal transitions by 
repression of estrogen receptor-alpha.

Dhasarathy A(1), Kajita M, Wade PA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, P.O. Box 12233, 111 TW Alexander Drive, Research Triangle Park, 
North Carolina 27709, USA.

The estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha (ESR1) is a key regulatory molecule in mammary
epithelial cell development. Loss of ER-alpha in breast cancer is correlated with
poor prognosis, increased recurrence after treatment, and an elevated incidence
of metastasis. A proposed molecular pathway by which ER-alpha acts to constrain
invasive growth in breast cancer cells involves direct, ER-alpha-dependent
expression of metastasis-associated protein 3, a cell-type-specific component of 
the Mi-2/NuRD chromatin remodeling complex. MTA3 in turn represses expression of 
Snail, a transcription factor linked to epithelial to mesenchymal transition and 
cancer metastasis. To elucidate its role(s) in epithelial to mesenchymal
transition (EMT), we expressed Snail in the noninvasive, ER-alpha-positive MCF-7 
cell line. Snail expression led to decreased cell-cell adhesion and increased
cell invasiveness. Furthermore, we observed loss of ER-alpha expression at both
the RNA and protein level that was accompanied by direct interaction of Snail
with regulatory DNA sequences at the ESR1 locus. A consequence of loss of
ER-alpha function in this system was the increased abundance of key components of
the TGF-beta signaling pathway. Thus, cross-talk among ER-alpha, Snail, and the
TGF-beta pathway appears to control critical phenotypic properties of breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2668600
PMID: 17761946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Psychiatr Genet. 2007 Oct;17(5):299-303.

Association analysis of 15 polymorphisms within 10 candidate genes for antisocial
behavioural traits.

Prichard ZM(1), Jorm AF, Mackinnon A, Easteal S.

Author information: 
(1)Predictive Medicine Group, John Curtin School of Medical Research, University 
of Melbourne, Australia.

This study sought to test 15 simple sequence repeat polymorphisms within 10
candidate genes for association with antisocial behavioural traits. Genes
included were those known to regulate dopamine synthesis and transmission in the 
brain (DBH, DRD2, MAOA, TFAP2B, NR4A2, LMX1B) and those involved in the
differentiation of social and sexual behaviour in men and women (AR, ESR1, OXTR, 
AVPR1A). Participants were Caucasians (men=1007, women=1089) aged 20-24 years who
were assessed for indicators of antisocial traits such as pseudo-maturity,
substance misuse and unstable lifestyle. Significant associations for antisocial 
traits were found with AR and ESR1 polymorphisms in men, and with polymorphisms
within NR4A2 and TFAP2B in women. The association with TFAP2B remained
significant after correction for multiple testing. This pattern of associations
suggests that genetic variation within transcription factors may in part explain 
the variation observed in the population for antisocial behavioural phenotypes.

PMID: 17728669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Ann Rheum Dis. 2008 May;67(5):584-91. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

Genetic associations in peripheral joint osteoarthritis and spinal degenerative
disease: a systematic review.

Ryder JJ(1), Garrison K, Song F, Hooper L, Skinner J, Loke Y, Loughlin J, Higgins
JP, MacGregor AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Health Policy and Practice, Institute of Health,
University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK. Jon.Ryder@uea.ac.uk

We conducted a systematic review of genetic association studies for
osteoarthritis of the peripheral joints (OA) and spinal degenerative disease
(SDD). Electronic searches were carried out for any English language article
reporting on a gene association study for either OA or SDD published up until the
end of 2006. A team of seven reviewers used a standardised template to extract
data in duplicate. In all, 90 studies fulfilled our inclusion criteria, reporting
a total of 94 significant associations from 83 different genes. We found
relatively few instances in which a specific gene-disease association had been
analysed by more than one study, and there were 14 cases in which significant
associations were replicated in independent studies (at joints associated with
the AGC1, ASPN, COL9A2, COL9A3, COL11A2, ESR1, FZRB, HFE, IL1A, IL1RN, PTGS2 and 
VDR genes).METHOD: logical and reporting problems were widespread, including
failure to report full results, missing population details, multiple testing, and
over-reliance on subgroup analysis. In summary, the complex phenotypes of OA and 
SDD may have made it difficult for researchers to focus their efforts. The field 
is dominated by isolated analyses of disparate potential associations, a problem 
that is amplified by the frequent analysis of different polymorphisms within
individual genes. Flaws in study methodology and interpretation undoubtedly
increase the risk of publication bias. Closer adherence to published
recommendations (in particular those produced by HuGENet) will help to ensure
that future studies are well-designed and build on current understanding, rather 
than simply adding to the growing bank of potential associations.

PMID: 17720722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2008 May;83(5):702-10. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Estrogen receptor genotypes, menopausal status, and the lipid effects of
tamoxifen.

Ntukidem NI(1), Nguyen AT, Stearns V, Rehman M, Schott A, Skaar T, Jin Y, Blanche
P, Li L, Lemler S, Hayden J, Krauss RM, Desta Z, Flockhart DA, Hayes DF;
Consortium on Breast Cancer Pharmacogenomics.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Tamoxifen induces important changes in serum lipid profiles in some women;
however, little information is available to predict which women will experience
improved lipid profiles during tamoxifen therapy. As part of a multicenter
prospective observational trial in 176 breast cancer patients, we tested the
hypothesis that tamoxifen-induced lipid changes were associated with genetic
variants in candidate target genes (CYP2D6, ESR1, and ESR2). Tamoxifen lowered
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (P<0.0001) by 23.5 mg/dl (13.5-33.5 mg/dl)
and increased triglycerides (P=0.006). In postmenopausal women, the ESR1-XbaI and
ESR2-02 genotypes were associated with tamoxifen-induced changes in total
cholesterol (P=0.03; GG vs GA/AA) and triglycerides (P=0.01; gene-dose effect),
respectively. In premenopausal women, the ESR1-XbaI genotypes were associated
with tamoxifen-induced changes in triglycerides (P=0.002; gene-dose effect) and
high-density lipoprotein (P=0.004; gene-dose effect). Our results suggest that
estrogen receptor genotyping may be useful in predicting which women would
benefit more from tamoxifen.

PMCID: PMC2782693
PMID: 17713466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Cancer. 2007 Aug 21;6:53.

Molecular portrait of cisplatin induced response in human testis cancer cell
lines based on gene expression profiles.

Duale N(1), Lindeman B, Komada M, Olsen AK, Andreassen A, Soderlund EJ, Brunborg 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Toxicology, Division of Environmental Medicine,
Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway. nur.duale@fhi.no

BACKGROUND: Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) respond well to cisplatin-based
chemotherapy and show a low incidence of acquired resistance compared to most
somatic tumors. The reasons for these specific characteristics are not known in
detail but seem to be multifactorial. We have studied gene expression profiles of
testicular and colon cancer derived cell lines treated with cisplatin. The main
goal of this study was to identify novel gene expression profiles with their
functional categories and the biochemical pathways that are associated with TGCT 
cells' response to cisplatin.
RESULTS: Genes that were differentially expressed between the TGCT cell lines vs 
the (somatic) HCT116 cell line, after cisplatin treatment, were identified using 
the significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) method. The response of TGCT cells
was strikingly different from that of HCT116, and we identified 1794 genes that
were differentially expressed. Functional classification of these genes showed
that they participate in a variety of different and widely distributed functional
categories and biochemical pathways. Database mining showed significant
association of genes (n = 41) induced by cisplatin in our study, and genes
previously reported to by expressed in differentiated TGCT cells. We identified
37 p53-responsive genes that were altered after cisplatin exposure. We also
identified 40 target genes for two microRNAs, hsa-mir-372 and 373 that may
interfere with p53 signaling in TGCTs. The tumor suppressor genes NEO1 and LATS2,
and the estrogen receptor gene ESR1, all have binding sites for p53 and
hsa-mir-372/373. NEO1 and LATS2 were down-regulated in TGCT cells following
cisplatin exposure, while ESR1 was up-regulated in TGCT cells. Cisplatin-induced 
genes associated with terminal growth arrest through senescence were identified, 
indicating associations which were not previously described for TGCT cells.
CONCLUSION: By linking our gene expression data to publicly available databases
and literature, we provide a global pattern of cisplatin induced cellular
response that is specific for testicular cancer cell lines. We have identified
cisplatin-responsive functional classes and pathways, such as the angiogenesis,
Wnt, integrin, and cadherin signaling pathways. The identification of
differentially expressed genes in this study may contribute to a better
understanding of the unusual sensitivity of TGCT to some DNA-damaging agents.

PMCID: PMC1988831
PMID: 17711579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Fertil Steril. 2008 Feb;89(2):318-24. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms are associated with idiopathic
premature ovarian failure.

Bretherick KL(1), Hanna CW, Currie LM, Fluker MR, Hammond GL, Robinson WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the role of hormone receptor/binding protein variants in
genetic predisposition to premature ovarian failure (POF).
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Academic.
PATIENT(S): Fifty-five POF patients, 107 control women from the general
population, and 27 control women who had proven fertility after age 37.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Allele distributions in cases and controls were assessed
for genetic association.
RESULT(S): Allele distributions of polymorphisms at the androgen receptor (AR)
gene, estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) gene, sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG)
gene, and FSH receptor (FSHR) gene did not differ between patients and controls. 
At a repeat in a promoter of the estrogen receptor alpha(ESR1) gene, POF patients
had fewer (<18) short repeat alleles than did controls (P=.004 vs. combined
controls). Genotypes consisting of two short alleles were found in 36.4% of
control women but only 5.5% of POF patients (P<.0001 vs. combined controls). The 
ESR1 repeat may confer risk for POF in a simple dominant manner in which carriers
of a long repeat have a relative risk of 9.7 (95% CI = 2.6 - 35.6).
CONCLUSION(S): Polymorphisms at the ESR1 gene are associated with POF in this
patient population, while those in AR, ESR2, SHBG, and FSHR showed no
association. Further studies are necessary to confirm these findings in larger
patient samples and to identify the specific predisposing lesion.

PMID: 17706202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Clin Chem. 2007 Oct;53(10):1749-56. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Polymorphisms and haplotypes of the estrogen receptor-beta gene (ESR2) and
cardiovascular disease in men and women.

Rexrode KM(1), Ridker PM, Hegener HH, Buring JE, Manson JE, Zee RY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA. krexrode@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Cohort studies suggest an association between variation in the
estrogen receptor-alpha gene (ESR1) and cardiovascular disease (CVD), but data
are lacking for the effect of variation in the estrogen receptor-beta gene
(ESR2).
METHODS: Three polymorphisms of the ESR2 gene, and their associated haplotypes,
were evaluated in 296 white women from the Women's Health Study and 566 white men
from the Physicians' Health Study who developed CVD [myocardial infarction (MI)
or ischemic stroke], each matched 1:1 to a member of the cohort study who
remained free from CVD. Blood samples and cardiovascular risk information were
collected at baseline.
RESULTS: Women, but not men, who developed CVD or MI, but not ischemic stroke,
were more likely to have the rs1271572 polymorphism variant T allele (P = 0.05
and 0.02) and less likely to have the rs1256049 polymorphism variant A allele (P 
= 0.003 and 0.004). No associations were observed for rs4986938. In conditional
logistic multivariate regression, the rs1271572 variant was associated with
increased odds of CVD [odds ratio (OR) = 1.49, 95% CI: 1.10-2.01] and MI (OR =
1.46, 95% CI: 0.96-2.23), whereas the rs1256049 variant was associated with
decreased odds of CVD (OR = 0.37, 95% CI: 0.17-0.79) and MI (OR = 0.25, 95% CI:
0.09-0.73) in women. A common haplotype that included the rs1271572 variant was
associated with a 7-fold increased risk of MI in women.
CONCLUSIONS: Two tightly linked polymorphisms of ESR2 were associated with risk
of CVD, particularly MI, in women but not men. Additional studies of ESR2 genetic
variation and risk of CVD are warranted.

PMCID: PMC2085372
PMID: 17702854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Sep 30;276(1-2):10-7. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

In vitro assessment of transcriptional activation of the estrogen and androgen
receptors of mosquitofish, Gambusia affinis affinis.

Katsu Y(1), Hinago M, Sone K, Urushitani H, Guillette LJ Jr, Iguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic
Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji,
Okazaki 444-8787, Japan.

Sex-steroid hormones are essential for normal reproductive activity in both
sexes. Estrogens are necessary for ovarian differentiation during a critical
developmental stage in many vertebrates and promote the growth and
differentiation of the female reproductive system. Androgens play essential roles
in the development and functioning of the vertebrate male reproductive system as 
well as actively supporting spermatogenesis. Importantly, recent studies suggest 
that androgens and estrogens have important reproductive roles in both males and 
females. To understand the molecular mechanisms of estrogen and androgen actions 
and to evaluate estrogen and androgen receptor-ligand interactions in the
mosquitofish, Gambusia affinis affinis, we used degenerate primer sets and PCR
techniques to isolated DNA fragments encoding estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha;
ESR1), ERbeta1 (ERbeta1) and ERbeta2 from the ovary. Full-length mosquitofish ER 
(mfER) cDNAs were obtained using cDNA library screening and RACE techniques.
Amino acid sequences of mfERs showed over-all homology of 46% (alpha versus
beta1), 43% (alpha versus beta2), and 52% (beta1 versus beta2). We applied the
ERE-luciferase reporter assay system to characterize these receptors. In this
transient transfection assay system using mammalian cells, the mfER proteins
displayed estrogen-dependent activation of transcription. In addition to ERs, the
transactivation of mosquitofish ARs (mfARs) previously isolated by our group,
were examined using an androgen-responsive MMTV-luciferase assay system.
Mosquitofish ARs showed androgen-dependent activation of transcription from the
MMTV promoter. These data provide a basic tool allowing future studies examining 
the receptor-ligand interactions and endocrine disrupting mechanisms in
mosquitofish and also expands our knowledge of estrogen and androgen receptor
evolution.

PMID: 17669586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Lung Cancer. 2007 Nov;58(2):220-30. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

DNA methylation profile of 28 potential marker loci in malignant mesothelioma.

Tsou JA(1), Galler JS, Wali A, Ye W, Siegmund KD, Groshen S, Laird PW, Turla S,
Koss MN, Pass HI, Laird-Offringa IA.

Author information: 
(1)Norris Cancer Center and Department of Surgery, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Room NOR6420, 1441 Eastlake Avenue, Los
Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA.

Patients with malignant mesothelioma (MM), an aggressive cancer associated with
asbestos exposure, usually present clinically with advanced disease and this
greatly reduces the likelihood of curative treatment. MM is difficult to diagnose
without invasive techniques; the development of non-invasively detectable
molecular markers would therefore be highly beneficial. DNA methylation changes
in cancer cells provide powerful markers that are potentially detectable
non-invasively in DNA shed into bodily fluids. Here we examined the methylation
status of 28 loci in 52 MM tumors to investigate their potential as molecular
markers for MM. To exclude candidate MM markers that might be positive in
biopsies/pleural fluid due to contaminating surrounding non-tumor lung
tissue/DNA, we also examined the methylation of these markers in lung samples
(age- or environmentally induced hypermethylation is frequently observed in
non-cancerous lung). Statistically significantly increased methylation in MM
versus non-tumor lung samples was found for estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1; p =
0.0002), solute carrier family 6 member 20 (SLC6A20; p = 0.0022) and spleen
tyrosine kinase (SYK; p=0.0003). Examination of associations between methylation 
levels of the 28 loci and clinical parameters suggest associations of the
methylation status of metallothionein genes with gender, histology, asbestos
exposure, and lymph node involvement, and the methylation status of leucine
zipper tumor suppressor 1 (LZTS1) and SLC6A20 with survival.

PMCID: PMC2752414
PMID: 17659810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Clin Invest. 2007 Aug;117(8):2205-15.

Src promotes estrogen-dependent estrogen receptor alpha proteolysis in human
breast cancer.

Chu I(1), Arnaout A, Loiseau S, Sun J, Seth A, McMahon C, Chun K, Hennessy B,
Mills GB, Nawaz Z, Slingerland JM.

Author information: 
(1)Braman Family Breast Cancer Institute and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

Estrogen drives both transcriptional activation and proteolysis of estrogen
receptor alpha (ER alpha; encoded by ESR1). Here we observed variable and
overlapping ESR1 mRNA levels in 200 ER alpha-negative and 50 ER alpha-positive
primary breast cancers examined, which suggests important posttranscriptional ER 
alpha regulation. Our results indicate that Src cooperates with estrogen to
activate ER alpha proteolysis. Inducible Src stimulated ligand-activated ER alpha
transcriptional activity and reduced ER alpha t(1/2). Src and ER alpha levels
were inversely correlated in primary breast cancers. ER alpha-negative primary
breast cancers and cell lines showed increased Src levels and/or activity
compared with ER alpha-positive cancers and cells. ER alpha t(1/2) was reduced in
ER alpha-negative cell lines. In both ER alpha-positive and -negative cell lines,
both proteasome and Src inhibitors increased ER alpha levels. Src inhibition
impaired ligand-activated ER alpha ubiquitylation and increased ER alpha levels. 
Src siRNA impaired ligand-activated ER alpha loss in BT-20 cells. Pretreatment
with Src increased ER alpha ubiquitylation and degradation in vitro. These
findings provide what we believe to be a novel link between Src activation and ER
alpha proteolysis and support a model whereby crosstalk between liganded ER alpha
and Src drives ER alpha transcriptional activity and targets ER alpha for
ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis. Oncogenic Src activation may promote not only
proliferation, but also estrogen-activated ER alpha loss in a subset of ER
alpha-negative breast cancers, altering prognosis and response to therapy.

PMCID: PMC1906730
PMID: 17627304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Biol Reprod. 2007 Oct;77(4):681-7. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

Promoter methylation regulates estrogen receptor 2 in human endometrium and
endometriosis.

Xue Q(1), Lin Z, Cheng YH, Huang CC, Marsh E, Yin P, Milad MP, Confino E,
Reierstad S, Innes J, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obsterics and
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

Steroid receptors in the stromal cells of endometrium and its disease counterpart
tissue endometriosis play critical physiologic roles. We found that mRNA and
protein levels of estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2) were strikingly higher, whereas
levels of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1), total progesterone receptor (PGR), and
progesterone receptor B (PGR B) were significantly lower in endometriotic versus 
endometrial stromal cells. Because ESR2 displayed the most striking levels of
differential expression between endometriotic and endometrial cells, and the
mechanisms for this difference are unknown, we tested the hypothesis that
alteration in DNA methylation is a mechanism responsible for severely increased
ESR2 mRNA levels in endometriotic cells. We identified a CpG island occupying the
promoter region (-197/+359) of the ESR2 gene. Bisulfite sequencing of this region
showed significantly higher methylation in primary endometrial cells (n = 8
subjects) versus endometriotic cells (n = 8 subjects). The demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine significantly increased ESR2 mRNA levels in endometrial
cells. Mechanistically, we employed serial deletion mutants of the ESR2 promoter 
fused to the luciferase reporter gene and transiently transfected into both
endometriotic and endometrial cells. We demonstrated that the critical region
(-197/+372) that confers promoter activity also bears the CpG island, and the
activity of the ESR2 promoter was strongly inactivated by in vitro methylation.
Taken together, methylation of a CpG island at the ESR2 promoter region is a
primary mechanism responsible for differential expression of ESR2 in
endometriosis and endometrium. These findings may be applied to a number of areas
ranging from diagnosis to the treatment of endometriosis.

PMID: 17625110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Rheumatol. 2007 Oct;34(10):1987-91. Epub 2007 Jul 1.

Disease activity score 28 as an instrument to measure disease activity in
patients with early rheumatoid arthritis.

Mäkinen H(1), Kautiainen H, Hannonen P, Möttönen T, Korpela M, Leirisalo-Repo M, 
Luukkainen R, Puolakka K, Karjalainen A, Sokka T.

Author information: 
(1)Jyväskylä Central Hospital, Jyväskylä, Finland. heidi.makinen@ksshp.fi

OBJECTIVE: To examine the influence of components of the Disease Activity Score
28 (DAS28) [tender joint count (TJC), swollen joint count (SJC), patient's
general health (GH), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)] on the total DAS28
score, and overlapping of the 4 individual components in rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) patients with low, moderate, or high disease activity.
METHODS: The effect of each component was studied in the FIN-RACo trial patients 
at 6 months and in a "theoretical model," where each component of the DAS28
ranged as follows: TJC and SJC from 0 to 28, GH from 0 to 100, and ESR from 1 to 
100, while the other 3 components were 0 (ESR1). Overlapping of the components
was studied in the FIN-RACo trial patients at 6 months with low (DAS28 < or =
3.2), moderate (DAS28 > 3.2 and < or = 5.1), and high (DAS28 > 5.1) disease
activity. The higher limit for overlapping was defined as the highest SJC in the 
low disease activity group, and the lower limit as the lowest SJC in the high
disease activity group; the percentage of patients who fall between these limits 
represent overlapping in SJC. Overlapping was calculated similarly concerning
TJC, ESR, and GH.
RESULTS: ESR had the greatest effect on DAS28, followed by TJC, GH, and SJC,
while in the "theoretical model" TJC had the greatest effect on the DAS28,
followed by ESR, SJC, and GH. At 6 months, overlapping was present in 54%, 45%,
49%, and 31% of patients in SJC, TJC, GH, and ESR, respectively.
CONCLUSION: In real-life patients, ESR had the greatest effect of the 4
components of DAS28 on the total DAS28 score. The values of the individual
components of DAS28 overlap considerably among the 3 disease activity groups.

PMID: 17611990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Neurogenetics. 2007 Aug;8(3):195-200. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Association of progesterone receptor with migraine-associated vertigo.

Lee H(1), Sininger L, Jen JC, Cha YH, Baloh RW, Nelson SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. snelson@ucla.edu

While migraine has been demonstrated to be familial and have genetic
contributions, genome-wide linkage analyses and candidate gene studies have
highlighted that migraine is genetically complex. Despite substantial efforts, no
consistent replication of linkage or association has been reported for common
migraine syndromes. Among the candidate genes tested for association with
migraine by several groups were female sex hormone genes based on the observation
of a much higher incidence of migraine in females. Migraine-associated vertigo
(MAV) is a migraine syndrome also much more common in females than males. Because
MAV is less common in the general population than migraine or migraine with aura,
it may be a better migraine syndrome to detect susceptibility alleles. In this
study, we tested the association of two female hormonal genes, progesterone
receptor (PGR) and estrogen receptor (ESR1), which were previously reported to be
associated with migraine in women. We typed 150 MAV subjects and 145 genomic
matched control subjects. One SNP (rs1042838) within PGR, which is in high
linkage disequilibrium with the functional PROGINS variant, was significantly
associated with MAV (p = 0.0007). Two SNPs (rs2228480 and rs1801132) within ESR1 
demonstrated no significant association. No synergistic effect between ESR1
variants and PGR variants was identified.

PMID: 17609999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 1;13(13):3796-802.

Age-related DNA methylation changes in normal human prostate tissues.

Kwabi-Addo B(1), Chung W, Shen L, Ittmann M, Wheeler T, Jelinek J, Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, The University of Texas
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. bernardk@bcm.tmc.edu

PURPOSE: Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer death among the aging male 
population but the mechanism underlying this association is unclear. Aberrant
methylation of promoter CpG islands is associated with silencing of genes and
age-dependent methylation of several genes has been proposed as a risk factor for
sporadic cancer. We examined the extent of gene methylation in pathologically
normal human prostate as a function of age.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used pyrosequencing to quantitatively analyze the
methylation status of nine CpG islands in normal prostate tissue DNA from 45
organ donors and 45 patients who had undergone cystoprostatectomy for bladder
cancer. We also analyzed 12 pairs of matched benign and prostate cancer tissue
DNA from patients with prostate cancer.
RESULTS: Linear regression analysis revealed a significant increase in promoter
methylation levels correlating with age for CpG islands at RARbeta2 (r = 0.4; P <
0.0001), RASSF1A (r = 0.27; P = 0.01), GSTP1 (r = 0.59; P < 0.0001), NKX2-5 (r = 
0.27; P = 0.008), and ESR1 (r = 0.244; P = 0.023) in the normal prostate tissue
samples studied. A calculated average methylation (z score) at all nine CpG loci 
analyzed in the normal prostate tissues showed a strong correlation with age (r =
0.6; P < 0.001). Comparison of the methylation level for the matched benign and
prostate cancer tissues from individual patients with prostate cancer showed
significantly higher methylation in the prostate cancer tissue samples for
RARbeta2 (P < 0.001), RASSF1A (P = 0.005), GSTP1 (P < 0.001), NKX2-5 (P = 0.003),
ESR1 (P = 0.016), and CLSTN1 (P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings show aberrant hypermethylation as a function of age in 
the normal prostate tissues. Such age-related methylation may precede and
predispose to full-blown malignancy.

PMID: 17606710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Aquat Toxicol. 2007 Aug 15;84(1):38-49. Epub 2007 May 25.

Microarray analysis in the zebrafish (Danio rerio) liver and telencephalon after 
exposure to low concentration of 17alpha-ethinylestradiol.

Martyniuk CJ(1), Gerrie ER, Popesku JT, Ekker M, Trudeau VL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics, 30 Marie Curie,
Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1N 6N5.

17alpha-ethinylestradiol (EE2) is detected in sewage effluent at concentrations
that can disrupt normal reproductive function in fish. The objectives of this
study were to identify novel genomic responses to EE2 exposure using microarray
and real-time RT-PCR analysis in the liver and telencephalon of male zebrafish.
Zebrafish were exposed to an environmentally relevant nominal concentration of
10ng/L EE2 for a 21-day period. In the liver, common biomarkers for estrogenic
exposure such as vitellogenin 1 and 3 (vtg1; vtg3), estrogen receptor alpha
(esr1), and apolipoprotein A1 (apoA1) mRNA were identified by microarray analysis
as being differentially regulated. Real-time RT-PCR confirmed that vtg1 was
induced approximately 700-fold, vtg3 was induced approximately 100-fold and esr1 
was induced approximately 20-fold. As determined by microarray analysis, ATPase
Na+/K+ alpha 1a.4 (atp1a1a.4) and ATPase Na+/K+ beta 1a (atp1b1a) mRNA were
down-regulated in the liver. Gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed that there were
common biological processes and molecular functions regulated by EE2 in both
tissues (e.g. electron transport and cell communication) but there were tissue
specific changes in gene categories. For example, genes involved in protein
metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism were down-regulated in the liver but were
induced in the telencephalon. This study demonstrates that (1) tissues exhibit
different gene responses to low EE2 exposure; (2) there are pronounced genomic
effects in the liver and (3) multi-tissue gene profiling is needed to improve
understanding of the effects of human pharmaceuticals on aquatic organisms.

PMID: 17606305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Biol Psychiatry. 2007 Oct 15;62(8):925-33. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Risk for premenstrual dysphoric disorder is associated with genetic variation in 
ESR1, the estrogen receptor alpha gene.

Huo L(1), Straub RE, Roca C, Schmidt PJ, Shi K, Vakkalanka R, Weinberger DR,
Rubinow DR.

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is a heritable mood disorder
that is triggered by gonadal steroids during the luteal phase in susceptible
women.
METHODS: We performed haplotype analyses of estrogen receptors alpha and beta
(ESR1 and ESR2) in 91 women with prospectively confirmed PMDD and 56 control
subjects to investigate possible sources of the genetic susceptibility to
affective dysregulation induced by normal levels of gonadal steroids. We also
examined associations with the valine (Val)158methionine (Met) single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) of the gene for catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), an enzyme
involved in estrogen metabolism and prefrontal cortical activation.
RESULTS: Four SNPs in intron 4 of ESR1 showed significantly different genotype
and allele distributions between patients and control subjects. Significant
case-control differences were seen in sliding-window analyses of two-, three-,
and four-marker haplotypes but only in those haplotypes containing SNPs in intron
4 that were positive in the single-locus analysis. No significant associations
were observed with ESR2 or with the COMT Val158Met polymorphism, although the
significant associations with ESR1 were observed only in those with the Val/Val
genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: These are the first positive (albeit preliminary) genetic findings
in this reproductive endocrine-related mood disorder and involve the receptor for
a hormone that is pathogenically relevant.

PMCID: PMC2762203
PMID: 17599809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008 May;109(1):101-11. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Active and passive smoking, IL6, ESR1, and breast cancer risk.

Slattery ML(1), Curtin K, Giuliano AR, Sweeney C, Baumgartner R, Edwards S, Wolff
RK, Baumgartner KB, Byers T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, UT 84117, USA. marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

We evaluated the association between smoking and risk of breast cancer in
non-Hispanic white (NHW) and Hispanic or American Indian (HAI) women living in
the Southwestern United States. Data on lifetime exposure to active and passive
smoke data were available from 1527 NHW cases and 1601 NHW controls; 798 HAI
cases and 924 HAI controls. Interleukin 6 (IL6) and Estrogen Receptor alpha
(ESR1) polymorphisms were assessed in conjunction with smoking. Pack-years of
smoking (>or=15) were associated with increased risk of pre-menopausal breast
cancer among NHW women (OR 1.6, 95% CI 1.1-2. 4). Passive smoke increased risk of
pre-menopausal breast cancer for HAI women (OR 1.9, 95% CI 1.1-3.1 everyone; OR
2.3, 95% CI 1.2-4.5 nonsmokers). HAI pre-menopausal women who were exposed to 10+
h of passive smoke per week and had the rs2069832 IL6 GG genotype had over a
fourfold increased risk of breast cancer (OR 4.4, 95% CI 1.5-12.8; P for
interaction 0.01). Those with the ESR1 Xba1 AA genotype had a threefold increased
risk of breast cancer if they smoked>or=15 pack-years relative to non-smokers (P 
interaction 0.01). These data suggest that breast cancer risk is associated with 
active and passive smoking.

PMCID: PMC2532584
PMID: 17594514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Environ Health Perspect. 2007 Jun;115(6):902-8. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Estradiol and Bisphenol A stimulate androgen receptor and estrogen receptor gene 
expression in fetal mouse prostate mesenchyme cells.

Richter CA(1), Taylor JA, Ruhlen RL, Welshons WV, Vom Saal FS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia,
Missouri 65211, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hormonal alterations during development have lifelong effects on the 
prostate gland. Endogenous estrogens, including 17beta-estradiol (E(2)), and
synthetic estrogenic endocrine disruptors, such as bisphenol A (BPA), have
similar effects on prostate development. Increasing exposure to estrogens within 
the low-dose, physiologic range results in permanent increases in the size and
androgen responsiveness of the prostate, whereas exposure within the high-dose,
pharmacologic range has the opposite effects.
OBJECTIVES: We tested the hypothesis that the low-dose effects of estrogens on
the developing prostate are associated with increased expression of androgen
receptor (Ar) and estrogen receptor 1 (alpha) (Esr1) genes in mesenchyme cells.
METHODS: Ar and Esr1 mRNA levels were quantified in primary cultures of fetal
mouse prostate mesenchyme cells treated with E(2) and BPA.
DISCUSSION: Ar and Esr1 mRNA expression increased in response to E(2), with
thresholds of 0.001 and 0.037 nM, respectively; and in response to BPA, with a
threshold of 1 nM for both mRNAs. We did not observe the expected inhibition of
Ar mRNA expression by pharmacologic levels of E(2) relative to unexposed cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed induction of gene expression occurred at concentrations
within the range of free E(2) previously shown to permanently increase prostate
size, thus supporting the involvement of direct effects of estrogens on gene
expression in prostate mesenchyme. The effects of BPA occurred within the range
of concentrations currently measured in human serum, demonstrating the
vulnerability of developing tissues to xenoestrogens.

PMCID: PMC1892114
PMID: 17589598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Menopause. 2008 Jan-Feb;15(1):105-11.

Association of estrogen-related polymorphisms with age at menarche, age at final 
menstrual period, and stages of the menopausal transition.

Mitchell ES(1), Farin FM, Stapleton PL, Tsai JM, Tao EY, Smith-DiJulio K, Woods
NF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family and Child Nursing, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98195-7262, USA. nellem@u.washington.edu

OBJECTIVE: To explore the association of estrogen-related polymorphisms with age 
at menarche, age at onset and duration of stages of the menopausal transition,
and age at final menstrual period (FMP).
DESIGN: A total of 152 white women were genotyped for CYP17, CYP19 3-untranslated
region, CYP19 TTTA7-13, HSDB1, CYP1A1, CYP1B1, and ESR1 polymorphisms. Analysis
of variance was used to test a nonspecific model for differences among genotypes 
associated with each polymorphism.
RESULTS: Five of the 84 associations tested were significant at P < 0.05, which
could be expected by chance. Women with two CYP19 7r alleles had menarche earlier
(11.5 y) than those with one 7r allele (13.1 y). Women with two 11r alleles were 
2 years older at onset of late stage than those with one 11r allele (50.7 y vs
48.6 y). Those with two 7r(-3) alleles were 2 years older at FMP than those
without this allele (53.9 y vs 51.3 y). Women with the homozygous wild-type
allele for HSDB1 (rs2830) were younger at FMP by 2 years than those with the
heterozygous allele (50.8 y vs 52.9 y). Women with the heterozygous allele for
CYP1B1*2 had a later age at menarche compared with women with the homozygous wild
type (13 y vs 12.5 y).
CONCLUSIONS: Age at onset of late stage and FMP and age at menarche are
associated with specific genetic polymorphisms in the estrogen biosynthesis and
metabolism genes. However, because of the number of comparisons, these
associations may be false positives. These findings should be confirmed with a
larger sample of white women.

PMID: 17589376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9(3):R38.

An oestrogen-dependent model of breast cancer created by transformation of normal
human mammary epithelial cells.

Duss S(1), André S, Nicoulaz AL, Fiche M, Bonnefoi H, Brisken C, Iggo RD.

Author information: 
(1)NCCR Molecular Oncology, Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research
(ISREC), Chemin des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION: About 70% of breast cancers express oestrogen receptor alpha
(ESR1/ERalpha) and are oestrogen-dependent for growth. In contrast with the
highly proliferative nature of ERalpha-positive tumour cells, ERalpha-positive
cells in normal breast tissue rarely proliferate. Because ERalpha expression is
rapidly lost when normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs) are grown in
vitro, breast cancer models derived from HMECs are ERalpha-negative. Currently
only tumour cell lines are available to model ERalpha-positive disease. To create
an ERalpha-positive breast cancer model, we have forced normal HMECs derived from
reduction mammoplasty tissue to express ERalpha in combination with other
relevant breast cancer genes.
METHODS: Candidate genes were selected based on breast cancer microarray data and
cloned into lentiviral vectors. Primary HMECs prepared from reduction mammoplasty
tissue were infected with lentiviral particles. Infected HMECs were characterised
by Western blotting, immunofluorescence microscopy, microarray analysis, growth
curves, karyotyping and SNP chip analysis. The tumorigenicity of the modified
HMECs was tested after orthotopic injection into the inguinal mammary glands of
NOD/SCID mice. Cells were marked with a fluorescent protein to allow
visualisation in the fat pad. The growth of the graft was analysed by
fluorescence microscopy of the mammary glands and pathological analysis of
stained tissue sections. Oestrogen dependence of tumour growth was assessed by
treatment with the oestrogen antagonist fulvestrant.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis of ERalpha-positive tumours reveals that they
commonly overexpress the Polycomb-group gene BMI1. Lentiviral transduction with
ERalpha, BMI1, TERT and MYC allows primary HMECs to be expanded in vitro in an
oestrogen-dependent manner. Orthotopic xenografting of these cells into the
mammary glands of NOD/SCID mice results in the formation of ERalpha-positive
tumours that metastasise to multiple organs. The cells remain wild type for TP53,
diploid and genetically stable. In vivo tumour growth and in vitro proliferation 
of cells explanted from tumours are dependent on oestrogen.
CONCLUSION: We have created a genetically defined model of ERalpha-positive human
breast cancer based on normal HMECs that has the potential to model human
oestrogen-dependent breast cancer in a mouse and enables the study of mechanisms 
involved in tumorigenesis and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC1929103
PMID: 17573968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2007 Apr;10(2):241-54.

Genotype-environment interactions: cognitive aging and social factors.

Reynolds CA(1), Gatz M, Berg S, Pedersen NL.

Author information: 
(1)University of California Riverside, Department of Psychology, Riverside, CA
92521, USA. chandra.reynolds@ucr.edu

The possibility of genotype-environment interaction for memory performance and
change was examined in 150 monozygotic (MZ) twin pairs from the Swedish Adoption 
Twin Study of Aging (SATSA). We used an MZ twin pair difference approach to
examine the possibility that genotype was associated with intrapair variability
and thus suggestive of genotype-nonshared environment interactions. Multiple
'variability genes' were found for longitudinal change in a semantic memory task 
including candidates coding for apolipoprotein E (APOE) and estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) as well as serotonin candidates (HTR2A and 5HTT). One candidate also
related to variability in change in episodic memory (5HTT). Of the significant
associations observed, generally results indicated that MZ pairs who carry
putative risk alleles were less variable than noncarriers, suggesting that
noncarriers may be more sensitive to environmental contexts. We sought to
'contextualize' the possible nonshared environmental influences for found
gene-environment (G x E) effects by considering intrapair differences in measured
social and stress factors, including social support, life events and depressive
symptoms. Results suggested that nonshared environmental influences associated
with depressive symptoms may moderate the G x E relationship observed for ESR1
and APOE and longitudinal semantic memory change whereby noncarriers of putative 
risk alleles may be relatively more sensitive to depressionevoking environmental 
contexts than carriers of the risk allele. Thus, the contexts that facilitate or 
reduce depressive symptoms may affect semantic memory resiliency dependent on
genotype. Further work ought to consider larger sample sizes as well as consider 
additional social and contextual factors.

PMID: 17564514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2007;67(4):380-6.

Estrogen receptor-1 genotype is related to coronary intima thickness in young to 
middle-aged women.

Henttonen AT(1), Kortelainen ML, Kunnas TA, Nikkari ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Tampere Medical School,
Tampere, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: The incidence of coronary disease in premenopausal women is about
one-half that in men of similar age. The estrogen receptor-1 (ESR1, c.454-397T>C)
CC variant genotype is associated with the severity of coronary artery disease
(CAD) and an increased risk of myocardial infarction in men. The purpose of the
present study was to investigate whether this ESR1 CC variant also disposes to
atherosclerosis in women in terms of increased total coronary artery intima
thickness.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 125 forensic autopsy cases of women aged 15 to
49 years were investigated. The thickness of the coronary intima, which reflects 
the severity of atherosclerosis, was measured by computerized image analysis. The
ESR1 c.454-397T>C genotype was determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
RESULTS: The mean intima thicknesses in the three genotype groups were 428+/-298 
microm (TT), 494+/-371 microm (CT) and 636+/-436 microm (CC). We found that, on
average, women with the CC genotype had a thicker coronary intima compared with
that of women with the TT genotype, even after adjusting for age and body mass
index (BMI) (p = 0.030). The intermediate group (TC) did not significantly differ
from either the CC or the TT genotype group in this respect.
CONCLUSION: Our results point to the importance of ESR1 genotype in relation to
cardiovascular disease susceptibility.

PMID: 17558892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Jun;38(6):673-90.

Constitutively active FOXO1a and a DNA-binding domain mutant exhibit distinct
co-regulatory functions to enhance progesterone receptor A activity.

Rudd MD(1), Gonzalez-Robayna I, Hernandez-Gonzalez I, Weigel NL, Bingman WE 3rd, 
Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

FOXO (Forkhead box O1 transcription factors) factors interact with and modify the
activity of other transcription factors, including nuclear hormone receptors.
However, not all of the structural domains within the FOXO proteins that mediate 
these functional interactions have been clearly defined. To address this issue,
we used a constitutively active (nuclear) mutant of FOXO1a (designated FOXOA3)
and within FOXOA3 made additional mutations to alter the putative nuclear hormone
interacting domain (NID), minimal activation domain (MAD), DNA-binding domain
(DBD), and the N terminus. We document that FOXOA3 enhanced the hormone-dependent
transcriptional activity of liganded progesterone receptors A (PGRA) on a
glucocorticoid response element-responsive promoter, PGRA on the insulin-like
growth factor-binding protein 1 promoter, and estrogen receptor alpha on an
estrogen response element-responsive promoter. The effects of FOXOA3 on PGRA were
dependent, in part, on an intact NID, the MAD, and N-terminal domain. In striking
contrast, a FOXOA3 DNA-binding mutant (FOXOA3-mDBD) modulated PGRA, PGRB, and
ESR1 activities by distinctly different mechanisms, markedly elevating
ligand-independent activity of these nuclear hormone receptors even in the double
mutant lacking the MAD. Furthermore, both FOXOA3 and FOXOA3-mDBD enhanced the
activity of a transcriptionally defective PGRA lacking its AF1 transactivation
domain, indicating that this region of the receptor is not essential in this
context. Since FOXOA3, FOXOA3-mDBD, and FOXOA3-mNID all bound PGRA in a GST
pull-down assay, it appears that the LXXLL (leucine-X-X-leucine-leucine) motif
within the NID is not critical for FOXOA3 interactions with PGRA, but may modify 
the recruitment of other co-regulatory molecules. Collectively, the results show 
that FOXOA3 exerts co-regulatory functions independent of DNA binding and that
the DNA-binding defective form of FOXO1a is transcriptionally active as a
co-regulator of these nuclear hormone receptors.

PMID: 17556536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Jun;38(6):663-71.

The retinol acid receptor B gene is hypermethylated in patients with familial
partial lipodystrophy.

Cortese R(1), Eckhardt F, Volleth M, Wehnert M, Koelsch U, Wieacker P, Brune T.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenomics AG Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Mutations in the LMNA gene cause various phenotypes including partial
lipodystrophy, muscular dystrophies, and progeroid syndromes. The specific
mutation position within the LMNA sequence can partially predict the phenotype,
but the underlying mechanisms for the development of these different phenotypes
are still unclear. To investigate whether different DNA methylation patterns
contribute to the development of different phenotypes caused by LMNA mutations,
we analyzed a panel of ten candidate genes related to fat metabolism, aging, and 
a tendency to different methylation patterns: CSPG2, ESR1, IGF1R, IGFR2, LMNA,
MLH1, RANBP1, RARB, ZMPSTE24, and TGFBR1. We studied two independent families
each comprising three individuals affected by familial partial lipodistrophy type
2 (FPLD2). Affected members in each family carried two different mutations of the
LMNA gene (R482L and R471G respectively). In addition, we analyzed four progeria 
patients (2xLMNA/C G608G, 1xLMNA/C S143F, and 1xZMPSTE24 IVS9-Ex10) and seven
healthy adults. The gene encoding retinoic acid receptor B (RARB) showed a higher
methylation in all six patients with FPLD2 when compared with the progeria
patients with other LMNA mutations as well as the healthy controls (P<0.05). All 
other investigated genes showed no difference in the methylation patterns between
the groups. A drug-induced inhibition of the retinol pathway is discussed as the 
key pathway for developing HAART-associated lipodystrophy and our data support a 
possible role of the retinol pathway in the development of lipodystrophy
phenotypes.

PMID: 17556535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Mol Hum Reprod. 2007 Aug;13(8):537-40. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

Estrogen receptor alpha polymorphisms and fertility in populations with different
reproductive patterns.

Corbo RM(1), Ulizzi L, Piombo L, Martinez-Labarga C, De Stefano GF, Scacchi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University La Sapienza, P.le A. 
Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy. rosamaria.corbo@uniroma1.it

The estrogen receptor (ER) plays an important role in mediating estrogen action
on target tissues. ER-alpha, the most abundant, is found in all human
reproductive tissues and studies on alpha-ER knockout mice have highlighted its
role in reproduction. ER-alpha gene (ESR1) polymorphisms have been associated
with a variety of disorders including human infertility. In this study, we
examined the association of ESR1 PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms with fertility in
two populations with different reproductive patterns and precisely in a sample of
healthy Italian men and women (n=178) and in a sample of healthy
African-Ecuadorian women (n=57). ESR1 xx and ppxx genotypes among the Italian men
were found to be associated with an above-median number of children (P=0.01 and
P=0.004, respectively). ESR1 pp genotype among the Italian women showed a
tendency to be associated with a lower number of abortions (P=0.04), whereas ESR1
pp and ppxx genotypes among African-Ecuadorian women were associated with a
higher number of children (P=0.02 and P=0.03, respectively). These results are
consistent with previous observations indicating a role of ESR1 genotypes in
human infertility and give insight into the complex interactions between
genotypes and reproductive behaviours in human populations.

PMID: 17556378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9(3):R36.

Risk factors for breast cancer characterized by the estrogen receptor alpha A908G
(K303R) mutation.

Conway K(1), Parrish E, Edmiston SN, Tolbert D, Tse CK, Moorman P, Newman B,
Millikan RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, CB 7435, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. kconway@med.unc.edu

INTRODUCTION: Estrogen is important in the development of breast cancer, and its 
biological effects are mediated primarily through the two estrogen receptors
alpha and beta. A point mutation in the estrogen receptor alpha gene, ESR1,
referred to as A908G or K303R, was originally identified in breast hyperplasias
and was reported to be hypersensitive to estrogen. We recently detected this
mutation at a low frequency of 6% in invasive breast tumors of the Carolina
Breast Cancer Study (CBCS).
METHODS: In this report, we evaluated risk factors for invasive breast cancer
classified according to the presence or absence of the ESR1 A908G mutation in the
CBCS, a population-based case-control study of breast cancer among younger and
older white and African-American women in North Carolina. Of the 653 breast
tumors evaluated, 37 were ESR1 A908G mutation-positive and 616 were
mutation-negative.
RESULTS: ESR1 A908G mutation-positive breast cancer was significantly associated 
with a first-degree family history of breast cancer (odds ratio [OR] = 2.69, 95% 
confidence interval [CI] = 1.15 to 6.28), whereas mutation-negative breast cancer
was not. Comparison of the two case subgroups supported this finding (OR = 2.65, 
95% CI = 1.15 to 6.09). There was also the suggestion that longer duration of
oral contraceptive (OC) use (OR = 3.73, 95% CI = 1.16 to 12.03; Ptrend = 0.02 for
use of more than 10 years) and recent use of OCs (OR = 3.63, 95% CI = 0.80 to
16.45; Ptrend = 0.10 for use within 10 years) were associated with ESR1 A908G
mutation-positive breast cancer; however, ORs for comparison of the two case
subgroups were not statistically significant. Hormone replacement therapy use was
inversely correlated with mutation-negative breast cancer, but the effect on
mutation-positive cancer was unclear due to the small number of postmenopausal
cases whose tumors carried the mutation. Mutation-negative breast cancer was
associated with several reproductive factors, including younger age at menarche
(OR = 1.46, 95% CI = 1.09 to 1.94) and greater total estimated years of ovarian
function (OR = 1.82, 95% CI = 1.21 to 2.74).
CONCLUSION: These preliminary results suggest that OCs may interact with the ESR1
A908G mutant receptor to drive the development of some breast tumors.

PMCID: PMC1929100
PMID: 17553133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Mol Hum Reprod. 2007 Aug;13(8):521-6. Epub 2007 May 30.

Allelic estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene variants predict the outcome of ovarian
stimulation in in vitro fertilization.

Altmäe S(1), Haller K, Peters M, Hovatta O, Stavreus-Evers A, Karro H, Metspalu
A, Salumets A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Estonian
Genome Project, University of Tartu, Estonia, and Department of Clinical Science,
Intervention and Technology, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

The outcome of in vitro fertilization (IVF) depends substantially on the
effectiveness of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) induced by
administration of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). In COH, endogenously
produced estrogens extend the action of FSH in stimulating folliculogenesis. We
determined the associations between genetic variations in estrogen receptor ESR1 
and ESR2 genes and etiology of female infertility, and analysed the influence of 
these variations on COH outcome-the quantity and quality of oocytes retrieved.
ESR1 PvuII T/C (rs2234693) and XbaI A/G (rs9340799) single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) and (TA)n microsatellite polymorphism, as well as ESR2 RsaI 
G/A (rs1256049) SNP and (CA)n microsatellite polymorphism were genotyped in 159
IVF patients. The ovarian response to FSH was diminished in patients with
endometriosis when compared to tubal factor infertility. ESR1 PvuII and XbaI as
well as ESR2 RsaI SNPs were associated with the microsatellite length of the
respective genes. Shorter ESR1 (TA)n was linked with a higher risk for
unexplained infertility, whereas longer ESR1 (TA)n associated with PvuII*C allele
were predictive of a better COH, but not clinical pregnancy outcome in an
age-independent manner. These data suggest the variations in ESR1 gene, in
addition to the age of a woman, may predict the COH outcome in IVF.

PMID: 17540666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Diabetes. 2007 Aug;56(8):2135-41. Epub 2007 May 18.

Association of the estrogen receptor-alpha gene with the metabolic syndrome and
its component traits in African-American families: the Insulin Resistance
Atherosclerosis Family Study.

Gallagher CJ(1), Langefeld CD, Gordon CJ, Campbell JK, Mychaleckyj JC, Bryer-Ash 
M, Rich SS, Bowden DW, Sale MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2650. Mychalecky, Josyf C [corrected to Mychaleckyj,
Josyf C].

OBJECTIVE: We previously detected an association between a region of the estrogen
receptor-alpha (ESR1) gene and type 2 diabetes in an African-American
case-control study; thus, we investigated this region for associations with the
metabolic syndrome and its component traits in African-American families from the
Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Family Study.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 17 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
from a contiguous 41-kb intron 1-intron 2 region of the ESR1 gene were genotyped 
in 548 individuals from 42 African-American pedigrees. Generalized estimating
equations were computed using a sandwich estimator of the variance and
exchangeable correlation to account for familial correlation.
RESULTS: Significant associations were detected between ESR1 SNPs and the
metabolic syndrome (P = 0.005 to P = 0.029), type 2 diabetes (P = 0.001), insulin
sensitivity (P = 0.0005 to P = 0.023), fasting insulin (P = 0.022 to P = 0.033), 
triglycerides (P = 0.021), LDL (P = 0.016 to P = 0.034), cholesterol (P = 0.046),
BMI (P = 0.016 to P = 0.035), waist circumference (P = 0.012 to P = 0.023), and
subcutaneous adipose tissue area (P = 0.016).
CONCLUSIONS: It appears likely that ESR1 contributes to type 2 diabetes and CVD
risk via pleiotropic effects, leading to insulin resistance, a poor lipid
profile, and obesity.

PMID: 17513703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Hypertens Res. 2007 Mar;30(3):205-11.

Association between estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene polymorphisms and severe 
preeclampsia.

Molvarec A(1), Vér A, Fekete A, Rosta K, Derzbach L, Derzsy Z, Karádi I, Rigó J
Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kútvölgyi Clinical Center, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary. molvarec@freemail.hu

Associations have been reported between estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene
polymorphisms and various pathological conditions, including cardiovascular
diseases. Our aim was to investigate whether two polymorphisms of the ESR1 gene
(ESR1 c.454 -397T>C: PvuII restriction site and c.454 -351A>G: XbaI restriction
site) are associated with preeclampsia. In a case-control study, we analyzed
blood samples from 119 severely preeclamptic patients and 103 normotensive,
healthy pregnant women using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) method. All of the women were Caucasian.
There was no association between severe preeclampsia and the PvuII and XbaI ESR1 
gene polymorphisms separately. However, with the simultaneous carriage of both
polymorphisms, the TT/AA genotype combination was significantly more frequent in 
severely preeclamptic patients than in healthy control subjects (24.4% vs. 9.7%, 
p=0.003), whereas the TT/AG combination was significantly less frequent in the
severely preeclamptic group than in the control group (5.0% vs. 18.4%, p=0.002). 
According to the haplotype estimation, the homozygous T-A haplotype carriers had 
an increased risk of severe preeclampsia independent of maternal age,
prepregnancy BMI, primiparity and smoking status (adjusted odds ratio [OR]: 4.36,
95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.65-11.53). The GG genotype of the XbaI
polymorphism was associated with a lower risk of fetal growth restriction in
patients with severe preeclampsia (OR: 0.23, 95% CI: 0.07-0.73). In conclusion,
the homozygous T-A haplotype carriers of ESR1 PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms showed
an increased risk of severe preeclampsia. In addition, the GG genotype of the
XbaI polymorphism decreased the risk of fetal growth restriction in severely
preeclamptic patients.

PMID: 17510501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 May;16(5):1009-16.

Phytoestrogen exposure is associated with circulating sex hormone levels in
postmenopausal women and interact with ESR1 and NR1I2 gene variants.

Low YL(1), Dunning AM, Dowsett M, Folkerd E, Doody D, Taylor J, Bhaniani A, Luben
R, Khaw KT, Wareham NJ, Bingham SA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Dunn Human Nutrition Unit, Wellcome Trust/Medical
Research Council Dunn Human Nutrition Unit Building, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2
2XY, United Kingdom.

In this large cross-sectional study, we investigated the relationship between
phytoestrogen exposure and circulating sex hormones and sex hormone-binding
globulin (SHBG) levels in 1988 healthy postmenopausal women and their
interactions with polymorphisms in genes involved in estrogen signaling. Plasma
estradiol, testosterone, androstenedione, estrone, and SHBG were measured.
Urinary levels of five isoflavones (daidzein, genistein, glycitein,
O-desmethylangolensin, and equol) and two lignans (enterodiol and enterolactone) 
were measured and used as biomarkers for dietary intakes. Eighteen polymorphisms 
in ESR1, ESR2, and NR1I2 genes were genotyped. Results showed that lignans were
positively associated with plasma SHBG levels (eta(p)(2) = 1.2%; P < 0.001) and
negatively associated with plasma testosterone (eta(p)(2) = 0.2%; P = 0.042).
Equol was negatively associated with plasma estradiol levels (eta(p)(2) = 0.3%; P
= 0.028), whereas O-desmethylangolensin was positively associated with plasma
estradiol level (eta(p)(2) = 0.3%; P = 0.010). There were significant
phytoestrogen interactions with polymorphisms in ESR1 and NR1I2 genes in
affecting estrone levels. We conclude that phytoestrogens modulate sex hormone
and SHBG levels in postmenopausal women and interact with gene variants involved 
in estrogen signaling. Such phytoestrogen-gene interactions may explain the
conflicting literature on the hormonal effects of phytoestrogens.

PMID: 17507630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 May;16(5):969-78.

Evaluation of genetic variations in the androgen and estrogen metabolic pathways 
as risk factors for sporadic and familial prostate cancer.

Cunningham JM(1), Hebbring SJ, McDonnell SK, Cicek MS, Christensen GB, Wang L,
Jacobsen SJ, Cerhan JR, Blute ML, Schaid DJ, Thibodeau SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Previous studies suggest that enzymes involved in the androgen metabolic pathway 
are susceptibility factors for prostate cancer. Estrogen metabolites functioning 
as genotoxins have also been proposed as risk factors. In this study, we
systematically tested the hypothesis that common genetic variations for those
enzymes involved in the androgen and estrogen metabolic pathways increase risk
for sporadic and familial prostate cancer. From these two pathways, 46
polymorphisms (34 single nucleotide polymorphisms, 10 short tandem repeat
polymorphisms, and 2 null alleles) in 25 genes were tested for possible
associations. Those genes tested included PRL, LHB, CYP11A1, HSD3B1, HSD3B2,
HSD17B2, CYP17, SRD5A2, AKR1C3, UGT2B15, AR, SHBG, and KLK3 from the androgen
pathway and CYP19, HSD17B1, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, COMT, GSTP1, GSTT1, GSTM1,
NQO1, ESR1, and ESR2 from the estrogen pathway. A case-control study design was
used with two sets of cases: familial cases with a strong prostate cancer family 
history (n = 438 from 178 families) and sporadic cases with a negative prostate
cancer family history (n = 499). The controls (n = 493) were derived from a
population-based collection. Our results provide suggestive findings for an
association with either familial or sporadic prostate cancer with polymorphisms
in four genes: AKR1C3, HSD17B1, NQO1, and GSTT1. Additional suggestive findings
for an association with clinical variables (disease stage, grade, and/or node
status) were observed for single nucleotide polymorphisms in eight genes: HSD3B2,
SRD5A2, SHBG, ESR1, CYP1A1, CYP1B1, GSTT1, and NQO1. However, none of the
findings were statistically significant after appropriate corrections for
multiple comparisons. Given that the point estimates for the odds ratio for each 
of these polymorphisms are <2.0, much larger sample sizes will be required for
confirmation.

PMID: 17507624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Clin Chim Acta. 2007 Jul;382(1-2):100-5. Epub 2007 Apr 13.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) PvuII and XbaI gene polymorphisms in ischemic
stroke in a Hungarian population.

Molvarec A(1), Széplaki G, Kovács M, Széplaki Z, Fazakas A, Prohászka Z, Füst G, 
Karádi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kútvölgyi Clinical Center, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary. molvarec@freemail.hu

BACKGROUND: Ischemic stroke is a multifactorial disorder with genetic and
environmental components. The aim of our study was to investigate whether two
polymorphisms of the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene (ESR1 c.454-397T>C and
c.454-351A>G) are associated with ischemic stroke in a Caucasian population from 
Hungary.
METHODS: One hundred and ninety-eight patients with ischemic stroke and 180
control subjects were enrolled in this case-control study. Ischemic stroke
subtypes were categorized according to the Trial of Org 10172 in Acute Stroke
Treatment (TOAST) classification as large-artery atherosclerosis, small-artery
occlusion, cardioembolism or stroke of other determined etiology. The ESR1 PvuII 
and XbaI genotypes were determined using the PCR-RFLP method.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in the genotype, allele and
haplotype frequencies of PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms between the group of
patients with ischemic stroke and the control group. Furthermore, ESR1 PvuII and 
XbaI genotypes, alleles and haplotypes were not associated with any subtype of
ischemic stroke.
CONCLUSIONS: We did not observe an association between ESR1 PvuII and XbaI gene
polymorphisms and ischemic stroke or any subtype of ischemic stroke. However,
further studies are needed to explore the complex interaction between
environmental factors and ESR1 gene polymorphisms in the risk of ischemic stroke,
particularly in ethnically different populations.

PMID: 17493601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Soc Reprod Fertil Suppl. 2007;64:379-96.

Fetal-maternal interactions during the establishment of pregnancy in ruminants.

Spencer TE(1), Johnson GA, Bazer FW, Burghardt RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, Departments of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA. tspencer@tamu.edu

This review integrates established information with new insights into molecular
and physiological mechanisms responsible for events leading to pregnancy
recognition, endometrial receptivity, and implantation with emphasis on sheep.
After formation of the corpus luteum, progesterone acts on the endometrium and
stimulates blastocyst growth and elongation to form a filamentous conceptus
(embryo/fetus and associated extraembryonic membranes). Recurrent early pregnancy
loss in the uterine gland knockout ewe model indicates that endometrial
epithelial secretions are essential for peri-implantation blastocyst survival and
growth. The elongating sheep conceptus secretes interferon tau (IFNT) that acts
on the endometrium to inhibit development of the luteolytic mechanism by
inhibiting transcription of the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene in the
luminal (LE) and superficial ductal glandular (sGE) epithelia, which prevents
estrogen-induction of oxytocin receptors (OXTR) and production of luteolytic
prostaglandin F2-alpha pulses. Progesterone downregulates its receptors (PGR) in 
LE and then GE, correlating with a reduction of anti-adhesive MUC1 (mucin
glycoprotein one) and induction of secreted LGALS15 (galectin 15) and SPP1
(secreted phosphoprotein one), that are proposed to regulate trophectoderm growth
and adhesion. IFNT acts on the LE to induce WNT7A (wingless-type MMTV integration
site family member 7A) and to stimulate LGALS15, CTSL (cathepsin L), and CST3
(cystatin C), which may regulate conceptus development and implantation. During
the peri-implantation period, trophoblast giant binucleate cells (BNC) begin to
differentiate from mononuclear trophectoderm cells, migrate and then fuse with
the uterine LE as well as each other to form multinucleated syncytial plaques.
Trophoblast giant BNC secrete chorionic somatomammotropin (CSH1 or placental
lactogen) that acts on the endometrial glands to stimulate their morphogenesis
and differentiated function. The interactive, coordinated and stage-specific
effects of ovarian and placental hormones regulate endometrial events necessary
for fetal-maternal interactions and successful establishment of pregnancy.

PMID: 17491160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Int J Cancer. 2007 Aug 15;121(4):759-66.

HPV related VIN: highly proliferative and diminished responsiveness to
extracellular signals.

Santegoets LA(1), Seters Mv, Helmerhorst TJ, Heijmans-Antonissen C,
Hanifi-Moghaddam P, Ewing PC, van Ijcken WF, van der Spek PJ, van der Meijden WI,
Blok LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. l.santegoets@erasmusmc.nl

Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN) is a premalignant disorder caused by human
papillomaviruses. Basic knowledge about the molecular pathogenesis of VIN is
sparse. Therefore, we have analyzed the gene expression profile of 9 VIN samples 
in comparison to 10 control samples by using genome wide Affymetrix Human U133A
plus2 GeneChips. Results were validated by quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis
and immunostaining of a few representative genes (TACSTD1, CCNE2, AR and ESR1).
Significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) showed that 1,497 genes were
differentially expressed in VIN compared to controls. By analyzing the biological
processes affected by the observed differences, we found that VIN appears to be a
highly proliferative disease; many cyclins (CCNA, CCNB and CCNE) and almost all
prereplication complex proteins are upregulated. Thereby, VIN does not seem to
depend for its proliferation on paracrine or endocrine signals. Many receptors
(for example ESR1 and AR) and ligands are downregulated. Furthermore, although
VIN is not an invasive disease, the inhibition of expression of a marked number
of cell-cell adhesion molecules seems to indicate development towards invasion.
Upon reviewing apoptosis and angiogenesis, it was observed that these processes
have not become significantly disregulated in VIN.IN CONCLUSION: although VIN is 
still a premalignant disease, it already displays several hallmarks of cancer.

PMID: 17471573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008 Feb;107(3):415-9. Epub 2007 Apr 24.

Estrogen receptor alpha polymorphisms and postmenopausal breast cancer risk.

González-Zuloeta Ladd AM(1), Vásquez AA, Rivadeneira F, Siemes C, Hofman A,
Stricker BH, Pols HA, Uitterlinden AG, van Duijn CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus MC, P.O. Box 2040,
Rotterdam, 3000 CA, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) is a mediator of estrogen response
in the breast. The most studied variants in this gene are the PvuII and XbaI
polymorphisms, which have been associated to lower sensitivity to estrogen. We
evaluated whether these polymorphisms were associated with breast cancer risk by 
means of an association study in a population of Caucasian postmenopausal women
from the Rotterdam study and a meta-analysis of published data.
METHODS: The PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms were genotyped in 3,893 women
participants of the Rotterdam Study. Baseline information was obtained through a 
questionnaire. We conducted logistic regression analyses to assess the risk of
breast cancer by each of the ESR1 genotypes. Meta-analyses of all publications on
these relations were done by retrieving literature from Pubmed and by further
checking the reference lists of the articles obtained.
RESULTS: There were 38 women with previously diagnosed breast cancer. During
follow-up, 152 were additionally diagnosed. The logistic regression analyses
showed no difference in risk for postmenopausal breast cancer in carriers of the 
PvuII or XbaI genotypes neither in overall, incident or prevalent cases. No
further evidence of a role of these variants was found in the meta-analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the ESR1 polymorphisms do not play a role
in breast cancer risk in Caucasian postmenopausal women.

PMCID: PMC2217623
PMID: 17453340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2007 Apr;19(2):165-8.

Estrogen Receptor 1 gene (ESR1) variants in Alzheimer's disease. Results of a
meta-analysis.

Luckhaus C(1), Sand PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: There is some disagreement between clinical and basic
science as to the benefit of estrogen in preventing cognitive decline. For
cardiovascular disease, estrogen effects have been shown to vary with estrogen
receptor (ESR) genotype. The present study was conceived to review evidence of
ESR association with Alzheimer's disease (AD) which could account for the
variability observed in estrogen treatment outcome.
METHODS: A meta-analysis was performed on data from 8288 cases and controls,
controlling for ethnicity (Asian vs European). To explore the specificity of our 
findings further, a second meta-analysis of association studies was then
appended, addressing non-AD forms of dementia or cognitive impairment (total
n=11036).
RESULTS: A significant overall association of AD with two neighboring ESR1
variants located in a transcription-enhancing region (p=0.015) was noted. The
genotypic effect was driven by the minor alleles in Asian populations, and did
not reach significance in European samples (OR=1.1, p>0.267). When the phenotype 
was extended to other forms of dementia or cognitive impairment, the association 
was no longer observed.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 variability was confirmed to modulate susceptibility to AD in
Asian individuals, but not in Europeans. More research is required to address
possible clinical implications, e.g., for hormone replacement therapy in early
stages of AD.

PMID: 17446729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Biol Reprod. 2007 Aug;77(2):320-8. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

Differential modulation of gonadotropin secretion by selective estrogen receptor 
1 and estrogen receptor 2 agonists in ovariectomized ewes.

Arreguin-Arevalo JA(1), Davis TL, Nett TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
Colorado 80523, USA.

The objectives of this study were to determine whether activation of estrogen
receptor 1 (ESR1; also known as ERalpha), or estrogen receptor 2 (ESR2; also
known as ERbeta), or both are required to: 1) acutely inhibit secretion of LH, 2)
induce the preovulatory-like surge of LH, and 3) inhibit secretion of FSH in
ovariectomized (OVX) ewes. OVX ewes (n = 6) were administered intramuscularly 25 
micrograms estradiol (E2), 12 mg propylpyrazoletriol (PPT; a subtype-selective
ESR1 agonist), 21 mg diaprylpropionitrile (DPN; a subtype-selective ESR2
agonist), or PPT + DPN. Like E2, administration of PPT, DPN, or combination of
the two rapidly decreased (P < 0.05) secretion of LH. Each agonist induced a
gradual, prolonged rise in secretion of LH after the initial inhibition, but
neither agonist alone nor the combined agonists was able to induce a "normal"
preovulatory-like surge of LH similar to that induced by E2. Compared with
E2-treated ewes, the beginning of the increase in secretion of LH occurred
earlier (P < 0.01) in DPN-treated ewes, later (P < 0.05) in PPT-treated ewes, and
at a similar interval in ewes receiving the combined agonist treatment. Like E2, 
PPT decreased (P < 0.05) secretion of FSH, but the duration of suppression was
much longer in PPT-treated ewes. DPN did not alter secretion of FSH in this
study. Modulation of the number of GnRH receptors by PPT and DPN was examined in 
primary cultures of ovine pituitary cells. In our hands, both PPT and DPN
increased the number of GnRH receptors, but the dose of DPN required to stimulate
synthesis of GnRH receptors was 10 times higher than that of PPT. We conclude
that in OVX ewes: 1) ESR1 and ESR2 mediate the negative feedback of E2 on
secretion of LH at the level of the pituitary gland, 2) ESR1 and ESR2 do not
synergize or antagonize the effects of each other; however, they do interact to
synchronize the beginning of the stimulatory effect of E2 on secretion of LH, 3) 
ESR1 and ESR2 may mediate at least partially the positive feedback of E2 on LH
secretion by increasing the number of GnRH receptors, and 4) only ESR1 appears to
be involved in the negative feedback of E2 on secretion of FSH.

PMID: 17429013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2007 Aug;15(8):972-8. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

Estrogen receptor alpha genotype is associated with a reduced prevalence of
radiographic hip osteoarthritis in elderly Caucasian women.

Lian K(1), Lui L, Zmuda JM, Nevitt MC, Hochberg MC, Lee JM, Li J, Lane NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

PURPOSE: This study evaluated the association between polymorphisms in the
estrogen receptor (ER) alpha gene (ESR1) and prevalent and incident radiographic 
hip osteoarthritis (RHOA) in a large, well-defined prospective cohort of elderly 
Caucasian women.
METHODS: Prevalent and incident RHOA was evaluated from all available pelvis
X-rays obtained from the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures at baseline and after a 
mean of 8.3 years. Evaluable DNA samples were available from 4746 of these
subjects. RHOA cases were defined by published methods. The ESR1 polymorphisms at
intron I (Pvu II for a T/C substitution and Xba I for an A/G substitution) were
genotyped in the context of a multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
amplification followed by allele-specific single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
detection with immobilized oligonucleotide probes in linear arrays. Multiple
logistic regression was performed to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95%
confidence intervals (95% CI) associated with the T/C and A/G polymorphisms.
RESULTS: RHOA was present in 12.1% of subjects, of whom 325 had joint space
narrowing (JSN) score > or =3 and 130 had an osteophyte score > or =2 and JSN
score > or =2. There was a significant reduction in the odds of prevalent RHOA
for individuals with the C/C compared to T/T genotype at the Pvu II site with an 
OR of 0.71 (95% CI: 0.55-0.92) (P=0.01). Adjustments for age, weight, height, hip
Bone mineral density (BMD) and estrogen use did not alter the relationship
between the C/C genotype and reduced risk of RHOA, with an OR of 0.71 (95% CI:
0.54-0.94) (P=0.01). The risk of incident RHOA was reduced for the Pvu II C/C
compared to the T/T genotype (P=0.11). Also, the reduced risk of incident RHOA in
C/C subjects varied by estrogen use. There was no association between the Xba I
G/G or G/A genotypes and RHOA with OR of 0.82 (95% CI: 0.61-1.10) (P=0.19)
compared to women with A/A genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the C/C genotype of the ER alpha Pvu II
polymorphism was associated with a modestly reduced risk of prevalent and
incident RHOA in elderly Caucasian women. Additional work is required to
understand how the intron I ESR1 polymorphism may alter joint degeneration.

PMCID: PMC2204046
PMID: 17419075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Nat Genet. 2007 May;39(5):655-60. Epub 2007 Apr 8.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene amplification is frequent in breast cancer.

Holst F(1), Stahl PR, Ruiz C, Hellwinkel O, Jehan Z, Wendland M, Lebeau A,
Terracciano L, Al-Kuraya K, Jänicke F, Sauter G, Simon R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, D-20246 
Hamburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):809-10; author reply 810-2.
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):807-8; author reply 810-2.
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):806-7; author reply 810-2.
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):809; author reply 810-2.

Using an Affymetrix 10K SNP array to screen for gene copy number changes in
breast cancer, we detected a single-gene amplification of the ESR1 gene, which
encodes estrogen receptor alpha, at 6q25. A subsequent tissue microarray analysis
of more than 2,000 clinical breast cancer samples showed ESR1 amplification in
20.6% of breast cancers. Ninety-nine percent of tumors with ESR1 amplification
showed estrogen receptor protein overexpression, compared with 66.6% cancers
without ESR1 amplification (P < 0.0001). In 175 women who had received adjuvant
tamoxifen monotherapy, survival was significantly longer for women with cancer
with ESR1 amplification than for women with estrogen receptor-expressing cancers 
without ESR1 amplification (P = 0.023). Notably, we also found ESR1 amplification
in benign and precancerous breast diseases, suggesting that ESR1 amplification
may be a common mechanism in proliferative breast disease and a very early
genetic alteration in a large subset of breast cancers.

PMID: 17417639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jun;92(6):2286-91. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

Effect of an estrogen receptor-alpha intron 4 polymorphism on fat mass in
11-year-old children.

Tobias JH(1), Steer CD, Vilarino-Güell C, Brown MA.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Bristol Royal Infirmary, Bristol, UK.
jon.tobias@bristol.ac.uk

CONTEXT: Polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene encoding estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha may
be associated with fat mass in adults.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of the study was to establish whether ESR1
polymorphisms influence fat mass in childhood.
DESIGN: This was a cross-sectional analysis after genotyping of rs9340799,
rs2234693, and rs7757956 ESR1 polymorphisms.
SETTING: The Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC) was a
population-based prospective study.
PARTICIPANTS: Participants included 3097 11-yr-old children with results for ESR1
genotyping, puberty measures, and dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry results.
OUTCOMES: Relationships between ESR1 polymorphisms and indices of body
composition were measured.
RESULTS: The rs7757956 polymorphism was associated with fat mass (P = 0.002).
Total body fat mass (adjusted for height) was reduced by 6% in children with
TA/AA genotypes, and risk of being overweight (> or =85th centile of fat mass)
was decreased by 20%. This genetic effect appeared to interact with puberty in
girls (P = 0.05 for interaction): in those with the TT genotype, total body fat
mass (adjusted for height) was 18% higher in Tanner stages 3-5 vs. stages 1-2;
the equivalent difference was 7% in those with TA/AA genotypes. Furthermore, the 
risk of being overweight was 36% lower in girls with TA/AA genotypes in Tanner
stages 3-5, but no reduction was seen in those in stages 1-2. Neither rs9340799
nor rs2234693 polymorphisms were associated with body composition measures.
CONCLUSIONS: Fat mass in 11-yr-old children was related to the rs7757956 ESR1
polymorphism. This association was strongest in girls in more advanced puberty,
in whom the risk of being overweight was reduced by 36% in those with the TA/AA
genotype.

PMID: 17405848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Development. 2007 May;134(9):1653-62. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

The AP2 transcription factors DORNROSCHEN and DORNROSCHEN-LIKE redundantly
control Arabidopsis embryo patterning via interaction with PHAVOLUTA.

Chandler JW(1), Cole M, Flier A, Grewe B, Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, University of Cologne, Gyrhofstrasse 17,
Cologne, Germany. john.chandler@uni-koeln.de

DORNROSCHEN (DRN) (also known as ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION1; ESR1) and
DRN-LIKE (DRNL; also known as ESR2) are two linked paralogues encoding AP2
domain-containing proteins. drn mutants show embryo cell patterning defects and, 
similarly to drnl mutants, disrupt cotyledon development at incomplete
penetrance. drn drnl double mutants with weak or strong drnl alleles show more
highly penetrant and extreme phenotypes, including a pin-like embryo without
cotyledons, confirming a high degree of functional redundancy for the two genes
in embryo patterning. Altered expression of PIN1::PIN1-GFP and DR5::GFP in drn
mutant embryos places DRN upstream of auxin transport and response. A yeast
two-hybrid screen with DRN followed by co-immunoprecipitation and bimolecular
fluorescence complementation revealed PHAVOLUTA (PHV) to be a protein interaction
partner in planta. drn phv double mutants show an increased penetrance of embryo 
cell division defects. DRNL can also interact with PHV and both DRN and DRNL can 
heterodimerise with additional members of the class III HD-ZIP family, PHABULOSA,
REVOLUTA, CORONA and ATHB8. Interactions involve the PAS-like C-terminal regions 
of these proteins and the DRN/DRNL AP2 domain.

PMID: 17376809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Hypertension. 2007 May;49(5):1000-6. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Age-related changes in echocardiographic measurements: association with variation
in the estrogen receptor-alpha gene.

Peter I(1), Huggins GS, Shearman AM, Pollak A, Schmid CH, Cupples LA, Demissie S,
Patten RD, Karas RH, Housman DE, Mendelsohn ME, Vasan RS, Benjamin EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Research and Health Policy Studies, Tufts-New England
Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111, USA. ipeter@tufts-nemc.org

Left ventricular (LV) mass and other LV measures have been shown to be heritable.
In this study we hypothesized that functional variation in the gene coding for
estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1), known for mediating the effect of estrogens on
myocardium, is associated with age-related changes in LV structure. Four genetic 
markers (ESR1 TA repeat; rs2077647, or +30T>C; rs2234693, or PvuII; and
rs9340799, or XbaI) were genotyped in 847 unrelated individuals (488 women) from 
the Framingham Offspring Study, who attended 2 examination cycles 16 years apart 
(mean ages at first examination: 43+/-9 years; at follow-up: 59+/-9 years).
ANCOVA was used to assess the association of polymorphisms and their haplotypes
with cross-sectional measurements and longitudinal changes in LV mass, wall
thickness, end-diastolic and end-systolic internal diameter, and fractional
shortening after adjustment for factors known to influence these variables.
Changes over time were detected for all of the LV measurements (P ranging from
<0.0001 to 0.02), except for fractional shortening in men. The SS genotype of the
ESR1 TA repeat polymorphism in the promoter region was associated with
longitudinal changes in LV mass and LV wall thickness (P ranging from 0.0006 to
0.01). Moreover, the TA[S]-+30[T]-PvuII[T]-XbaI[A] haplotype (frequency: 47.5%)
was associated with greater LV changes as compared with the
TA[L]-+30[C]-PvuII[C]-XbaI[G] haplotype (frequency: 31.8%). Our results are
consistent with the hypothesis that common ESR1 polymorphisms are significantly
associated with age-related changes in LV structure. Understanding the mechanisms
predisposing to unfavorable LV remodeling of the heart with advancing age may aid
in the discovery of new therapeutic targets for the prevention of heart failure.

PMID: 17372038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Hum Reprod. 2007 Jun;22(6):1778-88. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Assessment of the proliferative status of epithelial cell types in the
endometrium of young and menopausal transition women.

Niklaus AL(1), Aubuchon M, Zapantis G, Li P, Qian H, Isaac B, Kim MY, Adel G,
Pollard JW, Santoro NF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

BACKGROUND: We determined protein and mRNA expressions of markers of normal human
endometrial proliferation and hypothesized that dysregulation of the endometrial 
response to estradiol (E(2)) and progesterone would be observed in the older
menopausal transition (MT) women compared with mid-reproductive age (MRA)
controls.
METHODS: Endometrial biopsies were prospectively obtained from MRA and MT
non-randomized healthy volunteers during proliferative (+/- exogenous E(2)) and
secretory (MRA only) menstrual cycle phases. mRNA and/or nuclear protein
expressions of proliferative markers (MKI67, PCNA and MCM2), cell-cycle
regulators (cyclins A1, E1 and D1 and cyclin dependent kinase Inhibitor B; CCNA1,
CCNE1, CCND1 and CDKN1B) and sex-steroid receptors [estrogen receptor (ER) and
progesterone receptor (PR)] were assessed in endometrial lumen, gland and stroma.
RESULTS: MRA women had significantly higher proliferative than secretory
expression of MKI67, PCNA, MCM2, CCNA1, CCNE1, ESR1 and PGR in lumen and gland
(minimal stromal changes), whereas CDKN1B protein expression was higher during
the secretory phase. E(2)-treatment of MT women led to relatively less MKI67
glandular protein expression compared with MRA women; no other age-related
differences were observed.
CONCLUSION: Although the MT does not appear to alter the proliferative cell
phenotype of endometrial epithelium and stroma, the data suggest that prior to
the MT, age is associated with a decrease in some proliferative markers and
steroid receptor expression status within different endometrial cell types.

PMID: 17371803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2007 Apr;104(1-2):22-6. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

Exonic, but not intronic polymorphisms of ESR1 gene might influence the
hypolipemic effect of raloxifene.

Zavratnik A(1), Prezelj J, Kocijancic A, Marc J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Teaching Hospital Maribor,
Ljubljanska 5, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia. Andrej.Zavratnik@sb-mb.si

Studies have shown that selective modulator of estrogen receptor raloxifene,
exerts hypolipemic properties at least partially through estrogen receptor alpha 
activation. To test the hypothesis that polymorphisms of estrogen receptor alpha 
are associated with the influence of 6 months raloxifene treatment on serum
lipids, two intronic (PvuII and XbaI), and one exonic polymorphism (P325P) were
analyzed in 49 postmenopausal women, mean age 62.5+/-5.7 years. In all subjects, 
the total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, and triglycerides were
determined before and after 6 months of raloxifene treatment. We were unable to
find any relationship between estrogen receptor alpha genotype and serum lipids
at baseline. At the end of 6 months treatment with raloxifene, the mean decrease 
of total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol, independently of genotypes, was highly 
significant, but no influence on HDL and triglycerides concentrations was found. 
Neither the PvuII nor XbaI ESR1 gene polymorphisms were associated with the
magnitude of lipid changes after 6 months treatment, whereas the subjects with
non-CC genotype of P325P mutation had significantly lower total cholesterol and
LDL cholesterol concentrations, and higher decline of total cholesterol
(p<0.05).CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that exonic, but not intronic polymorphisms
of estrogen receptor alpha gene might intensify the cholesterol lowering effect
of raloxifene.

PMID: 17350824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Clin Chim Acta. 2007 May 1;380(1-2):157-64. Epub 2007 Feb 11.

Lipid, haemostatic and inflammatory variables in relation to the estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1) PvuII and XbaI gene polymorphisms.

Molvarec A(1), Nagy B, Kovács M, Walentin S, Imreh E, Rigó J Jr, Szalay J, Füst
G, Prohászka Z, Karádi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kútvölgyi Clinical Center, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary. molvarec@freemail.hu

BACKGROUND: Estrogen is known to affect lipoprotein metabolism, the haemostatic
system and inflammatory markers. Our aim was to determine whether estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1) PvuII and XbaI gene polymorphisms can influence lipid,
haemostatic and inflammatory variables in healthy Caucasian women and men of
reproductive age.
METHODS: 58 healthy women (aged between 18 and 45 years) and 55 healthy men (aged
between 21 and 45 years) of reproductive age were enrolled in our study. FSH
levels, lipid (total cholesterol, triglyceride, HDL cholesterol, lipoprotein(a), 
apo A-I, apo B), haemostatic (prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin 
time (aPTT), thrombin time, fibrinogen, factor V, VII, VIII, protein C, protein
S, antithrombin III) and inflammatory (CRP) variables were measured on
autoanalyzers using commercially available kits. Serum VLDL and LDL cholesterol
concentrations were calculated with the equation of Friedewald. The ESR1 PvuII
and XbaI genotypes were determined with PCR-RFLP method.
RESULTS: In the total group, the ESR1 XbaI GG genotype carriers had significantly
higher serum lipoprotein(a) concentrations than the AA or AG genotype carriers.
Serum total cholesterol concentrations were significantly higher in healthy women
with the PvuII CC genotype than in those with the TT or TC genotypes, whereas
healthy women with the GG genotype of the ESR1 XbaI polymorphism had
significantly higher serum total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol levels compared 
to those with the AA or AG genotypes. No other effects of the ESR1 PvuII and XbaI
polymorphisms were found on the investigated lipid, haemostatic and inflammatory 
variables either in the total group or in women and men separately.
CONCLUSIONS: The ESR1 PvuII and XbaI gene polymorphisms seem to affect
lipoprotein metabolism in healthy subjects of peak reproductive age. However,
further studies are needed to determine the molecular mechanisms by which the two
polymorphisms could influence serum lipid levels.

PMID: 17349986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Biol Reprod. 2007 Jun;76(6):1062-70. Epub 2007 Feb 28.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor affects mouse ovarian follicle growth via
mechanisms involving estradiol regulation and responsiveness.

Barnett KR(1), Tomic D, Gupta RK, Miller KP, Meachum S, Paulose T, Flaws JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a known transcription factor. Although
studies indicate that Ahr-deficient (AhRKO) mice have defects in female
reproduction, only a few studies have examined the role of AHR in the ovary.
Previous studies have suggested, without directly testing, that AhRKO mice have
slower follicular growth than wild-type (WT) mice. Therefore, the first objective
of the present study was to examine whether AhRKO follicles grow slower than WT
follicles and if so, to determine whether the mechanism by which Ahr affects
follicular growth is through effects on antrum size, granulosa cell
proliferation, and regulators of cell cycle progression. Since estradiol (E(2))
is critical for the normal growth of ovarian follicles, the second objective of
the present study was to determine the role of Ahr in regulating E(2) production 
and responsiveness. The third objective of the present study was to determine
whether E(2) replacement restores follicular growth of AhRKO follicles to WT
levels in vitro. We found that AhRKO follicles grew slower than WT follicles in
vitro. While AhRKO and WT follicles had similar antrum sizes, AhRKO follicles
showed decreased granulosa cell proliferation and reduced mRNA and protein levels
of cell cycle regulators, as compared to WT follicles. Furthermore, the AhRKO
mice had lower serum and follicle-produced E(2) levels and showed decreased Esr1 
and Esr2 mRNA levels compared to WT mice. Finally, E(2) treatment of AhRKO
follicles restored follicular growth to WT levels in vitro. Collectively, these
findings suggest that the AHR affects follicular growth via mechanisms that
involve E(2) regulation and responsiveness.

PMID: 17329597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Lancet Oncol. 2007 Mar;8(3):203-11.

Determination of oestrogen-receptor status and ERBB2 status of breast carcinoma: 
a gene-expression profiling study.

Gong Y(1), Yan K, Lin F, Anderson K, Sotiriou C, Andre F, Holmes FA, Valero V,
Booser D, Pippen JE Jr, Vukelja S, Gomez H, Mejia J, Barajas LJ, Hess KR, Sneige 
N, Hortobagyi GN, Pusztai L, Symmans WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. yungong@mdanderson.org

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2007 Mar;8(3):184-5.

BACKGROUND: Gene expression microarrays are being used to develop new prognostic 
and predictive tests for breast cancer, and might be used at the same time to
confirm oestrogen-receptor status and ERBB2 status. Our goal was to establish a
new method to assign oestrogen receptor and ERBB2-receptor status to breast
carcinoma based on mRNA expression measured using Affymetrix U133A
gene-expression profiling.
METHODS: We used gene expression data of 495 breast cancer samples to assess the 
correlation between oestrogen receptor (ESR1) and ERBB2 mRNA and clinical status 
of these genes (as established by immunohistochemical [IHC] or fluorescence
in-situ hybridisation [FISH], or both). Data from 195 fine-needle aspiration
(FNA) samples were used to define mRNA cutoff values that assign receptor status.
We assessed the accuracy of these cutoffs in two independent datasets: 123 FNA
samples and 177 tissue samples (ie, resected or core-needle biopsied tissues).
Profiling was done at two institutions by use of the same platform (Affymetrix
U133A GeneChip). All data were uniformly normalised with dCHIP software.
FINDINGS: ESR1 and ERBB2 mRNA levels correlated closely with routine measurements
for receptor status in all three datasets. Spearman's correlation coefficients
ranged from 0.62 to 0.77. An ESR1 mRNA cutoff value of 500 identified
oestrogen-receptor-positive status with an overall accuracy of 90% (training
set), 88% (first validation set), and 96% (second validation set). An ERBB2 mRNA 
threshold of 1150 identified ERBB2-positive status with the overall accuracy of
93% (training set), 89% (first validation set), and 90% (second validation set). 
Reproducibility of mRNA measurements in 34 replicate experiments was high
(correlation coefficient 0.975 for ESR1, 0.984 for ERBB2).
INTERPRETATION: Amounts of ESR1 and ERBB2 mRNA as measured by the Affymetrix
GeneChip reliably and reproducibly establish oestrogen-receptor status and ERBB2 
status, respectively.

PMID: 17329190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Diabetes. 2007 Mar;56(3):675-84.

Investigation of the estrogen receptor-alpha gene with type 2 diabetes and/or
nephropathy in African-American and European-American populations.

Gallagher CJ(1), Keene KL, Mychaleckyj JC, Langefeld CD, Hirschhorn JN, Henderson
BE, Gordon CJ, Freedman BI, Rich SS, Bowden DW, Sale MM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Medical 
Center Blvd., Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

The estrogen receptor-alpha gene (ESR1) was selected as a positional candidate
under a type 2 diabetes linkage peak at 6q24-27. A total of 42 ESR1 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in 380 African-American type 2
diabetic case subjects with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and 276
African-American control subjects. A total of 22 ancestry informative markers
were also genotyped, and the program Admixmap was used to adjust allelic and
haplotypic association tests for individual estimates of admixture. The most
significant association with type 2 diabetes-ESRD was with rs1033182 in intron 2 
(P = 0.013, admixture-adjusted P(a) = 0.021). Genotyping 17 SNPs across a region 
of ESR1 intron 1-intron 2 in an expanded population of 851 case and 635 control
subjects supported association with rs1033182 (P = 0.004, P(a) = 0.027) and with 
an independent six-SNP haplotype of high linkage disequilibrium spanning 6.4 kb
(P < 0.0001, P(a) < 0.0001). The same 17 ESR1 SNPs were genotyped in 300
European-American type 2 diabetes-ESRD case subjects and 310 European-American
control subjects. Two intron 2 SNPs, rs2431260 (P = 0.015) and rs1709183 (P =
0.019), and a four-SNP haplotype containing these SNPs (P = 0.033) were
associated with type 2 diabetes and/or ESRD. Results suggest that intron 1 and
intron 2 of the ESR1 gene may contain functionally important regions related to
type 2 diabetes or ESRD risk.

PMID: 17327435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Mar;48(3):1012-7.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms associated with incident aging macula 
disorder.

Boekhoorn SS(1), Vingerling JR, Uitterlinden AG, Van Meurs JB, van Duijn CM, Pols
HA, Hofman A, de Jong PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: It has been suggested that early menopause increases the risk of
aging-macula disorder (AMD), the major cause of incurable blindness with a dry
and wet late subtype, and that exposure to endogenous or postmenopausal exogenous
estrogens reduces this risk. This study was undertaken to investigate whether
genetic variations in the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene are associated with
incident AMD.
METHODS: In the Rotterdam Study, a prospective population-based cohort study of
participants aged 55 years and older, associations between ESR1 PvuII-XbaI
haplotypes and incident early or late AMD were studied in 4571 participants after
a mean follow-up time of 7.7 years. Cox proportional hazards regression was used 
to estimate hazard ratios (HRs) and corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs),
with adjustment for the most common confounders.
RESULTS: ESR1 PvuII-XbaI haplotype 1 was a risk factor for late AMD. Persons with
two copies of haplotype 1 were at 3.20 (95% CI, 1.47-6.99) times higher risk for 
late AMD than noncarriers of haplotype 1, after adjustment for age and sex. This 
increase was more pronounced for wet AMD (hazard ratio [HR] 4.29; 95% CI,
1.47-12.49) after adjustment for age, sex, smoking, and complement factor H
genotype. Correction for additional confounders, including age at menopause, use 
of hormone replacement therapy, blood pressure, and body mass index did not
essentially alter the findings.
CONCLUSIONS: Persons with one or two copies of ESR1 PvuII-XbaI haplotype 1 have
an increased risk of late AMD, especially of the wet form.

PMID: 17325140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 9;26(36):5204-13. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Fog2 excision in mice leads to premature mammary gland involution and reduced
Esr1 gene expression.

Manuylov NL(1), Smagulova FO, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

The critical role for GATA family proteins in maintaining the normal
(non-transformed) cell state is corroborated by the recent findings of mutations 
or methylation in GATA genes both in primary cancers and tumor lines including
breast. Previously, microarray profiling studies determined that the highest
expression of both GATA3 and ESR1 (estrogen receptor alpha) is seen in tumors
associated with the most favorable survival outcomes, whereas the lowest
expression of GATA3 is detected in tumor subtypes showing the worst outcomes. At 
this time, genes and pathways that are regulated by GATA3 in the mammary gland
are not well defined. We have previously established a requirement for FOG
(Friend Of GATA) cofactors during mouse development. Here we report that in the
murine mammary gland Fog2 gene expression is upregulated upon pregnancy and
lactation with prominent expression in the epithelial cells of the gland during
post-lactational regression. Mammary-specific deletion of Fog2 identified a role 
for this gene during gland involution; excision of the Fog2 gene leads to the
accelerated involution of the gland despite diminished levels of the remodeling
enzymes. Importantly, the levels of several genes linked to the control of
cancerous transformation in the breast (Esr1, Prg and Foxa1) are significantly
reduced upon Fog2 excision. This implicates FOG2 in the maintenance of epithelial
cell differentiation in the mammary gland and in performing a protective role in 
breast cancer.

PMID: 17310981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Circulation. 2007 Feb 20;115(7):861-71.

Estrogen receptor alpha polymorphism and risk of cardiovascular disease, cancer, 
and hip fracture: cross-sectional, cohort, and case-control studies and a
meta-analysis.

Kjaergaard AD(1), Ellervik C, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Axelsson CK, Grønholdt ML,
Grande P, Jensen GB, Nordestgaard BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Herlev University Hospital, Herlev
Ringvej 75, DK-2730 Herlev, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: We hypothesized that the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) IVS1-397T/C
polymorphism affects high-density lipoprotein cholesterol response to hormone
replacement therapy and risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD), cancer of
reproductive organs, and hip fracture.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied cross-sectionally 9244 individuals from the
Danish general population and followed them up for 23 to 25 years. End points
were CVD (ischemic heart disease, myocardial infarction, angina pectoris,
ischemic cerebrovascular disease, ischemic stroke, other ischemic cerebrovascular
disease, venous thromboembolism, deep vein thrombosis, and pulmonary embolism),
cancer of reproductive organs (breasts, ovaries, uterus, and prostate), and hip
fracture. We also studied patients with ischemic heart disease (n=2495), ischemic
cerebrovascular disease (n=856), and breast cancer (n=1256) versus general
population controls. The CC, CT, and TT genotypes had general population
frequencies of 21%, 50%, and 29%, respectively. Cross-sectionally, genotype did
not influence high-density lipoprotein cholesterol response to hormone
replacement therapy. In the cohort study, there were no differences in risks of
CVD, cancer of reproductive organs, or hip fracture between genotypes. In
case-control studies, risk of CVD did not differ between genotypes; however, the 
odds ratio for breast cancer in women with TT versus CC genotypes was 1.4 (95%
CI, 1.1 to 1.7). Meta-analysis in men of 6 previous and the present 2 studies,
including 4799 cases and 12,190 controls, showed odds ratios in CC versus CT and 
TT genotypes for fatal and nonfatal myocardial infarction of 0.81 (95% CI, 0.59
to 1.12) and 1.08 (95% CI, 0.97 to 1.21).
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 IVS1-397T/C polymorphism does not influence high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol response to hormone replacement therapy or risk of CVD,
most cancers of reproductive organs, or hip fracture.

PMID: 17309937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Genet Sel Evol. 2007 Mar-Apr;39(2):195-206. Epub 2007 Feb 17.

Association with litter size of new polymorphisms on ESR1 and ESR2 genes in a
Chinese-European pig line.

Muñoz G(1), Ovilo C, Estellé J, Silió L, Fernández A, Rodriguez C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Mejora Genética Animal, SGIT-INIA, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

The objective of this study was to search for polymorphisms in the coding region 
of the estrogen receptors 1 and 2 (ESR1 and ESR2) and to analyze the effects of
these variants and the well known intronic ESR1 PvuII polymorphism on litter size
in a Chinese-European pig line. We identified five silent single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) in the ESR1 cDNA: c.669T > C (exon 3), c.1227C > T (exon 5), 
c.1452C > T (exon 7), c.1665T > C and c.1755A > G (exon 8). One pair of these SNP
(c.1665T > C and c.1755A > G) co-segregated in the analyzed line, and the SNP
c.669T > C showed the same segregation pattern as the PvuII polymorphism. These
polymorphisms were tested in this study, although the c.1452C > T SNP within exon
7 was not analyzed due to its low informativeness. In the ESR2 cDNA, one missense
SNP was found within exon 5, which caused an amino acid substitution in the coded
protein: "c.949G > A (p.Val317Met)" and was tested on sow litter size.
Information on 1622 litter records from 408 genotyped sows was analyzed to
determine whether these SNP influenced the total number of piglets born (TNB) or 
the number of born alive (NBA). The polymorphisms ESR1: [ PvuII; c.669T > C] ,
ESR1: [ c.1665T > C; c.1755A > G] and ESR2: c.949G > A showed no statistically
significant association with litter size. However, the ESR1: c.1227T allele was
significantly associated with TNB. The additive substitution effect was estimated
to be 0.40 piglets born per litter (P < 0.03), and no dominance effects were
observed. This SNP could be useful in assisted selection for litter size in some 
pig lines, as a new genetic marker in linkage disequilibrium with the causative
mutation.

PMCID: PMC2682837
PMID: 17306201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Hum Reprod. 2007 May;22(5):1279-84. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

Haplotype analysis of the estrogen receptor 1 gene in male genital and
reproductive abnormalities.

Watanabe M(1), Yoshida R, Ueoka K, Aoki K, Sasagawa I, Hasegawa T, Sueoka K,
Kamatani N, Yoshimura Y, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: We have recently suggested that homozygosity for a specific 'AGATA'
haplotype within a approximately 50 kb linkage disequilibrium (LD) block of the
gene for estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) may raise the susceptibility to
cryptorchidism by enhancing estrogenic effects of environmental endocrine
disruptors (EEDs).
METHODS: Haplotype analysis of ESR1 was performed in 328 Japanese subjects, i.e. 
70 patients with micropenis (MP), 43 patients with hypospadias (HS), 80 patients 
with spermatogenic failure (SF) and 135 control males. Genotyping was performed
by the 5' nuclease assay.
RESULTS: The LD block was identified in each of the patient groups and in the
control males. The frequency of homozygotes for the specific 'AGATA' haplotype
was markedly higher in the HS patients [P = 0.0000033, odds ratio [OR] = 11.26]
and slightly higher in the MP patients (P = 0.034, OR = 3.64) than in the control
males, and the 'AGATA' haplotype was strongly associated with HS (P = 0.0000022, 
OR = 11.26) and weakly associated with MP (P = 0.040, OR = 3.64) in a recessive
mode. There was no significant difference between the SF patients and the control
males.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the hypothesis that homozygosity for the
specific ESR1 'AGATA' haplotype may increase the susceptibility to the
development of male genital abnormalities in response to estrogenic EEDs.

PMID: 17283037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2007 Dec;106(2):273-80. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Estrogen receptor alpha haplotypes and breast cancer risk in older Caucasian
women.

Wang J(1), Higuchi R, Modugno F, Li J, Umblas N, Lee J, Lui LY, Ziv E, Tice JA,
Cummings SR, Rhees B.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Department, Roche Molecular Systems, Inc., 1145 Atlantic Ave,
Alameda, CA 94555, USA. jun.wang@roche.com

Life-long exposure to estrogen is an established risk factor for breast cancer
development. The underlying mechanism has been suggested to be the binding of
estrogen-to-estrogen receptors in mammary tissue, which in turn promotes the
proliferation and differentiation of breast tissue. Polymorphisms and haplotypes 
in estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) have been reportedly associated with breast
cancer risk; however, the results are not fully consistent. In this study, we
investigated breast cancer risk associated with genotypes and haplotypes
resulting from four ESR1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs746432,
rs2234693, rs9340799, and rs1801132. Genotyping has been performed on 393 breast 
cancer cases and 790 randomly selected controls in 1,183 Caucasian women over age
65 from the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures (SOF). We observed an allelic
protective effect for SNP rs9340799 with an estimated odds ratio (OR) of 0.82
(95% CI = 0.68-1.00; P = 0.04) after adjustment for age, BMI and hip BMD. A
protective effect of this SNP has been reported before in several different
studies. We did not replicate the previously reported C-C-A-G haplotype
association to breast cancer-the C-C-A-G haplotype from these SNPs was rare in
this study (estimated frequency below 0.001% in cases and controls). No other
statistically significant associations were observed between ESR1 haplotypes from
the same four SNPs and the risk of breast cancer in older Caucasian women.

PMID: 17268813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Biol Pharm Bull. 2007 Feb;30(2):371-4.

Bisphenol A causes malformation of the head region in embryos of Xenopus laevis
and decreases the expression of the ESR-1 gene mediated by Notch signaling.

Imaoka S(1), Mori T, Kinoshita T.

Author information: 
(1)Nanobiotechnology Research Center and Department of Bioscience, School of
Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin University, Sanda, Japan.
imaoka@ksc.kwansei.ac.jp

Bisphenol A (BpA) is widely used in industry and dentistry. Its effects on the
embryonic development of Xenopus laevis were investigated. Xenopus embryos at
stage 10.5 were treated with BpA. Developmental abnormalities were observed at
stage 35; malformation of the head region including eyes and scoliosis. The
expression of several markers of embryonic development was investigated by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The pan-neural marker
SOX-2, the neural stem cell marker nrp-1, the mesodermal marker MyoD, and the
endodermal marker sox17alpha, were used. Although the expression of marker genes 
was not changed by treatment with BpA, that of Pax-6, a key regulator of the
morphogenesis of the eyes, was decreased by BpA. Pax-6 is a downstream factor of 
Notch signaling. So, the expression of a typical Notch-dependent factor, ESR-1,
was investigated in the presence of BpA. The expression of ESR-1 was efficiently 
suppressed by BpA. In whole mount in situ hybridization (WISH), Pax-6 was
expressed in the central nervous system and eyes. The expression was lost
completely on treatment with BpA. The expression of ESR-1 in the central nervous 
system and eyes also disappeared with BpA treatment. Injection of the
intracellular domain of Notch efficiently recovered ESR-1 expression in the
presence of BpA although injection of a ligand for notch, Delta, did not. These
results suggest that BpA decreased the expression of ESR-1 by disrupting the
Notch signal.

PMID: 17268083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Thromb Haemost. 2007 Feb;97(2):234-9.

Genetic variation in estrogen receptor, C-reactive protein and fibrinogen does
not predict the plasma levels of inflammation markers after longterm hormone
replacement therapy.

de Maat MP(1), Madsen JS, Langdahl B, Bladbjerg EM, Tofteng CL, Abrahamsen B,
Rejnmark L, Brixen K, Christensen K, Jespersen J, Kristensen SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Thrombosis research, Institute of Public Health, University of 
Southern Denmark, Denmark. m.demaat@erasmusmc.nl

Markers of inflammation, such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and fibrinogen, are
associated with the risk of atherothrombosis. Plasma levels of these markers of
inflammation are affected by hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and modulated by
smoking. We studied whether genetic variation in the estrogen receptor- 1 (ESR1),
CRP and fibrinogen-beta genes influences the plasma levels of inflammation
markers after HRT. Plasma CRP and fibrinogen were measured after five years
follow-up in healthy postmenopausal women (per-protocol group) who were
randomised to hormone therapy (n=187) or no treatment (n=249). The effect of HRT,
smoking and genetic variations in ESR1 (PvuII and XbaI), CRP (1444C/T) and
fibrinogen-beta (FGB, -455G/A) were determined. The plasma concentration of CRP
was higher in the HRT group than in the control group (2.03 mg/l and 1.41 mg/l,
respectively; p < 0.001), while the concentration of fibrinogen was lower in the 
HRT group than in the control group (3.02 g/l and 3.20 g/l, respectively; p <
0.001), indicating that it is unlikely that inflammation is the common underlying
pathway. There was a significant interaction between smoking and HRT on the
fibrinogen (p=0.02), but not on the CRP concentration (n.s.). Genetic
polymorphisms in ESR1, CRP and fibrinogen were not associated with an effect of
HRT on the CRP and fibrinogen plasma levels, and no significant interaction with 
smoking was observed. In conclusion, higher plasma levels of CRP and lower plasma
levels of fibrinogen were observed in women using HRT; however, genetic
polymorphisms in ESR1, CRP and FGB were not associated with these effects of HRT.

PMID: 17264952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 Jan;16(1):165-8.

Variant in sex hormone-binding globulin gene and the risk of prostate cancer.

Berndt SI(1), Chatterjee N, Huang WY, Chanock SJ, Welch R, Crawford ED, Hayes RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD 20892-7240, USA. berndts@mail.nih.gov

Sex hormones have been implicated in prostate carcinogenesis and are thought to
modulate cell proliferation and growth. To investigate the association between
polymorphisms in hormone-related genes and prostate cancer risk, we conducted a
two-stage, case-control study within the screening arm of the Prostate, Lung,
Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial. Using DNA extracted from blood
specimens, we initially genotyped 14 single nucleotide polymorphisms in genes
involved in hormone regulation or metabolism (AKR1C3, CYP1A1, CYP1B1, CYP3A4,
ESR1, GNRH1, HSD173B, HSD3B2, SHBG, and SRD5A2) in 488 prostate cancer cases and 
617 matched controls. Heterozygotes at SHBG D356N were found to be associated
with an increased risk of prostate cancer compared with the homozygous wild type,
particularly among non-Hispanic whites (odds ratio, 1.54; 95% confidence
interval, 1.13-2.09; P = 0.006). No significant associations were observed with
the other polymorphisms. The SHBG D356N polymorphism, which has potential
functional significance, was subsequently genotyped in additional 769 cases and
1,168 controls. Overall, SHBG D356N heterozygotes were found to have an increased
risk of prostate cancer among whites (odds ratio, 1.34; 95% confidence interval, 
1.10-1.63; P = 0.0007). This study suggests that genetic variation in SHBG may
influence prostate cancer susceptibility.

PMID: 17220347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007 Jan;16(1):50-6.

Hypermethylation of the breast cancer-associated gene 1 promoter does not predict
cytologic atypia or correlate with surrogate end points of breast cancer risk.

Bean GR(1), Ibarra Drendall C, Goldenberg VK, Baker JC Jr, Troch MM, Paisie C,
Wilke LG, Yee L, Marcom PK, Kimler BF, Fabian CJ, Zalles CM, Broadwater G, Scott 
V, Seewaldt VL.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Box 2628, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Mutation of the breast cancer-associated gene 1 (BRCA1) plays an important role
in familial breast cancer. Although hypermethylation of the BRCA1 promoter has
been observed in sporadic breast cancer, its exact role in breast cancer
initiation and association with breast cancer risk is unknown. The frequency of
BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation was tested in (a) 14 primary breast cancer
biopsies and (b) the initial random periareolar fine-needle aspiration (RPFNA)
cytologic samples obtained from 61 asymptomatic women who were at increased risk 
for breast cancer. BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation was assessed from nucleotide
-150 to nucleotide +32 relative to the transcription start site. RPFNA specimens 
were stratified for cytologic atypia using the Masood cytology index. BRCA1
promoter hypermethylation was observed at similar frequency in nonproliferative
(normal; Masood <or=10: 18%, 2 of 11), hyperplastic (Masood 11-13: 15%, 6 of 41),
and atypical cytology (Masood 14-17: 22%, 4 of 18; P = 0.79). BRCA1 promoter
hypermethylation was not associated with (a) family history of breast or ovarian 
cancer or (b) calculated Gail or BRCAPRO risk score. BRCA1 promoter
hypermethylation was associated with (a) age (P = 0.028) and (b) the combined
frequency of promoter hypermethylation of the retinoic acid receptor-beta2 (RARB)
gene, estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) gene, and p16 (INK4A) gene (P = 0.003).
These observations show that BRCA1 promoter hypermethylation (a) is not
associated with breast cancer risk as measured by mathematical risk models and
(b) does not predict mammary atypia in RPFNA cytologic samples obtained from
high-risk women.

PMID: 17220331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Cancer Inform. 2007 Feb 19;2:243-74.

Data perturbation independent diagnosis and validation of breast cancer subtypes 
using clustering and patterns.

Alexe G(1), Dalgin GS, Ramaswamy R, Delisi C, Bhanot G.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Center, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown
Heights, NY 10598, USA.

Molecular stratification of disease based on expression levels of sets of genes
can help guide therapeutic decisions if such classifications can be shown to be
stable against variations in sample source and data perturbation. Classifications
inferred from one set of samples in one lab should be able to consistently
stratify a different set of samples in another lab. We present a method for
assessing such stability and apply it to the breast cancer (BCA) datasets of
Sorlie et al. 2003 and Ma et al. 2003. We find that within the now commonly
accepted BCA categories identified by Sorlie et al. Luminal A and Basal are
robust, but Luminal B and ERBB2+ are not. In particular, 36% of the samples
identified as Luminal B and 55% identified as ERBB2+ cannot be assigned an
accurate category because the classification is sensitive to data perturbation.
We identify a "core cluster" of samples for each category, and from these we
determine "patterns" of gene expression that distinguish the core clusters from
each other. We find that the best markers for Luminal A and Basal are (ESR1,
LIV1, GATA-3) and (CCNE1, LAD1, KRT5), respectively. Pathways enriched in the
patterns regulate apoptosis, tissue remodeling and the immune response. We use a 
different dataset (Ma et al. 2003) to test the accuracy with which samples can be
allocated to the four disease subtypes. We find, as expected, that the
classification of samples identified as Luminal A and Basal is robust but
classification into the other two subtypes is not.

PMCID: PMC2675483
PMID: 19458770  [PubMed]


450. Nat Genet. 2007 Jan;39(1):17-23.

Systematic meta-analyses of Alzheimer disease genetic association studies: the
AlzGene database.

Bertram L(1), McQueen MB, Mullin K, Blacker D, Tanzi RE.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Aging Research Unit, MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative 
Disease (MIND), Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA. bertram@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

The past decade has witnessed hundreds of reports declaring or refuting genetic
association with putative Alzheimer disease susceptibility genes. This wealth of 
information has become increasingly difficult to follow, much less interpret. We 
have created a publicly available, continuously updated database that
comprehensively catalogs all genetic association studies in the field of
Alzheimer disease (http://www.alzgene.org). We performed systematic meta-analyses
for each polymorphism with available genotype data in at least three case-control
samples. In addition to identifying the epsilon4 allele of APOE and related
effects, we pinpointed over a dozen potential Alzheimer disease susceptibility
genes (ACE, CHRNB2, CST3, ESR1, GAPDHS, IDE, MTHFR, NCSTN, PRNP, PSEN1, TF, TFAM 
and TNF) with statistically significant allelic summary odds ratios (ranging from
1.11-1.38 for risk alleles and 0.92-0.67 for protective alleles). Our database
provides a powerful tool for deciphering the genetics of Alzheimer disease, and
it serves as a potential model for tracking the most viable gene candidates in
other genetically complex diseases.

PMID: 17192785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2007 Nov;105(3):327-35. Epub 2006 Dec 23.

ESR1, AR, body size, and breast cancer risk in Hispanic and non-Hispanic white
women living in the Southwestern United States.

Slattery ML(1), Sweeney C, Herrick J, Wolff R, Baumgartner K, Giuliano A, Byers
T.

Author information: 
(1)Health Research Center, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84117, USA.
mslatter@hrc.utah.edu

Estrogen and androgen are thought to influence breast cancer risk. The actions of
estrogens and androgens are mediated through the respective receptors. In this
study we examine the association of the Xb1 polymorphism of estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) and the CAG repeat of the androgen receptor (AR) gene with risk of
breast cancer in women living in the Southwestern United States. Cases (N = 1169 
non-Hispanic white (NHW) and 576 Hispanic) with first primary breast cancer were 
matched to controls (N = 1330 NHW and 725 Hispanic) by location (Arizona,
Colorado, New Mexico, or Utah) and 5-year age group. Detailed weight history was 
obtained along with other diet and lifestyle information. Neither the ESR1 nor
the AR polymorphisms evaluated were associated independently with breast cancer
risk in either Hispanic or NHW women. However, among Hispanic women taking
hormone replacement therapy (HRT), there was a 40% reduced risk of breast cancer 
among women with an X allele (95% CI 0.39, 0.94). Also Hispanic women with the xx
genotype had a significant reduced risk of breast cancer in the presence of
weight gain prior to age 50 if post-menopausal or prior to diagnosis if
pre-menopausal (P interaction 0.02 and <0.01 respectively). These results suggest
differences in risk factors for NHW and Hispanic women. However, they provide
only minor support for the role of the AR and ESR1 gene in the etiology of breast
cancer.

PMID: 17187234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Thromb Res. 2007;120(5):639-45. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

Association between estrogen receptor alpha and beta gene polymorphisms and deep 
vein thrombosis.

Aléssio AM(1), Höehr NF, Siqueira LH, Ozelo MC, de Pádua Mansur A,
Annichino-Bizzacchi JM.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology-Hemotherapy Center, State University of Campinas (UNICAMP),
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. joyce@unicamp.br

BACKGROUND: Estrogen and the estrogen receptors alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2) play
a role in regulating genes, including coagulation and fibrinolysis genes.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the association between ESR1 c.454-397T>C and
c.454-351A>G and ESR2 1082A>G and 1730A>G polymorphisms and the risk of deep vein
thrombosis (DVT), in 134 patients and 134 controls with acquired risk factors for
thrombosis associated with estrogen alterations, such as pregnancy, puerperium,
oral contraceptives (OC), and hormone replacement therapy (HRT). We also analysed
134 men with DVT. We investigated the relationship of these polymorphisms and the
levels of fibrinogen, protein C (PC), protein S (PS), and antithrombin (AT)
activity.
METHODS: Gene polymorphisms were identified by using PCR and RFLP. Coagulation
methods were used to measure PC, PS, and fibrinogen. Chromogenic methods were
used to quantify AT.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The presence of the AA genotype of the 1730G>A
polymorphism (OR=0.18; 95%CI=0.05-0.62) suggests a protective effect for DVT in
women using OC. As the GG genotype of the 1730G>A polymorphism is associated with
increased PS activity in all control women and women using OC, this suggested
that a protective effect must occur by another pathway not related to PS. The AA 
and AG genotypes of the c.454-351A>G and GG genotype of the 1082G>A polymorphisms
are associated with increased fibrinogen concentration in pregnant women. The GG 
haplotype in the ESR2 gene (P<0.001) was related to factor V Leiden or G20210A
mutation in the prothrombin gene, or both, as predictive factors of DVT.

PMID: 17184825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Int J Dev Biol. 2007;51(1):27-36.

XSu(H)2 is an essential factor for gene expression and morphogenesis of the
Xenopus gastrula embryo.

Ito M(1), Katada T, Miyatani S, Kinoshita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin
University, Hyogo, Japan.

The CSL (CBF-1, Suppressor of Hairless, Lag-1) transcriptional factor is an
important mediator of Notch signal transduction. It plays a key role in cell fate
determination by cell-cell interaction. CSL functions as a transcriptional
repressor before the activation of Notch signaling. However, once Notch signaling
is activated, CSL is converted into a transcriptional activator. It remains
unclear if CSL has any function during early development before neurogenesis,
while transcriptional products exist from the maternal stage. Here, we analyzed
the function of Xenopus Suppressor of Hairless (XSu(H)) using morpholino
antisense oligonucleotides (MO), which interfere with the translation of
transcripts. In Xenopus embryos, maternal transcripts of both XSu(H)1 and XSu(H)2
were ubiquitously observed until the blastula stage and thereafter only XSu(H)1
was zygotically transcribed. Knockdown experiments with MO demonstrated that
XSu(H)2 depletion caused a decrease in the expression of the Xbrachyury, MyoD and
JNK1 genes. Morphological and histological examinations indicated that XSu(H)2
depletion caused abnormal gastrulation, which resulted in severe defects of the
notochord and somitic mesoderm. The effect of XSu(H)2-MO was completely rescued
by co-injection of XSu(H)2 mRNAs, but not by XSu(H)1 mRNAs. XESR-1, a Notch
signaling target gene, inhibited Xbrachyury expression. However, expression of
the XESR-1 gene was not induced by depletion of XSu(H)2. Co-injection of the
dominant-negative form of XESR-1 could not rescue the suppression of Xbrachyury
expression in the XSu(H)2-depleted embryo. These results suggest that XSu(H)2 is 
involved in mesoderm formation and the cell movement of gastrula embryos in a
different manner from the XESR-1-mediated Notch signaling pathway.

PMID: 17183462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Nutr Cancer. 2006;56(1):31-9.

Phytoestrogen exposure, polymorphisms in COMT, CYP19, ESR1, and SHBG genes, and
their associations with prostate cancer risk.

Low YL(1), Taylor JI, Grace PB, Mulligan AA, Welch AA, Scollen S, Dunning AM,
Luben RN, Khaw KT, Day NE, Wareham NJ, Bingham SA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Dunn Human Nutrition Unit, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.

Prospective phytoestrogen exposure was assessed using both biomarkers and
estimates of intake in 89 British men recruited into the Norfolk arm of the
European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition study, men who
subsequently developed prostate cancer. Results were compared with those from 178
healthy men matched by age and date of recruitment. Levels of seven
phytoestrogens (daidzein, genistein, glycitein, O-desmethylangolensin, equol,
enterodiol, and enterolactone) were measured in spot urine and serum samples.
Five single-nucleotide polymorphisms in COMT, CYP19, ESR1, and SHBG genes were
genotyped. Urinary levels of all phytoestrogens correlated strongly with serum
levels. Correlation coefficients ranged from 0.63 (glycitein) to 0.88 (daidzein) 
(P < 0.001). Urinary and serum levels correlated significantly with isoflavone
intake assessed from food diaries (R = 0.15-0.20; P < 0.05) but not with that
from a food-frequency questionnaire. Odds ratios for phytoestrogen exposure, as
assessed using the four methods, were not significantly associated with prostate 
cancer risk (P = 0.15-0.94). Men with the CC genotype for the ESRI PvuII
polymorphism had significantly higher risk for prostate cancer compared with men 
with the TT genotype [adjusted odds ratio = 4.65 (1.60-13.49); P = 0.005]. Our
results utilizing a combined prospective exposure provide no evidence that
phytoestrogens alter prostate cancer risk in British men, whereas the C allele
for the PvuII polymorphism may be associated with increased risk.

PMID: 17176215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2006 Dec;13(4):1033-67.

Significance, detection and markers of disseminated breast cancer cells.

Lacroix M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Jean-Claude Heuson de Cancérologie Mammaire, Institut Jules
Bordet, Bruxelles, Belgium. itr@iname.com

The development of distant metastases is the major cause of death from breast
cancer. In order to predict and prevent tumour spreading, many attempts are being
made to detect small numbers of tumour cells that have shed from the primary
lesions and have moved to lymph nodes, blood or bone marrow. This article
presents the advantages and the limitations of techniques used for disseminated
tumour cells (DTC) detection. DTC markers are listed and the most currently used 
of them (KRT19, CEACAM5, TACSTD1, MUC1, EGFR, ERBB2, SCGB2A2, SCGB2A1, SCGB1D2,
PIP, SBEM, TFF1, TFF3, ANKRD30A, SPDEF, ESR1, SERPINB5 and GABRP) are discussed, 
notably on the basis of recent data on breast tumour portraits (luminal
epithelial-like, basal/myoepithelial-like and ERBB2). The significance of DTC for
the prognosis and prediction of response to therapy is examined. DTC viability,
the notion of cell dormancy and the concept of breast cancer stem cells are also 
discussed.

PMID: 17158753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Anim Reprod Sci. 2007 Dec;102(3-4):286-99. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Ontogeny of androgen and estrogen receptor expression in porcine testis: effect
of reducing testicular estrogen synthesis.

Ramesh R(1), Pearl CA, At-Taras E, Roser JF, Berger T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616,
USA.

Reducing endogenous estrogen leads to increased proliferation of porcine Sertoli 
cells during the first 2 months of life. The resulting increase in porcine
Sertoli cell numbers is maintained through puberty. The reduced estrogen appears 
to be the direct hormonal mediator because essentially no changes are observed in
other hormones. However, the mechanism for this effect on Sertoli cell
proliferation is unknown. The objective of these studies was to evaluate estrogen
receptors alpha and beta (ESR1 and ESR2) in conjunction with androgen receptor
(AR) on Sertoli cells and other testicular cell types, as an initial step toward 
understanding how reduced estrogen leads to increased Sertoli cell numbers.
Testis sections from treated animals (aromatase inhibition to decrease endogenous
estrogen beginning at 1 week of age) and from littermate controls treated with
vehicle were subjected to immunocytochemical labeling for ESR1, ESR2, and AR.
Three observers scored Sertoli cells, interstitial cells, peritubular myoid
cells, and germ cells for intensity of labeling (0: absent; 1+: weak; 2+:
moderate; or 3+: strong labeling). AR in Sertoli cells was readily detected at 1 
week of age, was very faint in 2-month vehicle controls, and labeling appeared to
increase in 3-month vehicle controls. AR in Sertoli cells, interstitial cells,
and apparently germ cells was increased in treated animals at 2 months of age
compared with the vehicle controls. This increase was confirmed in western blots.
ESR1 and ESR 2 were clearly present in Sertoli cells from 1-week-old animals; ESR
in Sertoli cells generally decreased with age with the decrease more apparent for
ESR2. ESR1 in Sertoli cells and peritubular myoid cells exhibited some
treatment-related effects but reduction of endogenous estrogen did not appear to 
affect ESR2 in the boar testis. The observed alterations in AR and ESR1 may
mediate the increases in Sertoli cell proliferation following inhibition of
endogenous estrogen production or may reflect the altered function of the Sertoli
cells and peritubular myoid cells.

PMID: 17157457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Exp Bot. 2006;57(15):4155-69. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

Cloning and characterization of Arabidopsis and Brassica juncea flavin-containing
amine oxidases.

Lim TS(1), Chitra TR, Han P, Pua EC, Yu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Temasek Life Sciences Laboratory,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117543.

Polyamines (PAs) are low molecular weight metabolites involved in various
physiological and developmental processes in eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells.
The cellular PA level is regulated in part by the action of amine oxidases (AOs) 
including copper diamine oxidases (DAOs) and flavoprotein polyamine oxidases
(PAOs). In this study, the isolation and characterization of flavin amine
oxidases (FAOs) from Brassica juncea (BJFAO) and Arabidopsis (ATFAO1) are
reported that were clustered in the same group as polyamine oxidases from maize
(MPAO) and barley (BPAO1) and monoamine oxidases from mammalian species. ATFAO1
was temporally and spatially regulated in Arabidopsis and showed distinct
expression patterns in response to different stress treatments. To investigate
the in vivo function of FAO, transgenic Arabidopsis plants expressing sense,
antisense, and double-stranded BJFAO RNAs were generated and those with altered
activity of FAOs were selected for further characterization. It was found that
the shoot regeneration response in transgenic plants was significantly affected
by the modulated PA levels corresponding to FAO activities. Tissues that
originated from transgenic plants with down-regulated FAO activity were highly
regenerative, while those from transgenic plants with upregulated FAO activity
were poorly regenerative. The shoot regeneration capacity in these transgenic
plants was related to the levels of individual PAs, suggesting that FAO affects
shoot regeneration by regulating cellular PAs. Furthermore, it was found that the
effect of FAO activity on shoot regeneration was exerted downstream of the
Enhancer of Shoot Regeneration (ESR1) gene, which may function in a branch of the
cytokinin signalling pathway.

PMID: 17122409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cephalalgia. 2006 Dec;26(12):1462-72.

Testing of variants of the MTHFR and ESR1 genes in 1798 Finnish individuals fails
to confirm the association with migraine with aura.

Kaunisto MA(1), Kallela M, Hämäläinen E, Kilpikari R, Havanka H, Harno H, Nissilä
M, Säkö E, Ilmavirta M, Liukkonen J, Teirmaa H, Törnwall O, Jussila M,
Terwilliger J, Färkkilä M, Kaprio J, Palotie A, Wessman M.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedicum Helsinki, Research Program in Molecular Medicine and Department of 
Clinical Chemistry, University of Helsinki, 00029 HUS, Helsinki, Finland.

Among the few independently replicated genetic associations in migraine are
polymorphisms in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) and oestrogen
receptor (ESR1) genes. We studied the contribution of these genes to migraine
susceptibility by genotyping six MTHFR and 26 ESR1 polymorphisms in 898 unrelated
migraine with aura (MA) patients and in 900 unrelated healthy controls. There
were no differences in the genotype distributions of the previously
migraine-associated SNPs C677T (MTHFR) and G2014A (ESR1) between cases and
controls (P-values 0.83 and 0.55, respectively). Thus, we were not able to
replicate the previous findings, although our study had considerable power.
However, five of the ESR1 SNPs (rs6557170, rs2347867, rs6557171, rs4870062 and
rs1801132) that were in strong linkage disequilibrium were nominally associated
with MA (uncorrected P-values 0.007-0.034). These results did not, however,
remain significant after taking multiple testing into account. Thus it seems
unlikely that the studied genes are involved in migraine susceptibility, at least
in this sample.

PMID: 17116097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Neurol Sci. 2007 Jan 15;252(1):9-12. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Allelic variation investigation of the estrogen receptor within an Australian
multiple sclerosis population.

Tajouri L(1), Fernandez F, Tajouri S, Detriche G, Szvetko A, Colson N, Csurhes P,
Pender MP, Griffiths LR.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Centre, School of Health Science, Griffith University Gold
Coast, Southport, Queensland 4215, Australia.

Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a central nervous system (CNS) chronic inflammatory
demyelinating disease leading to various neurological disabilities. The disorder 
is more prevalent for women with a ratio of 3:2 female to male.OBJECTIVES: To
investigate variation within the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) polymorphism gene in 
an Australian MS case-control population using two intragenic restriction
fragment length polymorphisms; the G594A located in exon 8 detected with the BtgI
restriction enzyme and T938C located in intron 1, detected with PvuII. One
hundred and ten Australian MS patients were studied, with patients classified
clinically as Relapsing Remitting MS (RR-MS), Secondary Progressive MS (SP-MS) or
Primary Progressive MS (PP-MS). Also, 110 age, sex and ethnicity matched controls
were investigated as a comparative group. No significant difference in the
allelic distribution frequency was found between the case and control groups for 
the ESR1 PvuII (P = 0.50) and Btg1 (P = 0.45) marker. Our results do not support 
a role for these two ESR1 markers in multiple sclerosis susceptibility, however
other markers within ESR1 should not be excluded for potential involvement in the
disorder.

PMID: 17109894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Feb;92(2):641-7. Epub 2006 Nov 14.

Estrogen receptor alpha regulates area-adjusted bone mineral content in late
pubertal girls.

Tobias JH(1), Steer CD, Vilarino-Güell C, Brown MA.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Science at South Bristol, University of Bristol, Bristol, United
Kingdom. Jon.Tobias@bristol.ac.uk

CONTEXT: Whether the action of estrogen in skeletal development depends on
estrogen receptor alpha as encoded by the ESR1 gene is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to establish whether the gain in
area-adjusted bone mineral content (ABMC) in girls occurs in late puberty and to 
examine whether the magnitude of this gain is related to ESR1 polymorphisms.
DESIGN: We conducted a cross-sectional analysis.
SETTING: The study involved the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children
(ALSPAC), a population-based prospective study.
PARTICIPANTS: Participants included 3097 11-yr-olds with DNA samples, dual x-ray 
absorptiometry measurements, and pubertal stage information.
OUTCOMES: Outcome measures included separate prespecified analyses in boys and
girls of the relationship between ABMC derived from total body dual x-ray
absorptiometry scans and Tanner stage and of the interaction between ABMC, Tanner
stage, and ESR1 polymorphisms.
RESULTS: Total body less head and spinal ABMC were higher in girls in Tanner
stages 4 and 5, compared with those in Tanner stages 1, 2, and 3. In contrast,
height increased throughout puberty. No differences were observed in ABMC
according to Tanner stage in boys. For rs2234693 (PvuII) and rs9340799 (XbaI)
polymorphisms, differences in spinal ABMC in late puberty were 2-fold greater in 
girls who were homozygous for the C and G alleles, respectively (P = 0.001). For 
rs7757956, the difference in total body less head ABMC in late puberty was 50%
less in individuals homozygous or heterozygous for the A allele (P = 0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: Gains in ABMC in late pubertal girls are strongly associated with
ESR1 polymorphisms, suggesting that estrogen contributes to this process via an
estrogen receptor alpha-dependent pathway.

PMID: 17105837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Hum Reprod. 2007 Feb;22(2):444-9. Epub 2006 Nov 10.

Molecular analysis of estrogen receptor alpha gene AGATA haplotype and SNP12 in
European populations: potential protective effect for cryptorchidism and lack of 
association with male infertility.

Galan JJ(1), Guarducci E, Nuti F, Gonzalez A, Ruiz M, Ruiz A, Krausz C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Genomics, Neocodex S.L., Seville, Spain.

BACKGROUND: A specific haplotype (AGATA) in the estrogen receptor alpha (ER1)
gene was recently described as a new risk factor for cryptorchidism in the
Japanese population. In this ethnic group, single-nucleotide polymorphism 12
(SNP12) was concluded to be the tag SNP for the AGATA haplotype.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A large group of patients (total number=335) and controls 
(total number=567) of two Caucasian populations were analysed for the AGATA
haplotype and SNP12 to verify whether this genetic variant and its tag SNP were
associated with cryptorchidism or with severe spermatogenic failure.
RESULTS: We confirm that SNP12 is the tag SNP for the AGATA haplotype also in
Caucasians. However, in contrast with the Japanese population we found a
protective effect for ESR1 SNP12 on cryptorchidism in the Italian population. No 
association between SNP12 and severe spermatogenic disturbances was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed associations (although with opposite effect) with
cryptorchidism encourage future studies on independent cases and controls from
different ethnic and geographic origins. On the other hand, in contrast with
other ESR1 polymorphisms, SNP12 polymorphism is not associated with severe male
factor infertility in two independent European population.

PMID: 17099213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Chin Med J (Engl). 2006 Nov 5;119(21):1794-801.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphism associated with type 2 diabetes
mellitus and the serum lipid concentration in Chinese women in Guangzhou.

Huang Q(1), Wang TH, Lu WS, Mu PW, Yang YF, Liang WW, Li CX, Lin GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.

BACKGROUND: Estrogen might play an important role in type 2 diabetes mellitus
pathogenesis. A number of polymorphisms have been reported in the estrogen
receptor alpha (ERalpha) gene (also named ESR1), including the XbaI and PvuII
restriction enzyme polymorphisms of ESR1, which may be involved in disease
pathogenesis. The aim of this study was to determine whether ERX gene
polymorphisms are associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus and serum lipid level.
METHODS: Two hundred and ninety-nine patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus were 
compared with three hundred and forty-one health controls of Guangzhou in China, 
both were male and postmenopausal female residents at 51 - 70 years. ESR1
genotyping was performed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and PvuII and XbaI
restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis.
RESULTS: ESR1 allelic frequencies of P, p and X, x alleles were 0.408, 0.592;
0.360, 0.640 in the type 2 diabetes mellitus group and 0.318, 0.682; 0.328, 0.672
in the control group, respectively. In case-control study, there was significant 
difference in PvuII, but not XbaI, allele frequency between the type 2 diabetes
mellitus and control groups (P = 0.001 and P = 0.122). When the group was
separated into men and women, the difference was significant in women (P < 0.001)
but not in men (P = 0.854) with the PvuII genotype, and the effect of PvuII
variant on the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus was improved with aging.
In addition, PvuII genotype was associated with blood glucose [fasting blood
glucose (FBG), postprandial blood glucose (PBG)] and serum lipid [total
cholesterol (TC) and low density lipoprotein (LDL)-c] concentration in healthy
women.
CONCLUSIONS: PvuII polymorphism of ESR1 increases susceptibility to type 2
diabetes mellitus in Chinese Guangzhou women. ESR1 variants may also impact serum
lipid metabolism, which might provide a mechanism connecting ESR1 to type 2
diabetes.

PMID: 17097034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Biol Reprod. 2007 Feb;76(2):303-13. Epub 2006 Nov 1.

LGR4 regulates the postnatal development and integrity of male reproductive
tracts in mice.

Hoshii T(1), Takeo T, Nakagata N, Takeya M, Araki K, Yamamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Institute of Resource Development and Analysis, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

The roles of the leucine-rich repeat domain containing G protein-coupled receptor
(GPCR) 4 (Lgr4), which is one of the orphan GPCRs, were analyzed with the Lgr4
hypomorphic mutant mouse line (Lgr4(Gt)). This homozygous mutant had only
one-tenth the normal transcription level; furthermore, 60% of them survived to
adulthood. The homozygous male was infertile, showing morphologic abnormalities
in both the testes and the epididymides. In the testes, luminal swelling, loss of
germinal epithelium in the seminiferous tubules, and rete testis dilation were
observed. Cauda epididymidis sperm were immotile. Rete testis dilation was due to
a water reabsorption failure caused by a decreased expression of an estrogen
receptor (ESR1) and SLC9A3 in the efferent ducts. Although we found differential 
regulation of ESR1 expression in the efferent ducts and the epididymis, the role 
of ESR1 in the epididymis remains unclear. The epididymis contained short and
dilated tubules and completely lacked its initial segment. In the caput region,
we observed multilamination and distortion of the basement membranes (BMs) with
an accumulation of laminin. Rupture of swollen epididymal ducts was observed,
leading to an invasion of macrophages into the lumen. Male infertility was
probably due to the combination of a developmental defect of the epididymis and
the rupture of the epithelium resulting in the immotile spermatozoa. These
results indicate that Lgr4 has pivotal roles to play in the regulation of ESR1
expression, the control of duct elongation through BM remodeling, and the
regional differentiation of the caput epididymidis.

PMID: 17079737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Dec 1;15(23):3429-35. Epub 2006 Oct 24.

Genetic determinants modulate susceptibility to pregnancy-associated
tumourigenesis in a recombinant line of Min mice.

Suraweera N(1), Haines J, McCart A, Rogers P, Latchford A, Coster M,
Polanco-Echeverry G, Guenther T, Wang J, Sieber O, Tomlinson I, Silver A.

Author information: 
(1)ICMS, Barts and The London Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry, and 
Cancer Research UK Colorectal Cancer Unit and Academic Department of Pathology,
St Mark's Hospital, Harrow, Middx, UK.

Min mice provide a good model of human familial adenomatous polyposis. Recently, 
we have reported on two recombinant inbred lines (I and V) and the location of a 
modifier (Mom3) close to Apc, which altered polyp numbers in our mice possibly by
modifying the frequency of wild-type (WT) allele loss at Apc; mice with severe
disease (line V) showed elevated rates of loss. We now show that in line I only, 
a single pregnancy caused a significant increase in adenoma multiplicity compared
with virgin controls (P<0.001) and that an additional pregnancy conferred a
similar risk. Pregnancy was linked to both adenoma initiation and enhanced tumour
growth in line I mice, and interline crosses indicated that susceptibility to
pregnancy-associated adenomas was under genetic control. We found no evidence for
the involvement of oestrodial metabolizing genes or the oestrogen receptors (Esr1
and 2) in tumour multiplicity. Importantly, a significantly elevated frequency of
WT allele loss at Apc was observed in adenomas from parous mice (line and
backcrossed) carrying the line I Min allele relative to equivalent virgin
controls (P=0.015). Our results provide the first experimental evidence for
genetic determinants controlling pregnancy-associated tumourigenesis; analogous
genetic factors may exist in humans.

PMID: 17062636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2006 Oct 1;31(21):2463-8.

A relook into the association of the estrogen receptor [alpha] gene (PvuII, XbaI)
and adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: a study of 540 Chinese cases.

Tang NL(1), Yeung HY, Lee KM, Hung VW, Cheung CS, Ng BK, Kwok R, Guo X, Qin L,
Cheng JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

STUDY DESIGN: A genetic association study of estrogen receptor-[alpha] gene
(ESR1) with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) in Chinese.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether: 1) PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms in ESR1 are
predisposition factor for AIS and 2) these polymorphisms correlate with the
severity of curvature in AIS.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: A common single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in ESR1
(XbaI) was found to be associated with curve severity in Japanese AIS patients
recently. The role of ESR1 as a predisposition gene using a case-control design
in other ethnic groups is required to confirm the previous associations.
METHODS: A total of 540 Chinese AIS girls with Cobb angle above 20 degrees were
recruited as cases together with 260 healthy controls. The effect of ESR1 SNPs on
severity of scoliosis was analyzed in a subgroup of AIS patients (n = 364)
followed up until skeletal maturity with the maximum Cobb angle recorded. Two
SNPs in ESR1 were genotyped by PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism in
all subjects.
RESULTS: The allelic frequency of X allele was 23% in both case and control
groups. The P allele was found at allelic frequency of 40% and 36% in the case
and control groups, respectively. No association between the two ESR1 SNPs and
the occurrence of AIS by both genotype and haplotype analysis could be
established, suggesting that both SNPs were not predisposition alleles for AIS.
AIS patients with different genotypes showed no difference in the maximum Cobb
angle. No association was found between the genotype and anthropometric
measurements in AIS patients.
CONCLUSION: The previously reported association with curve severity could not be 
replicated in our large series of Chinese AIS patients. The current study also
did not show any association of the 2 SNPs with increased risk of having AIS.

PMID: 17023856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Mol Diagn Ther. 2006;10(5):271-80.

Whole genome expression analysis for biologic rational pathway modeling:
application in cancer prognosis and therapy prediction.

Kemming D(1), Vogt U, Tidow N, Schlotter CM, Bürger H, Helms MW, Korsching E,
Granetzny A, Boseila A, Hillejan L, Marra A, Ergönenc Y, Adigüzel H, Brandt B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Tumor Biology, Hamburg, Germany.

Using semi-quantitative microarray technology, almost every one of the
approximately 30 000 human genes can be analyzed simultaneously with a low rate
of false-positives, a high specificity, and a high quantification accuracy. This 
is supported by data from comparative studies of microarrays and
reverse-transcription PCR for established cancer genes including those for
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), human epidermal growth factor receptor-2
(HER2/ERBB2), estrogen receptor (ESR1), progesterone receptor (PGR),
urokinase-type plasminogen activator (PLAU), and plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 (SERPINE1). As such, semi-quantitative expression data provide an
almost completely comprehensive background of biological knowledge that can be
applied to cancer diagnostics. In clinical terms, expression profiling may be
able to provide significant information regarding (i) the identification of
high-risk patients requiring aggressive chemotherapy; (ii) the pathway control of
therapy predictive parameters (e.g. ESR1 and HER2); (iii) the discovery of
targets for biologically rational therapeutics (e.g. capecitabine and
trastuzumab); (iv) additional support for decisions about switching therapy; (v) 
target discovery; and (vi) the prediction of the course of new therapies in
clinical trials. In conclusion, whole genome expression analysis might be able to
determine important genes related to cancer progression and adjuvant chemotherapy
resistance, especially in the context of new approaches involving primary
systemic chemotherapy. In this review, we will survey the current progress in
whole genome expression analyses for cancer prognosis and prediction. Special
emphasis is given to the approach of combining biostatistical analysis of
expression data with knowledge of biochemical and genetic pathways.

PMID: 17022690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Osteoporos Int. 2007 Feb;18(2):235-43. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

COL1A1, ESR1, VDR and TGFB1 polymorphisms and haplotypes in relation to BMD in
Spanish postmenopausal women.

Bustamante M(1), Nogués X, Enjuanes A, Elosua R, García-Giralt N, Pérez-Edo L,
Cáceres E, Carreras R, Mellibovsky L, Balcells S, Díez-Pérez A, Grinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

INTRODUCTION AND HYPOTHESIS: Genetic studies of osteoporosis have focused on
analysing single polymorphisms in individual genes - with inconclusive results.
An alternative approach may involve haplotypes and gene-gene interactions. The
aim of the study was to test the association between the COL1A1, ESR1, VDR and
TGFB1 polymorphisms or haplotypes and bone mineral density (BMD) in Spanish
postmenopausal women.
METHODS: Sixteen polymorphisms were analysed in 719 postmenopausal women. ANOVA, 
ANCOVA and Xi2 tests were used to perform the statistical analysis.
RESULTS: COL1A1 -1997G > T (p=0.04) and TGFB1 Leu10Pro (p=0.02) were found to be 
associated with adjusted lumbar spine (LS) BMD. Interactions were observed
between: the COL1A1 -1997 G/T and Sp1 polymorphisms (p < 0.01 for LS BMD) and the
COL1A1 -1663 indelT and VDR ApaI polymorphisms (p < 0.01 for femoral neck (FN)
BMD). The COL1A1 GDs and ESR1 LPX haplotypes were associated with FN BMD (p=0.03 
and p=0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms at COL1A1 and TGFB1 and haplotypes at COL1A1 and ESR1 
were found to be associated with BMD in a cohort of postmenopausal Spanish women.
Moreover, COL1A1 polymorphisms showed significant interactions among them and
with the VDR 3' polymorphisms.

PMID: 17021946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Int J Mol Med. 2006 Nov;18(5):843-51.

Genetic factors for obesity.

Yamada Y(1), Kato K, Kameyama T, Yokoi K, Matsuo H, Segawa T, Watanabe S,
Ichihara S, Yoshida H, Satoh K, Nozawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Functional Genomics, Life Science Research Center, Mie
University, Mie 514-8507, Japan. yamada@gene.mie-u.ac.jp

The purpose of the present study was to identify gene polymorphisms for the
reliable assessment of genetic factors for obesity. The study population
comprised 3906 unrelated Japanese individuals (2286 men, 1620 women), including
1196 subjects (677 men, 519 women) with obesity (body mass index of > or = 25
kg/m2) and 2710 controls (1609 men, 1101 women). The genotypes for 147
polymorphisms of 124 candidate genes were determined with a method that combines 
the polymerase chain reaction and sequence-specific oligonucleotide probes with
suspension array technology. Multivariable logistic regression analysis with
adjustment for age, sex, and the prevalence of smoking revealed that the
-30Gright curved arrow A polymorphism of GCK, the -240Aright curved arrow T
polymorphism of ACE, and the -482Cright curved arrow T polymorphism of APOC3 were
significantly (P < 0.01) associated with the prevalence of obesity, and the
-1989Tright curved arrow G polymorphism of ESR1 was almost significantly
associated. A stepwise forward selection procedure demonstrated that ACE, GCK,
and ESR1 genotypes significantly (P < 0.01) and independently affected the
prevalence of obesity. Combined genotype analysis for these three polymorphisms
yielded a lowest odds ratio of 0.45 for the combined genotypes of AT or TT for
ACE, GG for GCK, and GG for ESR1 in comparison with the combined genotypes of AA 
for ACE, GG for GCK, and TT or TG for ESR1. Genotypes for ACE, GCK, and ESR1 may 
prove reliable for the assessment of genetic factors for obesity. Determination
of the combined genotypes for these genes may contribute to the personalized
prevention of this condition.

PMID: 17016614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Reproduction. 2006 Oct;132(4):637-48.

A bovine oviduct epithelial cell suspension culture system suitable for studying 
embryo-maternal interactions: morphological and functional characterization.

Rottmayer R(1), Ulbrich SE, Kölle S, Prelle K, Neumueller C, Sinowatz F, Meyer
HH, Wolf E, Hiendleder S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Animal Breeding and Biotechnology, Gene Center of the
Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany.

We established a short-term (24 h) culture system for bovine oviduct epithelial
cells (BOECs), obtained on day 3.5 of the estrous cycle and evaluated the cells
with respect to morphological criteria, marker gene expression, and hormone
responsiveness. BOEC sheets were isolated mechanically from the ampulla with
similar yields from oviducts ipsi- and contralateral to the ovulation site (57.9 
+/- 4.6 and 56.4 +/- 8.0 x 10(6) cells). BOECs showed > 95% purity and cells
cultured for 24 h maintained morphological characteristics present in vivo, as
determined by light microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and transmission
electron microscopy. Both secretory cells with numerous secretory granules and
ciliated cells with long, well-developed, and vigorously beating kinocilia were
visible. Quantitative real-time PCR failed to detect significant differences in
transcript levels between ipsi-and contralateral BOECs for the majority of marker
genes (estrogen receptors alpha and beta (ESR1 and ESR2),
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), oviductal glycoprotein 1
(OVGP1), progesterone receptor (PGR), and tumor rejection antigen 1 (TRA1))
throughout the 24 h culture period. However, the combined data of all time points
for glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), a gene previously shown to be expressed at
higher levels in the ipsilateral oviduct in vivo, also indicated significantly
different mRNA levels in vitro. The expression of marker genes remained stable
after 6 h cell culture, indicating only a short adaptation period. Western blot
analysis confirmed ESR1 and PGR protein expression throughout the culture period.
In agreement with cyclic differences in vivo, estradiol-17beta stimulation
increased PGR transcript abundance in BOECs. Our novel culture system provides
functional BOECs in sufficient quantities for holistic transcriptome and proteome
studies, e.g. for deciphering early embryo-maternal communication.

PMID: 17008475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Anim Genet. 2006 Oct;37(5):454-8.

Comparison of genetic models for analysing the effects of a PvuII polymorphism in
the oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene on prolificacy in an Iberian x Meishan pig
population.

Braglia S(1), Ramírez O, Noguera JL, Tomás A, Ovilo C, Varona L.

Author information: 
(1)Area de Producció Animal, Centre UdL-IRTA, Lleida, 25198, Spain.

The effect of a previously reported PvuII polymorphism in oestrogen receptor 1
(ESR1) was analysed in an F(2) population of Iberian x Meishan pigs. We tested
three hypotheses: (1) that a causal mutation was fixed in the parental
populations, (2) that a causal mutation existed that was in complete linkage
disequilibrium with the alleles of the PvuII polymorphism and (3) that a causal
mutation existed in linkage disequilibrium within each parental population. The
third model was the most plausible based on the available data. ESR1 alleles
displayed different patterns of linkage disequilibrium with the causal mutation
in each of the parental populations and the PvuII polymorphism was clearly not
the causal mutation. As a consequence, the use of the ESR1 mutation for selection
must be evaluated for a particular pig population before it is applied.

PMID: 16978173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. BMC Genomics. 2006 Sep 11;7:231.

Discovery and validation of breast cancer subtypes.

Kapp AV(1), Jeffrey SS, Langerød A, Børresen-Dale AL, Han W, Noh DY, Bukholm IR, 
Nicolau M, Brown PO, Tibshirani R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
AKapp@stanford.edu

Erratum in
    BMC Genomics. 2007 Apr 13;8(1):101.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies demonstrated breast cancer tumor tissue samples
could be classified into different subtypes based upon DNA microarray profiles.
The most recent study presented evidence for the existence of five different
subtypes: normal breast-like, basal, luminal A, luminal B, and ERBB2+.
RESULTS: Based upon the analysis of 599 microarrays (five separate cDNA
microarray datasets) using a novel approach, we present evidence in support of
the most consistently identifiable subtypes of breast cancer tumor tissue
microarrays being: ESR1+/ERBB2-, ESR1-/ERBB2-, and ERBB2+ (collectively called
the ESR1/ERBB2 subtypes). We validate all three subtypes statistically and show
the subtype to which a sample belongs is a significant predictor of overall
survival and distant-metastasis free probability.
CONCLUSION: As a consequence of the statistical validation procedure we have a
set of centroids which can be applied to any microarray (indexed by UniGene
Cluster ID) to classify it to one of the ESR1/ERBB2 subtypes. Moreover, the
method used to define the ESR1/ERBB2 subtypes is not specific to the disease. The
method can be used to identify subtypes in any disease for which there are at
least two independent microarray datasets of disease samples.

PMCID: PMC1574316
PMID: 16965636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Oct 15;140(20):2180-7.

Additional chromosomal abnormalities in patients with a previously detected
abnormal karyotype, mental retardation, and dysmorphic features.

Bisgaard AM(1), Kirchhoff M, Tümer Z, Jepsen B, Brøndum-Nielsen K, Cohen M,
Hamborg-Petersen B, Bryndorf T, Tommerup N, Skovby F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
anne-marie.bisgaard.pedersen@rh.hosp.dk

The detection of chromosomal abnormalities in patients with mental retardation
(MR) and dysmorphic features increases with improvements of molecular cytogenetic
methods. We report on six patients referred for detailed characterization of
chromosomal abnormalities (four translocations, one inversion, one deletion)
detected by conventional cytogenetics, in whom metaphase CGH revealed imbalances 
not involved in the initially detected rearrangements. The detected abnormalities
were validated by real-time PCR. Parents were investigated by CGH in four cases. 
The genomic screening revealed interstitial deletions of 2q33.2-q34, 3p21,
4q12-q13.1, 6q25, 13q22.2-q31.1, and 14q12. The estimated minimum sizes of the
deletions ranged from 2.65 to 9.27 Mb. The CGH assay did not reveal imbalances
that colocalized with the breakpoints of the inversion or the translocations. The
deletion of 6q included ESR1, in which polymorphisms are associated with
variation of adult height. FOXG1B, known to be involved in cortical development, 
was located in the 14q deletion. The results illustrate that whole-genome
molecular cytogenetic analysis of phenotypically affected patients with abnormal 
conventional karyotypes may detect inapparent molecular cytogenetic abnormalities
in patients with microscopic chromosomal abnormalities and that these data
provide additional information of clinical importance.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16955412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S94-S102.

Cognitive functioning and sex steroid hormone gene polymorphisms in women at
midlife.

Kravitz HM(1), Meyer PM, Seeman TE, Greendale GA, Sowers MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA. hkravitz@rush.edu

Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotype frequencies were examined to
determine whether variation in 6 estrogen-related genes was associated with
differences in cognitive functioning in women at midlife. DNA from a
multiracial/multiethnic sample of 875 African American, Caucasian, Chinese, and
Japanese women aged 45 to 56 years participating in the Study of Women's Health
Across the Nation (SWAN) was genotyped. Gene markers from the sex steroid hormone
pathway were linked to measures of cognitive functioning including the Digit Span
Backward Test (DSB), a measure of working memory; the Symbol Digit Modalities
Test (SDMT), a measure of perceptual speed; and the East Boston Memory Test
(EBMT), a measure of episodic memory. Statistical models were fit using logistic 
regression and general linear models to estimate the strength of association of
estrogen-related polymorphisms with DSB, SDMT, and EBMT scores. On the EBMT,
African American women and Caucasian women with ESR1 rs9340799 GG genotypes had
about 1.5 to 2.0 times greater odds of remembering story elements on the
EBMT-immediate recall test. Caucasian women with ESR1 rs2234693 CC genotypes had 
1.3 to 1.5 times greater odds of remembering story elements on the EBMT-delayed
recall test. Chinese women with 17HSD rs615942 GG genotypes, 17HSD rs592389 TT
genotypes, and 17HSD rs2830 GG genotypes had about 1.7 times greater odds of
remembering story elements on the EBMT-immediate recall test. African American
women with CYP 19 rs936306 CC genotypes had about 0.25 to 0.40 lower odds of
remembering story elements on the EBMT-immediate recall test, whereas Chinese
women with CYP 19 rs936306 CC genotypes had about 2.3 times greater odds of
remembering story elements on both the EBMT-immediate and -delayed recall tests. 
On the DSB, African American women with CYP 19 rs749292 GG genotype had a higher 
mean score. On the SDMT, Japanese women with ESR1 rs728524 GG genotypes had a
higher mean score. On the 3 tests of cognitive functioning, there was 1
significant finding for CYP1A1 and none for the CYP1B1 or ESR2 SNPs. We conclude 
that selected genes involved in estrogen synthesis and metabolism may be
associated with performance differences on cognitive function tests. Also, the
relevant estrogen-related polymorphisms may vary by race/ethnicity.

PMID: 16949394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S79-86.

The association of bone mineral density with estrogen receptor gene
polymorphisms.

Greendale GA(1), Chu J, Ferrell R, Randolph JF Jr, Johnston JM, Sowers MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of
California-Los Angeles, California 90095-1687, USA. ggreenda@mednet.ucla.edu

The purpose of this investigation was to evaluate single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) variants of the estrogen receptor genes ESR1 and ESR2 and bone mineral
density (BMD) of the lumbar spine (LS-BMD) or total hip (hip BMD) in women of 4
races/ethnicities who were premenopausal or in early perimenopause. The sample
consisted of 1,301 participants from the Study of Women's Health Across the
Nation (SWAN) with measures of BMD and genotyping; of these, 295 were African
American, 693 were Caucasian, 151 were Chinese, and 162 were Japanese. We
evaluated the potential association of LS-BMD or hip BMD with 4 SNPs from the
ESR1 gene (ESR1 rs9340799, ESR1 rs2234693, ESR1 rs728524, and ESR1 rs3798577),
and 3 SNPs from the ESR2 gene (ESR2 rs1255998, ESR2 rs1256030, and ESR2
rs1256065). Unadjusted mean LS-BMD values ranged from 1.141+/-0.14 g/cm(2) in
African American women to 1.031+/-0.11 g/cm2 in Japanese women; unadjusted mean
hip BMD values ranged from 1.053+/-0.14 g/cm2 in African American women to
0.862+/-0.10 g/cm2 in Chinese women. African American and Japanese women with the
ESR1 rs2234693 (PvuII) CC genotype had higher LS-BMDs than did their peers with
the TT genotype (P=0.009 and P=0.04, respectively). Japanese women with the ESR1 
rs3798577 CC or TC genotypes had lower LS-BMD than did Japanese women with the TT
genotype (P=0.02 and P=0.01, respectively). Caucasian women with the TC genotype 
for ESR2 rs1256030 had lower LS-BMDs than did those with the CC genotype
(P=0.02). Chinese women who were heterozygous for ESR2 rs1256030 or ESR2
rs1256065 had significantly higher LS-BMDs and hip BMDs than did the referent
groups for each of these SNPs (CC and AA, respectively). Associations between BMD
and ESR1 and ESR2 genotypes varied by race/ethnicity and by bone site. Our
results differ from those previously reported for 2 ESR1 genotypes (ESR1
rs2234693 [PvuII] and ESR1 rs9340799 [XbaI]). Moreover, 2 ESR1 and 3 ESR2 SNPs we
studied have not previously been examined with respect to BMD. Among these, ESR2 
rs1256030 and ESR2 rs1256065 appear to have an effect at both the lumbar spine
and hip in Chinese women and may warrant further study.

PMID: 16949392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S69-78.

The association of genetic polymorphisms in sex hormone biosynthesis and action
with insulin sensitivity and diabetes mellitus in women at midlife.

Lo JC(1), Zhao X, Scuteri A, Brockwell S, Sowers MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Oakland,
California, USA.

We evaluated associations of insulin sensitivity, metabolic syndrome, and
diabetes mellitus with single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variants from sex
hormone biosynthesis and action in women of 4 races/ethnicities. DNA was
extracted from transformed cell samples of 1,538 women in the Study of Women's
Health Across the Nation (SWAN). African American, Caucasian, Chinese, and
Japanese women in SWAN enrolled in the Sex Steroid Hormone Genetics Protocol from
whom fasting glucose and insulin measures (for estimating insulin sensitivity),
diabetes status, and metabolic syndrome classification were obtained. SNPs from
the genes encoding aromatase (CYP 19), 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
(17HSD) type 1, and the estrogen receptors-alpha (ESR1) and -beta (ESR2) were
measured. The prevalence of metabolic syndrome was 20% in Chinese women, 22% in
Japanese women, 28% in Caucasian women, and 43% in African American women. The
prevalence of diabetes was 3% in Chinese women, 4% in Japanese women, 7% in
Caucasian women, and 19% in African American women. Significant associations of
CYP 19 genotypes and insulin sensitivity were observed in African American,
Caucasian, and Japanese women. Selected ESR1 and ESR2 genotypes were associated
with insulin sensitivity and metabolic syndrome only in Japanese and Chinese
women. The strongest associations related 17HSD genotypes to diabetes in
Caucasian women, with odds ratios ranging from 4.4 to 7.5 and confidence
intervals that excluded the null value. We observed strong associations between
variations in sex hormone biosynthesis and function genes with insulin
sensitivity, the metabolic syndrome, and diabetes that varied by race/ethnicity. 
The strong association of 17HSD and diabetes in Caucasian women has not been
previously reported and should be further investigated.

PMID: 16949391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S61-8.

Sex steroid hormone polymorphisms, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and
apolipoprotein A-1 from the Study of Women's Health Across the Nation (SWAN).

Sowers MR(1), Symons JP, Jannausch ML, Chu J, Kardia SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104, USA. mfsowers@umich.edu

We evaluated potential associations between single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
variants in estrogen receptor (ERalpha and ERbeta) genes, high-density
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, and apolipoprotein A-1 (apoA-1) concentrations in 
women of 4 races/ethnicities. Participants included 1,520 African American,
Caucasian, Chinese, and Japanese women from the Study of Women's Health Across
the Nation (SWAN) who were premenopausal or perimenopausal and who were also
enrolled in the SWAN Genetics Study, which collected blood for lipid analyses and
carried out lymphocyte transformation from which DNA was extracted and genotyped.
We evaluated SNPs from ERalpha and ERbeta genes (ESR1 and ESR2, respectively),
including ESR1 rs9340799, ESR1 rs2234693, ESR1 rs728524, ESR1 rs3798577, ESR2
rs1255998, ESR2 rs1256065, and ESR2 rs1256030. The mean HDL cholesterol and
apoA-1 values for these women were 1.47 mmol/L and 1.51 g/L, respectively.
Japanese women with the ESR1 rs3798577 TC genotype had significantly lower apoA-1
(P=0.02) and HDL cholesterol levels (P=0.03) than did those with the TT genotype.
African American women with the ESR1 rs728524 GG genotype had higher HDL
cholesterol levels than did women with the AA or AG genotypes (P=0.05). ESR2
rs1256030 and ESR2 rs1256065 genotypes were associated with HDL cholesterol
concentrations in Chinese women (P=0.05). Although associations were identified
between the ESR1 and ESR2 SNP variants and lipids in these women, these
associations were not consistently observed across the 4 racial/ethnic groups,
nor were the associations consistently inclusive of both HDL cholesterol and
apoA-1. These genetic variants provide limited evidence of associations with
lipids that may help explain the cardioprotective effect of premenopausal status 
in women.

PMID: 16949390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S31-43.

Menstrual cycle markers of ovarian aging and sex steroid hormone genotypes.

Sowers MR(1), Jannausch ML, McConnell DS, Kardia SR, Randolph JF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104, USA. mfsowers@umich.edu

We related variation in 4 sex steroid genes to 3 phenotypic indicators of ovarian
aging, including no evidence of luteal activity as a marker of anovulatory
cycles, shorter or longer menstrual cycle lengths, and the profiles of
metabolites of estrogens, progesterone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and
luteinizing hormone measured in urine samples collected daily across a menstrual 
cycle in women aged 43 to 53 years. The study sample included 485 menstruating
women without hormone therapy who had collected daily urine hormone samples
across 1 menstrual cycle or 50 days, whichever occurred first. There were 14
single nucleotide polymorphisms from 4 genes, including estrogen receptor-alpha
(ESR1), estrogen receptor-beta, aromatase, and 17beta hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1, related to ovarian aging phenotypes that include the
presence or absence of luteal activity, menstrual cycle lengths < or > 24 to 31
days, and profiles of urinary hormone metabolites. Women with the TT genotype of 
ESR1 rs3798577 have evidence of advanced ovarian aging compared with women with
the CT or CC genotypes, after adjustment for race/ethnicity, chronologic age, and
race/ethnicity-specific body mass index. Further, women with the TC and CC
genotypes of ESR1 rs2234693 may have a greater likelihood of more advanced
ovarian aging than do women with the TT genotype, adjusting for covariates. Using
a candidate gene approach, 2 ESR1 polymorphisms are related to 3 phenotypic
markers of ovarian aging, suggesting a possible role for the ESR1 gene in the
timing of the menopausal transition.

PMID: 16949387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S16-22.

Endogenous estradiol and its association with estrogen receptor gene
polymorphisms.

Sowers MR(1), Jannausch ML, McConnell DS, Kardia SR, Randolph JF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104, USA. mfsowers@umich.edu

We evaluated potential associations between single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
variants of the estrogen receptor genes ESR1 and ESR2 and circulating estradiol
(E2) concentrations in women of 4 races/ethnicities. The study population was
drawn from participants in the Study of Women's Health Across the Nation (SWAN). 
A total of 1,538 African American, Caucasian, Chinese, and Japanese women from
SWAN participated in the Sex Steroid Hormone Genetics Protocol by providing blood
for sex steroid hormone analyses and consenting to lymphocyte transformation from
which DNA was extracted and genotyped. We evaluated 4 ESR1 SNPs (ESR1 rs9340799, 
ESR1 rs2234693, ESR1 rs728524, and ESR1 rs3798577), and 3 ESR2 SNPs (ESR2
rs1255998, ESR2 rs1256030, and ESR2 rs1256065). Mean E2 level was 196.0 +/- 4.0
pmol/L in women who were premenopausal and perimenopausal (with blood drawn on
days 2 through 5 of the menstrual cycle follicular phase); however, mean E2
levels in Chinese and Japanese women were lower (155.7 +/- 10.6 pmol/L and 170.0 
+/- 10.3 pmol/L, respectively) than in African American (196.4 +/- 8.1 pmol/L, P 
<0.05) or Caucasian women (210.7 +/- 5.9 pmol/L, P <0.002). The ESR1 rs3798577 CC
genotype was associated with lower circulating E2 concentrations in African
American women (P <0.07) and explained about 1% of the variation in circulating
E2 concentrations. In Japanese women, the GC genotype of ESR2 rs1255998 was
associated with significantly lower circulating E2 concentrations that explained 
about 4% of the variation. Circulating E2 concentrations were not strongly or
consistently associated with selected polymorphisms for the estrogen receptor
genes. The 2 strongest associations explained <4% of the total variation in the
circulating E2 concentrations.

PMID: 16949384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Am J Med. 2006 Sep;119(9 Suppl 1):S103-10.

Sex steroid hormone pathway genes and health-related measures in women of 4
races/ethnicities: the Study of Women's Health Across the Nation (SWAN).

Sowers MR(1), Wilson AL, Karvonen-Gutierrez CA, Kardia SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48104, USA. mfsowers@umich.edu

We synthesized findings relating health outcomes and genetic variants of the sex 
steroid hormone pathway in women from the Study of Women's Health Across the
Nation (SWAN) Genetics Study. The SWAN Genetics Study, a component of the
longitudinal SWAN study, describes selected genetics characteristics of
health-related attributes during the menopausal transition in African American,
Caucasian, Chinese, and Japanese women. At baseline, SWAN recruited menstruating 
women aged 42 to 52 years, who were not using exogenous hormones. Immortalized
cell lines were developed and genotyped in 1,538 specimens from 1,757
participants in the genetics study. Genotypes and haplotypes from 6 genes (27
single nucleotide polymorphisms [SNPs]) in the sex steroid hormone pathway were
related to circulating hormone concentrations, menstrual cycle profiles, and
health-related outcomes, including lipids, diabetes mellitus, depressive
symptoms, measures of cognition, bone mineral density (BMD), and vasomotor
symptoms. Allele frequencies and distances differed substantially in the 4
race/ethnicity-specific groups evaluated, leading to variable patterns of
association with health-related measures. For example, 17HSD genotypes were
highly associated with diabetes risk in Caucasian women, whereas its haplotypes
were associated with diabetes risk in both African American and Caucasian women. 
Several SNPs were associated with multiple outcomes. ESR1 rs3798577 was
significantly associated with circulating estradiol concentrations, indicators of
ovarian aging, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, apolipoprotein A-1,
insulin sensitivity, and lumbar spine BMD. CYP1A1 rs2606345 was related to
estrogen metabolite concentrations, vasomotor symptoms, and depressive symptoms. 
Some associations were much more prominent in specific races/ethnicities; Chinese
women had statistically significant relations between ESR2 rs1256030 and HDL
cholesterol, lumbar spine BMD, hip BMD, and metabolic syndrome. Importantly,
women in the SWAN Genetics Study were typical of women in the community-based
SWAN sample. This community-based sample of women from the SWAN Genetics Study
identified important genetic sex steroid hormone pathway variants in relation to 
measures of health status. The magnitude and breadth of these relationships
should motivate further research to verify and extend the findings.

PMID: 16949383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Oct 20;349(2):540-8. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Novel role of the RET finger protein in estrogen receptor-mediated transcription 
in MCF-7 cells.

Townson SM(1), Kang K, Lee AV, Oesterreich S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University and Massey
Cancer Center, Sanger Hall, Richmond, VA 23219, USA. smtownson@mail1.vcu.edu

The Scaffold attachment factor B1 (SAFB1) is an estrogen receptor (ESR1)
repressor that has been proposed to inhibit breast tumorigenesis. To obtain
insight into the functions of SAFB1 we utilized a yeast two-hybrid screen and
identified the Ret finger protein (RFP) as interacting with the SAFB1 C-terminus.
RFP is a member of the trimotif (TRIM) family of proteins, which we found widely 
expressed in a series of breast cancer cell lines. We confirmed the interaction
between SAFB1 and RFP through in vitro (GST-pull-down) and in vivo
(coimmunoprecipitations) assays. We hypothesized that SAFB1 functions as a
scaffolding protein to recruit proteins such as RFP into proximity with ESR1.
Consequently, we asked whether RFP would modulate ESR1 activity and we discovered
that RFP was important for the ESR1-dependent expression of cyclin D1 (CCND1) and
the progesterone receptor (PR), but not IRS1 or MYC. Although RFP did not
interact with ESR1 directly, it does coimmunoprecipitate with ESR1, demonstrating
that RFP is found within the same protein complex. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assays (ChIP) located RFP to the TFF1 promoter, a known ESR1-regulated gene.
Taken together, our study provides further evidence that coactivation and
corepression are integrally linked processes and that RFP is a component of an
ESR1 regulatory complex.

PMCID: PMC1950156
PMID: 16945332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Bone Miner Res. 2006 Sep;21(9):1443-56.

Estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) polymorphisms in interaction with estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF1) variants influence the risk 
of fracture in postmenopausal women.

Rivadeneira F(1), van Meurs JB, Kant J, Zillikens MC, Stolk L, Beck TJ, Arp P,
Schuit SC, Hofman A, Houwing-Duistermaat JJ, van Duijn CM, van Leeuwen JP, Pols
HA, Uitterlinden AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. f.rivadeneira@erasmusmc.nl

In this large population-based cohort study, variants in ESR2 were associated
with increased risk of vertebral and incident fragility fracture in
postmenopausal women. Interaction of ESR2 with ESR1 and IGF1 was determined and
revealed a deleterious genetic combination that enhances the risk of osteoporotic
fracture.INTRODUCTION: Osteoporosis is a complex disease with strong genetic
influence, but the genes involved are ill-defined. We examined estrogen receptor 
beta (ESR2) polymorphisms in interaction with estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and 
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF1) variants in relation to the risk of
osteoporotic fracture, BMD, and bone geometry.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the Rotterdam study, a prospective population-based
cohort of elderly white individuals, we studied six single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in ESR2 (n = 6343, 60% women). We analyzed the genetic
variants in the form of haplotypes reconstructed by a statistical method. Results
refer to the most frequent ESR2 haplotype 1 estimated from two SNPs in intron 2
and the 3'-untranslated region (UTR). Outcomes included vertebral and incident
nonvertebral fractures, BMD, and hip structural analysis (HSA). We also studied
the interaction with (the most frequent) ESR1 haplotype 1 estimated from the
PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms and an IGF1 promoter CA-repeat.
RESULTS: Compared with ESR2 haplotype 1 noncarriers, female homozygous carriers
had a 1.8- and 1.4-fold increased risk of vertebral and fragility fractures. HSA 
showed that ESR2 haplotype 1 homozygote women had 2.6% thinner cortices, 1.0%
increased neck width, and 4.3% higher bone instability (buckling ratios). For
testing the gene interaction, we assumed a recessive model of ESR2 haplotype 1.
Female homozygous carriers of ESR2 haplotype 1 and noncarriers of ESR1 haplotype 
1 had a 3.5- and 1.8-fold increased risk of vertebral and fragility fractures
(p(interaction) = 0.10). Such effects and interactions were stronger in women
homozygous for the IGF1 192-bp allele, with 9.3-fold increased risk
(p(interaction) = 0.002) for vertebral and 4.0-fold increased risk
(p(interaction) = 0.01) for fragility fractures. Multilocus interaction analyses 
of fracture endured correction for multiple testing using Monte-Carlo simulations
(p(interaction) = 0.02 for vertebral and p(interaction) = 0.03 for fragility
fractures). Similar patterns of interaction were observed for BMD, cortical
thickness, bone strength (section modulus), and instability (buckling ratio). In 
men, no such effects were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants of ESR2 alone and in interaction with ESR1 and IGF1
influence the risk of fracture in postmenopausal women. These findings reinforce 
the polygenic and complex character of osteoporosis.

PMID: 16939403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Steroids. 2006 Nov;71(11-12):960-5. Epub 2006 Aug 28.

Estrogen receptor alpha polymorphism and susceptibility to uterine leiomyoma.

Villanova FE(1), Andrade PM, Otsuka AY, Gomes MT, Leal ES, Castro RA, Girão MJ,
Nishimura E, Baracat EC, Silva ID.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Gynecology Laboratory, Department of Gynecology, Federal University 
of São Paulo-UNIFESP, Rua Pedro de Toledo 781, 4th Floor, São Paulo 04039-032,
SP, Brazil.

Uterine leiomyoma is the most frequent pelvic tumor found in female genital
tract. Some studies have suggested an association between single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in estrogen receptors genes with susceptibility in
developing uterine leiomyoma. In this work, we estimated the frequency of two
SNPs: one located in the intron 1 (rs9322331) and other in the exon 1
(rs17847075) of the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene in 125 women with uterine
leiomyoma and 125 healthy women. To do this we used a PCR-RFLP method with MspI
and HaeIII restriction enzymes to respectively detect C/T SNPs in the intron 1
and in the exon 1 of ESR1. To our knowledge this is the first study aimed to
investigate the association of ESR1 SNPs with the risk of developing uterine
leiomyoma in Brazilian women. Our results showed that the allele frequencies of
the exon 1 and the intron 1 of the ESR1 gene did not differ between cases and
controls (P = 0.325 and 0.175, respectively). Furthermore, our findings provided 
little support for the association of these SNPs on ESR1 with leiomyoma. However,
we found that the SNP in the intron 1 of the ESR1 gene was underrepresented in
the Brazilian female population.

PMID: 16935316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Reprod Dev. 2006 Dec;73(12):1481-90.

Temperature effects on sex determination and ontogenetic gene expression of the
aromatases cyp19a and cyp19b, and the estrogen receptors esr1 and esr2 in
atlantic halibut (Hippoglossus hippoglossus).

van Nes S(1), Andersen Ø.

Author information: 
(1)AKVAFORSK Institute of Aquaculture Research, Norwegian University of Life
Sciences, As, Norway. solveig.van-nes@akvaforsk.no

The aromatase (CYP19) and estrogen receptor (ESR) play important roles in the
molecular mechanism of sex determination and differentiation of lower
vertebrates. Several studies have proven these mechanisms to be temperature
sensitive, which can influence the direction of phenotypic gender development. A 
temperature study was conducted to examine the effect of temperature on the sex
differentiation in farmed Atlantic halibut. Sexually undifferentiated larvae were
exposed to 7 degrees C, 10 degrees C, or 13 degrees C during gonadal
differentiation. Temperature effects on the transcription rate of the aromatase
genes cyp19a (ovary type) and cyp19b (brain type) and the ESR genes esr1 and esr2
were examined by quantitative real-time PCR. With increasing temperatures, both
cyp19a mRNA levels and the female incidence showed a decreasing trend, thus
strongly indicating a relation between the expression of cyp19a and morphological
ovary differentiation. In contrast to cyp19a, the levels of cyp19b, esr1, and
esr2 mRNA strongly increased in all temperature groups throughout the study
period, and did not show obvious temperature-related expression patterns. The
present data provide evidence that posthatching temperature exposure
significantly affects the expression of cyp19a mRNA during the developmental
period and that high temperature possibly influences genetic sex determination in
Atlantic halibut. Though, the female incidence never exceeded 50%, suggesting
that only the homogametic (XX) female is thermolabile. So whereas temperature
treatment is not likely suitable for direct feminization in halibut, the
possibility for high-temperature production of XX neomales for broodstock to
obtain all-female offspring by crossing with XX females is suggested.

PMID: 16929526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2006 Sep 26;257-258:84-94. Epub 2006 Aug 17.

Molecular cloning of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha; ESR1) of the Japanese
giant salamander, Andrias japonicus.

Katsu Y(1), Kohno S, Oka T, Mitsui N, Tooi O, Santo N, Urushitani H, Fukumoto Y, 
Kuwabara K, Ashikaga K, Minami S, Kato S, Ohta Y, Guillette LJ Jr, Iguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic
Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji,
Okazaki 444-8787, Aichi, Japan.

Estrogens are essential for normal reproductive activity in females and males and
for ovarian differentiation during a critical developmental stage in many
vertebrates. To understand the molecular mechanisms of estrogen action and to
evaluate estrogen receptor ligand interactions in the Japanese giant salamander
(Andrias japonicus), we isolated cDNA encoding the estrogen receptor (ER) from
the liver. A full-length Japanese giant salamander ER cDNA (jgsER) was obtained
using 5' and 3' rapid amplification cDNA ends (RACE). The deduced amino acid
sequence of the jgsER showed high identity to the Xenopus ERalpha (ESR1) (77.7%).
We have applied both the conventional ERE-luciferase reporter assay system and
the GAL4-transactivation system to characterize this receptor. In two different
transient transfection assay systems using mammalian cells, the jgsER protein
displayed estrogen-dependent activation of transcription. The
GAL4-transactivation system showed about 10-fold greater activity of the estrogen
receptor by hormone when compared to the conventional ERE-luciferase reporter
assay system. Tissue distribution of ERalpha mRNA was examined and kidney, ovary 
and liver exhibited expression. This is the first isolation of an estrogen
receptor from a salamander and also is the first functional cDNA obtained from
the Japanese giant salamander, an endangered species considered a special natural
monument of Japan.

PMID: 16919388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Eur J Clin Invest. 2006 Aug;36(8):588-96.

Modulation of HER2 expression by ferulic acid on human breast cancer MCF7 cells.

Chang CJ(1), Chiu JH, Tseng LM, Chang CH, Chien TM, Wu CW, Lui WY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Traditional Medicine, Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The molecular mechanisms underlying the mitogenic effect of ferulic
acid (FA), an active compound derived from Angelica sinensis, have never been
elucidated. It was the aim of this study to investigate the proliferative effect 
of FA on human breast cancer cell lines and to elucidate its modulation mechanism
on HER2 expression in MCF7 line.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: By using MCF7 (oestrogen receptor-positive; ER+,
HER2-low), BT474 (ER+, HER2-high), MDAMB231 (ER-, HER2-low) and SKBR3 (ER-,
HER2-high) human breast cancer cell lines as in vitro models, the mitogenic
effects of FA were assessed by trypan blue dye exclusion assay and DNA flow
cytometry. Ferulic acid-modulated cell signalling and HER2 gene expression were
evaluated in MCF7 line by Western blot and real-time RT-PCR analysis.
RESULTS: Ferulic acid ER-dependently stimulated cell proliferation on MCF7 cells 
in a concentration-dependent manner. The HER2 oncogene (one of the prognostic
factors of breast cancer) and ESR1 gene (oestrogen receptor-alpha; ERalpha)
transcription were markedly up-regulated by FA treatment. Besides, HER2
signalling and its downstream molecules such as AKT and ERK1/2 were involved in
FA-modulated ERalpha and cyclin D1 synthesis. Addition of anti-HER2 antibody,
trastuzumab, abrogated FA-enhanced proliferative effect on MCF7 cells, indicated 
a positive feedback control for the action of HER2 in this setting. The fact that
the ER antagonist blocked most of the FA-up-regulated HER2 expression, and that
trastuzumab down-regulated ERalpha gene expression, suggested a cross-talk
between ERalpha and HER2 signalling on MCF7 cells.
CONCLUSION: The authors' conclude that FA causes human breast cancer cell
proliferation by up-regulation of HER2 and ERalpha expression.

PMID: 16893382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Anticancer Res. 2006 Jul-Aug;26(4B):3077-81.

The estrogen receptor alpha C975G variant in familial and sporadic breast cancer:
a case-control study.

Skoglund J(1), Margolin S, Zhou XL, Maguire P, Werelius B, Lindblom A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institute, S-171 76
Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) mediates the effect of estrogen in
target tissues. Estrogen is important in breast cancer development and several
polymorphic variants in the ESR1 gene have been investigated for association with
breast cancer. The C975G variant is the most extensively studied and has been
suggested to be a risk factor.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The frequency of the C975G variant was investigated in 288
sporadic, 197 low-risk non-BRCA1/2 familial and 191 high-risk non-BRCA1/2
familial breast cancer cases and 653 controls.
RESULTS: There was a lower frequency of the C975G variant in high-risk familial
breast cancer cases compared to the controls (18% versus 22%, p=0.046). The odds 
ratio (OR) for the GG homozygotes was 0.2 (95% CI: 0.06-0.8) compared to the CC
homozygotes. No association was seen with sporadic or low-risk familial breast
cancer.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicated that the common C975G variant may
have an effect on familial breast cancer susceptibility.

PMID: 16886637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Gene Expr Patterns. 2007 Jan;7(1-2):158-64. Epub 2006 Jun 28.

Transcription of the putative maize orthologue of the Arabidopsis DORNROSCHEN
gene marks early asymmetry in the proembryo and during leaf initiation in the
shoot apical meristem.

Zimmermann R(1), Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Gyrhofstr. 17, D-50923 Köln, Germany.

A potential orthologue of the Arabidopsis DORNROSCHEN (DRN) gene was isolated
from maize based on phylogeny and expression patterns. ZmDRN transcription
provides a new marker for embryonic patterning and cellular differentiation in
the shoot apical meristem. In contrast to DRN expression in the 2-4-cell
Arabidopsis embryo, transcription of the maize orthologue is activated only in
the late proembryo stage where expression, however, marks the prospective
scutellum domain such as DRN transcription prepatterns cotyledon development in
the Arabidopsis globular embryo. The scutellum is commonly considered to be the
grass specific organ, which is homologous to the pair of cotyledons in dicots.
Such as in Arabidopsis, ZmDRN transcriptional activity is linked to the anlagen
of new lateral organs in the maize apex. Striking with respect to the timing of
cellular decisions during leaf initiation is asymmetry established between
adjacent cells at the very tip of the shoot apical meristem.

PMID: 16880009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Neuroscience. 2006 Sep 29;142(1):165-73. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Parental regulation of central patterns of estrogen receptor alpha.

Kramer KM(1), Carr MS, Schmidt JV, Cushing BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN 38152, USA.

Reduced levels of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) in the medial amygdala (MeA) 
and bed nucleus of stria terminalis (BST) have been hypothesized to play a
significant role in the expression of male behaviors associated with monogamy.
Therefore, the regulation of ERalpha could be a critical factor in determining
male behavior and the evolution of monogamy. Central expression of ERalpha
immunoreactivity was compared in hybrid offspring from crosses between two
phenotypically distinct populations of prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster).
Illinois voles (IL) are socially monogamous and display low levels of ERalpha,
while Kansas voles (KN) display some characteristics associated with polygyny and
have higher levels of ERalpha. In offspring from hybrid crosses, the pattern of
ERalpha expression was dependent upon parentage; the two types of hybrid crosses 
did not produce the same ERalpha pattern in the offspring. In the BST and MeA,
hybrid males expressed ERalpha patterns consistent with those of males from their
mother's population, while hybrid females had ERalpha patterns typical of females
belonging to their father's population. The parental-specific patterns of ERalpha
expression are suggestive of genomic imprinting, therefore, the vole ERalpha
(Esr1) gene was cloned and sequenced, and examined for allele-specific
expression. Results from this study indicate that while maternal factors may play
a major role the expression of ERalpha in their male offspring, genomic
imprinting is unlikely to be involved, suggesting another mechanism is
responsible.

PMID: 16876954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2006;18(5):573-83.

Effect of systemic progesterone concentration on the expression of
progesterone-responsive genes in the bovine endometrium during the early luteal
phase.

McNeill RE(1), Sreenan JM, Diskin MG, Cairns MT, Fitzpatrick R, Smith TJ, Morris 
DG.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction Department, Teagasc Research Centre, Athenry, Co. Galway, 
Ireland.

Increasing evidence indicates an association between the concentration of
systemic progesterone during the early luteal phase of the oestrous cycle and
embryo survival rate in cattle. We examined the relationship between the
concentration of systemic progesterone on Days 4 to 8 post-ovulation and
expression of progesterone receptor (PGR), oestrogen receptor +/- (ESR1) and
retinol-binding protein (RBP) mRNA in the bovine endometrium. Heifers were blood 
sampled from the day of ovulation (Day 0) to Day 8 post-ovulation. On Day 4,
animals were divided into low progesterone control (LC) and high progesterone
control (HC) groups based on their plasma progesterone concentrations. Half of
each group was supplemented with exogenous progesterone resulting in two further 
groups, low progesterone supplemented (LS) and high progesterone supplemented
(HS). Endometrial tissues were recovered from all groups on Day 6 or Day 8 and
gene expression was analysed following Northern blotting. Increasing progesterone
concentrations were associated with decreased PGR and ESR1 expression.
Duration-dependent effects of progesterone supplementation on ESR1 were evident
and there was an effect of systemic progesterone concentrations between Day 0 and
Day 4 on the expression of RBP at Days 6 and 8. Such progesterone-responsive
changes in uterine gene expression are likely to affect embryo development.

PMID: 16836964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Oncol Rep. 2006 Aug;16(2):429-35.

Promoter methylation status of the MGMT, hMLH1, and CDKN2A/p16 genes in
non-neoplastic mucosa of patients with and without colorectal adenomas.

Ye C(1), Shrubsole MJ, Cai Q, Ness R, Grady WM, Smalley W, Cai H, Washington K,
Zheng W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee,
USA.

The aberrant methylation of CpG islands is a common epigenetic alteration found
in cancers. The process contributes to cancer formation through the
transcriptional silencing of tumor suppressor genes. CpG island methylation has
been observed in aberrant crypt foci (ACF) and adenomas in the colon, implicating
it in the earliest aspects of colon cancer formation. In addition, some
investigators have identified an age-related increase in DNA methylation of the
ESR1 locus in the colon mucosa, suggesting that DNA methylation may be a
pre-neoplastic change that increases the risk of colon adenomas and colon cancer.
We investigated the methylation status in the promoter regions of the CDKN2A/p16,
hMLH1, and MGMT genes in human non-neoplastic rectal mucosa and evaluated whether
these methylation markers may predict the presence of adenomatous polyps in the
colon. The promoter methylation patterns of these genes were examined in rectal
biopsies (mucosa samples) of 97 colorectal adenoma cases and 94 healthy controls 
using methylation-specific PCR (MSP) assays. Methylation of the MGMT and hMLH1
genes was present in both cases and controls, with a frequency of 12.4% and 18.1%
for the MGMT gene and 12.4% and 11.7% for the hMLH1 gene. The frequency of
CDKN2A/p16 promoter methylation was very rare in normal colorectal tissue with a 
frequency of approximately 2%. Overall, no apparent case-control difference was
identified in the methylation status of these genes, either alone or in
combination. hMLH1 methylation was more frequently observed among overweight or
obese subjects (BMI>/=25) with an adjusted OR of 3.7 (95% CI=1.0-13.7).
Methylated alleles of the hMLH1 and MGMT genes were frequently detected in normal
rectal mucosa, while the frequency of CDKN2A/p16 methylation detected was very
low. The methylation status of these genes in rectal mucosa biopsies detected by 
MSP assays may not distinguish between patients with and without adenomas in the 
colon.

PMID: 16820927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. BMC Cancer. 2006 Jun 29;6:173.

Polymorphisms in estrogen-metabolizing and estrogen receptor genes and the risk
of developing breast cancer among a cohort of women with benign breast disease.

Gallicchio L(1), Berndt SI, McSorley MA, Newschaffer CJ, Thuita LW, Argani P,
Hoffman SC, Helzlsouer KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. lgallic@mdmercy.com

BACKGROUND: A cohort study was conducted to examine the role of genetic
polymorphisms in three estrogen metabolizing enzymes (COMT, CYP1A1, CYP1B1) and
the two estrogen receptors (ESR1, ESR2) in the progression of benign breast
disease (BBD) to breast cancer.
METHODS: Among participants in an ongoing cohort study, 1438 Caucasian women had 
a breast biopsy for BBD and were successfully genotyped for at least one of the
polymorphisms examined in this study. Genotypes were determined using DNA
extracted from blood specimens collected in 1989. Incident cases of breast cancer
occurring subsequent to BBD diagnosis up to 2003 were identified through cancer
registries.
RESULTS: Among all participants, the ESR2 *5772G allele was associated with a
significant decrease in the risk of breast cancer among women with BBD (Odds
Ratio (OR) 0.38; 95% Confidence Interval (CI) 0.15, 0.96). Compared to the
reference wild-type genotypes, marginally significant associations with the
development of breast cancer were observed between carriers of the variant ESR1 -
104062T allele (OR 0.70, 95% CI 0.45, 1.09), the variant ESR2 *38A allele (OR
1.40; 95% CI 0.88, 2.25), and the variant CYP1B1 453Ser allele (OR 1.48, 95% CI
0.95, 2.32).
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that specific polymorphisms in the CYP1B1, ESR1,
and ESR2 genes may play a role in progression of BBD to breast cancer among
Caucasian women. Although additional studies are needed to confirm or refute our 
findings, these results suggest that genetic markers may aid in the
identification of women who are at risk for progression of BBD to cancer.

PMCID: PMC1534058
PMID: 16808847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2006 Jun;132(6):668-77.

Epigenetic events of disease progression in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Worsham MJ(1), Chen KM, Meduri V, Nygren AO, Errami A, Schouten JP, Benninger MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery and Research Division,
Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Mich, USA. mworsha1@hfhs.org

OBJECTIVE: To examine the promoter methylation status of the 22 cancer genes and 
their contribution to disease progression in 6 head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines.
DESIGN: A panel of 41 gene probes, designed to interrogate 35 unique genes with
known associations to cancer including HNSCC, was interrogated for alterations in
gene copy number and aberrant methylation status (22 genes) using the
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assay.
SUBJECTS: Primary (A) and recurrent or metastatic (B) HNSCC cell lines
UMSCC-11A/11B, UMSCC-17A/17B, and UMSCC-81A/81B are described.
RESULTS: Nine genes, TIMP3, APC, KLK10, TP73, CDH13, IGSF4, FHIT, ESR1, and
DAPK1, were aberrantly methylated. The most frequently hypermethylated genes were
APC and IGSF4, observed in 3 of 6 cell lines, and TP73 and DAPK1, observed in 2
of 6. For KLK10 and IGSF4, TIMP3 and FHIT, and TP73, in UMSCC-11B, UMSCC-17B, and
UMSCC-81B, respectively, promoter hypermethylation was a disease progression
event, indicating complete abrogation of tumor suppressor function for KLK10,
IGSF4, and TIMP3 and gene silencing of 1 of 2 copies of TP73. Hypermethylation of
IGSF4, TP73, CDH13, ESR1, DAPK1, and APC were primary events in UMSCC-17A.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene silencing through promoter hypermethylation was observed in 5
of 6 cell lines and contributed to primary and progressive events in HNSCC. In
addition to genetic alterations of gains and losses, epigenetic events appear to 
further undermine a destabilized genomic repertoire in HNSCC.

PMID: 16785414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Gastroenterology. 2006 Jun;130(7):2001-9. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

Estrogen receptor alpha polymorphisms associated with susceptibility to
hepatocellular carcinoma in hepatitis B virus carriers.

Zhai Y(1), Zhou G, Deng G, Xie W, Dong X, Zhang X, Yu L, Yang H, Yuan X, Zhang H,
Zhi L, Yao Z, Shen Y, Qiang B, He F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genomics & Proteomics, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, 
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Overexpression of estrogen receptors (ESRs) is implicated in
the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in both animal models and
humans. We examined whether the ESR1 polymorphisms were related to HCC risk among
chronic hepatitis B virus carriers.
METHODS: Six ESR1 polymorphisms, which are (TA)n repeat in the promoter, T29C at 
codon 10 in exon 1, PvuII and XbaI site in intron 1, C136474G at codon 325 in
exon 4, and A252966G in intron 5, were genotyped in 248 patients with HCC and 239
controls. The associations with the susceptibility to HCC were estimated by
logistic regression. Allele-specific transcription difference of ESR1 messenger
RNA was performed by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: We observed a statistically significant increased susceptibility to HCC 
associated with the homozygous alleles with a high number of TA repeats (assigned
as H/H genotype; odds ratio [OR], 2.66; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.44-4.94; 
P = .0018), T29C C/C genotype (OR, 2.31; 95% CI, 1.25-4.26; P = .0076), and PvuII
C/C genotype (OR, 2.19; 95% CI, 1.27-3.78; P = .0048) compared with the
homozygous alleles with a low number of TA repeats (assigned as L/L genotype),
T29C T/T, and PvuII T/T genotype, respectively. In accordance, the relative
messenger RNA levels of the at-risk C allele of T29C were consistently higher
than those of the T allele in heterozygous cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the genetic polymorphism in ESR1 may play 
a role in mediating susceptibility to HCC in Chinese hepatitis B virus carriers.

PMID: 16762623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Int J Cancer. 2006 Oct 15;119(8):1908-14.

Assessment of gene promoter hypermethylation for detection of cervical neoplasia.

Wisman GB(1), Nijhuis ER, Hoque MO, Reesink-Peters N, Koning AJ, Volders HH,
Buikema HJ, Boezen HM, Hollema H, Schuuring E, Sidransky D, van der Zee AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, The Netherlands. g.b.a.wisman@og.umcg.nl

Current cervical cancer screening is based on morphological assessment of Pap
smears and associated with significant false negative and false positive results.
Previously, we have shown that detection of hypermethylated genes in cervical
scrapings using quantitative methylation-specific PCR (QMSP) is a promising tool 
for identification of squamous cell cervical cancer. Aim of the present
pilot-study was to evaluate presence of hypermethylated genes in cervical
carcinogenesis, both in squamous cell as well as adenocarcinomas. Cervical
scrapings were obtained from 30 patients diagnosed with cervical cancer (20
squamous cell carcinomas and 10 adenocarcinomas) and 19 women with histologically
normal cervices. The scraped cells were used for determination of promoter
hypermethylation by QMSP for 12 genes and for morphological assessment. Overall, 
CALCA, DAPK, ESR1, TIMP3, APC and RAR-beta2 promoters were significantly more
often hypermethylated in cancers than in controls, while adenocarcinomas were
more often hypermethylated above the highest control ratio for APC, TIMP3 and
RASSF1A promoters. Combining 4 genes (CALCA, DAPK, ESR1 and APC) yielded a
sensitivity of 89% (with all adenocarcinomas identified), equal to cytomorphology
(89%) and high-risk human papilloma virus (Hr-HPV; 90%). The 4-gene QMSP proved
theoretically superior to cytomorphology as well as Hr-HPV in specificity (100%
vs. 83 and 68%, respectively), because cytology identified 3 controls as moderate
or severe dyskaryosis and 6 controls were positive for Hr-HPV. In conclusions,
QMSP of 4 gene promoters combined appears to have comparable sensitivity and
potentially better specificity in comparison to "classic" cytomorphological
assessment and Hr-HPV detection. QMSP holds promise as a new diagnostic tool for 
both squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma of the cervix.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16736496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Endocrinol. 2006 Jun;189(3):473-84.

Steroid hormone regulation of Clca3 expression in the murine uterus.

Jeong JW(1), Lee KY, Lydon JP, DeMayo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Progesterone (P4) and its cognate receptor, the progesterone receptor (PGR), have
important roles in the establishment and maintenance of pregnancy in the murine
uterus. In previous studies, using high-density DNA microarray analysis, we
identified a subset of genes whose expression is repressed by chronic P4-PGR
activation in the uterus. The Clca3 gene is one of the genes whose expression is 
the most significantly downregulated by P4 and PGR. In the present study, we
performed real-time RT-PCR and in situ hybridization to investigate the
regulation of Clca3 by P4 and determine the pattern of expression of Clca3 in the
uterus during early pregnancy. This analysis shows that Clca3 mRNA transcripts
were detected in the luminal and glandular epithelium of the pseudopregnant
uterus at day 0.5 and that the expression of Clca3 was not detected after day
3.5. P4 represses Clca3 mRNA synthesis in the luminal epithelial and glandular
epithelial cells of the uterus in ovariectomized wild-type mice, but not in Pgr
knockout (PRKO) mice. Conversely, estrogen (E2) induces Clca3 expression in the
luminal epithelium and glandular epithelium, and this induction was repressed by 
P4 in the murine uterus. Analysis of the promoter region of Clca3 by in silico
and transient transfection analysis in HEC-1A cells identified the regulation of 
Clca3 by estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) within the first 528 bp of 5'-flanking
region of the Clca3 gene. Our studies identified Clca3 as a novel downregulated
gene of PGR that is a direct target of E2 regulation.

PMID: 16731779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Oct;291(4):E761-70. Epub 2006 May 23.

Recombinant human follicle-stimulating hormone alters maternal ovarian hormone
concentrations and the uterus and perturbs fetal development in mice.

Kelley RL(1), Kind KL, Lane M, Robker RL, Thompson JG, Edwards LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Reproductive Health, Discipline of Obstetrics &
Gynaecology, School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, University of
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. rebecca.kelley@adelaide.edu.au

Gonadotropins are routinely administered to produce multiple oocytes for clinical
in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment, laboratory research, and livestock
industries. Studies in mice have shown gonadotropin stimulation using equine
chorionic gonadotropin (eCG) affects the endometrium, implantation, and fetal
development. Evidence from clinical studies also indicates that stimulation with 
recombinant human follicle-stimulating hormone (rhFSH) may be detrimental to the 
endometrium and implantation rates. We investigated the effect of rhFSH in mice
on maternal plasma hormone concentrations and uterine gene and protein expression
and the effect of a stimulated maternal environment on pregnancy. Adult females
were stimulated with rhFSH or eCG, followed by human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG). On day 4 of pseudopregnancy, mice either had embryos transferred to the
uterus or were killed, and blood and uterine samples were collected. Pregnancy
outcomes were examined on day 15. Gonadotropin stimulation increased plasma
progesterone concentrations on day 4 compared with controls, whereas estradiol
concentrations were unaffected. Stimulation also reduced uterine leukemia
inhibitory factor (Lif) mRNA, but the expression of estrogen and progesterone
receptors (Esr1 and Pgr), homeobox gene Hoxa10, and Vegf mRNA were unchanged.
Furthermore, distribution of uterine PGR protein expression was altered by
stimulation, but LIF protein was unchanged. Stimulated embryo transfer recipients
had lower pregnancy rates than controls, and fetuses from the rhFSH group had
reduced weight, length, and maturity. These results demonstrate that gonadotropin
stimulation with rhFSH or eCG alters the preimplantation maternal environment,
which results in reduced pregnancy rates and fetal development in the mouse.

PMID: 16720629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Cyst Fibros. 2006 Dec;5(4):229-35. Epub 2006 May 18.

The genetic background of osteoporosis in cystic fibrosis: association analysis
with polymorphic markers in four candidate genes.

Castellani C(1), Malerba G, Sangalli A, Delmarco A, Petrelli E, Rossini M, Assael
BM, Mottes M.

Author information: 
(1)Cystic Fibrosis Center, Pediatric Department, Azienda Ospedaliera, Verona,
Italy. carlo.castellani@azosp.vr.it

BACKGROUND: Reduced Bone Mass Density (BMD) is frequent in Cystic Fibrosis (CF). 
Potentially, other genes than the Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance
Regulator (CFTR) gene may contribute to the bone phenotype variability in CF
patients.
METHODS: Four candidate genes likely associated with BMD variability were
studied: the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene, the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1),
the calcitonin receptor (CALCR) and the type I alpha 1 collagen (COL1A1) gene. A 
complete bone and CF evaluation was obtained for 82 subjects (39 m, 43 f): 15 had
normal BMD (group 1), 46 were osteopenic (group 2), and 21 were osteoporotic
(group 3).
RESULTS: No statistical difference was found among the three groups for age, sex,
pancreatic status, and vertebral fractures, nor for any of the biochemical
markers. Weight, Body Mass Index (BMI), and FEV1, scored significantly worse in
the two groups with the lowest T score. The CFTR mutations R1162X and F508del
were more frequent in patients with lower BMD (p=0.044 and p=0.071). There was no
significant difference in the distribution of the five marker genotypes among the
3 groups defined according to the unadjusted or adjusted (BMI and FEV1) BMD T
score. No significant correlation was found between the VDR, CALCR, or COL1A1
gene polymorphisms and reduced BMD values. The individual ESR1 PvuII-XbaI
haplotype C-A is associated to elevated u-calcium levels whereas the haplotype
T-A is associated to lower values (p=0.00251).
CONCLUSIONS: There was no evidence that the genes under study, with the possible 
exception of ESR1 gene variants, may modulate bone phenotype in CF.

PMID: 16713399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Biol Reprod. 2006 Sep;75(3):387-94. Epub 2006 May 17.

ECC-1 cells: a well-differentiated steroid-responsive endometrial cell line with 
characteristics of luminal epithelium.

Mo B(1), Vendrov AE, Palomino WA, DuPont BR, Apparao KB, Lessey BA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Women's Medicine, Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and
Infertility, Greenville Hospital System, Greenville, South Carolina 29605, USA.

Endometrial cancer cell lines have provided a valuable model to study endometrial
epithelial cells in vitro. Since the first development of HEC1B over 35 yr ago,
many different cell lines have been isolated and described. One valuable cell
line that maintains hormone responsiveness and unique stability over time is the 
ECC-1 cell line, developed originally by the late P.G. Satyaswaroop. In this
study, we investigated some of the properties of these cells and present their
salient characteristics. Like Ishikawa cells, ECC-1 cells maintain both estrogen 
receptors (ESR1 [ER alpha] and ESR2 [ER beta]), progesterone receptors (PR A and 
B; PGRs), and androgen receptors (ARs), along with the p160 steroid receptor
coactivators NCOA1 (formerly SRC1), NCOA2 (formerly TIF2), and NCOA3 (formerly
AIB1). The karyotype of these cells is abnormal, with multiple structural
rearrangements in all cells analyzed. Unlike Ishikawa cells that express
glandular epithelial antigens, ECC-1 cells maintain a luminal phenotype, with
expression of KRT13 (cytokeratin 13) and KRT18 (cytokeratin 18). Apparent
differences in the regulation of ESR2 also were evident in ECC-1 cells compared
to Ishikawa cells. Like other endometrial cell lines, ECC-1 cells express the
steroid receptor coactivators and exhibit epidermal growth factor-stimulated
expression of known luminal proteins thought to be involved in implantation,
including the hyaluronate receptor CD44 and SPP1 (formerly osteopontin) and CD55 
(decay-accelerating factor). These characteristics appear to be stable and
persistent over multiple cell passages, making this well-differentiated cell line
an excellent choice to study endocrine and paracrine regulation of endometrial
epithelium in vitro.

PMID: 16707768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2006;22(1):67-72. Epub 2006 May 12.

Association of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms with
sporadic Alzheimer's disease and their effect on apolipoprotein E concentrations.

Corbo RM(1), Gambina G, Ruggeri M, Scacchi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University 'La Sapienza', Rome, 
Italy. Rosamaria.corbo@uniroma1.it

BACKGROUND: Many studies have shown that estrogen replacement therapy may improve
cognitive function in women and reduce the risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Because most of the estrogen neuroprotective effect is mediated by receptors, we 
studied the associations between estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) polymorphisms
(PvuII and XbaI) and AD, and their interactions with apolipoprotein E (APOE)
polymorphism and plasma levels.
METHODS: ESR1 genotypes and APOE plasma concentrations were determined in a
sample of AD patients and controls.
RESULTS: ESR1 PP and XX genotypes were associated with an increased risk for AD
only in males (OR = 3.6, 95% CI = 1.2-10.9) and conferred a relevant additional
risk of AD to subjects also carrying APOE e*4 allele (OR = 13.3, 95% CI =
1.7-103.6). Mean APOE concentrations were lower in AD patients; the lowest levels
were observed in male patients carrying PP and/or XX genotypes (p = 0.006) and in
patients carrying PP and/or XX genotypes together with the e*4 allele (p =
0.003). In AD women, ESR1 PP and XX genotypes were also associated with lower
MMSE values (p = 0.0007).
CONCLUSION: The present data suggest that the involvement of ESR1 polymorphisms
in AD onset is mediated by the regulation of apoE expression. ESR1 polymorphisms 
are also associated with a faster cognitive decline in the women AD patients.

PMID: 16699281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Neurosci Res. 2006 Aug 1;84(2):370-8.

Estrogen-mediated immunomodulation involves reduced activation of effector T
cells, potentiation of Treg cells, and enhanced expression of the PD-1
costimulatory pathway.

Polanczyk MJ(1), Hopke C, Vandenbark AA, Offner H.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, Oregon
97239, USA.

Estrogen (E2)-induced immunomodulation involves dual effects on
antigen-presenting cells (APC) and CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells (Treg) but
not a direct effect on effector T cells. In this report, we further investigated 
the effects of E2 on APC and Treg function. We found that E2 treatment in vivo
strongly reduced recovery of APC from the peritoneal cavity and inhibited
induction of the inflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-12 and interferon-gamma 
but enhanced secretion of IL-10. Moreover, E2-conditioned bone marrow-derived
dendritic cells (BM-DC) could both enhance Treg activity and directly inhibit
responder T cells in the absence of Treg cells. We examined whether this
E2-induced inhibitory activity of BM-DC might involve costimulation through the
recently described PD-1 pathway. Both E2 and pregnancy markedly enhanced PD-1
expression in several types of APC, including macrophages, B cells, and
especially dendritic cells (DC). Similarly to E2-induced enhancement of FoxP3
expression and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis protection, E2-induced
enhancement of PD-1(+) cells was also mediated through estrogen receptor alpha
(Esr1) in DC and macrophages but not in B cells. Based on antibody inhibition
studies, PD-1 interaction with its ligands, PDL-1 and especially PDL-2, could
mediate either positive or negative regulatory signaling in both mature and
immature E2-conditioned DC, depending, respectively, on a relatively high (10:1) 
or low (1:1) ratio of T cells:BM-DC. These novel findings indicate that
E2-induced immunomodulation is mediated in part through potentiation in BM-DC of 
the PD-1 costimulatory pathway.

PMID: 16676326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Trends Biotechnol. 2006 Jun;24(6):267-73. Epub 2006 May 2.

Divide and conquer: development and cell cycle genes in plant transformation.

Arias RS(1), Filichkin SA, Strauss SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forest Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR
97331-5752, USA.

Genetic transformation and regeneration of transgenic plants remains unfeasible
for the majority of plant species. We propose that inducible expression and/or
suppression of the genes that control the cell cycle and development, by altering
chromatin structure and exerting epigenetic control of gene expression, might
substantially improve competence for transformation and/or regeneration.
Transformation efficiency was higher in cells with nuclei at the S and G2 phases,
and manipulating the genes whose activation or silencing promote the G1-S
transition has increased both transient and stable transformation. Controlling
the cell cycle directly, using RBR and VIP1, or indirectly, through hormone
regulation using IPT and ESR1, has improved rates of stable transformation. Other
target genes that might promote incorporation of DNA and/or pluripotency of cells
include HP1, CycD3 and CycD1. The availability of large EST databanks, complete
plant-genome sequences and/or inducible gene expression systems create
opportunities for testing homologous genes to increase competence of
transformation and regeneration.

PMID: 16650909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 15;12(8):2545-54.

Association of DNA repair and steroid metabolism gene polymorphisms with clinical
late toxicity in patients treated with conformal radiotherapy for prostate
cancer.

Damaraju S(1), Murray D, Dufour J, Carandang D, Myrehaug S, Fallone G, Field C,
Greiner R, Hanson J, Cass CE, Parliament M.

Author information: 
(1)Cross Cancer Institute, Department of Oncology, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the possible relationship between single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) in candidate genes encoding DNA damage
recognition/repair/response and steroid metabolism proteins with respect to
clinical radiation toxicity in a retrospective cohort of patients previously
treated with three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy (3-DCRT) for prostate
cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: One hundred twenty-four patients with prostate cancer
underwent 3-DCRT at our institution between September 1996 and December 2000. Of 
these, 83 consented for follow-up of blood sampling and SNP analysis.
Twenty-eight patients were documented as having experienced grade >/=2 late
bladder or rectal toxicity (scoring system of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group)
on at least one follow-up visit. We analyzed 49 SNPs in BRCA1, BRCA2, ESR1,
XRCC1, XRCC2, XRCC3, NBN, RAD51, RAD52, LIG4, ATM, BCL2, TGFB1, MSH6, ERCC2, XPF,
NR3C1, CYP1A1, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP3A5, CYP2D6, CYP11B2, and CYP17A1 genes using 
the Pyrosequencing technique.
RESULTS: Significant univariate associations with late rectal or bladder toxicity
(grade >/=2) were found for XRCC3 (A>G 5' untranslated region NT 4541), LIG4 (T>C
Asp(568)Asp), MLH1 (C>T, Val(219)Ile), CYP2D6*4 (G>A splicing defect), mean
rectal and bladder dose, dose to 30% of rectum or bladder, and age <60 years. On 
Cox multivariate analysis, significant associations with toxicity were found for 
LIG4 (T>C, Asp(568)Asp), ERCC2 (G>A, Asp(711)Asp), CYP2D6*4 (G>A, splicing
defect), mean bladder dose >60 Gy, and dose to 30% of rectal volume >75 Gy.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we identified SNPs in LIG4, ERCC2, and CYP2D6 genes
as putative markers to predict individuals at risk for complications arising from
radiation therapy in prostate cancer.

PMID: 16638864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Oncogene. 2006 Aug 31;25(39):5426-35. Epub 2006 Apr 24.

BARX2 and estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) coordinately regulate the production of 
alternatively spliced ESR1 isoforms and control breast cancer cell growth and
invasion.

Stevens TA(1), Meech R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

The estrogen receptor-alpha gene (ESR1) was previously identified as a direct
target of the homeobox transcription factor BARX2 in MCF7 cells. Here, we show
that BARX2 and ESR1 proteins bind to different ESR1 gene promoters and regulate
the expression of alternatively spliced mRNAs that encode 66 and 46 kDa ESR1
protein isoforms. BARX2 increases the expression of both ESR1 isoforms; however, 
it has a greater effect on the 46 kDa isoform, leading to an increased ratio
between the 46 and 66 kDa proteins. BARX2 also influences estrogen-dependent
processes such as anchorage-independent growth and modulates the expression of
the estrogen-responsive genes SOX5, RBM15, Dynein and Mortalin. In addition,
BARX2 expression promotes cellular invasion and increases the expression of
active matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9). BARX2 also increases the expression of 
the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) genes, TIMP1 and TIMP3, in
cooperation with estrogen signaling. Overall, these data indicate that BARX2 and 
ESR1 may coordinately regulate cell growth, survival and invasion pathways that
are critical to breast cancer progression.

PMID: 16636675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2006 Apr;39(4):447-54. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

Estrogen receptor 1 gene polymorphisms and coronary artery disease in the
Brazilian population.

Almeida S(1), Hutz MH.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

We examined the association of three established single nucleotide polymorphisms,
IVS1-397T>C, IVS1-351A>G, and +261G>C, in the ESR1 gene with the prevalence and
severity of coronary atherosclerosis in a southern Brazilian population of
European ancestry. Three hundred and forty-one subjects (127 women and 214 men)
with coronary artery disease (CAD) were classified as having significant disease 
(CAD+ patient group) when they showed 60% or more luminal stenosis in at least
one coronary artery or major branch segment at angiography; patients with 10% or 
less luminal stenosis were considered to have minimal CAD (CAD- patient group).
The control sample consisted of 142 subjects (79 women and 63 men) without
significant disease, in whom coronary angiography to rule out the presence of
asymptomatic CAD was not performed. The polymorphisms were investigated by
polymerase chain reaction followed by restriction analyses. In the male sample,
the +261G>C*C allele was more frequent in CAD+ than CAD- subjects (8 versus 1%, P
= 0.024). Homozygosity for the C allele of the IVS1-397T>C polymorphism was also 
significantly associated with increased CAD severity (OR: 2.99; 95% CI =
1.35-6.63; P = 0.007). In agreement with previous findings, these results suggest
that the IVS1-397T>C*C allele was associated with CAD severity independent of
gender, whereas the association of the +261G>C variant with CAD was observed in
males only. The relation between ESR1 variation and CAD may influence clinical
decisions such as the use of hormone therapy, and additionally will be helpful to
identify the genetic susceptibility determinants of cardiovascular disease
development.

PMID: 16612467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Apr;23(2):129-33.

Association of bone metabolism related genes polymorphisms with the effect of
raloxifene hydrochloride on bone mineral density and bone turnover markers in
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.

Zhang ZL(1), He JW, Qin YJ, Huang QR, Liu YJ, Hu YQ, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Preventing and Treating Osteoporosis, Osteoporosis Research Unit,
Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, 200233
P.R.China. ZZL2002@medmail.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of bone metabolism related genes
polymorphisms with the effect of raloxifene hydrochloride(RLX) on bone mineral
density (BMD) and bone turnover markers in postmenopausal women with
osteoporosis.
METHODS: A total of 68 unrelated postmenopausal women with osteoporosis of Han
ethnicity aged 47-74 years were randomly divided into 2 groups of 34 women: RLX
group (60 mg were given daily for 12 months) and placebo group. BMD and bone
turnover markers were measured at baseline, 6 and 12 months after treatment. The 
polymorphisms of Xba I and Pvu II sites in estrogen receptor 1 gene(ESR1), Ras I 
site in ESR2 gene, and start codon (Fok I) and CDX2 binding sites in vitamin D
receptor gene (VDR) were analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 58 patients completed 12 months of study period. By the end
of study, the increased percentage of BMD in lumbar spine 2-4 (L2-4), total hip, 
and trochanter were found significantly different between RLX group and placebo
group(P<0.05), and the decreased percentage of C-telopeptide and osteocalcin were
significantly different between the two groups (P<0.01). The BMD of total hip and
trochanter of women with FF genotypes of VDR Fok I site were decreased by
1.98%+/-4.86% and 2.26%+/-4.73% respectively in the RLX group, but those of women
with Ff/ff genotypes were increased by 2.52%+/-2.75% and 2.74 %+/-2.97%,
respectively(P<0.05). Moreover, the total hip BMD of women with PP/Pp genotypes
of ESR1 Pvu II site was increased by 2.12%+/-2.78%, and of women with pp genotype
it was decreased by 1.34%+/-3.73%(P<0.05). However, no significant association
was observed of the polymorphisms of five sites with the changes of BMD and bone 
turnover markers in the placebo group.
CONCLUSION: The effect of RLX on BMD in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis is
regulated by the polymorphisms of Fok I of VDR gene and Pvu II of ESR1 gene. The 
study is valuable to select this drug according to genotype of patients in
clinical.

PMID: 16604479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Fertil Steril. 2006 Feb;85(2):462-7.

Genotype distribution of estrogen receptor-alpha, catechol-O-methyltransferase,
and cytochrome P450 17 gene polymorphisms in Caucasian women with uterine
leiomyomas.

Denschlag D(1), Bentz EK, Hefler L, Pietrowski D, Zeillinger R, Tempfer C, Tong
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Freiburg, School of
Medicine, Freiburg, Germany. ddenschl@frk.ukl.uni-freiburg.de

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between the presence of uterine leiomyomas
and three functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1), catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), and cytochrom P450 17
(CYP17A) genes, which have been described to modify the estrogen metabolism.
DESIGN: Prospective case control study.
SETTING: Academic research institution.
PATIENT(S): One hundred thirty women with clinically and surgically diagnosed
uterine leiomyomas and 139 population controls.
INTERVENTION(S): Peripheral venous puncture.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Polymerase chain reaction and pyrosequencing were
performed to genotype women with respect to the ESR1 IVS1-397 T/C (PvuII), COMT
G158A, and the CYP17A 34T-->C SNPs.
RESULT(S): Comparing women with uterine leiomyomas and controls, no statistically
significant differences with respect to allele frequency and genotype
distribution were ascertained for ESR1 IVS 1-397 T/C (PvuII) (P=0.9 and P=0.6,
respectively), COMT G158A (P=0.3 and P=0.6, respectively), and CYP17A 34T-->C
(P=0.1 and P=0.5, respectively). When all two-way interactions of investigated
SNPs were ascertained, no significant interactions were observed. In a
multivariate model, no SNP was significantly associated with leiomyomas.
CONCLUSION(S): Carriage of the ESR1 IVS1-397 T/C (PvuII), COMT G158A, and the
CYP17A 34T-->C SNPs is not associated with the susceptibility to uterine
leiomyoma in a Caucasian population.

PMID: 16595228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Androl. 2006 Jul-Aug;27(4):552-9. Epub 2006 Apr 1.

Reducing estrogen synthesis in developing boars increases testis size and total
sperm production.

At-Taras EE(1), Berger T, McCarthy MJ, Conley AJ, Nitta-Oda BJ, Roser JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
California, One Shields Ave, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

The abundant production of testicular estrogens and the presence of both ESR1 and
ESR2 within boar testes are consistent with a role for estrogen in testicular
development and/or function in this species. This study was aimed at determining 
the role of endogenous estrogen in the regulation of testicular development and
function, including the effects on testis weight, histology, sperm production
(detergent-resistant spermatid numbers), Sertoli cell numbers, and Leydig cell
volume in the boar. Twenty-eight littermate pairs of boars were assigned to
groups as follows: 1 boar from each pair was assigned to the control group
(vehicle) and the other was assigned to treatment and received 0.1 mg/kg body
weight of an aromatase enzyme inhibitor (letrozole) orally each week beginning at
1 week of age until castration at 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 months of age. Testes
were weighed and testicular parenchyma was recovered for determination of
histology and detergent-resistant spermatid numbers, and for determination of
Sertoli cell number and Leydig cell volume by staining for GATA-4 and 17-alpha
hydroxylase/17-20 lyase respectively. Testes of aromatase-inhibited boars
initially exhibited delayed lumen formation, lower testicular weight, fewer
detergent-resistant spermatids, and fewer Sertoli cells, but by 7 to 8 months,
these boars had recovered and had larger testes, more detergent-resistant
spermatids per testis, and more Sertoli cells. Total Leydig cell volume increased
in proportion to testis size. Reducing endogenous estrogen is consistent with a
delay in testicular maturation/puberty that allows for a longer window for the
proliferation of Sertoli cells and maturation of Leydig cells, resulting in
larger testes and higher spermatid production.

PMID: 16582410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Endocrinol Invest. 2006 Jan;29(1):5-10.

Polymorphisms of estrogen receptor beta gene are associated with hypospadias.

Beleza-Meireles A(1), Omrani D, Kockum I, Frisén L, Lagerstedt K, Nordenskjöld A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

INTRODUCTION: Hypospadias is a common male congenital urethral malformation,
defined as the displacement of the urethral meatus ventrally from the tip of the 
glans penis. The importance of androgen receptor in male external genitalia
development has been well recognized. Recently, the presence of active estrogen
receptors (ER) in the developing male external genitalia has also been
demonstrated. There are two isoforms of the human estrogen receptor, ESR1 and
ESR2, which occur, with distinct tissue and cell patterns of expression. We
hypothesized that modifications in these nuclear receptors' genes could lead to
hypospadias.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We screened 60 boys with hypospadias for mutations in the 
coding regions of ESR1 and ESR2 genes, by denaturing high-performance liquid
chromatography and automated sequence analysis. We also genotyped the CA repeat
polymorphism in ESR2 and the TA repeat polymorphism in ESR1.
RESULTS: The CA repeat polymorphism in ESR2 is prolonged in hypospadias patients 
compared to controls (p < 0.05). Prolongation of this CA repeat polymorphism has 
previously been associated with lower levels of testosterone. Six patients
presented the genetic variant 2681-4A > G (rs944050) in the heterozygous form in 
ESR2, which was a significantly higher frequency than in the control population
(p < 0.05). One of these patients also presented a 266_267insC in exon 1 of ESR2,
which is also a known single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP; rs3832949). In ESR1,
no significant gene alteration was found to be associated with hypospadias.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that variations in the ESR2 might influence
susceptibility to hypospadias.

PMID: 16553027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur Heart J. 2006 Jul;27(13):1597-604. Epub 2006 Mar 21.

The association of oestrogen receptor alpha-haplotypes with cardiovascular risk
factors in the British Women's Heart and Health Study.

Lawlor DA(1), Timpson N, Ebrahim S, Day IN, Smith GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Social Medicine, University of Bristol, Canynge Hall,
Whiteladies Rd, Bristol, BS8 2PR, UK. d.a.lawlor@bristol.ac.uk

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 2006 Jul;27(13):1519-20.

AIMS: One previous study among women with established coronary heart disease
found a gene-treatment interaction between the oestrogen receptor gene (ESR1) and
hormone replacement in their association with high density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL-c). We aimed to replicate these findings in a general population
sample.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cross-sectional associations were assessed in a study of
3404 women from 23 towns across Britain who were aged 60-79 at the time of
assessment and were described as white by the examining nurse. Women with the T-A
haplotype [constructed from two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
first intron of ESR1: c454-397T > C (rs2234693) and c454-351A > G (rs9340799)],
which was predicted to be associated with reduced oestrogen response, were more
likely to have been past [per haplotype odds ratio 1.16 (95% CI 1.01, 1.33), P = 
0.02] or to be current users [per haplotype odds ratio 1.19 (95% CI 0.99, 1.42), 
P = 0.05] of hormone replacement. However, there was no association between
haplotype or either SNP and HDL-c or other cardiovascular disease risk factors
and no statistical evidence of an interaction between hormone replacement use and
haplotype or either SNP with respect to HDL-c or any other cardiovascular disease
risk factors.
CONCLUSION: Women with the T-A haplotype are more likely to use hormone
replacement. However, genotyping of ESR1 rs2234693 or rs9340799 in
post-menopausal women to tailor hormone replacement is unlikely to markedly
improve cardiovascular risk.

PMID: 16551651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Psychiatr Genet. 2006 Apr;16(2):85-8.

Estrogen receptor alpha and risk for cognitive impairment in postmenopausal
women.

Olsen L(1), Rasmussen HB, Hansen T, Bagger YZ, Tankó LB, Qin G, Christiansen C,
Werge T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Biological Psychiatry, Copenhagen University Hospital,
Roskilde, Denmark.

The estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene has been implicated in the process of
cognitive impairment in elderly women. In a paired case-control study, we tested 
whether two ESR1 gene polymorphisms (the XbaI and PvuII sites) are risk factors
for cognitive impairment as measured by the six-item
Orientation-Memory-Concentration test in postmenopausal Danish women. Hormone
replacement therapy, age and executive cognitive ability were examined as
covariates for ESR1 gene effects on cognitive impairment. The XbaI polymorphism
showed a marginal effect on cognitive abilities (P=0.054) when adjusted for
executive cognitive ability. Using a dominant genetic model for the X allele, we 
found an elevated risk (executive cognitive ability adjusted P=0.033) for
cognitive impairment. Hormone replacement therapy also had a borderline effect on
cognitive ability (P=0.049) and this effect was reflected in executive cognitive 
ability. These data support that the ESR1 gene variants affect cognitive
functioning in postmenopausal women.

PMID: 16538187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2006 Mar;15(3):462-7.

Influence of estrogen receptor alpha and progesterone receptor polymorphisms on
the effects of hormone therapy on mammographic density.

van Duijnhoven FJ(1), Peeters PH, Warren RM, Bingham SA, Uitterlinden AG, van
Noord PA, Monninkhof EM, Grobbee DE, van Gils CH.

Author information: 
(1)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center,
Utrecht, Mail-drop Str. 6.131, P.O. Box 85500, 3508 GA Utrecht, the Netherlands.

Postmenopausal hormone therapy increases mammographic density, a strong breast
cancer risk factor, but effects vary across women. We investigated whether the
effect of hormone therapy use is modified by polymorphisms in the estrogen
receptor (ESR1) and progesterone receptor (PGR) genes in the Dutch Prospect-EPIC 
and the English EPIC-Norfolk cohorts. Information on hormone therapy use was
obtained through questionnaires at recruitment and after 5 years. Blood samples
were collected and consecutive mammograms were available through breast cancer
screening programs. For 795 hormone therapy users, one mammogram before and a
second mammogram during hormone therapy use was included. For 781 never hormone
therapy users, mammograms with similar time intervals were included. Mammographic
density was assessed using a computer-assisted method. Changes in density were
analyzed using linear regression. A statistically significant difference in
percentage density change between hormone therapy users and never users was seen 
in women with the ESR1 PvuII Pp or pp genotype (2.24%; P < 0.01), but not in
those with the PP genotype (0.90%; P = 0.47). Similarly, effects of hormone
therapy on percentage density were observed in women with the ESR1 XbaI Xx or xx 
genotype (2.20%; P < 0.01), but not in those with the XX genotype (-0.65%; P =
0.70). Also, effects were seen in women with the PGR +331 GG genotype (2.04%; P <
0.01), but not in those with the GA or AA genotype (0.98%; P = 0.53). The PGR
PROGINS polymorphism did not seem to make women more susceptible to the effects
of hormone therapy use. In conclusion, our results suggest that specific
polymorphisms in the ESR1 and PGR genes may make women more susceptible to the
effects of hormone therapy use on mammographic density.

PMID: 16537702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Bone. 2006 Jul;39(1):213-21. Epub 2006 Mar 10.

Multilocus analysis of estrogen-related genes in Spanish postmenopausal women
suggests an interactive role of ESR1, ESR2 and NRIP1 genes in the pathogenesis of
osteoporosis.

Morón FJ(1), Mendoza N, Vázquez F, Molero E, Quereda F, Salinas A, Fontes J,
Martínez-Astorquiza T, Sánchez-Borrego R, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genómica Estructural, Neocodex, Avda, Charles Darwin sn,
Parque Tecnológico Isla de la Cartuja, 41092-Sevilla, and Servicio de Ginecología
y Obsetricia, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain.

Osteoporosis is a common disease with multiple environmental and genetic risk
factors involved. Using a marker-by-marker approach, the role of different
estrogen-related genes has been analyzed in different populations, but most of
these studies ignore the complex multigenic nature of human osteoporosis. Looking
for markers related to osteoporosis, we have analyzed five single nucleotide
polymorphisms located in genes related to the estrogen pathway, Follicle
Stimulating Hormone Receptor (FSHR) gene, the CYP19 aromatase (CYP19A1) gene, the
Estrogen Receptor alpha (ESR1) gene, the Estrogen Receptor beta (ESR2) gene and
the Nuclear Receptor Interacting Protein 1 (NRIP1) gene in 265 unrelated
postmenopausal women. We have obtained nominal P values for the NRIP1 Gly75Gly
and ESR2 *39A>G markers (P=0.013 and P=0.02 respectively), but no gene seems to
be associated after multiple test corrections. Reanalysis of this study using 437
postmenopausal women confirmed our results and only detect marginal effects for
ESR2 marker (P=0.045). By contrast, multilocus analysis predicted epistatic
interactions between ESR1, ESR2 and NRIP1 loci and its involvement in
postmenopausal osteoporosis (P=0.003). We detected two digenic genotypes
involving ESR2-NRIP1 and ESR2-ESR1 genes strongly associated with osteoporosis
(P=0.007). Replication of multilocus studies using 437 patients confirmed the
detected interactions (P<0.01). We proposed a non-additive non-multiplicative
oligogenic model including ESR2 AG genotype modulated by NRIP1 A+ or ESR1 TT
genotypes involved in osteoporosis. Our results reaffirm the polygenic nature and
the genetic complexity of osteoporosis trait adding a new candidate gene (NRIP1) 
for association studies of bone-related traits.

PMID: 16530497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006 Mar;117(3):604-11. Epub 2006 Feb 15.

Estrogen receptor 1 polymorphisms are associated with airway hyperresponsiveness 
and lung function decline, particularly in female subjects with asthma.

Dijkstra A(1), Howard TD, Vonk JM, Ampleford EJ, Lange LA, Bleecker ER, Meyers
DA, Postma DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of PulmonologyUniversity Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Sex hormones may contribute to the higher prevalence and severity of 
adult asthma in women compared with men.
OBJECTIVE: Sequence variants in the estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) may alter
estrogen action in asthma.
METHODS: Two hundred asthma probands and their families (n=1249) were genotyped
for 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ESR1 gene (intervening
sequence 1 [IVS1]-1505A/G, IVS1-1415T/C, IVS1-397C/T, IVS1-351G/A and
exon1+30T/C). Association with asthma and bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR)
were tested. In the asthma probands, association of SNPs with BHR severity and
annual FEV1 decline were determined.
RESULTS: No SNP was associated with asthma. IVS1-397 was significantly associated
with the presence of BHR (P=.02) and interacted with sex; female subjects with
the CT or TT genotype were at risk (P=.01). In asthma probands, all SNPs were
associated with FEV1 decline. Exon1+30 CT and TT group had an excess decline of
11.6 mL/y (P=.03) and 15.7 mL/y (P=.01), respectively, compared with the CC
group. Of the IVS1 polymorphisms, IVS1-351G/A showed the strongest association,
with the AA group having excess decline of 16.1 mL/y (P=.01) compared with the GG
group. In subanalyses by sex, these associations were significant only in female 
subjects.
CONCLUSION: ESR1 gene variants may affect development of BHR, particularly in
female subjects. They may also lead to a more rapid lung function loss in
patients with asthma, and in female subjects specifically. This may result from
altered estrogen action, which affects lung development and/or airway remodeling.
Further studies on ESR1 gene variations are important to understand better the
origin of sex differences in asthma.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Variations in the gene encoding estrogen receptor alpha
are associated with BHR and a more rapid annual lung function decline, especially
in female subjects. Even though this has no diagnostic or clinical implication,
it may open avenues for future sex-specific treatment in asthma.

PMID: 16522460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. BMC Med Genet. 2006 Feb 28;7:12.

No role for estrogen receptor 1 gene intron 1 Pvu II and exon 4 C325G
polymorphisms in migraine susceptibility.

Colson NJ(1), Lea RA, Quinlan S, Griffiths LR.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Centre, School of Health Science, Griffith University Gold
Coast, PMB 50, Gold Coast Mail Centre, Queensland, 9726, Australia.
n.colson@griffith.edu.au

BACKGROUND: We have previously reported an association between the estrogen
receptor 1 (ESR1) gene exon 8 G594A polymorphism and migraine susceptibility in
two independent Australian cohorts. In this paper we report results of analysis
of two further single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ESR1 gene in the
same study group, the T/C Pvu II SNP in intron 1 and the C325G SNP in exon 4, as 
well as results of linkage disequilibrium (LD) analysis on these markers.
METHODS: We investigated these variants by case-control association analysis in a
cohort of 240 migraineurs and 240 matched controls. The SNPs were genotyped using
specific restriction enzyme assays. Results were analysed using contingency table
methods incorporating the chi-squared statistic. LD results are presented as D'
statistics with associated P values.
RESULTS: We found no evidence for association of the Pvu II T/C polymorphism and 
the C325G polymorphism and migraine susceptibility and no evidence for LD between
these two SNPs and the previously implicated exon 8 G594A marker.
CONCLUSION: We have found no role for the polymorphisms in intron 1 and exon 4
with migraine susceptibility. To further investigate our previously implicated
exon 8 marker, we suggest the need for studies with a high density of
polymorphisms be undertaken, with particular focus on markers in LD with the exon
8 marker.

PMCID: PMC1431511
PMID: 16504171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Blood Press. 2006;15(1):45-50.

Association of an estrogen receptor-alpha gene polymorphism with left ventricular
mass.

Leibowitz D(1), Dresner-Pollak R, Dvir S, Rokach A, Reznik L, Pollak A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel. oleibo@hadassah.org.il

BACKGROUND: The development of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is influenced
by gender and by sex hormones including estrogens. This study hypothesized that
genetic variation in the TA repeat regulatory region of the estrogen receptor
alpha gene (ESR1) is related to left ventricular mass.
METHODS: Consecutive patients undergoing coronary angiography with
echocardiographic studies were studied. The length of the dinucleotide repeat
thymine and adenine (TA) upstream of exon 1 in the ESR1 gene was determined. The 
mean number of TA repeats (n = 18) categorized the subjects into long, short and 
mixed allele genotypes.
RESULTS: Ninety-two patients (mean age 60.3+/-12.6 years, 63 males, 29 females)
were entered into the study. When LV mass indexed to body surface area was
examined in the three genotype groups, a significant difference between the
groups was noted with lower LV mass in the short allele group (p < 0.03). When
the short allele group was compared with subjects with at least one long allele, 
a highly significant difference in left ventricular mass index was noted (86.9
g/m2 vs 101.3 g/m2, p < 0.009). CONCLUSION. The ESR1 TA repeat polymorphism may
influence left ventricular mass. Patients with at least one long allele exhibit a
tendency to higher LV mass.

PMID: 16492615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Circ Res. 2006 Mar 17;98(5):590-2. Epub 2006 Feb 16.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene variation is associated with risk of myocardial
infarction in more than seven thousand men from five cohorts.

Shearman AM(1), Cooper JA, Kotwinski PJ, Miller GJ, Humphries SE, Ardlie KG,
Jordan B, Irenze K, Lunetta KL, Schuit SC, Uitterlinden AG, Pols HA, Demissie S, 
Cupples LA, Mendelsohn ME, Levy D, Housman DE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
MA 02139, USA. shearman@mit.edu

Understanding the mechanisms by which estrogens affect cardiovascular disease
risk, including the role of variation in the gene for estrogen receptor alpha
(ESR1), may be key to new treatment strategies. We investigated whether the CC
genotype at ESR1 c.454-397T>C is associated with increased risk among men. Study 
of more than 7000 whites in 5 cohorts from 4 countries provided evidence that
genotype CC, present in roughly 20% of individuals, is a risk factor for nonfatal
acute myocardial infarction (odds ratio=1.44; P<0.0001), after adjustment for
established cardiovascular risk factors. After exclusion of younger subjects from
2 cohorts, because of age interaction, the odds ratio increased (to 1.63).

PMID: 16484614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Int J Cancer. 2006 Jul 15;119(2):467-71.

Estrogen and progesterone receptor gene polymorphisms and sporadic breast cancer 
risk: a Spanish case-control study.

Fernández LP(1), Milne RL, Barroso E, Cuadros M, Arias JI, Ruibal A, Benítez J,
Ribas G.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Group, Human Cancer Genetics Program, Spanish National Cancer
Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

Estrogens, and to a lesser extent progesterones, influence the proliferation,
differentiation and physiology of breast tissue as well as the development and
progression of breast cancer. Genetic variants in the steroid hormone receptor
genes ESR1 and PGR (belonging to the nuclear receptor superfamily) could
therefore modify sporadic breast cancer susceptibility. Two studies have shown a 
protective effect associated with variants in ESR1 in 2 distinct populations. We 
studied 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ESR1 and 4 in PGR in 550
consecutive and unrelated sporadic Spanish breast cancer patients and 564 healthy
Spanish controls. We observed a dominant protective effect for the S10S variant
in ESR1, with an estimated odds ratio (OR) of 0.75 (95% CI = 0.58-0.97; p = 0.03)
although functional studies did not show changes in the RNA stability. A small
subset of individuals carried a haplotype combination that corroborates this
protection. No other SNP considered in either gene was found to be associated
with sporadic breast cancer. Our results obtained in a European population
confirm the protective role of the S10S variant in ESR1, previously reported in
an Asian and a European-American population.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16477637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Arthritis Rheum. 2006 Feb;54(2):533-9.

Reproducible genetic associations between candidate genes and clinical knee
osteoarthritis in men and women.

Valdes AM(1), Van Oene M, Hart DJ, Surdulescu GL, Loughlin J, Doherty M, Spector 
TD.

Author information: 
(1)St. Thomas' Hospital, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Jan;60(1):178.

OBJECTIVE: Osteoarthritis (OA) is recognized to have a genetic component, and in 
this study, we aimed to replicate in a case-control study of men and women with
clinical knee OA genetic associations in 12 candidate genes previously reported
to be associated with OA.
METHODS: Twenty-five single-nucleotide polymorphisms were genotyped in 298 men
and 305 women ages 50-86 who were diagnosed as having knee OA, as assessed both
clinically and radiographically, and in 297 men and 299 women matched for age and
ethnicity (controls). Standardized anteroposterior radiographs of the knee in
extension were performed on each of the cases, and all cases met the American
College of Rheumatology criteria for OA of the knee. Genotype and haplotype
frequencies in cases and controls were compared separately in men and women. The 
12 genes tested were AACT, ADAM12, BMP2, CD36, CILP, COX2, ESR1, NCOR2, OPG, TNA,
TNFAIP6, and VDR.
RESULTS: Eight of the candidate genes were associated in women and 5 in men, and 
only 3 genes (TNFAIP6, NCOR2, and CD36) were not significantly associated in
either sex. The strongest associations in terms of odds ratios (ORs) were a
haplotype in ADAM12 (OR 7.1 [95% confidence interval (95% CI) 3.3-33.8]) and a
haplotype in ESR1 (OR 3.6 [95% CI 1.18-10.98]) in women. The same ADAM12
haplotype (OR 2.54 [95% CI 1.2-5.4]) and a haplotype in the CILP gene (OR 0.38
[95% CI 0.23-0.62]) were the strongest associations in men.
CONCLUSION: We found that genes previously identified by their association with
subclinical features of knee OA or progression were also associated with clinical
knee OA. These genetic associations may identify individuals at a particularly
high risk of developing knee OA.

PMID: 16453284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Urol. 2006 Feb;175(2):523-7.

Association between an estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphism and the risk of 
prostate cancer in black men.

Hernández J(1), Balic I, Johnson-Pais TL, Higgins BA, Torkko KC, Thompson IM,
Leach RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE: Studies suggest that SNPs within ESR1 may be associated with an
increased risk of prostate cancer. We evaluated the association of the XbaI and
PvuII ESR1 SNPs and prostate cancer risk in 3 different racial/ethnic
populations.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 1,603 volunteers from the SABOR study (285
black, 876 white and 442 Hispanic men) were genotyped to assess allelic
frequencies of the ESR1 SNPs. Case-control analysis was performed on 598 prostate
cancer cases and 1,098 controls (260 black men, 1,013 non-Hispanic white men and 
423 Hispanic white men) to assess the association between these polymorphisms and
prostate cancer risk.
RESULTS: Allelic frequency was significantly different across ethnic/racial
groups for both SNPs. Logistic regression analysis adjusted for age and
stratified by race and ethnicity demonstrated an association between the AG
genotype or presence of the G allele (GG or AG genotype) in the XbaI SNP and
prostate cancer risk within black men (OR 2.25, 95% CI 1.07-4.70, p = 0.031; OR
2.14, 95% CI 1.05-4.35, p = 0.035, respectively). No association was observed
among Hispanic and non-Hispanic white men for this SNP. Furthermore, there was no
association between the PvuII SNP and prostate cancer risk across all groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates an association between the AG genotype, as
well as presence of the G allele within the XbaI ESR1 SNP and prostate cancer
risk among black men.

PMID: 16406987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Neuroreport. 2006 Jan 23;17(1):61-4.

Association of migraine and ESR1 G325C polymorphism.

Oterino A(1), Pascual J, Ruiz de Alegría C, Valle N, Castillo J, Bravo Y,
González F, Sánchez-Velasco P, Cayón A, Leyva-Cobián F, Alonso-Arranz A, Muñoz P.

Author information: 
(1)Services of Neurology, Universitary Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla, Santander,
Spain. aoterino@humv.es

Migraine is a genetically complex disorder in which sexual hormones influence the
phenotype. ESR1 G594A polymorphism has been associated with migraine in
Australians. We performed a case-control study with G594A and G325C polymorphisms
to determine whether ESR1 is associated with migraine in our population. An
association between G594A and migraine could not be demonstrated here. By
contrast, we observed that the C325 allele conferred a 1.6 (95% confidence
interval=1.1-2.4) higher risk for suffering from migraine in women than the G
allele. Women carrying the C352C genotype were over 3 times more likely to suffer
from migraine than those carrying the G325G genotype. Therefore, we conclude that
ESR1 G325C polymorphism is associated with migraine in our population.

PMID: 16361951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Endokrynol Pol. 2005 May-Jun;56(3):233-9.

Polymorphism of VDR gene--the most effective molecular marker of osteoporotic
bone fractures risk within postmenopausal women from Wielkopolska region of
Poland.

Horst-Sikorska W(1), Wawrzyniak A, Celczynska-Bajew L, Marcinkowska M, Dabrowski 
S, Kalak R, Slomski R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Karol Marcinkowski Medical University, Poznan, 
Poland.

The major public health problem which will arise is a frequency of osteoporosis. 
The first manifestations of this disease are often bone fractures. Identification
and evaluation of individual bone fracture risk will be the most effective way of
solving the problem. Genetic determination of osteoporosis is unquestionable. The
aim of this study is to detect which variants of genotypes lead to illness. We
investigated 187 patients with osteoporosis (161 women, 26 men) and 19 healthy
subjects. Polymorphisms of the following genes were investigated: OPG, VDR, ESR1,
TGFB1 COL1A1, and BMP2. The statistically significant relationship between BMD
value and T allele of Taq I VDR gene were found. Genotypes: aa, bb, TT of VDR
gene occur more frequently in polish osteoporotic population in Wielkopolska
region within patients with higher risk of bone fractures.

PMID: 16350715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dev Growth Differ. 2005 Dec;47(9):609-25.

Hairy is a cell context signal controlling Notch activity.

Cui Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Biomolecular Systems, Oregon Graduate
Institute School of Science and Engineering, Oregon Health and Science
University, 20000 NW Walker Road, Beaverton, OR 97006, USA. cuiy@ebs.ogi.edu

Notch signaling regulates cell fate determination and many developmental
processes. Here we report that lateral inhibition, a major mechanism for Notch
activity, is modulated by Hairy, a bHLH-WRPW protein. In Xenopus, Notch can have 
from inhibitory, permissive to enhancing roles in muscle or neural
differentiation. These cell context-dependent effects correlate with Hairy
expression levels from high to low, respectively, in the cells. Moreover, Notch
effects can be altered upon manipulation of Hairy expression. We propose that
Hairy provides a cell context in which a cell can interpret Notch and other
extrinsic signals by controlling responsiveness of its target genes; this mode of
Hairy-Notch interaction may apply in other systems.

PMID: 16316406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cancer Lett. 2006 Sep 28;241(2):213-20. Epub 2005 Nov 21.

Methylation and expression analysis of 15 genes and three normally-methylated
genes in 13 Ovarian cancer cell lines.

Imura M(1), Yamashita S, Cai LY, Furuta J, Wakabayashi M, Yasugi T, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1
Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Aberrant methylation of CpG islands (CGIs) in promoter regions of
tumor-suppressor genes causes their silencing, and aberrant demethylation of
normally methylated CGIs in promoter regions causes aberrant expression of
cancer-testis antigens. Here, we comprehensively analyzed aberrant methylation of
15 genes and demethylation of three normally methylated genes in 13 ovarian
cancer cell lines. RASSF1A was most frequently methylated (complete methylation
in 7 and partial methylation in 4 cell lines), followed by ESR1 (5 and 2,
respectively), FLNC (4 and 4), HAND1 (4 and 2), LOX (3 and 2), HRASLS (3 and 2), 
MGMT (3 and 0), CDKN2A (3 and 0), THBD (2 and 1), hMLH1 (2 and 0), CDH1 (1 and 1)
and GSTP1 (1 and 0). hTERC and TIMP3 were only partially methylated in 7 and 2
cell lines, respectively. BRCA1 was not methylated at all. Aberrant demethylation
of MAGE-A3, -B2 and -A1 was detected in 8, 4 and 3 cell lines, respectively. Gene
expression was consistently absent in cell lines without unmethylated DNA
molecules. Aberrant methylation was frequently observed in MCAS, RMUG-L (mucinous
cell carcinomas), RTSG (poorly-differentiated carcinoma) and TYK-nu
(undifferentiated carcinoma) while infrequent in HTOA, JHOS-2, and OV-90 (serous 
cell carcinomas). Aberrant demethylation was frequently observed in OV-90,
OVK-18, and ES-2 cell lines. It was shown that aberrant methylation and
demethylation were frequently observed in ovarian cancer cell lines, and these
data will provide a basis for further epigenetic analysis in ovarian cancers.

PMID: 16303245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005 Nov;14(11 Pt 1):2655-60.

Polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha gene and mammographic density.

van Duijnhoven FJ(1), Bezemer ID, Peeters PH, Roest M, Uitterlinden AG, Grobbee
DE, van Gils CH.

Author information: 
(1)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care University Medical Center, 
Utrecht Mail Drop Str. 6.131, 3508 GA Utrecht, the Netherlands.

The presence of the PvuII or the XbaI polymorphism in the estrogen receptor alpha
gene (ESR1, 6q25) has been related to breast cancer risk; however, results are
not fully consistent. To further elucidate this relation, we examined these
polymorphisms in relation with mammographic density, a measure of dense tissue in
the breast, which is strongly associated with breast cancer risk. For this study,
620 participants aged 49 to 68 years were selected from the Prospect-European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition cohort. Blood samples,
lifestyle- and medical questionnaire data and mammograms were available for these
women. Genotyping was done using the TaqMan PCR assay and mammographic density
was assessed using a computer-assisted method. Means of mammographic density were
compared by ESR1 genotypes and haplotypes. The percentage density was higher in
women with one or two copies of the PvuII p allele (means for Pp and pp are 37%
and 36%, respectively) than in those with the PP genotype (32%, P(trend) = 0.09).
Women with one or two copies of the XbaI x allele had higher mean percentage
density (Xx and xx, 36% and 37%, respectively) than those with the XX genotype
(31%, P(trend) < 0.01). Haplotype 1 (px) was associated with increased density,
whereas haplotype 2 (PX) was associated with decreased density, both suggesting
an allele-dose effect (P(trend) = 0.08 and <0.01, respectively). Similar
associations were found with absolute density (P(trend) < 0.01). The findings of 
this study support the view that ESR1 polymorphisms may affect breast cancer risk
through differences in breast density.

PMID: 16284392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Hypertens. 2005 Dec;23(12):2193-200.

Variation in estrogen-related genes and cross-sectional and longitudinal blood
pressure in the Framingham Heart Study.

Peter I(1), Shearman AM, Zucker DR, Schmid CH, Demissie S, Cupples LA, Larson MG,
Vasan RS, D'Agostino RB, Karas RH, Mendelsohn ME, Housman DE, Levy D.

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Research Center, Institute for Clinical Research and Health
Policy Studies, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
ipeter@tufts-nemc.org

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2005 Dec;23(12):2147-9.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the association between variation in estrogen-related genes
and cross-sectional and longitudinal blood pressure in men and women.
DESIGN: In 1780 unrelated members of the community-based Framingham Heart Study
offspring cohort, systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure were
measured over a total of six examination cycles encompassing 24 years of
follow-up. Multivariate regression analyses were used to assess the relation
between untreated cross-sectional and longitudinal blood pressure and
polymorphisms at the estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1), estrogen receptor-beta
(ESR2), aromatase (CYP19A1), and nuclear receptor coactivator 1 (NCOA1) genes
after adjustment for common risk factors.
RESULTS: In men, systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure (systolic blood
pressure minus diastolic blood pressure) were associated with two polymorphisms
in ESR1, while pulse pressure was also associated with variations in NCOA1 and
CYP19A1. Polymorphisms in ESR1, CYP19A1, and NCOA1 were associated with diastolic
blood pressure in women.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the underlying relations between genes involved in estrogen
action and hypertension remain to be completely understood, our findings provide 
suggestive evidence of gender-specific contributions of estrogen-related genes to
blood pressure variation. As no correction for multiple testing was performed in 
the analyses, we view these results as suggestive and not definitive. Further
studies are warranted to confirm these results using a comprehensive set of
polymorphisms in order to shed more light on the involvement of estrogen in blood
pressure regulation.

PMID: 16269961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 Nov;94(2):145-52.

Estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) polymorphisms in familial and sporadic breast
cancer.

Maguire P(1), Margolin S, Skoglund J, Sun XF, Gustafsson JA, Børresen-Dale AL,
Lindblom A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

Estrogen is involved in both normal mammary development and in breast
carcinogenesis. A family history of disease and exposure to estrogen are major
risk factors for developing breast cancer. Estrogen exerts its biological effects
through binding to the estrogen receptors, estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and the
more recently discovered estrogen receptor beta (ESR2). Genetic variation in
genes involved in estrogen biosynthesis, metabolism and signal transduction have 
been suggested to play a role in breast cancer risk. We therefore tested the
hypothesis that common genetic variants of the ESR2 gene may be associated with
increased risk for breast cancer and this risk may vary between breast cancer
groups. We investigated three common ESR2 polymorphisms, rs1256049 (G1082A),
rs4986938 (G1730A) and rs928554 (Cx+56 A-->G) for association to breast cancer
risk. A total of 723 breast cancer cases and 480 controls were included in the
study. Of the breast cancer cases, 323 were sporadic and 400 were familial, the
familial cases were further divided into familial high-risk and familial low-risk
breast cancer cases. We found no overall statistically significant association
for any of the single polymorphisms studied. Haplotype analysis suggested one
haplotype associated with increased risk in sporadic breast cancer patients (OR =
3.0, p = 0.03). Further analysis is needed to elucidate the role of estrogen
receptor beta in breast cancer susceptibility.

PMID: 16261413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Endocrinology. 2006 Feb;147(2):899-911. Epub 2005 Oct 27.

Estrogen regulates transcription of the ovine oxytocin receptor gene through
GC-rich SP1 promoter elements.

Fleming JG(1), Spencer TE, Safe SH, Bazer FW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, 77843-2471, USA.

Establishment of pregnancy in ruminants results from paracrine signaling by
interferon tau (IFNT) from the conceptus to uterine endometrial luminal epithelia
(LE) that prevents release of luteolytic prostaglandin F(2alpha) pulses. In
cyclic and pregnant ewes, progesterone down-regulates progesterone receptor (PGR)
gene expression in LE. In cyclic ewes, loss of PGR allows for increases in
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and then oxytocin receptor (OXTR) gene expression 
followed by oxytocin-induced prostaglandin F(2alpha) pulses. In pregnant ewes,
IFNT inhibits transcription of the ESR1 gene, which presumably inhibits OXTR gene
transcription. Alternatively, IFNT may directly inhibit OXTR gene transcription. 
The 5' promoter/enhancer region of the ovine OXTR gene was cloned and found to
contain predicted binding sites for activator protein 1, SP1, and PGR, but not
for ESR1. Deletion analysis showed that the basal promoter activity was dependent
on the region from -144 to -4 bp that contained only SP1 sites. IFNT did not
affect activity of the OXTR promoter. In cells transfected with ESR1, E2, and ICI
182,780 increased promoter activity due to GC-rich SP1 binding sites at positions
-104 and -64. Mutation analyses showed that the proximal SP1 sites mediated ESR1 
action as well as basal activity of the promoter. In response to progesterone,
progesterone receptor B also increased OXTR promoter activity. SP1 protein was
constitutively expressed and abundant in the LE of the ovine uterus. These
results support the hypothesis that the antiluteolytic effects of IFNT are
mediated by direct inhibition or silencing of ESR1 gene transcription, thereby
precluding ESR1/SP1 from stimulating OXTR gene transcription.

PMID: 16254027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 2005 Oct;32(10):1011-7.

A novel mutation of estrogen receptor gene detected in girls with precocious
puberty.

Li B(1), Liu L, Fu X, Zhou WQ, Zou DT, Zhao XY, Cai YN, Tu HB, Liu QC, Chen YY.

Author information: 
(1)Experumental Medical Research Center, Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou
510182, China. lbfree@21cn.com

Female precocious puberty is caused by premature activation of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, exposure to exogenous sex steroid hormones, 
and the presence of endogenous sex steroids caused by various factors. Estrogen
is the final key factor to start onset of puberty. However,in some cases of
precocious puberty in girls estrogen elevation could not be detected. The raised 
sensitivity of estrogen receptor, which may caused by ESR1 mutation or
polymorphism, has been frequently mentioned for interpreting the etiology of
sporadic low estrogen type cases. But no case evidence has been found in clinical
practice. For the purpose of screening possible mutations in estrogen receptor
gene, leukocyte genomic DNA were collected from 16 girls with precocious puberty 
of sporadic low estrogen,and exons of ESR1 were amplified and analysized using
PCR-SSCP/silver staining method. A single strand conformation change in exon 8
was found in one of the patients (No. 14). The suspected fragment were cloned to 
a T vector and sequenced for analysis. Sequencing of these clones revealed that
this conformation change is caused by a C to T transition. This mutation results 
in the replacement of arginine by cystine at position 548 of ESR1 protein. The
mutation created an extra Btsl digest site and made it can be readily identified 
by PCR-PFLP method. Further detection using this method, and sequencing of cloned
exon8 colonies from patients proved that the patient No. 14 is Arg548/Cys548
heterozagous in genotype. This mutation increased hydrophobility of the area
dramatically. The position and the conservative of this residue in vertebrates
suggested Arg548 may play an important role in ESR1 function. For study the role 
of this mutation in the onset of precocious puberty, a firefly luciferase
reporter plasmid pGL3-promoter-ERE was constructed,and a pCR3. 1-hermut pisimid
expressing Cys548 ER was constructed based on wild type pCR3. 1her.
Co-transfection of reporter and pCR3. 1 -hermut in CMF-7 cell strain proved that 
Cys548 mutant can significantly increase the transcription activity over the
Arg548 wild type.

PMID: 16252695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Mar;206(3):594-602.

Transcriptomic analysis of an in vitro murine model of ovarian carcinoma:
functional similarity to the human disease and identification of prospective
tumoral markers and targets.

Urzúa U(1), Roby KF, Gangi LM, Cherry JM, Powell JI, Munroe DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Biología Celular y Molecular, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas,
Universidad de Chile, Independencia, Santiago, Chile. uurzua@med.uchile.cl

Ovarian cancer is an aggressive disease of poor prognostic when detected at
advanced stage. It is widely accepted that the ovarian surface epithelium plays a
central role in disease etiology, but little is known about disease progression
at the molecular level. To identify genes involved in ovarian tumorigenesis, we
carried out a genome-wide transcriptomic analysis of six spontaneously
transformed mouse ovarian surface epithelial (MOSE) cell lines, an in vitro model
for human ovarian carcinoma. Loess normalization followed by statistical analysis
with control of multiple testing resulted in 509 differentially expressed genes
using an adjusted P-value < or = 0.05 as cut-off. The top 20 differentially
expressed genes included 10 genes (Spp1, Cyp1b1, Btg1, Cfh, Mt1, Mt2, Igfbp5,
Gstm1, Gstm2, and Esr1) implicated in various aspects of ovarian carcinomas, and 
other 3 genes (Gsto1, Lcn7, and Alcam) associated to breast cancer. Upon
functional analysis, the majority of alterations affected genes involved in
glutathione metabolism and MAPK signaling pathways. Interestingly, over 20% of
the aberrantly expressed genes were related to extracellular components,
suggestive of potential markers of disease progression. In addition, we
identified the genes Pura, Cnn3, Arpc1b, Map4k4, Tgfb1i4, and Crsp2 correlated to
in vivo tumorigenic parameters previously reported for these cells. Taken
together, our findings support the utility of MOSE cells in studying ovarian
cancer biology and as a source of novel diagnostic and therapeutic targets.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16245302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Maturitas. 2006 May 20;54(2):119-26. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

ESR1 and APOE gene polymorphisms, serum lipids, and hormonal replacement therapy.

Almeida S(1), Fiegenbaum M, de Andrade FM, Osório-Wender MC, Hutz MH.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do
Rio Grande do Sul, Caixa Postal 15053, and Departamento de Ginecologia e
Obstetrícia, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: The risks and benefits of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) are, at
least in part, mediated by the metabolic individuality of women. Therefore, we
investigated the association between polymorphisms at the estrogen receptor 1
gene (ESR1) and at the apolipoprotein E gene (APOE) with lipid and lipoprotein
levels in order to verify whether these concentrations are modulated by these
gene variants in women with different hormonal status.
METHODS: One hundred and eighteen postmenopausal women using oral HRT with
estrogen or estrogen plus progestagen (HRT+, mean age=56+/-6.7 years, 39-75
years) and 167 postmenopausal women that were not on HRT (HRT-, mean age=58+/-9.8
years, 38-85 years) participated in the study. The polymorphisms were genotyped
by PCR-RFLP methods.
RESULTS: No significant effect of ESR1 genotypes or haplotypes and ESR1*HRT
interactions were detected on lipid levels in two-way analysis of variance.
Postmenopausal women HRT nonusers carriers of the APOE*4 allele had higher T-chol
and LDL-C levels than postmenopausal women HRT nonusers carriers of the APOE*3
and APOE*2 allele. T-chol and LDL-C concentrations in postmenopausal users of HRT
that were APOE*4 carriers were similar to those in postmenopausal women nonusers 
of HRT homozygotes for APOE*3 and APOE*2 carriers. A significant APOE*4/HRT
interaction was detected on T-chol and LDL-C levels by multiple regression
analysis.
CONCLUSION: The results from this study suggest that the HRT influence on T-chol 
and LDL-C levels is modulated by APOE isoforms but not by ESR1 polymorphisms.

PMID: 16242874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Fertil Steril. 2005 Oct;84(4):910-8.

Multilocus analyses of estrogen-related genes reveal involvement of the ESR1 gene
in male infertility and the polygenic nature of the pathology.

Galan JJ(1), Buch B, Cruz N, Segura A, Moron FJ, Bassas L, Martinez-Pineiro L,
Real LM, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Genomics, Neocodex, Seville, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To examine whether polymorphisms within the ESR1, FSHR, ESR2, CYP19A1,
and NRIP1 genes are susceptibility factors for human male idiopathic infertility 
and to test the joint effects of these genes on male reproductive function.
DESIGN: Genetic association study of male infertility with polymorphisms, using
both single-gene and multilocus approaches.
SETTING: Private and public fertility units and a private center for biomedical
research.
PATIENT(S): One hundred four Spanish men with azoospermia or severe
oligozoospermia and 95 unselected race-matched healthy controls from the same
geographic region.
INTERVENTION(S): Peripheral blood extraction, DNA purification, and ESR1
g.938T>C, FSHR Ser680Asn, ESR2 *39A>G, CYP19A1 *19C>T, and NRIP1 Gly75Gly
polymorphism analyses.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Single-gene statistical analyses and multilocus
statistical analyses with Sumstat, Permutation and Model-free analysis, and
Estimating Haplotypes software.
RESULT(S): We observed an excess of homozygous infertile men for the ESR1
g.938T>C marker. Multilocus analyses detected genetic interaction between the
five candidate gene markers that are influential over male infertility. In
addition, we detected a five-loci protector genetic pattern with a frequency of
9.4% in controls but absent in infertile men.
CONCLUSION(S): Our results support a relevant role for the estrogenic pathway,
notably the ESR1 gene, in human male reproductive function and advocate a complex
trait model for male infertility.

PMID: 16213843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Neoplasia. 2005 Aug;7(8):748-60.

Survey of differentially methylated promoters in prostate cancer cell lines.

Wang Y(1), Yu Q, Cho AH, Rondeau G, Welsh J, Adamson E, Mercola D, McClelland M.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, 10835 Road to the Cure, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

DNA methylation and copy number in the genomes of three immortalized prostate
epithelial and five cancer cell lines (LNCaP, PC3, PC3M, PC3M-Pro4, and PC3M-LN4)
were compared using a microarray-based technique. Genomic DNA is cut with a
methylation-sensitive enzyme HpaII, followed by linker ligation, polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) amplification, labeling, and hybridization to an array of promoter
sequences. Only those parts of the genomic DNA that have unmethylated restriction
sites within a few hundred base pairs generate PCR products detectable on an
array. Of 2732 promoter sequences on a test array, 504 (18.5%) showed
differential hybridization between immortalized prostate epithelial and cancer
cell lines. Among candidate hypermethylated genes in cancer-derived lines, there 
were eight (CD44, CDKN1A, ESR1, PLAU, RARB, SFN, TNFRSF6, and TSPY) previously
observed in prostate cancer and 13 previously known methylation targets in other 
cancers (ARHI, bcl-2, BRCA1, CDKN2C, GADD45A, MTAP, PGR, SLC26A4, SPARC, SYK,
TJP2, UCHL1, and WIT-1). The majority of genes that appear to be both
differentially methylated and differentially regulated between prostate
epithelial and cancer cell lines are novel methylation targets, including PAK6,
RAD50, TLX3, PIR51, MAP2K5, INSR, FBN1, and GG2-1, representing a rich new source
of candidate genes used to study the role of DNA methylation in prostate tumors.

PMCID: PMC1501885
PMID: 16207477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Circulation. 2005 Oct 4;112(14):2138-42.

No replication of association between estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms 
and susceptibility to myocardial infarction in a large sample of patients of
European descent.

Koch W(1), Hoppmann P, Pfeufer A, Mueller JC, Schömig A, Kastrati A.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Herzzentrum München, Lazarettstrasse 36, 80636 Munich, Germany.
wkoch@dhm.mhn.de

Comment in
    Circulation. 2005 Oct 4;112(14):2081-4.

BACKGROUND: The effects of estrogen on blood vessels are partly due to changes in
vascular cell gene expression and protein synthesis that are mediated by estrogen
receptors. In previous association studies, the -397T/C (rs2234693) and -351A/G
(rs9340799) single nucleotide polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor alpha gene
(ESR1) have been implicated in the risk of coronary atherosclerosis and
myocardial infarction. To test these findings, we examined the relationship of
the polymorphisms to myocardial infarction in a large sample of white patients
and control individuals of predominantly European descent.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The case group included 3657 patients with myocardial
infarction, and the control group comprised 1211 individuals with
angiographically normal coronary arteries and without signs or symptoms of
myocardial infarction. TaqMan assays were used for the determination of
genotypes. Genotype distributions of the -397T/C and -351A/G polymorphisms were
not significantly different between the control and patient groups (P> or =0.85).
The frequencies of haplotypes defined by the -397T/C and -351A/G polymorphisms
were similar in the control group and the patient group (P=0.42). In addition,
the distributions of haplotype-defined genotypes (diplotypes) were not
significantly different between the control group and the patient group (P=0.81).
Separate analyses in women and men did not reveal sex-related associations of
specific genotypes or haplotypes of the polymorphisms with myocardial infarction 
(P> or =0.25).
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that the -397T/C and -351A/G polymorphisms of
ESR1 or haplotypes based on these polymorphisms are not associated with
myocardial infarction in a white population.

PMID: 16203927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Stroke. 2005 Oct;36(10):2281-2. Epub 2005 Sep 22.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene variation and the risk of stroke.

Shearman AM(1), Cooper JA, Kotwinski PJ, Humphries SE, Mendelsohn ME, Housman DE,
Miller GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
MA, USA. shearman@mit.edu

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene variation is
associated with a range of important estrogen-dependent characteristics,
including responses of lipid profile and atherosclerotic severity to hormone
replacement therapy, coronary heart disease risk, and migraine. The roles that
reproductive steroids play in cerebrovascular pathophysiology and ischemia are an
important area of investigation. Given that there is a significantly higher risk 
of myocardial infarction among men with the CC genotype (PP of PvuII) of
c.454-397T>C (rs2234693), we asked whether this genotype is associated with a
higher risk of stroke.
METHODS: Relative risk of stroke by genotype was determined in 2709 participants 
of the Second Northwick Park Heart Study, white males with a mean baseline age 56
years and follow up 10.5 years.
RESULTS: Compared with participants with the ESR1 c.454-397CT or TT genotype,
those with the CC genotype had a relative risk of stroke of 1.92 (95% confidence 
interval, 1.06 to 3.48, P=0.03) after adjustment for age, primary care practice; 
additional adjustment for body mass index, serum cholesterol and triglyceride
levels, hypertension, diabetes, and smoking status. Exclusion of stroke cases
with coronary heart disease gave results that were essentially unchanged.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, subjects with the common ESR1 c.454-397CC genotype
have a substantial increase in risk of stroke. In another publication, other ESR1
variation was associated with migraine. We thus hypothesize that estrogen
receptor variation may provide a basis for the established relationship among
estrogens, migraine, and stroke.

PMID: 16179580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Dec;90(12):6556-60. Epub 2005 Sep 13.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms are associated with the angiographic
extent of coronary artery disease.

Rokach A(1), Pollak A, Rosen L, Friedlander Y, Blumenfeld A, Reznik L,
Dresner-Pollak R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hadassah University Hospital on Mount Scopus,
Jerusalem, Israel.

CONTEXT: Sequence variants in the estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) may alter
the atheroprotective effects of estrogens, and be associated with the severity of
coronary artery disease (CAD).
OBJECTIVE: This study seeks to investigate the association between the ESR1
haplotype created by the c.454-397 T>C and c.454-351 A>G polymorphisms, the
length of the (TA)n repeats, and the angiographic extent of CAD.
DESIGN: Consecutive subjects with age younger than or equal to 55 yr who had
undergone coronary angiography between November 2003 and January 2004 were
included in the study.
SETTING: The study was conducted in a referral center.
PATIENTS: One hundred five subjects with age younger than or equal to 55 yr (87
males, 18 females) participated in the study.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The angiographic extent of CAD was graded by number of: 1)
major coronary vessels with more than 50% narrowing (NMCV); 2) narrowed major
coronary vessels and/or their second-order branch (NCV); and 3) coronary segments
with any narrowing (NN). Analysis of covariance was used to test the effect of
haplotype and (TA)n length on the angiographic extent of CAD with gender and
number of CAD risk factors (hyperlipidemia, diabetes, hypertension, obesity,
smoking, and family history of CAD) as covariates.
RESULTS: The ESR1 haplotype c.454-397C and c.454-351G was associated with NCV and
NN (P = 0.008 and 0.02, respectively). Carriers of two copies of haplotype C-G
had a higher number of NCV compared with subjects with one or no copies combined 
(3.5 +/- 2.2 vs. 2.3 +/- 1.9, P = 0.012, respectively). A longer (TA)n repeat was
associated with NCV (P = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: The ESR1 c.454-397C and c.454-351G haplotype and longer (TA)n
repeats are associated with the extent of CAD in young subjects, independent of
the known CAD risk factors.

PMID: 16159931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Calcif Tissue Int. 2005 Sep;77(3):152-9. Epub 2005 Sep 8.

Genetic polymorphisms of OPG, RANK, and ESR1 and bone mineral density in Korean
postmenopausal women.

Choi JY(1), Shin A, Park SK, Chung HW, Cho SI, Shin CS, Kim H, Lee KM, Lee KH,
Kang C, Cho DY, Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

To evaluate the effects of genetic polymorphisms of OPG, RANK, and ESR1, which
regulate osteoclastogenesis, on bone mineral density (BMD), a cross-sectional
study was conducted in 650 Korean postmenopausal women. BMDs of the distal radius
and the calcaneus were measured by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA).
Genetic polymorphisms of OPG 163 A > G, 1181 G > C; RANK 421 C > T, 575 T > C;
and ESR1 1335 C > T, 2142 G > A were determined by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-ToF) mass spectrometry. The
differences between the BMDs of the genotypes of OPG, RANK, and ESR1 were
analyzed by multiple linear regression model adjusted for age and body mass
index. Women with the OPG 1181 CC genotype had higher BMDs at the distal radius
(7%) and calcaneus (10%) than those with the GG genotype; and these differences
were statistically significant (P = 0.001 and P = 0.007, respectively). A
significant association was also observed between RANK 575 T > C and calcaneus
BMD (P for trend = 0.017). No significant association was observed between BMDs
and the polymorphisms of ESR1. The association between OPG 1181 G > C and BMD was
profound in subjects with the RANK 575 TT or ESR1 2142 GG genotypes; women with
OPG 1181 CC had higher BMDs at the distal radius (11%) and calcaneus (11%) than
those with OPG 1181 GG only in women with RANK 575 TT genotype (P = 0.002 and P =
0.021, respectively). These results suggest that OPG genetic polymorphisms,
especially with the RANK 575 TT or ESR1 2142 GG genotypes, are related to low BMD
in postmenopausal Korean women.

PMID: 16151677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Nov;90(11):6257-62. Epub 2005 Sep 6.

Sex-specific association between estrogen receptor-alpha gene variation and
measures of adiposity: the Framingham Heart Study.

Fox CS(1), Yang Q, Cupples LA, Guo CY, Atwood LD, Murabito JM, Levy D, Mendelsohn
ME, Housman DE, Shearman AM.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Framingham Heart Study,
Framingham, Massachusetts 01702, USA. foxca@nhlbi.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms in estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) may be associated
with variation in body mass index and waist circumference. However, most prior
studies have been limited by sample size and power.
METHODS: DNA from 1763 unrelated men and women (mean age, 56 yr) from the
Framingham Heart Study offspring cohort was genotyped for four ESR1
polymorphisms: T30C (rs2077647) in exon 1, PvuII (rs2234693), and XbaI (rs
9340799) in intron 1, and C1335G (rs 1801132) in exon 4.
RESULTS: Men homozygous for the PvuII C allele (frequency, 0.45) had lower waist 
circumference (99.3 cm), compared with TT homozygous men (99.8 cm) and
heterozygotes (100.6 cm) (P < 0.004). Similar results were obtained with XbaI,
which lies in the same linkage disequilibrium block. C1335G also demonstrated a
gender-specific association: men with CG or GG genotypes had lower mean body mass
index, 27.7 and 27.9 kg/m2 respectively, compared with 28.6 kg/m2 among the CC
homozygotes (P < 0.01). No significant associations were seen with T30C, nor were
associations observed among women.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms in ESR1 are associated with measures of adiposity in
men. These associations further support the hypothesis that the intron 1 region
of ESR1 influences phenotypes important for cardiovascular risk.

PMID: 16144952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Arch Med Res. 2005 Sep-Oct;36(5):511-7.

Genetic polymorphisms of estrogen receptors in patients with premature coronary
artery disease.

Mansur Ade P(1), Nogueira CC, Strunz CM, Aldrighi JM, Ramires JA.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Institute (InCor), University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo,
Brazil. corantonio@incor.usp.br

BACKGROUND: Estrogen protects against atherosclerosis through its
genomic/nongenomic effects. Estrogen receptors (ESR) alpha (1) and beta (2)
mediate much estrogen action. Both receptors exist in the arterial wall, but the 
extent of their distribution in arterial layers is unknown. Allelic variants of
the gene encoding ESR1 and ESR2 may alter their expression and function,
resulting in genetic variability.
METHODS: In the present age-adjusted, case-control study, the prevalence of four 
mutations in estrogen receptors was analyzed in patients with premature CAD and
controls.
RESULTS: Mutation in the ESR1 (PvuII) was more prevalent in the controls (18 vs. 
11%; p=0.062) than in CAD patients, and the mutation identified by the XbaI
enzyme in the same receptor was associated with reduced apolipoprotein B levels
and low body mass index. Mutation of the ESR2 (AluI) was more prevalent in CAD
patients (0.6 vs. 18%; p=0.008). Homozygosis for this mutation involved increased
body mass index, elevated serum triglycerides and apolipoprotein B, and reduced
HDL-cholesterol. Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed dyslipidemia,
low serum HDL levels, and ESR2 polymorphism (AluI) [OR=1.89 (95% CI: 1.08-3.34); 
p=0.034] to be independent risk factors for CAD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that mutation of the ESR2 is an independent risk
marker for premature CAD.

PMID: 16099331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 2005 Aug;132(16):3619-30.

The Notch targets Esr1 and Esr10 are differentially regulated in Xenopus neural
precursors.

Lamar E(1), Kintner C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. lamar@salk.edu

The HES family of bHLH repressors plays a key role in regulating the
differentiation of neural precursors in the vertebrate embryo. Members of the HES
gene family are expressed in neural precursors as targets of the Notch signaling 
pathway, but how this occurs in the context of neurogenesis is not known. Here,
we address this issue by identifying enhancers driving Notch-dependent gene
expression of two Hes5-like genes expressed in Xenopus called Esr1 and Esr10.
Using frog transgenesis, we identify enhancer elements driving expression of Esr1
and Esr10 in neural precursors or in response to ectopic expression of the
proneural protein, Xngnr1. Using deletion and mutation analysis, we define motifs
required for enhancer activity of both genes, namely Notch-responsive elements
and, in the case of Esr10, E-box motifs. We find that Esr1 and Esr10 are
differentially regulated both in terms of Notch input and its interaction with
heterologous factors. These studies reveal inputs required for proneural
expression of genes encoding bHLH repressors in the developing vertebrate nervous
system.

PMID: 16077089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Eur J Endocrinol. 2005 Aug;153(2):327-34.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms are associated with estradiol levels
in postmenopausal women.

Schuit SC(1), de Jong FH, Stolk L, Koek WN, van Meurs JB, Schoofs MW, Zillikens
MC, Hofman A, van Leeuwen JP, Pols HA, Uitterlinden AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Postmenopausal estradiol (E(2)) levels vary widely between individuals
and this variation is an important determinant of diseases such as osteoporosis. 
It has been suggested that the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene may influence 
peripheral E(2) levels, but the role of common sequence variations in the ESR1
gene is unclear.
METHODS: In 631 postmenopausal women and 528 men from the Rotterdam Study, a
population-based, prospective cohort study of individuals aged 55 years and over,
ESR1 PvuII-XbaI haplotypes were determined and correlated with plasma E2 levels.
RESULTS: In women, haplotype 1 (T-A) was significantly associated with an
allele-dose-dependent decrease in E(2). After adjusting for age, body mass index,
years since menopause and testosterone levels, plasma E(2) levels decreased by
1.90 pmol/l per allele copy of this haplotype (P < 0.05). Extreme genotypes,
representing 23 and 27% of the population, varied by 3.93 pmol/l. No association 
with plasma testosterone was observed. In a subset of 446 women, no association
of genotype with plasma concentrations of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate,
androstenedione or estrone was seen. In men, none of the sex hormone levels was
associated with the ESR1 PvuII-XbaI haplotypes.
CONCLUSION: We have demonstrated a role for genetic variations in the ESR1 gene
in determining post-menopausal E(2) levels in women.

PMID: 16061840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Biochem Soc Trans. 2005 Aug;33(Pt 4):709-11.

Methylation of the ESR1 CpG island in the colorectal mucosa is an 'all or
nothing' process in healthy human colon, and is accelerated by dietary folate
supplementation in the mouse.

Belshaw NJ(1), Elliott GO, Williams EA, Mathers JC, Buckley L, Bahari B, Johnson 
IT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Research, Colney Lane, Norwich NR4 7UA, UK.
nigel.belshaw@bbsrc.ac.uk

ESR1 is frequently silenced by CGI (CpG island) methylation, both in human
colorectal tumours and, in an age-dependent manner, in healthy mucosa. It is not 
clear, however, whether methylation of individual cytosines occurs randomly
within the epithelial genome, or preferentially within individual cells as an
'all-or-nothing' phenomenon. CGI methylation can be quantified in human DNA
residues recovered from faecal samples. We used bisulphite genomic sequencing of 
human DNA from this source and from a colorectal cancer cell line (SW48) to show 
that the ESR1 CGI is methylated in an allele-specific manner. This provides
support for the 'all or none' mechanism for methylation of this gene, and shows
how age-dependent methylation of the ESR1 CGI leads rapidly to silencing of the
gene within the cells, and hence the colonic crypt within which it occurs.
Preliminary studies with a rodent model suggest the rate of age-dependent
methylation of ESR1 is modifiable by dietary folate.

PMID: 16042580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biol Reprod. 2005 Nov;73(5):866-71. Epub 2005 Jul 20.

Estrogen receptor beta in health and disease.

Imamov O(1), Shim GJ, Warner M, Gustafsson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Medical Nutrition, Novum, Karolinska Institute, 
Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, SE-141 86 Sweden.

Estrogens, acting through its two receptors, ESR1 (hereafter designated ER alpha)
and ESR2 (hereafter designated ER beta), have diverse physiological effects in
the reproductive system, bone, cardiovascular system, hematopoiesis, and central 
and peripheral nervous systems. Mice with inactivated ER alpha, ER beta, or both 
show a number of interesting phenotypes, including incompletely differentiated
epithelium in tissues under steroidal control (prostate, ovary, mammary, and
salivary glands) and defective ovulation reminiscent of polycystic ovarian
syndrome in humans (in ER beta-/- mice), and obesity, insulin resistance, and
complete infertility (both in male and female ER alpha-/- mice). Estrogen
agonists and antagonists are frequently prescribed drugs with indications that
include postmenopausal syndrome (agonists) and breast cancer (antagonists).
Because the two estrogen receptors (ERs) have different physiological functions
and have ligand binding pockets that differ enough to be selective in their
ligand binding, opportunities now exist for development of novel ER
subtype-specific selective-ER modulators.

PMID: 16033996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 May;95(1-5):105-11.

Effects of anastrozole on the intratumoral gene expression in locally advanced
breast cancer.

Kristensen VN(1), Sørlie T, Geisler J, Yoshimura N, Linegjaerde OC, Glad I,
Frigessi A, Harada N, Lønning PE, Børresen-Dale AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Norwegian Radium
Hospital, Montebello 0310, Oslo, Norway. nedelcheva.vessela@dnr.uio.no

Intratumoral levels of E1 (oestrone), E1S (oestrone sulphate) and E2 (oestradiol)
are significantly reduced by treatment with the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole
regardless of treatment response. The purpose of the present pilot study was to
look for additional markers of biochemical response to aromatase inhibitors on
mRNA expression level. Whole genome expression was studied using microarray
analysis of breast cancer tissue from 12 patients with locally advanced tumors,
both before and following 15 weeks of treatment with the aromatase inhibitor
anastrozole (Arimidex). Intratumoral mRNA levels for a subset of genes coding for
steroid metabolizing enzymes, hormone receptors and some growth mediators
involved in cell cycle control were analysed by quantitative RT-PCR. There was a 
correlation between the two methods for some but not all genes. The mRNA
expression levels of the different genes were correlated to each other and to the
intratumoral levels of E1, E2 and E1S, before and after the treatment. Notably, a
correlation of the E1/E2 metabolic ratio to the mRNA levels of CYP19A1 was
observed before treatment (r=0.745, p<0.005). Whole genome expression analysis of
these 12 breast cancer patients revealed similar tumor classification to
previously published larger studies. Tumors with no or low expression of ESR1
(oestrogen receptor) clustered together and were characterized by a strong
basal-like signature highly expressing keratins 5/17, cadherin 3, frizzled and
apolipoprotein D, among others. The luminal epithelial tumor cluster, on the
other hand, highly expressed ESR1, GATA binding protein 3 and N-acetyl
transferase. An evident ERBB2 cluster was observed due to the marked
over-expression of the ERBB2 gene and GRB7 and PPARBP in this patient material). 
Using significance analysis of microarrays (SAM), we identified 298 genes
significantly differently expressed between the partial response and progressive 
disease groups.

PMID: 16023338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2006 Jan;30(1):38-55. Epub 2005 Jun 28.

Expression analysis of androgen-responsive genes in the prostate of veal calves
treated with anabolic hormones.

Toffolatti L(1), Rosa Gastaldo L, Patarnello T, Romualdi C, Merlanti R,
Montesissa C, Poppi L, Castagnaro M, Bargelloni L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica Patologia Comparata ed Igiene Veterinaria,
Università di Padova,Viale dell'università 16, 35020 Legnaro, Italy.

In order to identify indirect molecular biomarkers of anabolic treatments in veal
calves, an animal experiment was performed using two combinations of growth
promoters (consisting of boldenone undecylenate and estradiol benzoate, and of
testosterone enantate and estradiol benzoate). We selected a set of 12 genes that
are known to be androgen responsive in other mammalian species. The expression
profile of this set of genes was analysed on prostate samples of veal calves
using a real-time RT-PCR approach. For each selected gene the corresponding
bovine sequence was obtained and a gene specific real-time assay was optimised
and validated. The amplification was shown to be highly specific, linear and
efficient. High reproducibility (<1%) and low-test variability (<2.5%) were also 
been achieved. Messenger RNA levels were quantified in prostate samples,
non-parametric analysis of variance showed significant up-regulation of three
genes (MAF, ESR1 and AR) and significant down-regulation of four genes (HMGCS1,
HPGD, DBI, and LIM) in treated samples when compared with untreated controls. To 
assess the possibility of identifying hormone-treated animals by molecular means 
we performed a discriminant analysis that was effective in classifying treated
and non-treated samples with an accuracy of 93%. Our results indicate that
identification of treatment with steroid hormones in veal calves by means of gene
expression analysis is a feasible approach and could be improved increasing both 
the number of genes and the number of controls analysed.

PMID: 16023321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Aug 15;14(16):2405-13. Epub 2005 Jul 13.

Tobacco smoking, estrogen receptor alpha gene variation and small low density
lipoprotein level.

Shearman AM(1), Demissie S, Cupples LA, Peter I, Schmid CH, Ordovas JM,
Mendelsohn ME, Housman DE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
MA 02139, USA. shearman@mit.edu

High levels of small low density lipoprotein (LDL) particles are a major risk
factor for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Both estrogens and smoking,
with known anti-estrogenic effects, alter the atherogenic lipid profile. We
tested for a role of interaction between smoking and estrogen receptor alpha gene
(ESR1) variation in association with plasma concentration of atherogenic small
LDL particles and LDL particle size. We studied 1727 unrelated subjects, 854
women and 873 men, mean age 51 years (SD 10), from the population-based
Framingham Heart Study. After covariate adjustment, women who smoked and had the 
common ESR1 c.454-397 TT genotype (in 30% of women, T was present on both
chromosomes at position 397 prior to the start of exon 2) had >1.7-fold higher
levels of small LDL particles than women with the alternative genotypes (P-value 
for smoking-genotype interaction was 0.001). Similar results were obtained for
three other ESR1 variants including c.454-351A > G, in the same linkage
disequilibrium block. A similar substantial gender-specific result was also
evident with a fifth variant, in a separate linkage disequilibrium block, in exon
4 (P = 0.003). Women who smoked and had specific, common ESR1 genotypes had a
substantially higher plasma concentration of atherogenic small LDL particles.
Significant results revealed a dose-dependent effect of smoking and were evident 
in both pre- and postmenopausal women. The reported association has the potential
to explain the risks associated with estrogen use in certain women and a recent
report of association between an ESR1 haplotype comprised of c.454-397 T and
c.454-351 A alleles with increased myocardial infarction and ischaemic heart
disease, independent of the standard, established cardiovascular risk factors.

PMID: 16014638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Atherosclerosis. 2006 Mar;185(1):210-8. Epub 2005 Jul 7.

Estrogen receptor-alpha variants are associated with lipoprotein size
distribution and particle levels in women: the Framingham Heart Study.

Demissie S(1), Cupples LA, Shearman AM, Gruenthal KM, Peter I, Schmid CH, Karas
RH, Housman DE, Mendelsohn ME, Ordovas JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, 715
Albany Street, TE425 Boston, MA 02118, USA. demissie@bu.edu

Plasma lipid profile is affected by endogenous estrogen levels and hormone
replacement therapy (HRT). As plasma lipid concentrations have a significant
heritable basis and the effects of both endogenous estrogen and use of HRT are
mediated by estrogen receptors, we sought to investigate the relationships
between polymorphisms in estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) and plasma lipid and
lipoprotein concentrations. We analyzed data from 854 women (mean age 52+/-10
years) from the Framingham Heart Study. A TA repeat in the promoter region,
c.30T>C in exon 1, c.454-397T>C, and c.454-351A>G in intron 1, all in linkage
disequilibrium (LD), were significantly associated with low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) particle size and concentration of small LDL particles. Women with the
c.454-397C allele had larger LDL particle size (21.09+/-0.02 nm versus
21.01+/-0.03 nm, p=0.021) concurrent with lower small LDL particle concentration 
(0.47+/-0.02 mmol/L versus 0.58+/-0.03 mmol/L, p=0.008). Moreover, the
TA[L]-c.30C-c.454-397C-c.454-351G haplotype (frequency, 32%) was associated with 
lower small LDL particle concentrations (-0.06+/-0.03 mmol/L change associated
with each copy of this haplotype, p=0.011) when compared to the
TA[S]-c.30T-c.454-397T-c.454-351A haplotype (frequency, 46%), where L and S are
long and short TA repeats. Our results suggest that common ESR1 polymorphisms
have a significant effect on lipoprotein metabolism in women.

PMID: 16005459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Biol Reprod. 2005 Oct;73(4):703-12. Epub 2005 Jun 8.

Expression of estrogen receptor ESR1 and its 46-kDa variant in the gubernaculum
testis.

Staub C(1), Rauch M, Ferrière F, Trépos M, Dorval-Coiffec I, Saunders PT,
Cobellis G, Flouriot G, Saligaut C, Jégou B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U625, GERHM, IFR 140, Campus de Beaulieu, Univ Rennes I, Bretagne,
France.

Testicular descent corresponds to migration of the testis from the abdominal
cavity to the scrotum and is essential for proper functioning of the testis.
Recent advances in the characterization of estrogen receptor (ESR) subtypes and
isoforms in various tissues prompted us to study ESRs within the gubernaculum
testis, a structure involved in testicular descent. In the rat gubernaculum, we
searched for ESR alpha (Esr1) and beta (Esr2) and for the androgen receptor (Ar),
androgens being known to regulate testicular descent. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) revealed that Esr1, Esr2, and Ar
mRNAs were all expressed in the gubernaculum. Using PEETA (Primer extension,
Electrophoresis, Elution, Tailing, and Amplification), we established that all
Esr1 leader exons, previously identified in other organs, such as the uterus and 
pituitary, were transcribed in the gubernaculum, with the major form being O/B.
The RNA protection assays, RT-PCR, and Western blot experiments revealed that
isoform-specific mRNA transcripts generated by alternative splicing of the
C-leader sequence on coding exons 1 and 2 of the Esr1 gene gave the 46- and
66-kDa ESR1 proteins. The ESR1 and AR proteins were found to colocalize in the
parenchymal cells of the gubernaculum early in development, whereas AR also was
strongly expressed in the muscular cells, both during fetal and postnatal life.
The ESR2 protein was weakly expressed, principally in the muscular cells, but
only once testicular descent had occurred. The levels of the 46-kDa ESR1 variant 
(ER46) exceeded those of the 66-kDa ESR1 form (ER66) at periods when the
gubernaculum developed. Conversely, the 66-kDa form appears to predominate
clearly when the gubernaculum growth was low or completed. The possible role of
estrogens on the modulation of the androgen-dependent growth of the gubernaculum 
and, more widely, on testicular descent is discussed.

PMID: 15944240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Biol. 2005 Jul 1;283(1):253-67.

Identification of target genes for the Xenopus Hes-related protein XHR1, a
prepattern factor specifying the midbrain-hindbrain boundary.

Takada H(1), Hattori D, Kitayama A, Ueno N, Taira M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

The midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) acts as a local organizer in the
development of the CNS in vertebrates. Previously, we identified an MHB-specific 
bHLH-WRPW transcriptional repressor gene, Xenopus Hes-related 1 (XHR1), which is 
initially expressed in the presumptive MHB (pre-MHB) region at the early gastrula
stage. To better understand the gene cascades involved in MHB formation, we
investigated the genes downstream from XHR1 by differential screening using a
Xenopus cDNA macroarray and a dexamethasone (DEX)-inducible, dominant-negative
transcriptional activator construct of XHR1 (XHR1-VP16-GR). Among the newly
identified candidate target genes of XHR1 were Enhancer of split-related genes
(ESR1, ESR3/7, and ESR9) and Xenopus laevis cleavage 2 (XLCL2). XHR1-VP16-GR
induced the expression of the ESR genes and XLCL2 as well as Xdelta1, Xngnr1, and
XHR1 itself in the presence of DEX even after pretreatment with the protein
synthesis inhibitor, cycloheximide. This suggests that these genes are direct
targets of XHR1. XHR1-knockdown experiments with antisense morpholino oligos and 
ectopic expression of wild-type XHR1 revealed that XHR1 is necessary and
sufficient to repress ESR genes in the pre-MHB region. Misexpression of the ESR
genes in the pre-MHB region repressed the MHB marker gene, Pax2, suggesting that 
the repression of the ESR genes by XHR1 is at least partly required for the early
development of the pre-MHB. Our data also show that XHR1 is not activated by
Notch signaling, differing from ESR genes. Taken together, we propose a model in 
which XHR1 defines the pre-MHB region as a prepattern gene by repressing those
possible direct target genes.

PMID: 15935340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biol Reprod. 2005 Oct;73(4):648-62. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Molecular characterization of estrogen receptors 1, 2a, and 2b and their tissue
and ontogenic expression profiles in fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas).

Filby AL(1), Tyler CR.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental and Molecular Fish Biology Group, Department of Biological
Sciences, Hatherly Laboratories, University of Exeter, Devon, UK.
a.l.filby@exeter.ac.uk

There are two estrogen receptor (ER) subtypes in fish, Esr1 and Esr2 (formerly
ERalpha and ERbeta), and in some species the Esr2 subtype has two forms, Esr2b
(formerly ERbeta1) and Esr2a (formerly ERbeta2 or ERgamma). There is little
information, however, on the different characteristics and functional
significance of the two receptor subtypes in fish, and this is especially
relevant for understanding the disruption of ER signaling by chemicals with
estrogenic activity. In this study, the full-length cDNAs for esr1 (3167 base
pairs [bp]) and esr2b (2318 bp), and a partial-length (267 bp) cDNA for esr2a,
were cloned and characterized in fathead minnow (fhm; Pimephales promelas), and
their patterns of expression established during development and in adults.
Real-time polymerase chain reaction revealed some clear distinctions in the
ontogenic and tissue expression of fhm esr1, esr2b, and esr2a, suggesting
different functions for each ER subtype. Fhm ERs were expressed in brain,
pituitary, liver, gonad, intestine, and gill of male and female fish, esr2b and
esr2a were also expressed in muscle. Fhm esr1 and esr2b were expressed
predominantly in the liver, whereas fhm esr2a was expressed predominantly in
intestine and was lowest expressed in liver. Responses of the different hepatic
ERs in male fathead minnow exposed to 100 ng estradiol/L differed, with a
significant induction (5-fold) of fhm esr1 but no effect on esr2b or esr2a
expression, suggesting different mechanisms of regulation for the different ERs. 
The detailed characterization of ERs in fathead minnow provides the foundation
for understanding the molecular basis of estrogenic disruption in fish.

PMID: 15930325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Hum Genet. 2005 Aug;117(4):402-3. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Sex differential in methylation patterns of selected genes in Singapore Chinese.

Sarter B(1), Long TI, Tsong WH, Koh WP, Yu MC, Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Kenneth Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

To date there have been few reports of a gender difference in methylation levels 
of genes. When examining the methylation levels of four autosomal genes (ESR1,
MTHFR, CALCA and MGMT) in the white blood cells of a random sample of Singapore
Chinese Health Study cohort participants (n = 291), we encountered an unexpected 
gender differential. Using MethyLight technology, we calculated a gene-specific
percentage of methylated reference (PMR) value, which quantified the relative
level of gene methylation for each study subject (134 males and 157 females). Two
summary methylation indices were constructed by assigning gene-specific rank
scores. We then used ANCOVA to compare logarithmically transformed individual PMR
values and summary methylation indices by age and gender simultaneously.
Adjustment was made for plasma homocysteine. For ESR1, for which a large
proportion of subjects were negative for methylation, we also used polytomous
regression to compare methylation across age and gender. Increasing age and the
male gender independently predicted increasing PMR values for CALCA and MGMT. For
the MTHFR gene, male gender was associated with higher PMR values (P = 0.002),
while age was not (P = 0.75). Neither age nor gender had any statistically
significant influence on the PMR values for ESR1 (P = 0.13 and 0.96,
respectively). Our data suggest that gender is at least as strong a predictor of 
methylation level in the four genes under study as age, with males showing higher
PMRs.

PMID: 15928902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biol Reprod. 2005 Sep;73(3):472-81. Epub 2005 May 25.

Null mutation of Kruppel-like factor9/basic transcription element binding
protein-1 alters peri-implantation uterine development in mice.

Velarde MC(1), Geng Y, Eason RR, Simmen FA, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock. AR 72202, USA.

Female mice null for the basic transcription element binding protein-1 (Bteb1)
gene have reduced numbers of implanting embryos. We hypothesized that the
implantation defect, resulting in subfertility, is a consequence of developmental
asynchrony between the embryo and uterine endometrium at peri-implantation. To
address this, endometrium from wild-type (WT) and Bteb1(-/-) females at 0.5 to
5.5 days postcoitum (dpc) were evaluated for proliferation (BrdU labeling),
apoptosis (TUNEL), and steroid hormone receptor expression
(immunohistochemistry). Loss of BTEB1 did not affect serum estrogen (E) and
progesterone (P) levels. In stroma (ST), the numbers of progesterone receptor
(PGR) and HomeoboxA10 (HOXA10)-expressing cells were lower (3.5 and 4.5 dpc),
while those of estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) were higher (3.5 dpc), with Bteb1
ablation. The peak of proliferation in luminal epithelium (LE), glandular
epithelium (GE), and ST was delayed, while the apoptotic index in all cell types 
was increased (2.5 dpc) in Bteb1(-/-) relative to WT mice. The numbers of
PGR-positive ST cells was negatively correlated with LE proliferation in WT mice;
this correlation was lost in Bteb1(-/-) mice and was not observed before 2.5 dpc 
for both genotypes. Proliferation and apoptosis in all endometrial compartments, 
as well as the numbers of PGR-, HOXA10-, and ESR1-expressing ST cells, were lower
in Bteb1(-/-) relative to WT mice after ovariectomy and E + P treatment. Results 
suggest that BTEB1, by regulating ST PGR expression and transactivation,
participates in the paracrine control of LE proliferation by PGR and thus is
important for establishment of a receptive uterus critical for successful
implantation.

PMID: 15917344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Aug;90(8):4716-21. Epub 2005 May 17.

Association of cryptorchidism with a specific haplotype of the estrogen receptor 
alpha gene: implication for the susceptibility to estrogenic environmental
endocrine disruptors.

Yoshida R(1), Fukami M, Sasagawa I, Hasegawa T, Kamatani N, Ogata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, 2-10-1 Ohkura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Aug;90(8):4975-7.

CONTEXT: The prevalence of cryptorchidism (CO) has increased during the past few 
decades in several countries, and this event has primarily been ascribed to the
estrogenic effects of environmental endocrine disruptors (EEDs). Little is known,
however, about the role of genetic susceptibility to EEDs in this phenomenon.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to determine whether CO is associated 
with a specific haplotype of the gene for estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) that
mediates the estrogenic effects of EEDs.
DESIGN: This was a case-control study.
SETTING: The study was performed at the National Research Institute and
University Hospitals.
SUBJECTS: Sixty-three cryptorchid males, aged 1-13 yr, and 47 control males, aged
4-12 yr, were studied.
INTERVENTION: After genotyping 15 single nucleotide polymorphisms widely
distributed in the greater than 300-kb genomic sequences of ESR1, haplotype
analysis was performed.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Identification of a specific ESR1 haplotype associated with
CO was the main outcome measure.
RESULTS: A haplotype block was identified for an approximately 50-kb region
encompassing single nucleotide polymorphisms 10-14 in the 3' region of ESR1 in
both groups. The frequency of the estimated AGATA haplotype within the block was 
higher in the patients than in the control males (34.0% vs. 21.3%; P = 0.037),
and the association of this haplotype with CO phenotype was significant in a
recessive mode (P = 0.0060). The homozygosity for this haplotype was identified
only in the patients, and the frequency of the homozygotes was significantly
different between the two groups (10 of 63 vs. zero of 47; P = 0.0042).
CONCLUSIONS: The association of CO with homozygosity for the specific ESR1
haplotype suggests the relevance of genetic susceptibility to EEDs in the
development of CO.

PMID: 15899960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005 May;14(5):1219-23.

Gene-specific methylation and subsequent risk of colorectal adenomas among
participants of the polyp prevention trial.

Woodson K(1), Weisenberger DJ, Campan M, Laird PW, Tangrea J, Johnson LL,
Schatzkin A, Lanza E.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Prevention Studies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. kw114v@nih.gov

Hypermethylation of tumor suppressor and other regulatory genes is thought to
play an important role in colorectal neoplasia and tumorigenesis. This study
examined the association between gene methylation status in baseline adenomas and
subsequent adenoma recurrence in a randomized dietary intervention study, the
Polyp Prevention Trial. The methylation status of four genes [CDKN2A (p16), PTGS2
(COX2), ESR1 (ER-alpha), and PGR(PR)] was determined by MethyLight in 284
baseline adenomas from 196 trial participants. The association of gene
methylation with recurrence was determined using logistic regression models. Gene
methylation was evaluated as percent of methylated reference, a measure of
methylation of each gene relative to control DNA. ESR1methylation status was
inversely associated with adenoma recurrence, odds ratio = 0.36 (95% confidence
interval, 0.15-0.88; P = 0.02) for the highest compared with the lowest quartile 
of the ESR1methylation. Further, ESR1 methylation status was inversely associated
with the recurrence of multiple adenomas, advanced adenomas, and the recurrence
of adenomas in the proximal but not distal bowel. No association between CDKN2A, 
PTGS2, or PGR methylation and adenoma recurrence was observed. These data suggest
that ESR1 methylation may play a role in subsequent adenoma recurrence.

PMID: 15894675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Cancer. 2005 Oct 10;116(6):984-91.

Association of estrogen receptor alpha polymorphisms with breast cancer risk in
older Caucasian women.

Modugno F(1), Zmuda JM, Potter D, Cai C, Ziv E, Cummings SR, Stone KL, Morin PA, 
Greene D, Cauley JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. modugno+@pitt.edu

Erratum in
    Int J Cancer. 2006 May 1;118(9):2371.

Estrogens exert their effect on the breast through the estrogen receptor. We
prospectively investigated breast cancer risk associated with 2 polymorphic sites
in the estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1). A total of 4,248 Caucasian women from
the Study of Osteoporotic Fractures were genotyped for the -401 T/C and -354 A/G 
polymorphisms in ESR1. Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate
hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the associations between
genotypes and breast cancer. During a mean follow-up of 12.4 years, 252 (5.9%)
women developed breast cancer. The HR (95% CI) for breast cancer were 0.928
(0.708, 1.22) and 0.834 (0.538, 1.29) for the -354 A/G and A/A genotypes,
respectively. Interactions with -354 variant were observed for smoking (HR = 1.52
and 1.56 for A/G and A/A smokers, respectively; HR = 0.74 and 0.60 for A/G and
A/A non-smokers, respectively; interaction p = 0.03) and walking (HR = 0.75 and
1.15 for A/G and A/A walkers, respectively; HR = 0.18 and 0.49 for A/G and A/A
non-walkers, respectively; interaction p = 0.01). There were no differences in
the HR for the -401 T/C genotypes. An interaction between parity and carriage of 
the T allele was found (HR = 0.60 vs. 1.12 for nulliparous vs. parous women;
interaction p = 0.03). ESR1 polymorphisms in combination with lifestyle factors
may be associated with breast cancer risk in older Caucasian women.

PMID: 15856463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biol Reprod. 2005 Aug;73(2):343-50. Epub 2005 Apr 13.

Sufficient progesterone-priming prior to estradiol stimulation is required for
optimal induction of the cervical prostaglandin system in pregnant sheep at 0.7
gestations.

Wu WX(1), Coksaygan T, Chakrabarty K, Collins V, Rose JC, Nathanielsz PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wake Forest University SOM,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA. wenwu@wfubmc.edu

The purposes of this study were to determine the separate and interactive
functions of progesterone and estradiol in regulating the cervical prostaglandin 
(PG) system in pregnant sheep at 0.7 gestations. At 106-108 days of gestational
age (dGA), ewes were treated with vehicle for 14 days (n = 5) or vehicle for 12
days followed by estradiol 5 mg twice a day, intramuscularly for 2 days (n = 5)
or progesterone 100 mg, twice a day, intramuscularly for 14 days (n = 5) or
progesterone 100 mg twice a day, intramuscularly for 10 days and then 2 days
vehicle followed by estradiol 5 mg twice a day intramuscularly for 2 days (n =
5). At 121-123 dGA, cervical tissues were obtained under halothane anesthesia.
Cervical RNA and protein were extracted and analyzed for
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (COX2), two PGE(2) receptors, PTGER2 and
PTGER4, and estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) by Northern and Western blot analysis.
Immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridization were applied to localize cellular
distribution of COX2, PTGER2, and PTGER4 in the cervix. Data were analyzed by
ANOVA. COX2 and PTGER4 mRNAs and proteins were increased (P < 0.05) in ewes
treated with combined estradiol and progesterone but not in ewes treated with
estradiol or progesterone alone compared with controls. ESR1 mRNA was increased
in ewes treated with progesterone and estradiol plus progesterone. In contrast,
PTGER2 mRNA and protein remained the same after all treatments. COX2 mRNA and
protein were localized only in cervical glandular epithelial cells, whereas
PTGER2 and PTGER4 were localized in both cervical glandular epithelial and smooth
muscle cells. In conclusion, these data suggest that additional progesterone
priming at 0.7 gestations synergizes with estradiol to induce cervical COX2,
PTGER4, and ESR1 and support our hypothesis that stimulation of the cervical PG
system by estradiol is optimized by sufficient progesterone priming in the
pregnant sheep cervix.

PMID: 15829624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Trends Mol Med. 2005 Apr;11(4):186-91.

Recent advances in the genetic investigation of osteoarthritis.

Peach CA(1), Carr AJ, Loughlin J.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Oxford, Nuffield
Orthopaedic Centre, Oxford, OX3 7LD, UK.

Osteoarthritis (OA) demonstrates considerable clinical heterogeneity, generating 
heated debate over whether OA is a single disease or a complex mix of disparate
diseases and concerning which tissues are principally involved in disease
initiation and progression. Epidemiological studies have demonstrated a major
genetic component to OA risk. However, these studies have also revealed
differences in risk between males and females and for disease at different
skeletal sites. This observation has resulted in the concept of genes for
specific sites rather than a generalised OA phenotype. Recent breakthroughs have 
shed considerable light on the nature of OA genetic susceptibility. Many
candidate genes have been confirmed, such as the interleukin-1 gene cluster and
the oestrogen alpha-receptor gene ESR1. Genome-wide linkage scans have revealed
several regions harbouring novel loci, some of which are beginning to yield their
genes.

PMID: 15823757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Aspects Med. 2005 Jun;26(3):145-67.

Gene variants for osteoporosis and their pleiotropic effects in aging.

Ferrari SL(1), Rizzoli R.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Bone Diseases, WHO Collaborating Center for Osteoporosis
Prevention, Department of Rehabilitation and Geriatrics, Geneva University
Hospital, Switzerland. serge.ferrari@medecine.unige.ch

The prevalence of osteoporosis is raising worldwide as improving conditions of
living and treatment of other common diseases continuously increases life
expectancy. Thus, osteoporosis affects most women above 80 years of age and, at
the age of 50, the lifetime risk of suffering an osteoporosis-related fracture
approaches 50% in women and 20% in men. Numerous genetic, hormonal, nutritional
and life-style factors contribute to the acquisition and maintenance of bone
mass. Among them, genetic variations explain as much as 70% of the variance for
bone mineral density (BMD) in the population. Dozens of quantitative trait loci
(QTLs) for BMD have been identified by genome screening and linkage approaches in
humans and mice, and more than 100 candidate gene polymorphisms tested for
association with BMD and/or fracture. Sequence variants in the vitamin D receptor
(VDR), collagen 1 alpha 1 chain (Col1A1), estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1),
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and LDL receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5) genes were all
found to be significantly associated with differences in BMD and/or fracture risk
in multiple replication studies. Moreover, some genes, such as VDR and IL-6, were
shown to interact with non-genetic factors, i.e. calcium intake and estrogens, to
modulate BMD. Since these gene variants have also been associated with other
complex disorders, including cancer and coronary heart disease, they may
represent common genetic susceptibility factors exerting pleiotropic effects
during the aging process.

PMID: 15811432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Bone. 2005 Apr;36(4):700-9.

Genetic and environmental determinants of bone mineral density in Chinese women.

Lau HH(1), Ng MY, Ho AY, Luk KD, Kung AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital,
China.

BMD is a complex trait determined by genetic and lifestyle factors. To assess the
genetic and environmental determinants of BMD in southern Chinese women, we
studied a community-based cohort of 531 pre- and postmenopausal southern Chinese 
women and assessed the influence of 12 candidate gene loci and lifestyle risk
factors on spine and hip BMD. The candidate genes studied include estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1) and beta (ESR2), calcium sensing receptor (CASR), vitamin D
receptor (VDR), collagen type Ialpha1 (COLIA1), and LDL receptor-related protein 
5 (LRP5). Social, medical, reproductive history, dietary habits and lifestyle
factors were determined using a structured questionnaire. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of the COLIA1 and LRP5 gene in Chinese were determined by
direct sequencing. Nucleotide (nt) -1363C/G and -1997 G/T of COLIA1, nt 266A/G,
2220C/T and 3989C/T of LRP5 gene were analyzed. Using stepwise multiple linear
regression analyses, body weight was the strongest predictor for BMD in
premenopausal women (n = 262), which accounted for 15.9% of the variance at the
spine, 20% at femoral neck, 17.1% at trochanter, 24.3% at total hip and 10.9% at 
the Ward's triangle. Other significant predictors were ESR1 Ivs1-397T/C genotype 
(2.2% at the spine); LRP5 2220C/T genotype (1.3% at the spine, 1.6% at the
trochanter); LRP5 266A/G genotype (1.1% at Ward's triangle); age at menarche
(1.3% at trochanter) and age (2.0% at Ward's triangle). As for postmenopausal
women (n = 269), body weight ( approximately 25% at various sites) and age
(approximately 16% at femoral neck, trochanter, total hip and Ward's triangle
sites) were the strongest predictors of BMD. Other significant predictors were
age at menarche (4.4% at spine, 0.7% at femoral neck, 1.4% at trochanter, and
1.4% at Ward's triangle); weight bearing physical activity (2.1% at trochanter
and 1% at total hip); calcium intake (1.1% at femoral neck, 0.9% at trochanter,
and 1.7% at total hip) ; height (0.7% at trochanter); and ESR2 1082A/G genotype
(0.8% at trochanter). We conclude that BMD at various sites and at different time
span of a woman is modified by different genetic and lifestyle factors,
suggesting that BMD is highly dependent on gene-environmental interactions.

PMID: 15781005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. BMC Bioinformatics. 2005 Mar 18;6:60.

SNPHunter: a bioinformatic software for single nucleotide polymorphism data
acquisition and management.

Wang L(1), Liu S, Niu T, Xu X.

Author information: 
(1)Program for Population Genetics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA
02115, USA. linwang@hsph.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) provide an important tool in
pinpointing susceptibility genes for complex diseases and in unveiling human
molecular evolution. Selection and retrieval of an optimal SNP set from publicly 
available databases have emerged as the foremost bottlenecks in designing
large-scale linkage disequilibrium studies, particularly in case-control
settings.
RESULTS: We describe the architectural structure and implementations of a novel
software program, SNPHunter, which allows for both ad hoc-mode and batch-mode SNP
search, automatic SNP filtering, and retrieval of SNP data, including physical
position, function class, flanking sequences at user-defined lengths, and
heterozygosity from NCBI dbSNP. The SNP data extracted from dbSNP via SNPHunter
can be exported and saved in plain text format for further down-stream analyses. 
As an illustration, we applied SNPHunter for selecting SNPs for 10 major
candidate genes for type 2 diabetes, including CAPN10, FABP4, IL6, NOS3, PPARG,
TNF, UCP2, CRP, ESR1, and AR.
CONCLUSION: SNPHunter constitutes an efficient and user-friendly tool for SNP
screening, selection, and acquisition. The executable and user's manual are
available at http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/ppg/software.htm

PMCID: PMC1274256
PMID: 15774022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biol Reprod. 2005 Jul;73(1):115-22. Epub 2005 Mar 16.

A nongenomic action of 17beta-estradiol as the mechanism underlying the acute
suppression of secretion of luteinizing hormone.

Arreguin-Arevalo JA(1), Nett TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
Colorado 80523, USA.

The objective of the present study was to determine the ability of
17beta-estradiol (E(2)) and conjugated forms of E(2) (E(2) conjugated to BSA
[E(2)-BSA] and a novel conjugate, E(2) conjugated to a small peptide [E(2)-PEP]) 
to prevent the GnRH-induced secretion of LH and to determine the role of
estradiol receptors (ERs) and ER subtypes (ERalpha, also known as ESR1, and
ERbeta, also known as ESR2) in the mediation of the acute action of E(2) in
primary cultures of ovine pituitary cells. Preincubation of cells for 15 min with
E(2), E(2)-BSA, or E(2)-PEP prevented the GnRH-induced secretion of LH (P <
0.01). Treatment of cells with nonestrogenic steroid hormones did not affect
secretion of LH when given alone, nor did these steroids impair the E(2)-induced 
inhibition of LH secretion (P > 0.1). Likewise, treatment of cells with the
ER-antagonists tamoxifen, hydroxytamoxifen, or ICI 182 780 did not affect (P >
0.1) secretion of LH when given alone but did prevent (P < 0.01) the inhibition
by E(2) and the E(2)-conjugates on GnRH-induced secretion of LH. When cells were 
treated with subtype-selective ER agonists, the ERalpha agonist
(propylpyrazole-triol), but not the ERbeta agonist (diarylpropionitrile),
decreased (P < 0.01) the GnRH-induced secretion of LH. In conclusion, the
rapidity by which E(2) prevented GnRH-induced release of LH in ovine pituitary
cells suggests that this inhibition is mediated via a nongenomic action of E(2). 
The inhibition of GnRH-induced secretion of LH proved to be steroid specific and 
mediated by ERs. It may occur specifically through ERalpha. The fact that
E(2)-BSA or E(2)-PEP mimicked the action of E(2) suggests that this effect was
mediated by an ER associated with the plasma membrane.

PMID: 15772257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biochemistry. 2005 Mar 22;44(11):4196-203.

Inhibition of DNA binding by human estrogen-related receptor 2 and estrogen
receptor alpha with minor groove binding polyamides.

Gearhart MD(1), Dickinson L, Ehley J, Melander C, Dervan PB, Wright PE,
Gottesfeld JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Human estrogen-related receptor 2 (hERR2, ESRRB, ERRbeta, NR3B2) belongs to a
class of nuclear receptors that bind DNA through sequence-specific interactions
with a 5'-AGGTCA-3' estrogen response element (ERE) half-site in the major groove
and an upstream 5'-TNA-3' site in the minor groove. This minor groove interaction
is mediated by a C-terminal extension (CTE) of the DNA binding domain and is
unique to the estrogen-related receptors. We have used synthetic
pyrrole-imidazole polyamides, which bind specific sequences in the minor groove, 
to demonstrate that DNA binding by hERR2 is sensitive to the presence of
polyamides in both the upstream minor groove CTE site and the minor groove of the
ERE half-site. Thus, polyamides can inhibit hERR2 by two mechanisms, by direct
steric blockage of minor groove DNA contacts mediated by the CTE and by changing 
the helical geometry of DNA such that major groove interactions are weakened. To 
confirm the generality of the latter approach, we show that the dimeric human
estrogen receptor alpha (hERalpha, ESR1, NR3A1), which binds in the major groove 
of the ERE, can be inhibited by a polyamide bound in the opposing minor groove of
the ERE. These results highlight two mechanisms for inhibition of protein-DNA
interactions and extend the repertoire of DNA recognition motifs that can be
inhibited by polyamides. These molecules may thus be useful for controlling
expression of hERR2- or hERalpha-responsive genes.

PMID: 15766247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Med Genet. 2005 Mar;42(3):240-6.

Association of oestrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms with postmenopausal
bone loss, bone mass, and quantitative ultrasound properties of bone.

Albagha OM(1), Pettersson U, Stewart A, McGuigan FE, MacDonald HM, Reid DM,
Ralston SH.

Author information: 
(1)The Bone Research Group, Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, University
of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK.

BACKGROUND: The gene encoding oestrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) appears to regulate
bone mineral density (BMD) and other determinants of osteoporotic fracture risk.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relation between common polymorphisms and
haplotypes of the ESR1 gene and osteoporosis related phenotypes in a population
based cohort of 3054 Scottish women.
RESULTS: There was a significant association between a common haplotype "px",
defined by the PvuII and XbaI restriction fragment length polymorphisms within
intron 1 of the ESR1 gene, and femoral neck bone loss in postmenopausal women who
had not received hormone replacement therapy (n = 945; p = 0.009). Annual rates
of femoral neck bone loss were approximately 14% higher in subjects who carried
one copy of px and 22% higher in those who carried two copies, compared with
those who did not carry the px haplotype. The px haplotype was associated with
lower femoral neck BMD in the postmenopausal women (p = 0.02), and with reduced
calcaneal broadband ultrasound attenuation (BUA) values in the whole study
population (p = 0.005). There was no association between a TA repeat polymorphism
in the ESR1 promoter and any phenotype studied, though on long range haplotype
analysis subjects with a smaller number of TA repeats who also carried the px
haplotype had reduced BUA values.
CONCLUSIONS: The ESR1px haplotype is associated with reduced hip BMD values and
increased rates of femoral neck bone loss in postmenopausal women. An association
with BUA may explain the fact that ESR1 intron 1 alleles predict osteoporotic
fractures by a mechanism partly independent of differences in BMD.

PMCID: PMC1736016
PMID: 15744038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Hum Reprod. 2005 Apr;20(4):852-63. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

Gene expression studies provide clues to the pathogenesis of uterine leiomyoma:
new evidence and a systematic review.

Arslan AA(1), Gold LI, Mittal K, Suen TC, Belitskaya-Levy I, Tang MS, Toniolo P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Department of Environmental Medicine,
Department of Pathology and Department of Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. akhmea01@med.nyu.edu

BACKGROUND: Uterine leiomyomas are extremely common and a major cause of pelvic
pain, bleeding, infertility, and the leading indication for hysterectomy.
Familial and epidemiological studies provide compelling evidence that genetic
alterations play an important role in leiomyoma development.
METHODS: Using Affymetrix U133A GeneChip we analysed expression profiles of
22,283 genes in paired samples of leiomyoma and adjacent normal myometrium. We
compared our results with previously published data on gene expression in uterine
leiomyoma and identified the overlapping gene alterations.
RESULTS: We detected 80 genes with average differences of > or = 2-fold and false
discovery rates of < 5% (14 overexpressed and 66 underexpressed). A comparative
analysis including eight previous gene expression studies revealed eight
prominent genes (ADH1, ATF3, CRABP2, CYR61, DPT, GRIA2, IGF2, MEST) identified by
at least five different studies, eleven genes (ALDH1, CD24, CTGF, DCX, DUSP1,
FOS, GAGEC1, IGFBP6, PTGDS, PTGER3, TYMS) reported by four studies, twelve genes 
(ABCA, ANXA1, APM2, CCL21, CDKN1A, CRMP1, EMP1, ESR1, FY, MAP3K5, TGFBR2, TIMP3) 
identified by three studies, and 40 genes reported by two different studies.
CONCLUSIONS: Review of gene expression data revealed concordant changes in genes 
regulating retinoid synthesis, IGF metabolism, TGF-beta signaling and
extracellular matrix formation. Gene expression studies provide clues to the
relevant pathways of leiomyoma development.

PMID: 15705628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Atherosclerosis. 2005 Feb;178(2):331-8.

Gender-specific effects of estrogen receptor alpha gene haplotype on high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol response to atorvastatin: interaction with apolipoprotein
AI gene polymorphism.

Kajinami K(1), Brousseau ME, Lamon-Fava S, Ordovas JM, Schaefer EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lipid Research Laboratory, Division of Endocrinology Metabolism and Molecular 
Biology, Tufts-New England Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
kajinami@kanazawa-med.ac.jp

Statins can modestly raise the levels of HDL cholesterol and apolipoprotein A-I
(APOA1). Recently, associations between polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor
alpha (ESR1) and the HDL cholesterol response to hormone replacement therapy were
reported. To test the hypothesis that common polymorphisms in ESR1 and APOA1
genes are associated with the response to statin therapy, two ESR1 (PvuII and
XbaI) and two APOA1 (G-75A and +83) polymorphisms were examined in 338
hypercholesterolemic patients treated with atorvastatin 10mg. The ESR1
PvuII-XbaI+ haplotype was significantly, and independently, associated with a
greater response of HDL raising in women (+13% versus +7%, p=0.010) but not in
men (+9% versus +7%, p=0.248). Effects of the APOA1+83 variant allele on HDL
cholesterol response also differed significantly by gender (p=0.012). The
APOA1+83 variant allele was associated with higher basal LDL cholesterol levels
in men as well, but not in women. Finally, significant interactions were observed
between the ESR1 PvuII-XbaI+ haplotype and the APOA1+83 variant allele regarding 
both HDL (p=0.042) and LDL (p=0.031) cholesterol responses. In conclusion, the
ESR1 haplotype was associated with a greater HDL-raising to atorvastatin in a
gender-specific manner, and the interactions between ESR1 and APOA1 genotypes
regarding HDL and LDL cholesterol response were also gender specific.

PMID: 15694942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005 Jan;14(1):213-20.

Phytoestrogen exposure correlation with plasma estradiol in postmenopausal women 
in European Prospective Investigation of Cancer and Nutrition-Norfolk may involve
diet-gene interactions.

Low YL(1), Taylor JI, Grace PB, Dowsett M, Scollen S, Dunning AM, Mulligan AA,
Welch AA, Luben RN, Khaw KT, Day NE, Wareham NJ, Bingham SA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Dunn Human Nutrition Unit, Wellcome Trust/Medical
Research Council Building, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, United Kingdom.
sab@mrc-dunn.cam.ac.uk

Cross-sectional studies investigating the relationship between phytoestrogens in 
diet, urine, or blood with plasma estradiol and sex hormone binding globulin
(SHBG) have been inconclusive. We investigated the relationship among
phytoestrogen exposure, polymorphisms in the ESR1, COMT, CYP19, and SHBG genes,
and plasma estradiol and SHBG levels in 125 free-living postmenopausal women
taking part in a cohort study (European Prospective Investigation of Cancer and
Nutrition-Norfolk) using three different markers: dietary, urinary, and serum
phytoestrogens. Phytoestrogen levels (daidzein, genistein, glycitein,
O-desmethylangolensin, equol, enterodiol, and enterolactone) in spot urine and
serum were analyzed by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry and liquid
chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry, respectively. Plasma estradiol and SHBG 
were measured by immunoassays. Adjusting for age and body mass index, urinary
daidzein, genistein, glycitein, and serum daidzein and glycitein were negatively 
correlated with plasma estradiol (R = -0.199 to -0.277, P <0.03), with
particularly strong associations found in the 18 women with CC genotype for ESR1 
PvuII polymorphism (R = -0.597 to -0.834, P < 0.03). The negative correlations
observed between isoflavones and estradiol in women as a whole became no longer
significant when we excluded women with ESR1 PvuII CC genotype, indicating that
the correlations observed were due mainly to this group of women. There was no
relationship between dietary isoflavones and plasma estradiol and no association 
was found between any of the dietary, urinary, and serum phytoestrogen and plasma
SHBG or between these factors and polymorphisms in CYP19, SHBG, and COMT. We
conclude that higher isoflavone exposure is associated with lower plasma
estradiol in postmenopausal women and that this preliminary study is suggestive
of the involvement of diet-gene interactions.

PMID: 15668497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Neurogenetics. 2005 Feb;6(1):17-23. Epub 2005 Jan 15.

Investigation of hormone receptor genes in migraine.

Colson NJ(1), Lea RA, Quinlan S, MacMillan J, Griffiths LR.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Centre, School of Health Science, Griffith University, Gold 
Coast, Queensland, Australia.

Migraine is a common neurological condition with a complex mode of inheritance.
Steroid hormones have long been implicated in migraine, although their role
remains unclear. Our investigation considered that genes involved in hormonal
pathways may play a role in migraine susceptibility. We therefore investigated
the androgen receptor (AR) CAG repeat, and the progesterone receptor (PR) PROGINS
insert by cross-sectional association analysis. The results showed no association
with the AR CAG repeat in our study group of 275 migraineurs and 275 unrelated
controls. Results of the PR PROGINS analysis showed a significant difference in
the same cohort, and in an independent follow-up study population of 300
migraineurs and 300 unrelated controls. Analysis of the genotypic risk groups of 
both populations together indicated that individuals who carried the PROGINS
insert were 1.8 times more likely to suffer migraine. Interaction analysis of the
PROGINS variant with our previously reported associated ESR1 594A variant showed 
that individuals who possessed at least one copy of both risk alleles were 3.2
times more likely to suffer migraine. Hence, variants of these steroid hormone
receptor genes appear to act synergistically to increase the risk of migraine by 
a factor of three.

PMID: 15654614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Hum Genet. 2005;50(2):62-8. Epub 2005 Jan 15.

Association of habitual smoking and drinking with single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) in 40 candidate genes: data from random population-based Japanese samples.

Liu Y(1), Yoshimura K, Hanaoka T, Ohnami S, Ohnami S, Kohno T, Yoshida T,
Sakamoto H, Sobue T, Tsugane S.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology and Prevention Division, Research Center of Cancer Prevention and
Screening, National Cancer Center, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 104-0045,
Japan.

Basic information on the association between lifestyle factors and candidate
genes is valuable for genetic-environmental study. We screened the association of
habitual smoking or drinking with polymorphism in 40 candidate genes for a total 
of 153 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using a sample of 339 middle-aged, 
randomly selected Japanese men. Smoking and drinking statuses were elicited
during questionnaire-based interviews. Genes were selected based on their
possible involvement in genetic-environmental, life-style interactions and
constitute the genes expressing xenobiotic metabolism enzymes, DNA repair
enzymes, and other stress-related proteins. The P values of odds ratios to
habitual smoking for CYP17A1, ESR1, EPHX1, GSTT2, ALDH2, NOS2A, OGG1, and SLC6A4 
and those of odds ratios to habitual drinking for CYP1B1, ESR1, HSD17B3, GSTM3,
COMT, ADH1C, ALDH2, NOS3, and NUDT1 were under 0.05. These variables were
included in a stepwise logistic analysis in order to develop a predictive model
for smoking or drinking behavior. In the final model, the only significant
variables selected for smoking were OGG1, SLC6A4, EPHX1, ESR1, and CYP17A1, and
for drinking, ALDH2 and NUDT1. The findings of the present study suggest that
polymorphism in associated candidate genes plays a role in the habitual use of
tobacco and alcohol among Japanese men.

PMID: 15654505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Lung Cancer. 2005 Feb;47(2):193-204.

Distinct DNA methylation profiles in malignant mesothelioma, lung adenocarcinoma,
and non-tumor lung.

Tsou JA(1), Shen LY, Siegmund KD, Long TI, Laird PW, Seneviratne CK, Koss MN,
Pass HI, Hagen JA, Laird-Offringa IA.

Author information: 
(1)Norris Cancer Center and Department of Surgery and Biochemistry, Room NOR
6420, 1441 Eastlake Ave., Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA.

DNA methylation markers provide a powerful tool to make diagnoses based on
genetic material obtained directly from tumors or from "remote" locations such as
sputum, pleural fluid, or serum. In particular when limited cell numbers are
available, amplifyable DNA markers can provide a very sensitive tool for cancer
detection and classification. Malignant mesothelioma (MM), an aggressive cancer
strongly associated with asbestos exposure, can be difficult to distinguish from 
adenocarcinoma of the lung when limited material is available. In an attempt to
identify molecular markers for MM and adenocarcinoma, we examined the DNA
methylation status of 14 loci. Analysis of methylation levels in 10 MM and 8
adenocarcinoma cell lines showed that methylation of APC was significantly
elevated in adenocarcinoma compared to MM cell lines (P=0.0003), while
methylation of CDH1 was higher in MM (P<0.02). Subsequent examination of the
methylation status of the 14 loci in 6 MM and 7 adenocarcinoma primary tumors,
which yielded similar methylation profiles, supported these observations.
Comparison of methylation in MM cell lines and tumors versus non-tumor lung
tissue indicated that APC exhibits less methylation in MM (P=0.003) while RASSF1,
PGR1, ESR1, and CDH1 show more methylation in MM, the latter two showing the most
significant difference between the two tissue types (P< or = 0.0001). Comparison 
of methylation in adenocarcinoma cell lines and tumors versus non-tumor lung
tissue showed methylation of ESR1, PGR1 and RASSF1 to be significantly elevated
in adenocarcinoma, with RASSF1 being most significant (P=0.0002). Thus, with the 
examination of 14 loci, we have identified 5 candidates that show potential for
distinguishing between MM, adenocarcinoma and/or non-cancer lung. Our
observations support the strong potential of methylation markers as tools for
accurate diagnosis of neoplasms in and around the lung.

PMID: 15639718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 15;64(24):8891-900.

Estrogen receptor genotypes and haplotypes associated with breast cancer risk.

Gold B(1), Kalush F, Bergeron J, Scott K, Mitra N, Wilson K, Ellis N, Huang H,
Chen M, Lippert R, Halldorsson BV, Woodworth B, White T, Clark AG, Parl FF,
Broder S, Dean M, Offit K.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Section, Laboratory of Genomic Diversity, National Cancer
Institute at Frederick, Frederick, Maryland, USA. goldb@ncifcrf.gov

Nearly one in eight US women will develop breast cancer in their lifetime. Most
breast cancer is not associated with a hereditary syndrome, occurs in
postmenopausal women, and is estrogen and progesterone receptor-positive.
Estrogen exposure is an epidemiologic risk factor for breast cancer and estrogen 
is a potent mammary mitogen. We studied single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
estrogen receptors in 615 healthy subjects and 1011 individuals with
histologically confirmed breast cancer, all from New York City. We analyzed 13
SNPs in the progesterone receptor gene (PGR), 17 SNPs in estrogen receptor 1 gene
(ESR1), and 8 SNPs in the estrogen receptor 2 gene (ESR2). We observed three
common haplotypes in ESR1 that were associated with a decreased risk for breast
cancer [odds ratio (OR), approximately O.4; 95% confidence interval (CI),
0.2-0.8; P < 0.01]. Another haplotype was associated with an increased risk of
breast cancer (OR, 2.1; 95% CI, 1.2-3.8; P < 0.05). A unique risk haplotype was
present in approximately 7% of older Ashkenazi Jewish study subjects (OR, 1.7;
95% CI, 1.2-2.4; P < 0.003). We narrowed the ESR1 risk haplotypes to the promoter
region and first exon. We define several other haplotypes in Ashkenazi Jews in
both ESR1 and ESR2 that may elevate susceptibility to breast cancer. In contrast,
we found no association between any PGR variant or haplotype and breast cancer.
Genetic epidemiology study replication and functional assays of the haplotypes
should permit a better understanding of the role of steroid receptor genetic
variants and breast cancer risk.

PMID: 15604249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Am J Pathol. 2004 Dec;165(6):2069-77.

T lymphocytes do not directly mediate the protective effect of estrogen on
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Polanczyk MJ(1), Jones RE, Subramanian S, Afentoulis M, Rich C, Zakroczymski M,
Cooke P, Vandenbark AA, Offner H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Orgeon, USA.

Gender influences mediated by 17 beta-estradiol (E2) have been associated with
susceptibility to and severity of autoimmune diseases such as diabetes,
arthritis, and multiple sclerosis. In this regard, we have shown that estrogen
receptor-alpha (Esr1) is crucial for the protective effect of 17 beta-estradiol
(E2) in murine experimental autoimmune encephalitis (EAE), an animal model of
multiple sclerosis. The expression of estrogen receptors among various immune
cells (eg, T and B lymphocytes, antigen-presenting cells) suggests that the
therapeutic effect of E2 is likely mediated directly through specific receptor
binding. However, the target immune cell populations responsive to E2 treatment
have not been identified. In the current study, we induced EAE in
T-cell-deficient, severe combined immunodeficient mice or in immunocompetent mice
with encephalitogenic T cells from wild-type Esr1+/+ or Esr1 knockout (Esr1-/-)
donors and compared the protective E2 responses. The results showed that
E2-responsive, Esr1+/+ disease-inducing encephalitogenic T cells were neither
necessary nor sufficient for E2-mediated protection from EAE. Instead, the
therapeutic response appeared to be mediated through direct effects on
nonlymphocytic, E2-responsive cells and down-regulation of the inflammatory
response in the central nervous system. These results provide the first
demonstration that the protective effect of E2 on EAE is not mediated directly
through E2-responsive T cells and raise the alternative possibility that
nonlymphocytic cells such as macrophages, dendritic cells, or other
nonlymphocytic cells are primarily responsive to E2 treatment in EAE.

PMCID: PMC1618702
PMID: 15579449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. JAMA. 2004 Nov 3;292(17):2105-14.

Differential genetic effects of ESR1 gene polymorphisms on osteoporosis outcomes.

Ioannidis JP(1), Ralston SH, Bennett ST, Brandi ML, Grinberg D, Karassa FB,
Langdahl B, van Meurs JB, Mosekilde L, Scollen S, Albagha OM, Bustamante M, Carey
AH, Dunning AM, Enjuanes A, van Leeuwen JP, Mavilia C, Masi L, McGuigan FE,
Nogues X, Pols HA, Reid DM, Schuit SC, Sherlock RE, Uitterlinden AG; GENOMOS
Study.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Department of Hygiene and
Epidemiology, University of Ioannina School of Medicine, Ioannina, Greece.
jioannid@cc.uoi.gr

CONTEXT: Both bone mineral density (BMD) and fracture risk have a strong genetic 
component. Estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) is a candidate gene for osteoporosis,
but previous studies of ESR1 polymorphisms in this field were hampered by small
sample size, lack of standardization, and inconclusive results.
OBJECTIVE: To generate large-scale evidence on whether 3 common ESR1
polymorphisms (intron 1 polymorphisms XbaI [dbSNP: rs9340799] and PvuII [dbSNP:
rs2234693] and promoter TA repeats microsatellite) and haplotypes thereof are
associated with BMD and fractures.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Meta-analysis of individual-level data involving standardized
genotyping of 18 917 individuals in 8 European centers.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: BMD of femoral neck and lumbar spine; all fractures and
vertebral fractures by genotype.
RESULTS: No between-center heterogeneity was observed for any outcome in any
genetic contrast. None of the 3 polymorphisms or haplotypes had any statistically
significant effect on BMD in adjusted or unadjusted analyses, and estimated
differences between genetic contrasts were 0.01 g/cm2 or less. Conversely, we
found significant reductions in fracture risk. In women homozygous for the
absence of an XbaI recognition site, the adjusted odds of all fractures were
reduced by 19% (odds ratio, 0.81 [95% CI, 0.71-0.93]; P = .002) and vertebral
fractures by 35% (odds ratio, 0.65 [95% CI, 0.49-0.87]; P = .003). Effects on
fractures were independent of BMD and unaltered in adjusted analyses. No
significant effects on fracture risk were seen for PvuII and TA repeats.
CONCLUSIONS: ESR1 is a susceptibility gene for fractures, and XbaI determines
fracture risk by mechanisms independent of BMD. Our study demonstrates the value 
of adequately powered studies with standardized genotyping and clinical outcomes 
in defining effects of common genetic variants on complex diseases.

PMID: 15523071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Mol Med (Berl). 2004 Dec;82(12):821-5. Epub 2004 Oct 27.

Estrogen receptor genotype modulates myocardial perfusion in young men.

Kunnas TA(1), Lehtimäki T, Karhunen PJ, Laaksonen R, Janatuinen T, Vesalainen R, 
Nuutila P, Knuuti J, Nikkari ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical School, University of Tampere,
33014 Tampere, Finland. tarja.kunnas@uta.fi

Most of the effects of estrogens are mediated by estrogen receptors. Vascular
endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells express estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) 
in both genders. A long genotype group of a common thymine-adenine (TA)
dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the regulatory region of this gene has
previously been related to coronary artery disease. The present study examined
whether coronary blood flow is affected by this genotype. A total of 49 healthy
men were genotyped by PCR and divided into three groups according to median
number of the ESR1 promoter TA repeat (=19), i.e., in the short allele genotype
group both alleles were of fewer than 19 repeats whereas in the long allele group
both alleles were 19 repeats or more. The intermediate group comprised men who
had one short and one long allele. Myocardial blood flow was measured by positron
emission tomography using [(15)O]water, performed at rest and during adenosine
stimulation. Men with long alleles had lower adenosine-stimulated coronary flow
than those with short alleles and those with one short and one long allele. Our
results suggest that adenosine-stimulated myocardial perfusion is lower in
subjects with ESR1 long alleles than the other TA repeat genotypes.

PMID: 15517129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Neurosci Res. 2004 Dec 1;78(5):603-24.

Neuroimmunoprotective effects of estrogen and derivatives in experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis: therapeutic implications for multiple sclerosis.

Offner H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Neuroimmunology
Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, Oregon, USA.
offnerva@ohsu.edu

The extensive literature and the work from our laboratory illustrate the large
number of complex processes affected by estrogen that might contribute to the
striking ability of 17beta-estradiol (E2) and its derivatives to inhibit clinical
and histological signs of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in
mice. These effects require sustained exposure to relatively low doses of
exogenous hormone and offer better protection when initiated prior to induction
of EAE. However, oral ethinyl estradiol (EE) and fluasterone, which lacks
estrogenic side effects, could partially reverse clinical EAE when given after
the onset of disease. The three main areas discussed in this review include
E2-mediated inhibition of encephalitogenic T cells, inhibition of cell migration 
into central nervous system tissue, and neuroprotective effects that promote axon
and myelin survival. E2 effects on EAE were mediated through Esr1 (alpha receptor
for E2) but not Esr2 (beta receptor for E2), as were its antiinflammatory and
neuroprotective effects. A novel finding is that E2 up-regulated the expression
of Foxp3 and CTLA-4 that contribute to the activity of CD4+CD25+ Treg cells. The 
protective effects of E2 in EAE suggest its use as therapy for MS, although the
risk of cardiovascular disease may complicate treatment in postmenopausal women. 
This risk could be minimized by using subpregnancy levels of exogenous E2 that
produced synergistic effects when used in combination another immunoregulatory
therapy. Alternatively, one might envision using EE or fluasterone metabolites
alone or in combination therapies in both male and female MS patients.

PMID: 15515048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Oncogene. 2004 Dec 2;23(56):9042-51.

Characterization of gene expression in mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas 
using oligonucleotide microarrays.

Fukushima N(1), Sato N, Prasad N, Leach SD, Hruban RH, Goggins M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
21205, USA.

Mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCNs) of the pancreas are uncommon neoplasms usually
located in the body or tail of the pancreas and usually in females (>90% of
cases). Clinically, they are often misdiagnosed as non-neoplastic pseudocysts
leading to failed opportunities for curative resection. To better understand the 
biology of MCNs and to identify markers of the disease, we performed global gene 
expression profiling of MCNs using oligonucleotide microarrays. Using laser
capture microdissection applied to frozen sections, RNA was extracted from the
neoplastic epithelium of MCNs, from the adjacent 'ovarian-type' stroma of MCNs,
from histologically normal pancreatic ductal epithelium, from pancreatic acinar
tissue and from fibrous stroma in pancreata affected by chronic pancreatitis.
Each RNA sample was subjected to two rounds of linear amplification followed by
hybridization with U133A gene chips (Affymetrix). The expression patterns of
selected genes were confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR and by immunohistochemistry 
using tissue microarrays containing 19 resected MCNs. A total of 114 known genes 
were overexpressed in the neoplastic epithelium compared to normal pancreatic
ductal epithelium (>3-fold) including S100P, PSCA, c-myc, STK6/STK15, cathepsin E
and pepsinogen C. Activation of the Notch pathway in the epithelial component of 
MCNs was evident by the demonstration of overexpression of Jagged1 and the
downstream Notch pathway member Hes1. In the 'ovarian-type' stroma, several genes
involved in estrogen metabolism were overexpressed including STAR and ESR1 genes.
Some of the genes identified as overexpressed in these neoplasms may be useful as
markers that can distinguish MCNs from non-neoplastic pancreatic cystic lesions.

PMID: 15489895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biotechniques. 2004 Sep;37(3):476-81.

Multiparametric duplex real-time nucleic acid sequence-based amplification assay 
for mRNA profiling.

Verjat T(1), Cerrato E, Jacobs M, Leissner P, Mougin B.

Author information: 
(1)bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France.

Nucleic acid sequence-based amplification (NASBA) is a sensitive isothermal
transcription-based amplification method. We have developed real-time NASBA
assays to detect mRNA coding for the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and the
progesterone receptor (PGR) in breast tumors by means of duplex reactions using
cyclophilin B (PPIB) as the normalizing gene. Both the ESR1/PPIB and PGR/PPIB
duplex NASBA assays are highly sensitive, specific, and reproducible.
Quantification is determined using external standard calibration curves and the
ratio between the number of target and housekeeping gene mRNA copies.
Amplification of the target gene in the duplex NASBA assay was disrupted when
this latter was mixed with a large amount of the housekeeping PPIB gene,
suggesting that it is preferable for the normalizing gene chosen to have an
expression level comparable to the target gene. Sensitivity and robustness of the
duplex NASBA assays were assessed in breast cancer cell lines. Such a rapid and
easy-to-use multiparametric duplex real-time NASBA assay could also
advantageously be set up for other mRNA profiling applications.

PMID: 15470903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Dermatol Sci. 2004 Sep;35(3):181-6.

Association of estrogen receptor 1 intron 1 C/T polymorphism in Korean vitiligo
patients.

Jin SY(1), Park HH, Li GZ, Lee HJ, Hong MS, Park HJ, Park HK, Seo JC, Yim SV,
Chung JH, Lee MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Kohwang Medical Research
Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Vitiligo is a common disease characterized by cutaneous white maculae
due to loss of melanocytes. It is a polygenic disease, however, the exact
pathogenesis of vitiligo is not yet known. The estrogen receptor (ESR) 1 gene was
selected as a candidate gene because some researchers treated vitiligo
successfully with the steroid-thyroid hormone mixture containing estrogen.
Furthermore ESR was expressed in the melanocytes which have an important role in 
the pigmentation. The polymorphisms of ESR1 gene in vitiligo patients was not
reported yet.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether polymorphisms of ESR1 gene were associated with
susceptibility to vitiligo patients in Korean population.
METHODS: We conducted case-control association study of vitiligo patients (120)
and healthy controls (254). Genotypes of ESR1 gene (intron 1 C/T, exon 4 C/G, and
exon 8 A/G) were determined by polymerase chain reaction followed by restriction 
enzyme digestion.
RESULTS: Intron 1 T/C allele frequency was significantly different between
patients and controls (P = 0.034). Intron 1 T/C genotype distribution (P = 0.021)
and allele frequency (P = 0.013) were different between female vitiligo patients 
and female controls. Intron 1 T/C allele frequency showed significantly
difference between generalized type of vitiligo patients and controls (P =
0.044). Genotype distributions and allele frequencies of exon 4 C/G and exon 8
A/G polymorphisms were not different between patients and controls.
CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that ESR1 may be a possible risk factor
for female or generalized type of vitiligo patients.

Copyright 2004 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology

PMID: 15381239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Oncol Rep. 2004 Oct;12(4):701-7.

Gene regulation by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231, two
breast cancer cell lines exhibiting highly different phenotypes.

Lacroix M(1), Haibe-Kains B, Hennuy B, Laes JF, Lallemand F, Gonze I, Cardoso F, 
Piccart M, Leclercq G, Sotiriou C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Jean-Claude Heuson de Cancérologie Mammaire, Institut Jules
Bordet, Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium. marc.lacroix@ulb.be

We have examined the effects of the protein kinase C (PKC)-activator phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) on gene expression in two breast cancer cell (BCC) 
lines exhibiting highly different phenotypes. These are the estrogen receptor
alpha (ERalpha)-positive, weakly invasive, luminal epithelial-like MCF-7 and the 
ERalpha-negative, highly invasive, fibroblast-like MDA-MB-231. They express
constitutively low and high PKC activities, respectively. After a 24-h exposition
to 100 nM PMA, the number of genes showing an altered expression at the 2-fold
change level was much higher in MCF-7 (n=435) than in MDA-MB-231 (n=18) BCC. Four
of these genes, namely CDC2, CENPA, NR4A1 and MMP10, were altered in the same way
in both cell lines. Two genes were regulated in an opposite way: ID1 and EVA1.
Many of the genes down-regulated in MCF-7 BCC appeared to be preferentially
expressed in the G1, S, and/or G2 phases of the cell cycle. The ERalpha gene,
ESR1, and other genes associated to the ERalpha-positive, luminal epithelial-like
BCC phenotype were down-regulated, while a series of genes related to a more
aggressive, fibroblast-like BCC phenotype were up-regulated. Other altered genes 
were notably linked to cell architecture, supporting profound effects of PMA on
cell morphology and motility, as well as on the interactions between BCC and
their neighboring proteins. Of note, all the modulated genes involved in
proteolysis and its control were up-regulated. In summary, PMA effects suggest
that PKC activation may induce, to some extent, a more fibroblast-like phenotype 
in the ERalpha-positive, luminal epithelial-like MCF-7 BCC, and significantly
modulate the interactions of these cells with their environment.

PMID: 15375488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Hepatology. 2004 Aug;40(2):318-26.

Association of estrogen receptor alpha polymorphisms with susceptibility to
chronic hepatitis B virus infection.

Deng G(1), Zhou G, Zhai Y, Li S, Li X, Li Y, Zhang R, Yao Z, Shen Y, Qiang B,
Wang Y, He F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Chongqing, China.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2004 Aug;40(2):284-6.

Several studies have demonstrated that estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1)
participates in the pathogenesis of persistent hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection.
To examine whether polymorphisms at the ESR1 gene locus are associated with
persistent HBV infection, we resequenced ESR1 genomic region for single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 27 unrelated Chinese. Two haplotype-tagged
SNPs (htSNP), T29C and A252966G, were selected for genotyping in 1,277 persistent
HBV-infected cases, 748 spontaneously recovered controls, and 293 nuclear
families using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-restriction fragment length
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis. We observed that the subjects bearing ESR1
29T/T genotype had an increased susceptibility to persistent HBV infection
compared to those bearing at least one 29C allele (odds ratio 1.41; 95% CI,
1.17-1.71, P < .001). Consistent with the results of population-based association
study, a significantly greater than expected transmission of the 29T allele
(56.4%) from heterozygous parents to offspring with persistent HBV infection was 
observed (chi2 = 4.60, P = .033) using the transmission-disequilibrium test (TDT)
in 293 nuclear families. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) mapping analysis indicated
that the T29C polymorphism contained within a LD block located from promoter
region to intron 3 of ESR1, suggesting that the strong association detected with 
T29C in ESR1 originated from ESR1 itself. In conclusion, our results suggest that
the genetic variation at the ESR1 locus influences susceptibility to persistent
HBV infection in a Chinese population.

Copyright 2004 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases

PMID: 15368436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Oncogene. 2004 Oct 7;23(46):7669-78.

Mutation of GATA3 in human breast tumors.

Usary J(1), Llaca V, Karaca G, Presswala S, Karaca M, He X, Langerød A, Kåresen
R, Oh DS, Dressler LG, Lønning PE, Strausberg RL, Chanock S, Børresen-Dale AL,
Perou CM.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

GATA3 is an essential transcription factor that was first identified as a
regulator of immune cell function. In recent microarray analyses of human breast 
tumors, both normal breast luminal epithelium and estrogen receptor
(ESR1)-positive tumors showed high expression of GATA3. We sequenced genomic DNA 
from 111 breast tumors and three breast-tumor-derived cell lines and identified
somatic mutations of GATA3 in five tumors and the MCF-7 cell line. These
mutations cluster in the vicinity of the highly conserved second zinc-finger that
is required for DNA binding. In addition to these five, we identified using cDNA 
sequencing a unique mis-splicing variant that caused a frameshift mutation. One
of the somatic mutations we identified was identical to a germline GATA3 mutation
reported in two kindreds with HDR syndrome/OMIM #146255, which is an autosomal
dominant syndrome caused by the haplo-insufficiency of GATA3. The ectopic
expression of GATA3 in human 293T cells caused the induction of 73 genes
including six cytokeratins, and inhibited cell line doubling times. These data
suggest that GATA3 is involved in growth control and the maintenance of the
differentiated state in epithelial cells, and that GATA3 variants may contribute 
to tumorigenesis in ESR1-positive breast tumors.

PMID: 15361840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Aug 20;321(2):455-61.

Age-dependent methylation of ESR1 gene in prostate cancer.

Li LC(1), Shiina H, Deguchi M, Zhao H, Okino ST, Kane CJ, Carroll PR, Igawa M,
Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

The incidence of prostate cancer increases dramatically with age and the
mechanism underlying this association is unclear. Age-dependent methylation of
estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene has been previously implicated in other
cancerous and benign diseases. We evaluated the age-dependent methylation of ESR1
in prostate cancer. The methylation status of ESR1 in 83 prostate cancer samples 
from patients aged 49 to 77 years (mean age at 67.4 years) was examined using the
bisulfite genomic sequencing technique. The samples were divided into three age
groups: men aged 60 years and under (n = 14), men aged 61-70 years (n = 40), and 
men aged over 70 years (n = 29). Overall, ESR1 promoter methylation was detected 
in 54 out of 83 (65.1%) prostate samples. The methylation rate of ESR1 increased 
dramatically with age from 50.0% in patients aged 60 years and under to 89.7% for
patients aged 70 years and over. Logistic regression analyses revealed that age
and Gleason score were the only variables that affect incidence of ESR1
methylation; other clinical factors such as prostate-specific antigen level and
clinical stage did not. We also calculated ESR1 methylation density (the
percentage of methylated CpGs among all CpGs within the analyzed region) and
severity (the percentage of methylated CpG alleles) for each sample analyzed.
Multiple regression analyses showed a positive correlation between age and
methylation density (beta, 0.35; P, 0.012; 95% CI, 0.26-2.01); while Gleason
score was positively associated with methylation severity (beta, 0.45; P, 0.018; 
95% CI, 1.04-4.26). These findings suggest that methylation of ESR1 is both
age-dependent and tumor differentiation-dependent and age-dependent methylation
of ESR1 may represent a mechanism linking aging and prostate cancer.

PMID: 15358197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2004 Sep;13(9):1495-501.

Use of DNA from human stools to detect aberrant CpG island methylation of genes
implicated in colorectal cancer.

Belshaw NJ(1), Elliott GO, Williams EA, Bradburn DM, Mills SJ, Mathers JC,
Johnson IT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park, Colney, Norwich, United
Kingdom.

Hypermethylation of cytosine residues in the CpG islands of tumor suppressor
genes is a key mechanism of colorectal carcinogenesis. Detection and
quantification of CpG island methylation in human DNA isolated from stools might 
provide a novel strategy for the detection and investigation of colorectal
neoplasia. To explore the feasibility of this approach, colorectal biopsies and
fecal samples were obtained from 32 patients attending for colonoscopy or
surgery, who were found to have adenomatous polyps, colorectal cancer, or no
evidence of neoplasia. A further 18 fecal samples were obtained from healthy
volunteers, with no bowel symptoms. Isolated DNA was modified with sodium
bisulfite and analyzed by methylation-specific PCR and combined bisulfite
restriction analysis for CpG island methylation of ESR1, MGMT, HPP1, p16(INK4a), 
APC, and MLH1. CpG island methylation was readily detectable in both mucosal and 
fecal DNA with methylation-specific PCR. Using combined bisulfite restriction
analysis, it was established that, in volunteers from whom biopsies were
available, the levels of methylation at two CpG sites within ESR1 assayed using
fecal DNA were significantly correlated with methylation in DNA from colorectal
mucosa. Thus, noninvasive techniques can be used to obtain quantitative
information about the level of CpG island methylation in human colorectal mucosa.
The methods described here could be applied to a much expanded range of genes and
may be valuable both for screening purposes and to provide greater insight into
the functional consequences of epigenetic changes in the colorectal mucosa of
free-living individuals.

PMID: 15342451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 15;10(16):5349-54.

Nonrandom distribution of aberrant promoter methylation of cancer-related genes
in sporadic breast tumors.

Parrella P(1), Poeta ML, Gallo AP, Prencipe M, Scintu M, Apicella A, Rossiello R,
Liguoro G, Seripa D, Gravina C, Rabitti C, Rinaldi M, Nicol T, Tommasi S,
Paradiso A, Schittulli F, Altomare V, Fazio VM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Therapy and Oncology, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), 
Italy. pparrella@operapadrepio.it

PURPOSE: In an effort to additionally determine the global patterns of CpG island
hypermethylation in sporadic breast cancer, we searched for aberrant promoter
methylation at 10 gene loci in 54 primary breast cancer and 10 breast benign
lesions.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Genomic DNA sodium bisulfate converted from benign and
malignant tissues was used as template in methyl-specific PCR for BRCA1, p16,
ESR1, GSTP1, TRbeta1, RARbeta2, HIC1, APC, CCND2, and CDH1 genes.
RESULTS: The majority of the breast cancer (85%) showed aberrant methylation in
at least 1 of the loci tested with half of them displaying 3 or more methylated
genes. The highest frequency of aberrant promoter methylation was found for HIC1 
(48%) followed by ESR1 (46%), and CDH1 (39%). Similar methylation frequencies
were detected for breast benign lesions with the exception of the CDH1 gene (P = 
0.02). The analysis of methylation distribution indicates a statistically
significant association between methylation of the ESR1 promoter, and methylation
at CDH1, TRbeta1, GSTP1, and CCND2 loci (P < 0.03). Methylated status of the
BRCA1 promoter was inversely correlated with methylation at the RARbeta2 locus (P
< 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a nonrandom distribution for promoter
hypermethylation in sporadic breast cancer, with tumor subsets characterized by
aberrant methylation of specific cancer-related genes. These breast cancer
subgroups may represent separate biological entities with potential differences
in sensitivity to therapy, occurrence of metastasis, and overall prognosis.

PMID: 15328171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Sep;4(5):561-8.

Expression patterns of three estrogen receptor genes during zebrafish (Danio
rerio) development: evidence for high expression in neuromasts.

Tingaud-Sequeira A(1), André M, Forgue J, Barthe C, Babin PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Génomique et Physiologie des Poissons, UMR 1067 NUAGE
INRA-IFREMER, Université Bordeaux 1, Avenue des Facultes, Bat. B2, 33405 Talence 
cedex, France.

The estrogen receptor (ER) genes encode a group of nuclear enhancer proteins,
which are important ligand-activated transcription factors, modulating
estrogen-target gene transcription. In this study we analyzed expression patterns
of three zebrafish ER genes, esr1, esr2a, and esr2b, during development using
whole-mount in situ hybridization. High levels of esr2a and esr2b of maternal
origin are inherited and segregated to the blastomers. After the mid-blastula
transition, the three genes exhibit similar spatio-temporal patterns of
expression. In 24 h postfertilization (hpf) embryos, high levels of esr2a and
esr2b and low levels of esr1 mRNAs are detected in the epidermis, pectoral fin
buds, hatching gland and, to a lesser extent, developing brain. From 24 hpf
onward, the expression of the three genes is down-regulated in the epidermis. By 
60 hpf, esr2a mRNA is abundant in mature primary neuromasts of the anterior line 
system and by 3 days postfertilization (dpf), all mature primary neuromasts in
both the anterior and posterior lateral line systems express significant levels
of esr2a and esr2b transcripts. Histological sections show a high level of esr2a 
transcripts in both mechanoreceptive hair cells and supporting cells. The
transcripts are still detected after neomycin-induced hair cell death, consistent
with the presence of esr2a transcripts in supporting cells. From 6 dpf onward,
esr2a and esr2b transcripts are robustly co-expressed in primary neuromasts,
branchial arches, pectoral fins, and anal papilla, while slight labeling is
observed for esr1 transcripts.

PMID: 15261834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Jun;1022:44-9.

Prognostic DNA methylation marker in serum of cancer patients.

Müller HM(1), Fiegl H, Widschwendter A, Widschwendter M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Transplant Surgery, Innsbruck Medical University,
A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Changes in the status of DNA methylation are among the most common molecular
alterations in human neoplasia. Recent demonstrations of tumor-derived methylated
DNA in the blood stream of cancer patients allow the use of these epigenetic
markers for risk assessment in cancer patients. We were interested in evaluating 
the prognostic value of several methylated genes in the serum of cancer patients.
Using MethyLight, a high-throughput DNA methylation assay, we analyzed 215 serum 
samples from patients with cervical (n = 93) or breast cancer (n = 122) for DNA
methylation changes. In cervical cancer, hypermethylation of three genes (MYOD1, 
CDH1, and CDH13) in pretreatment sera was statistically significantly associated 
with a poorer disease outcome. Additionally, for the first time we used a
so-called gene evaluation set to identify the most important DNA methylation
changes in the serum of breast cancer patients from a long list of candidate
genes. In the gene evaluation set, we detected five genes (ESR1, APC, HSD17B4,
HIC1, and RASSF1A) using our criteria for further analysis. Finally, two of the
evaluated genes (APC and RASSF1A) proved to be independent prognostic parameters 
in breast cancer patients. In summary, we detected several prognostic DNA
methylation markers in the serum of cervical and breast cancer patients. This
finding indicates great potential for the use of these epigenetic markers in
clinical, routine risk assessment in patients with various malignancies.

PMID: 15251938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Breast Cancer Res. 2004;6(4):R437-49. Epub 2004 Jun 4.

Oestrogen receptor alpha gene haplotype and postmenopausal breast cancer risk: a 
case control study.

Wedrén S(1), Lovmar L, Humphreys K, Magnusson C, Melhus H, Syvänen AC, Kindmark
A, Landegren U, Fermér ML, Stiger F, Persson I, Baron J, Weiderpass E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. sara.wedren@meb.ki.se

INTRODUCTION: Oestrogen receptor alpha, which mediates the effect of oestrogen in
target tissues, is genetically polymorphic. Because breast cancer development is 
dependent on oestrogenic influence, we have investigated whether polymorphisms in
the oestrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) are associated with breast cancer risk.
METHODS: We genotyped breast cancer cases and age-matched population controls for
one microsatellite marker and four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
ESR1. The numbers of genotyped cases and controls for each marker were as
follows: TAn, 1514 cases and 1514 controls; c.454-397C --> T, 1557 cases and 1512
controls; c.454-351A --> G, 1556 cases and 1512 controls; c.729C --> T, 1562
cases and 1513 controls; c.975C --> G, 1562 cases and 1513 controls. Using
logistic regression models, we calculated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs). Haplotype effects were estimated in an exploratory analysis,
using expectation-maximisation algorithms for case-control study data.
RESULTS: There were no compelling associations between single polymorphic loci
and breast cancer risk. In haplotype analyses, a common haplotype of the
c.454-351A --> G or c.454-397C --> T and c.975C --> G SNPs appeared to be
associated with an increased risk for ductal breast cancer: one copy of the
c.454-351A --> G and c.975C --> G haplotype entailed an OR of 1.19 (95% CI
1.06-1.33) and two copies with an OR of 1.42 (95% CI 1.15-1.77), compared with no
copies, under a model of multiplicative penetrance. The association with the
c.454-397C --> T and c.975C --> G haplotypes was similar. Our data indicated that
these haplotypes were more influential in women with a high body mass index.
Adjustment for multiple comparisons rendered the associations statistically
non-significant.
CONCLUSION: We found suggestions of an association between common haplotypes in
ESR1 and the risk for ductal breast cancer that is stronger in heavy women.

PMCID: PMC468663
PMID: 15217512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. JAMA. 2004 Jun 23;291(24):2969-77.

Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms and risk of myocardial infarction.

Schuit SC(1), Oei HH, Witteman JC, Geurts van Kessel CH, van Meurs JB, Nijhuis
RL, van Leeuwen JP, de Jong FH, Zillikens MC, Hofman A, Pols HA, Uitterlinden AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2004 Oct 13;292(14):1683; author reply 1683-4.
    JAMA. 2004 Jun 23;291(24):3008-10.

CONTEXT: The role of estrogens in ischemic heart disease (IHD) is uncertain.
Evidence suggests that genetic variations in the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1)
gene may influence IHD risk, but the role of common sequence variations in the
ESR1 gene is unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the ESR1 haplotype created by the c.454-397T>C
(PvuII) and c.454-351A>G (XbaI) polymorphisms is associated with myocardial
infarction (MI) and IHD risk.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In 2617 men and 3791 postmenopausal women from
The Rotterdam Study (enrollment between 1989-1993 and follow-up to January 2000),
a population-based, prospective cohort study of participants aged 55 years and
older, ESR1 c.454-397T>C and c.454-351A>G haplotypes were determined. Detailed
interviews and physical examinations were performed, blood samples were obtained,
and cardiovascular risk factors were assessed.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: The primary outcome was MI and IHD defined as MIs,
revascularization procedures, and IHD mortality.
RESULTS: Approximately 29% of women and 28.2% of men were homozygous carriers of 
the ESR1 haplotype 1 (-397 T and -351 A) allele, 49% of women and 50% of men were
heterozygous carriers, and 22% of women and 21.4% of men were noncarriers. During
a mean follow-up of 7.0 years, 285 participants (115 women; 170 men) had MI, and 
440 (168 women; 272 men) had an IHD event, of which 97 were fatal. After
adjustment for known cardiovascular risk factors, female heterozygous carriers of
haplotype 1 had an increased risk of MI (event rate, 2.8%; relative risk [RR],
2.23; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.13-4.43) compared with noncarriers (event
rate, 1.3%), whereas homozygous carriers had an increased risk (event rate, 3.2%;
RR, 2.48; 95% CI, 1.22-5.03). For IHD events, we observed a similar association. 
In women, the effect of haplotype 1 on fatal IHD was larger than on nonfatal IHD.
In men, the ESR1 haplotypes were not associated with an increased risk of MI
(event rate, 5.7%; RR, 0.93; 95% CI, 0.59-1.46 for heterozygous carriers; and
event rate, 5.1%; RR, 0.82; 95% CI, 0.49-1.38 for homozygous carriers) compared
with noncarriers (event rate, 5.8%) and were not associated with an increased
risk of IHD.
CONCLUSIONS: In this population-based, prospective cohort study, postmenopausal
women who carry ESR1 haplotype 1 (c.454-397 T allele and c.454-351 A allele) have
an increased risk of MI and IHD, independent of known cardiovascular risk
factors. In men, no association was observed.

PMID: 15213208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cancer Res. 2004 Jun 1;64(11):3807-13.

Association of breast cancer DNA methylation profiles with hormone receptor
status and response to tamoxifen.

Widschwendter M(1), Siegmund KD, Müller HM, Fiegl H, Marth C, Müller-Holzner E,
Jones PA, Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Southern California, Keck School of
Medicine, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, California,
90089-9176, USA.

We have generated DNA methylation profiles of 148 human breast tumors and found
significant differences in hormone receptor (HR) status between clusters of DNA
methylation profiles. Of 35 DNA methylation markers analyzed, the ESR1 gene,
encoding estrogen receptor alpha, proved to be the best predictor of progesterone
receptor status, whereas methylation of the PGR gene, encoding progesterone
receptor, was the best predictor of estrogen receptor status. ESR1 methylation
outperformed HR status as a predictor of clinical response in patients treated
with the antiestrogen tamoxifen, whereas promoter methylation of the CYP1B1 gene,
encoding a tamoxifen- and estradiol-metabolizing cytochrome p450, predicted
response differentially in tamoxifen-treated and nontamoxifen-treated patients.
High levels of promoter methylation of the ARHI gene, encoding a RAS-related
small G-protein, were strongly predictive of good survival in patients who had
not received tamoxifen therapy. Our results reveal an as yet unrecognized degree 
of interaction between DNA methylation and HR biology in breast cancer cells and 
suggest potentially clinically useful novel DNA methylation predictors of
response to hormonal and non-hormonal breast cancer therapy.

PMID: 15172987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Hypertens. 2004 Jun;22(6):1119-26.

Genetic analysis of 22 candidate genes for hypertension in the Japanese
population.

Iwai N(1), Tago N, Yasui N, Kokubo Y, Inamoto N, Tomoike H, Shioji K.

Author information: 
(1)National Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Osaka, Japan. iwai@ri.ncvc.go.jp

Comment in
    J Hypertens. 2004 Jun;22(6):1081-3.

OBJECTIVE: We performed association studies between 118 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of 22 candidate genes (or gene family) and hypertension in a
Japanese population.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: The study population consisted of 1880 subjects
representing the general population in Japan, recruited from the Suita study. The
candidate genes were selected based on their functions, including insulin
resistance (APM1, CD36, HSD11B1), oxidative stress (CYBA, GPX1, GSTMs), steroid
hormone (ESR1, ESR2, HSD11B2), renal functions (PTGS2, KLK1, NPHS1, NPHS2, SGK,
SLC12A1, PTGES), and others related to cardiovascular physiology (GJA4, NOS1,
NTRK3, P2RX4, SPP1, ALDH2).
RESULTS: Multiple logistic analyses, with age and body mass index as covariates, 
indicated that 13 SNPs (eight genes), six SNPs (four genes) and 11 SNPs (four
genes) were associated with hypertension (P < 0.05) in the total, male, and
female populations, respectively. PTGS2 seems to be a promising candidate gene
for hypertension in men. GSTM3 and SLC12A1 seem to be promising candidate genes
for hypertension in women. Especially, a polymorphism in SLC12A1 was
significantly associated with hypertension in women even after correction by the 
Bonferroni method (corrected P = 0.0236). Multiple logistic analyses, with age
and body mass index as covariates, indicated that the prevalence of hypertension 
in females was significantly higher in subjects with the CC genotype than in
those with the TT + TC genotypes (P < 0.0001, odds ratio = 1.967, 95% confidence 
interval = 1.430-2.712).
CONCLUSION: Although the present results should be replicated in other study
populations for confirmation, the present results suggest that SLC12A1 may
contribute to hypertension in Japanese women.

PMID: 15167446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Am J Pathol. 2004 Jun;164(6):1915-24.

Estrogen receptor-1 (Esr1) and -2 (Esr2) regulate the severity of clinical
experimental allergic encephalomyelitis in male mice.

Polanczyk M(1), Yellayi S, Zamora A, Subramanian S, Tovey M, Vandenbark AA,
Offner H, Zachary JF, Fillmore PD, Blankenhorn EP, Gustafsson JA, Teuscher C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Oregon, USA.

Estrogens and estrogen-receptor signaling function in establishing and regulating
the female immune system and it is becoming increasingly evident that they may
play a similar role in males. We report that B10.PL/SnJ male mice with a
disrupted estrogen receptor-1 (alpha) gene (Esr1(-/-)) develop less severe
clinical experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) compared to either
Esr1(+/-) or wild-type (Esr1(+/+)) controls when immunized with myelin basic
protein peptide Ac1-11 (MBP(Ac1-11)). In contrast, the disease course in
B10.PL/SnJ male mice with a disrupted estrogen receptor-2 (beta) gene (Esr2(-/-))
does not differ from that of wild-type (Esr2(+/+)) mice. However, Esr2(+/-) mice 
do develop more severe clinical disease with an earlier onset indicating that
heterosis at Esr2 plays a significant role in regulating EAE in males. No
significant differences in central nervous system histopathology or
MBP(Ac1-11)-specific T-cell responses as assessed by proliferation and
interleukin-2 production were observed as a function of either Esr1 or Esr2
genotype. An analysis of cytokine/chemokine secretion by MBP(Ac1-11)-specific T
cells revealed unique Esr1 and Esr2 genotype-dependent regulation.
Interferon-gamma secretion was found to be negatively regulated by Esr1 whereas
interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha secretion exhibited classical Esr2 
gene dose responses. Interestingly, MCP-1 displayed distinctively unique patterns
of genotype-dependent regulation by Esr1 and Esr2. The contribution of the
hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cellular compartments associated with the
heterotic effect at Esr2 in regulating the severity of clinical EAE was
identified using reciprocal hematopoietic radiation bone marrow chimeras
generated between male wild-type and Esr2(+/-) mice. Wild-type --> Esr2(+/-) mice
exhibited EAE equivalent in severity to that seen in Esr2(+/-) --> Esr2(+/-)
control constructs; both of which were more severe than the clinical signs
observed in Esr2(+/-) --> wild-type and wild-type --> wild-type mice. These
results indicate that the heterotic effect at Esr2 is a function of the
nonhematopoietic compartment.

PMCID: PMC1615766
PMID: 15161628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Apr 30;219(1-2):1-7.

About GATA3, HNF3A, and XBP1, three genes co-expressed with the oestrogen
receptor-alpha gene (ESR1) in breast cancer.

Lacroix M(1), Leclercq G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Jean-Claude Heuson de Cancérologie Mammaire, Institut Jules
Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 127 Boulevard de Waterloo, B-1000
Bruxelles, Belgium. marc.lacroix@ulb.ac.be

In breast tumours and breast cancer cell (BCC) lines, microarray analyses have
revealed that a series of genes are expressed in close association with the
oestrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) gene, ESR1. Three of them, GATA3, HNF3A (also
known as FOXA1), and XBP1 encode transcription factors. Here, we present these
factors and we discuss their potential involvement in the ER-alpha-mediated
actions in BCC. We notably show the relations that exist, or that might exist,
between these factors and the oestrogen-inducible trefoil factor TFF1.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 15149721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Neurogenetics. 2004 Jun;5(2):129-33. Epub 2004 May 7.

The estrogen receptor 1 G594A polymorphism is associated with migraine
susceptibility in two independent case/control groups.

Colson NJ(1), Lea RA, Quinlan S, MacMillan J, Griffiths LR.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Centre, School of Health Science, Griffith University, Gold 
Coast, Queensland, Australia.

Migraine is a painful and debilitating disorder with a significant genetic
component. Steroid hormones, in particular estrogen, have long been considered to
play a role in migraine, as variations in hormone levels are associated with
migraine onset in many sufferers of the disorder. Steroid hormones mediate their 
activity via hormone receptors, which have a wide tissue distribution. Estrogen
receptors have been localized to the brain in regions considered to be involved
in migraine pathogenesis. Hence it is possible that genetic variation in the
estrogen receptor gene may play a role in migraine susceptibility. This study
thus examined the estrogen receptor 1 (ESRalpha) gene for a potential role in
migraine pathogenesis and susceptibility. A population-based cohort of 224
migraine sufferers and 224 matched controls were genotyped for the G594A
polymorphism located in exon 8 of the ESR1 gene. Statistical analysis indicated a
significant difference between migraineurs and non-migraineurs in both the allele
frequencies (P=0.003) and genotype distributions (P=0.008) in this sample. An
independent follow-up study was then undertaken using this marker in an
additional population-based cohort of 260 migraine sufferers and 260 matched
controls. This resulted in a significant association between the two groups with 
regard to allele frequencies (P=8 x 10(-6)) and genotype distributions (P=4 x
10(-5)). Our findings support the hypothesis that genetic variation in hormone
receptors, in particular the ESR1 gene, may play a role in migraine.

PMID: 15133719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Pharmacogenetics. 2004 May;14(5):285-93.

Human controlled ovarian hyperstimulation outcome is a polygenic trait.

de Castro F(1), Morón FJ, Montoro L, Galán JJ, Hernández DP, Padilla ES,
Ramírez-Lorca R, Real LM, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Reproducción Humana Asistida, Hospital Universitario Príncipe de
Asturias, Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Allat Médica, Madrid and Departamento de
Genómica Estructural. Neocodex, Sevilla, Spain.

This study aimed to evaluate the association between follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) hormone efficacy and FSHR, CYP19, ESR1 and ESR2 genes using single
nucleotide polymorphism analyses. One hundred and seventy women with conserved
ovarian function undergoing controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) with daily
exogenous recombinant FSH administration. Women were categorized as poor
responders to FSH (three or less ovarian follicles observed at the end of cycle) 
or normal responders (more than three follicles). The outcome is the number of
normal/poor responders as defined by the number of follicles obtained during COS.
The DNA markers studied are located in genes related to the FSH mechanism of
action (FSH receptor, CYP19 aromatase and oestrogen receptors alpha and beta
genes). We conducted an association study between the COS outcome and selected
DNA markers using two-point and multi-locus genetic association studies. Genotype
pattern tracking in extreme phenotypes and multi-locus analysis using Sumstat and
PM algorithms provided significant evidences of genetic interaction between FSHR,
ESR1 and ESR2 markers in relation to COS outcome (P = 0.0015). Our results
support the hypothesis that a discrete set of genes, related to the FSH hormone
mechanism of action, controls the ovarian response to FSH in humans. An
oligogenic model including specific FSHR, ESR1 and ESR2 genotype patterns may
partially explain the poor response to FSH hormone during controlled ovarian
stimulation treatments. The existence of genetic heterogeneity is also suspected.

Copyright 2004 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

PMID: 15115914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Diabetes. 2004 May;53(5):1399-402.

Genome-wide linkage to chromosome 6 for waist circumference in the Framingham
Heart Study.

Fox CS(1), Heard-Costa NL, Wilson PW, Levy D, D'Agostino RB Sr, Atwood LD.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's Framingham Heart Study, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA. foxca@nhlbi.nih.gov

While several loci for BMI have been identified, it is not known whether genes
underlie the process of regional fat deposition. We sought to test whether waist 
circumference, a measure of central adiposity, contains a genetic component.
Variance components linkage analysis was performed on 330 families from the
Framingham Heart Study original and offspring cohorts, using a 10-cM genome-wide 
linkage analysis. Overall, 2,086 subjects (51% women), mean age 48 years, were
available for analysis. The overall heritability of waist circumference was 0.41.
The maximum logarithm of odds (LOD) score in the full dataset was 3.3 on
chromosome 6 at marker D6S1009; when subjects were limited to those aged <60
years, the peak LOD score was 3.7 at the same location. Substantial evidence
exists for linkage to waist circumference, a measure of central adiposity.
Potential candidate genes include ESR1, OPRM1, and NMBR. Further research is
necessary to understand the genes involved in central adiposity.

PMID: 15111512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Breast Cancer Res. 2004;6(3):R170-9. Epub 2004 Feb 24.

Red-clover-derived isoflavones and mammographic breast density: a double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled trial [ISRCTN42940165].

Atkinson C(1), Warren RM, Sala E, Dowsett M, Dunning AM, Healey CS, Runswick S,
Day NE, Bingham SA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Dunn Human Nutrition Unit, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2004;6(3):140-2.

INTRODUCTION: Isoflavones are hypothesized to protect against breast cancer, but 
it is not clear whether they act as oestrogens or anti-oestrogens in breast
tissue. Our aim was to determine the effects of taking a red clover-derived
isoflavone supplement daily for 1 year on mammographic breast density. Effects on
oestradiol, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH),
lymphocyte tyrosine kinase activity and menopausal symptoms were also assessed.
METHODS: A total of 205 women (age range 49-65 years) with Wolfe P2 or DY
mammographic breast patterns were randomly assigned to receive either a red
clover-derived isoflavone tablet (26 mg biochanin A, 16 mg formononetin, 1 mg
genistein and 0.5 mg daidzein) or placebo. Change in mammographic breast density,
serum oestradiol, FSH, LH, menopausal symptoms and lymphocyte tyrosine kinase
activity from baseline to 12 months were assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 177 women completed the trial. Mammographic breast density
decreased in both groups but the difference between the treatment and placebo was
not statistically significant. There was a significant interaction between
treatment group and oestrogen receptor (ESR1) PvuII polymorphism for the change
in estimated percentage breast density (mean +/- standard deviation): TT
isoflavone 1.4 +/- 12.3% and TT placebo -9.6 +/- 14.2%; CT isoflavone -5.2 +/-
12.0% and CT placebo -2.8 +/- 10.3%; and CC isoflavone -3.4 +/- 9.7% and CC
placebo -1.1 +/- 9.5%. There were no statistically significant treatment effects 
on oestradiol, FSH, or LH (assessed only in postmenopausal women), or on
lymphocyte tyrosine kinase activity. Baseline levels of menopausal symptoms were 
low, and there were no statistically significant treatment effects on frequency
of hot flushes or other menopausal symptoms.
CONCLUSION: In contrast to studies showing that conventional hormone replacement 
therapies increase mammographic breast density, the isoflavone supplement did not
increase mammographic breast density in this population of women. Furthermore,
there were no effects on oestradiol, gonadotrophins, lymphocyte tyrosine kinase
activity, or menopausal symptoms.

PMCID: PMC400670
PMID: 15084240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 May;19(5):773-81. Epub 2003 Dec 22.

Estrogen receptor beta polymorphisms are associated with bone mass in women and
men: the Framingham Study.

Shearman AM(1), Karasik D, Gruenthal KM, Demissie S, Cupples LA, Housman DE, Kiel
DP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA.

ESR2 is expressed in bone cells, yet few studies have tested its variation for
association with BMD, an important determinant of osteoporotic fractures. This
was investigated in 723 men and 795 women from the Framingham study. Results show
association of variation in this gene with BMD in both women and
men.INTRODUCTION: Osteoporotic fracture risk is highly dependent on bone density,
a quantitative multifactorial trait with a substantial genetic component. In
contrast to the growing body of evidence that estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1)
plays a role in bone metabolism, few studies have examined the estrogen receptor 
beta (ESR2) gene for association with BMD. An ESR2 CA repeat polymorphism,
D14S1026, was associated with BMD in two small studies, each with <200 women.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The objective of this investigation was to assess whether 
D14S1026 or four other intronic polymorphisms were associated with BMD in 723 men
and 795 women (mean age, 60 years) from the offspring cohort of the
population-based Framingham Study. BMD was measured at the femur (neck,
trochanter, and Ward's area) and the lumbar spine (L(2)-L(4)).
RESULTS: In both women and men, there was significant association of D14S1026
genotype with measures of femoral but not spinal BMD. In addition, genotypes of
two common single nucleotide polymorphisms, rs1256031 and rs1256059, in strong
linkage disequilibrium with one another but not with D14S1026, were associated
with measures of femoral BMD in men. The rs1256031 genotypes had up to a 4.0%
difference in mean femoral BMD. An inferred rs1256031-D14S1026-rs1256059
haplotype C-23CA-T was significantly associated with reduced femoral BMD in women
(p = 0.03, 0.003, and 0.01 for neck, trochanter, and Ward's area, respectively). 
Haplotype-based BMD differences ranged from 3.0% to 4.3%.
CONCLUSIONS: We have observed significant association of common ESR2 variants
with measures of femoral BMD in both men and women.

PMID: 15068501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 May;40(1):51-4.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) mutant A908G is not a common feature in benign and
malignant proliferations of the breast.

Tebbit CL(1), Bentley RC, Olson JA Jr, Marks JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Alterations in estrogen responsive pathways are thought to contribute to benign
and malignant breast disease. It has been reported previously that more than a
third of typical epithelial hyperplasia lesions harbor the missense mutation
A908G in the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene. This substitution of an
arginine for a lysine at codon 303 was reported to confer mitogenic
hypersensitivity to estrogen. To explore this finding further, we analyzed ESR1
for this mutation in a series of breast tissues ranging from typical hyperplasia 
to invasive cancer. In contrast to previous studies, no evidence for this
mutation was found in 36 invasive cancers, 11 in situ carcinomas, 14 epithelial
hyperplasias with atypia, 11 epithelial hyperplasias without atypia, and 11
breast cancer cell lines. These results indicate that ESR1 mutant A908G does not 
occur with significant frequency in either benign or malignant proliferations of 
breast epithelia.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15034868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cancer Res. 2004 Mar 15;64(6):1975-86.

Hypermethylation of CpG islands in primary and metastatic human prostate cancer.

Yegnasubramanian S(1), Kowalski J, Gonzalgo ML, Zahurak M, Piantadosi S, Walsh
PC, Bova GS, De Marzo AM, Isaacs WB, Nelson WG.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, 1650 Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21231-1000, USA.

Aberrant DNA methylation patterns may be the earliest somatic genome changes in
prostate cancer. Using real-time methylation-specific PCR, we assessed the extent
of hypermethylation at 16 CpG islands in DNA from seven prostate cancer cell
lines (LNCaP, PC-3, DU-145, LAPC-4, CWR22Rv1, VCaP, and C42B), normal prostate
epithelial cells, normal prostate stromal cells, 73 primary prostate cancers, 91 
metastatic prostate cancers, and 25 noncancerous prostate tissues. We found that 
CpG islands at GSTP1, APC, RASSF1a, PTGS2, and MDR1 were hypermethylated in >85% 
of prostate cancers and cancer cell lines but not in normal prostate cells and
tissues; CpG islands at EDNRB, ESR1, CDKN2a, and hMLH1 exhibited low to moderate 
rates of hypermethylation in prostate cancer tissues and cancer cell lines but
were entirely unmethylated in normal tissues; and CpG islands at DAPK1, TIMP3,
MGMT, CDKN2b, p14/ARF, and CDH1 were not abnormally hypermethylated in prostate
cancers. Receiver operator characteristic curve analyses suggested that CpG
island hypermethylation changes at GSTP1, APC, RASSF1a, PTGS2, and MDR1 in
various combinations can distinguish primary prostate cancer from benign prostate
tissues with sensitivities of 97.3-100% and specificities of 92-100%.
Hypermethylation of the CpG island at EDNRB was correlated with the grade and
stage of the primary prostate cancers. PTGS2 CpG island hypermethylation
portended an increased risk of recurrence. Furthermore, CpG island
hypermethylation patterns in prostate cancer metastases were very similar to the 
primary prostate cancers and tended to show greater differences between cases
than between anatomical sites of metastasis.

PMID: 15026333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2004 Feb;83(3):249-89.

Relevance of breast cancer cell lines as models for breast tumours: an update.

Lacroix M(1), Leclercq G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Jean-Claude Heuson de Cancérologie Mammaire, Institut Jules
Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, Belgium.
labo.cancerologie.mammaire@bordet.be

The number of available breast cancer cell (BCC) lines is small, and only a very 
few of them have been extensively studied. Whether they are representative of the
tumours from which they originated remains a matter of debate. Whether their
diversity mirrors the well-known inter-tumoural heterogeneity is another
essential question. While numerous similarities have long been found between cell
lines and tumours, recent technical advances, including the use of micro-arrays
and comparative genetic analysis, have brought new data to the discussion. This
paper presents most of the BCC lines that have been described in some detail to
date. It evaluates the accuracy of the few of them widely used (MCF-7, T-47D,
BT-474, SK-BR-3, MDA-MB-231, Hs578T) as tumour models. It is concluded that BCC
lines are likely to reflect, to a large extent, the features of cancer cells in
vivo. The importance of oestrogen receptor-alpha (gene ESR1 ) and Her-2/ neu (
ERBB2 ) as classifiers for cell lines and tumours is underlined. The recourse to 
a larger set of cell lines is suggested since the exact origin of some of the
widely used lines remains ambiguous. Investigations on additional specific lines 
are expected to improve our knowledge of BCC and of the dialogue that these
maintain with their surrounding normal cells in vivo.

PMID: 14758095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Mol Diagn. 2004 Feb;6(1):28-36.

Classification of individual lung cancer cell lines based on DNA methylation
markers: use of linear discriminant analysis and artificial neural networks.

Marchevsky AM(1), Tsou JA, Laird-Offringa IA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, California, USA.

The classification of small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) can pose diagnostic problems due to inter-observer variability and
other limitations of histopathology. There is an interest in developing
classificatory models of lung neoplasms based on the analysis of multivariate
molecular data with statistical methods and/or neural networks. DNA methylation
levels at 20 loci were measured in 41 SCLC and 46 NSCLC cell lines with the
quantitative real-time PCR method MethyLight. The data were analyzed with
artificial neural networks (ANN) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) to
classify the cell lines into SCLC or into NSCLC. Models used either data from all
20 loci, or from five significant DNA methylation loci that were selected by a
step-wise back-propagation procedure (PTGS2, CALCA, MTHFR, ESR1, and CDKN2A). The
data were sorted randomly by cell line into 10 different data sets, each with
training and testing subsets composed of 71 and 16 of the cases, respectively.
Ten ANN models were trained using the 10 data sets: five using 20 variables, and 
five using the five variables selected by step-wise back-propagation. The ANN
models with 20 input variables correctly classified 100% of the cell lines, while
the models with only five variables correctly classified 87 to 100% of cases. For
comparison, 10 different LDA models were trained and tested using the same data
sets with either the original data or with logarithmically transformed data.
Again, half of the models used all 20 variables while the others used only the
five significant variables. LDA models provided correct classifications in 62.5% 
to 87.5% of cases. The classifications provided by all of the different models
were compared with kappa statistics, yielding kappa values ranging from 0.25 to
1.0. We conclude that ANN models based on DNA methylation profiles can
objectively classify SCLC and NSCLC cells lines with substantial to perfect
concordance, while LDA models based on DNA methylation profiles provide poor to
substantial concordance. Our work supports the promise of ANN analysis of DNA
methylation data as a powerful approach for the development of automated methods 
for lung cancer classification.

PMCID: PMC1867460
PMID: 14736824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jan;89(1):303-9.

Height in pre- and postmenopausal women is influenced by estrogen receptor alpha 
gene polymorphisms.

Schuit SC(1), van Meurs JB, Bergink AP, van der Klift M, Fang Y, Leusink G,
Hofman A, van Leeuwen JP, Uitterlinden AG, Pols HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, 3000 DR Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

The estrogen receptor alpha gene (ESR1) is known to be involved in metabolic
pathways influencing growth. We have performed two population-based association
studies using three common polymorphisms within this candidate gene to determine 
whether these are associated with variation in adult stature. In 607 women, aged 
55-80 yr, from the Rotterdam Study, the ESR1 PvuII-XbaI haplotype 1 (px) and the 
L allele of the TA repeat polymorphism (<18 TA repeats) were significantly
associated with an allele dose-dependent decrease in height. The per allele copy 
of ESR1 PvuII-XbaI haplotype 1 height was 0.9 cm shorter (P trend = 0.02) and 1.0
cm/allele copy of the TA repeat L allele (P trend = 0.003). These results were
independent of age, age at menarche and menopause, and lumbar spine bone mineral 
density and remained significant after participants with vertebral fractures were
excluded. In 483 men from the Rotterdam Study we found no association with
height. In 1500 pre- and perimenopausal women from the Eindhoven Study a similar 
association was observed; women were 0.5 cm shorter per allele copy of the ESR1
haplotype 1 (P for trend = 0.03). In conclusion, we demonstrate a role for
genetic variations in the estrogen receptor alpha gene in determining adult
stature in women.

PMID: 14715865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Genet Epidemiol. 2004 Jan;26(1):22-30.

Power estimation of multiple SNP association test of case-control study and
application.

Hao K(1), Xu X, Laird N, Wang X, Xu X.

Author information: 
(1)Program for Population Genetics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

At the current stage, a large number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
have been deployed in searching for genes underlying complex diseases. A powerful
method is desirable for efficient analysis of SNP data. Recently, a novel method 
for multiple SNP association test using a combination of allelic association (AA)
and Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium (HWD) has been proposed. However, the power of 
this test has not been systematically examined. In this study, we conducted a
simulation study to further evaluate the statistical power of the new procedure, 
as well as of the influence of the HWD on its performance. The simulation
examined the scenarios of multiple disease SNPs among a candidate pool, assuming 
different parameters including allele frequencies and risk ratios, dominant,
additive, and recessive genetic models, and the existence of gene-gene
interactions and linkage disequilibrium (LD). We also evaluated the performance
of this test in capturing real disease associated SNPs, when a significant global
P value is detected. Our results suggest that this new procedure is more powerful
than conventional single-point analyses with correction of multiple testing.
However, inclusion of HWD reduces the power under most circumstances. We applied 
the novel association test procedure to a case-control study of preterm delivery 
(PTD), examining the effects of 96 candidate gene SNPs concurrently, and detected
a global P value of 0.0250 by using Cochran-Armitage chi(2)s as "starting"
statistics in the procedure. In the following single point analysis, SNPs on
IL1RN, IL1R2, ESR1, Factor 5, and OPRM1 genes were identified as possible risk
factors in PTD.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14691954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Hum Genet. 2003;48(12):654-8. Epub 2003 Nov 21.

Allele frequencies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 40 candidate
genes for gene-environment studies on cancer: data from population-based Japanese
random samples.

Yoshimura K(1), Hanaoka T, Ohnami S, Ohnami S, Kohno T, Liu Y, Yoshida T,
Sakamoto H, Tsugane S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Information and Epidemiology Division, National Cancer Center Research 
Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. kyoshimu@ncc.go.jp

Knowledge of genetic polymorphisms in gene-environment studies may contribute to 
more accurate identification of avoidable risks and to developing tailor-made
preventative measures. The aim of this study was to describe the allele
frequencies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of select genes, which may 
be included in future gene-environment studies on cancer in Japan. SNP typing was
performed on middle-aged Japanese men randomly selected from the general
population in five areas of Japan. We genotyped and calculated allele frequencies
of 153 SNPs located on 40 genes: CYP1A1, CYP1B1, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2E1,
CYP17A1, CYP19A1, AHR, ESR1, ESR2, ERRRG, PGR, EPHX1, EPHX2, HSD17B2, HSD17B3,
GSTM2, GSTM3, GSTT2, GSTP1, NAT1, NAT2, COMT, ADH1A, ADH1B, ADH1C, ALDH2, NOS2A, 
NOS3, IL1A, IL1B, OGG1, NUDT1 [MTH1], DRD2, DRD3, DRD4, SLC6A4, NR3C1 [GCCR],
MTHFR, and NQO1. In the present study, the Japanese allele frequencies were
verified by using nationwide population samples.

PMID: 14634838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Res. 2003 Nov 15;63(22):7641-5.

DNA methylation in serum of breast cancer patients: an independent prognostic
marker.

Müller HM(1), Widschwendter A, Fiegl H, Ivarsson L, Goebel G, Perkmann E, Marth
C, Widschwendter M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Innsbruck University Hospital,
University of Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

Changes in the status of DNA methylation are one of the most common molecular
alterations in human neoplasia. Because it is possible to detect these epigenetic
alterations in the bloodstream of patients, we investigated whether aberrant DNA 
methylation in patient pretherapeutic sera is of prognostic significance in
breast cancer. Using MethyLight, a high-throughput DNA methylation assay, we
analyzed 39 genes in a gene evaluation set, consisting of 10 sera from
metastasized patients, 26 patients with primary breast cancer, and 10 control
patients. To determine the prognostic value of genes identified within the gene
evaluation set, we finally analyzed pretreatment sera of 24 patients having had
no adjuvant treatment (training set) to determine their prognostic value. An
independent test set consisting of 62 patients was then used to test the validity
of genes and combinations of genes, which in the training set were found to be
good prognostic markers. In the gene evaluation set we identified five genes
(ESR1, APC, HSD17B4, HIC1, and RASSF1A). In the training set, patients with
methylated serum DNA for RASSF1A and/or APC had the worst prognosis (P < 0.001). 
This finding was confirmed by analyzing serum samples from the independent test
set (P = 0.007). When analyzing all 86 of the investigated patients, multivariate
analysis showed methylated RASSF1A and/or APC serum DNA to be independently
associated with poor outcome, with a relative risk for death of 5.7. DNA
methylation of particular genes in pretherapeutic sera of breast cancer patients,
especially of RASSF1A/APC, is more powerful than standard prognostic parameters.

PMID: 14633683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. JAMA. 2003 Nov 5;290(17):2263-70.

Association between estrogen receptor alpha gene variation and cardiovascular
disease.

Shearman AM(1), Cupples LA, Demissie S, Peter I, Schmid CH, Karas RH, Mendelsohn 
ME, Housman DE, Levy D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Mass 02139, USA. shearman@mit.edu

Erratum in
    JAMA. 2004 Jan 14;291(2):186.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2003 Nov 5;290(17):2317-9.

CONTEXT: Estrogen and related hormone therapies activate estrogen receptors,
which in turn regulate genes for several cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk
factors. Relatively little is known, however, about the impact of genetic
variation in estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) on CVD risk.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the ESR1 c.454-397T>C polymorphism is
associated with CVD risk.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Prospective study of 1739 unrelated men and
women from the population-based offspring cohort of the Framingham Heart Study,
who were followed up from 1971 to 1998.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Total atherosclerotic CVD events, defined as recognized or
unrecognized myocardial infarction (MI), angina pectoris, coronary insufficiency,
intermittent claudication, coronary heart disease death, or atherothrombotic
stroke (n = 178); major atherosclerotic CVD, defined as recognized acute MI,
coronary insufficiency, coronary heart disease death, or atherothrombotic stroke 
(n = 83); and recognized acute MI (n = 59).
RESULTS: Twenty percent of participants (n = 352) were homozygous for the ESR1
c.454-397C allele. After adjustment for covariates (age, sex, body mass index,
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol, and cigarette smoking), the CC genotype was significantly associated
with major atherosclerotic CVD, with an odds ratio of 2.0 (95% confidence
interval [CI], 1.3-3.2; P =.004) compared with individuals with the CT or TT
genotypes. Participants with the CC genotype had 3.0-fold greater odds of MI (95%
CI, 1.7-5.2; P<.001) compared with those with the CT or TT genotype. The results 
remained significant when analyses were restricted to men; too few women had
events to study them separately.
CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with the common ESR1 c.454-397CC genotype have a
substantial increase in risk of MI. Whether ESR1 c.454-397T>C is causally related
to MI risk or in linkage disequilibrium with 1 or more causal variants remains to
be determined. These findings support the importance of estrogen receptors in CVD
susceptibility, especially in men. Estrogen receptor variation also has potential
to explain recent conflicting data regarding the effects of hormone therapy on
CVD susceptibility in women.

PMID: 14600184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Pathol. 2003 Oct;163(4):1599-605.

The protective effect of 17beta-estradiol on experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis is mediated through estrogen receptor-alpha.

Polanczyk M(1), Zamora A, Subramanian S, Matejuk A, Hess DL, Blankenhorn EP,
Teuscher C, Vandenbark AA, Offner H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Oregon 97201, USA.

Low-dose estrogen (E2) treatment significantly inhibits the clinical signs and
histopathological lesions of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), and
is being used in clinical trials to treat multiple sclerosis. To assess the role 
of intracytoplasmic estrogen receptors in mediating suppression of EAE, we
studied mice with disrupted estrogen receptor-alpha (Esr1) and -beta (Esr2)
genes. We demonstrate that the protective effect of E2 is abrogated in
B6.129-Esr1(tm1Unc) mice (Esr1-/-) but not in B6.129-Esr2(tm1Unc) mice (Esr2-/-).
The loss of E2-mediated protection from EAE in Esr1-/- mice immunized with the
encephalitogenic MOG-35-55 peptide was manifested phenotypically by the
development of severe acute clinical signs and histopathological lesions even in 
the presence of moderately high serum E2 levels. This is in contrast to C57BL/6
wild-type (WT) mice and Esr2-/- mice in which E2 treatment resulted in comparable
serum levels and markedly suppressed clinical signs of EAE and abolished
inflammatory lesions in the CNS. This pattern showing a lack of E2-dependent
inhibition of EAE in Esr1-/- mice was mirrored by an enhanced rather than a
reduced secretion of TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma, and interleukin (IL)-6 in MOG-specific
splenocytes and a lack of inhibition of message for inflammatory cytokines,
chemokines and chemokine receptors in CNS tissue. These results indicate that the
immunomodulatory effects of E2 in EAE are dependent on Esr1 and not Esr2
signaling.

PMCID: PMC1868300
PMID: 14507666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2003 Sep;59(5-6):389-93. Epub 2003 Aug 16.

Six polymorphisms on estrogen receptor 1 gene in Japanese, American and German
populations.

Sasaki M(1), Tanaka Y, Sakuragi N, Dahiya R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Urology Research Center, University of California, San 
Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Estrogen receptor 1 ( ESR1) plays an important role in various
estrogen-related diseases, the incidences of which are significantly lower in the
Japanese population than in Western populations. We hypothesize that
polymorphisms in exon 1 of the ESR1 gene are associated with a lower incidence of
estrogen-related diseases in the Japanese population.
METHODS: The genetic distributions of six different ESR1 gene polymorphisms were 
investigated among 200 Japanese, 200 Americans and 112 Germans using a novel
sequence-specific polymerase chain reaction (SSP) technique and direct DNA
sequencing.
RESULTS: The frequencies of variant genotypes on codons 10 and 87 located on exon
1 were significantly lower in the Japanese population than other populations. The
polymorphism on codon 87 was not detected in the Japanese population, although
other populations showed the homozygous and heterozygous variant genotype on this
codon. Other loci, intron 1, and codons 243 and 594 were not different among
these populations.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report to demonstrate the polymorphisms at codons 
10 and 87 of ESR1 are significantly low for the Japanese population. Thus,
inherited alterations in ESR1 polymorphisms may be associated with changes of
estrogen effects and, thereby, may possibly explain inter-population differences 
in incidences of estrogen-mediated diseases.

PMID: 12923601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Ann Hum Genet. 2003 May;67(Pt 3):216-27.

Differentiation of Caucasians and Chinese at bone mass candidate genes:
implication for ethnic difference of bone mass.

Dvornyk V(1), Liu XH, Shen H, Lei SF, Zhao LJ, Huang QR, Qin YJ, Jiang DK, Long
JR, Zhang YY, Gong G, Recker RR, Deng HW.

Author information: 
(1)Osteoporosis Research Center and Department of Biomedical Sciences, Creighton 
University, 601 N. 30th St., Suite 6787, Omaha, NE 68131, USA.

Bone mineral density (BMD) is an important risk factor for osteoporosis and has
strong genetic determination. While average BMD differs among major ethnic
groups, several important candidate genes have been shown to underlie BMD
variation within populations of the same ethnicity. To investigate whether
important candidate genes may contribute to ethnic differences in BMD, we studied
the degree of genetic differentiation among several important candidate genes
between two major ethnic groups: Caucasians and Chinese. The genetic variability 
of these two populations (1131 randomly selected individuals) was studied at six 
restriction sites exhibiting polymorphisms of five important candidate genes for 
BMD: the BsaHI polymorphism of the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) gene, the SacI
polymorphism of the alpha2HS-glycoprotein (AHSG) gene, the PvuII and XbaI
polymorphisms of the estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) gene, the ApaI polymorphism
of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene, and the BstBI polymorphism of the
parathyroid hormone (PTH) gene. The two ethnic groups showed significant allelic 
and genotypic differentiation of all the polymorphisms studied. The mean FST was 
0.103, which significantly differed from zero (P < 0.01). The Chinese population 
had lower mean heterozygosity (0.331) than the Caucasian one (0.444); the
CASR-BsaHI and PTH-BstBI polymorphisms contributed most significantly to this
difference. Analysis of the intra- and inter-population variability suggests that
various types of natural selection may affect the observed patterns of variation 
at some loci. If some of the candidate genes we studied indeed underlie variation
in BMD, their population differentiation revealed here between ethnic groups may 
contribute to understanding ethnic difference in BMD.

PMID: 12914574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Jul 15;12(14):1745-54.

Association of 5' estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms with bone mineral
density, vertebral bone area and fracture risk.

van Meurs JB(1), Schuit SC, Weel AE, van der Klift M, Bergink AP, Arp PP, Colin
EM, Fang Y, Hofman A, van Duijn CM, van Leeuwen JP, Pols HA, Uitterlinden AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Centre, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. j.vanmeurs@erasmusmc.nl

This study investigates the influence of genetic variation of the estrogen
receptor alpha (ESR1) gene locus on several bone parameters in 2042 individuals
of The Rotterdam Study, a prospective population-based cohort study of elderly
subjects. We analysed three polymorphic sites in the 5' region of the ESR1 gene; 
a (TA)(n)-repeat in the promoter region, and molecular haplotypes of the PvuII
and XbaI RFLPs in intron 1, and inferred long-range haplotypes (LRH) thereof. We 
observed only three of the possible four PvuII-XbaI haplotypes in our population.
A comparison with other Caucasian populations showed similar haplotype
frequencies, while in Asian and African populations these were different. Linkage
disequilibrium (LD) analysis between the PvuII-XbaI haplotype and the (TA)(n)
repeat showed strong LD between the two sites. Reconstruction of long range
haplotypes over the entire 5' region, revealed six frequent LRH. In men, we did
not observe an association between the ESR1 polymorphisms studied and bone
parameters. In women, we demonstrated an allele dose effect of haplotype "px"
(P=0.003) and a low number of (TA)(n) repeats (P=0.008) with decreased lumbar
spine bone mineral density (BMD) (4.8% lower BMD in women homozygous for
haplotype "px", representing 28% of the population, compared with homozygous
non-carriers) and decreased vertebral bone area (2.3% difference between extreme 
genotypes; P=0.016). Most importantly, we found an increased vertebral fracture
risk with evidence for an allele dose effect with an odds ratio of 2.2 (95%CI
1.3-3.5) for haplotype "px", and 2.0 (1.5-3.2) for a low number of (TA)(n)
repeats. The ESR1 genotype dependent fracture risk is largely independent of BMD 
and bone area. Combination of risk alleles at both loci by long-range haplotyping
improved the associations slightly, but because of the strong LD between the two 
polymorphic sites, we were unable to determine if any particular polymorphic site
is driving the associations found. We conclude that ESR1 polymorphism in the 5'
(promoter) region is associated with vertebral fracture risk, lumbar spine BMD
and vertebral bone area in postmenopausal women, but not in men. The molecular
mechanism underlying this association needs further study.

PMID: 12837697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int J Cancer. 2003 Aug 10;106(1):52-9.

Distinct methylation profiles of glioma subtypes.

Uhlmann K(1), Rohde K, Zeller C, Szymas J, Vogel S, Marczinek K, Thiel G,
Nürnberg P, Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Universitätsklinikum Charité,
Humboldt-Universität, Berlin, Germany.

Gliomas are tumors of the central nervous system with a wide spectrum of
different tumor types. They range from pilocytic astrocytoma, with a generally
good prognosis, to the extremely aggressive malignant glioblastoma. In addition
to these 2 types of contrasting neoplasms, several other subtypes can be
distinguished, each characterized by specific phenotypic, as well as genotypic
features. Recently, the epigenotype, as evident from differentially methylated
DNA loci, has been proposed to be useful as a further criterion to distinguish
between tumor types. In our study, we screened 139 tissue samples, including 33
pilocytic astrocytomas, 46 astrocytomas of different grades, 7 oligoastrocytomas,
10 oligodendrogliomas, 10 glioblastoma multiforme samples and 33 control tissues,
for methylation at CpG islands of 15 different gene loci. We used the
semiquantitative high throughput method MethyLight to analyze a gene panel
comprising ARF, CDKN2B, RB1, APC, CDH1, ESR1, GSTP1, TGFBR2, THBS1, TIMP3, PTGS2,
CTNNB1, CALCA, MYOD1 and HIC1. Seven of these loci showed tumor specific
methylation changes. We found tissue as well as grade specific methylation
profiles. Interestingly, pilocytic astrocytomas showed no evidence of CpG island 
hypermethylation, but were significantly hypomethylated, relative to control
tissues, at MYOD1. Our results show that glioma subtypes have characteristic
methylation profiles and, with the exception of pilocytic astrocytomas, show both
locus specific hyper- as well as hypomethylation.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12794756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cancer. 2003 May 1;97(9):2160-70.

A multigene test for the risk of sporadic breast carcinoma.

Comings DE(1), Gade-Andavolu R, Cone LA, Muhleman D, MacMurray JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte,
California 91010, USA. dcomings@earthlink.net

BACKGROUND: Although the identification of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes have been of
great interest, these genes account for less than 5% of all breast carcinoma
cases. The remaining cases are sporadic. Reanalysis of a large twin study
suggested that genetic factors may play a significant role in sporadic breast and
other carcinomas. Sporadic breast carcinoma is polygenically inherited. Multiple 
genes are likely to have an additive effect, each gene accounting for a fraction 
of the variance. One factor that may have an impact on the development of
hormonally responsive breast tumors is the duration of exposure of the breast to 
estrogen. Therefore, one of the demographic risk factors for breast carcinoma is 
an early age of onset of menarche. The current study was based on the hypothesis 
that genes that play a role in demographic risk factors may be breast carcinoma
risk genes in their own right. The authors hypothesized that six genes relevant
to the timing of the onset of menarche and related risk factors might be
candidate genes for breast carcinoma. These were the leptin gene (LEP), the
leptin receptor gene (LEPR), the catechol-0-methyltransferase gene (COMT), the
dopamine D(2) receptor gene (DRD2), the estrogen 1 receptor gene (ESR1), and the 
androgen receptor gene (AR).
METHODS: The authors examined 67 women with postmenopausal sporadic breast
carcinoma and 145 gender and race-matched controls.
RESULTS: Five of these genes accounted for a significant percent of the variance 
(r(2)) of breast carcinoma. The following r(2) and P values were calculated: LEP:
0.073, P < or = 0.0001; LEPR: 0.064, P < or = 0.0002; COMT: 0.073, P < or =
0.0001; AR: 0.040, P < or = 0.0035; and DRD2: 0.018, P < or = 0.05. When
evaluated in a multivariate regression analysis, they accounted collectively for 
24% of the variance of breast carcinoma (P < or = 0.0001). These genes accounted 
for 40% of the variance (P < or = 0.00001) in a subset of age-matched cases.
Individual gene scores were added to form a breast carcinoma risk score (BCRS)
that ranged from 0 to 17. When the BCRS was evaluated in a receiver operator
characteristic plot, the area under the curve was 0.80 for the full set and 0.869
for the age-matched set. The relative breast carcinoma risk for the different
BCRS scores ranged from 0.10 to 11.9.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate a potentially powerful method of
evaluating the additive effect of multiple breast carcinoma risk genes to form a 
potentially clinically useful assessment of women's risk for sporadic breast
carcinoma.

Copyright 2003 American Cancer Society.DOI 10.1002/cncr.11340

PMID: 12712467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2003 Mar;41(3):392-3.

Detection of pvull polymorphism within intron 1 of ESR1 gene by real-time PCR.

González-Gómez F, Vergara F, Fernández A, Pedrosa C, Ramirez JP, Castilla JA,
Ruiz R, Galán JJ, Ruiz A, Real LM.

PMID: 12705350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Apr;14(3):118-23.

Prolactin regulation of estrogen receptor expression.

Frasor J(1), Gibori G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612,
USA.

The ability of the rat corpus luteum to respond to estrogen requires prolactin
(PRL), which can stimulate the expression of the estrogen receptor (ER). This
review will focus on the signaling mechanisms by which this occurs. Transcription
of the genes encoding both ERalpha (Esr1) and ERbeta (Esr2) is stimulated by PRL 
through the Jak2-Stat5 pathway and Stat5-response elements that are located in
each of the Esr promoters. A single nucleotide difference between these two
response elements is responsible for the observation that either Stat5a or Stat5b
can stimulate Esr1 transcription, whereas only Stat5b can activate transcription 
of Esr2. The tyrosine kinase Jak2 is required for PRL activation of Esr1 promoter
activity; however, additional pathways are involved in PRL-induced Stat5b
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation and DNA binding. In addition to the corpus
luteum, PRL-induced ER expression might provide a mechanism for fine-tuning the
responsiveness of other target tissues, such as the decidua and mammary gland, to
these two hormones.

PMID: 12670737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Plant Cell. 2003 Mar;15(3):694-705.

The DORNROSCHEN/ENHANCER OF SHOOT REGENERATION1 gene of Arabidopsis acts in the
control of meristem ccll fate and lateral organ development.

Kirch T(1), Simon R, Grünewald M, Werr W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Universität zu Köln, Gyrhofstrasse 17,
D-50923 Köln, Germany.

The two main tasks of a meristem, self-perpetuation and organ initiation, are
separated spatially. Slowly dividing cells in the meristem center act as
pluripotent stem cells, and only their derivatives in the meristem periphery
specify new organs. Meristem integrity and cellular proliferation are controlled 
in part by regulatory interactions between genes that are expressed in specific
subdomains of the meristem. Using transposon-mediated activation tagging, we have
identified Dornröschen (drn-D) mutants of Arabidopsis that prematurely arrest
shoot meristem activity with the formation of radialized lateral organs. The
mutated gene (DRN/ESR1), which encodes an AP2/ERF protein, is expressed in a
subdomain of meristem stem cells, in lateral organ anlagen, and transiently in
the distal domain of organ primordia. During the development of drn-D mutants,
expression of the homeobox gene SHOOTMERISTEMLESS is downregulated and later
reactivated in an altered domain. In addition, we found increased expression of
CLAVATA3 and WUSCHEL, two genes that antagonistically regulate stem cell fate in 
meristems. These findings suggest that the DRN/ESR1 gene product is involved in
the regulation of gene expression patterns in meristems. Furthermore, specific
misexpression of DRN in meristem stem cells affects organ polarity and outgrowth 
in the meristem periphery, indicating that DRN/ESR1 itself, or a process
regulated by DRN/ESR1, can act non-cell-autonomously. We elaborate on the role of
DRN/ESR1 in meristem and organ development and discuss its possible role in the
process of shoot regeneration.

PMCID: PMC150023
PMID: 12615942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Maturitas. 2003 Jan 30;44(1):29-38.

The effect of hormone replacement therapy on atherosclerotic severity in relation
to ESR1 genotype in postmenopausal women.

Koivu TA(1), Fan YM, Mattila KM, Dastidar P, Jokela H, Nikkari ST, Kunnas T,
Punnonen R, Lehtimäki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Atherosclerosis Genetics, Center for Laboratory Medicine,
University Hospital of Tampere, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: The atheroprotective action of estrogen is mediated by estrogen
receptors (ESR) 1 and 2, expressed in atherosclerotic lesions. The effects of
hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and ESR1 PvuII genotypes on atherosclerosis
have not previously been studied prospectively in postmenopausal women.
METHODS: We investigated the effect of HRT on the progression of atherosclerosis 
in a 5-year follow-up study of 88 postmenopausal women aged 45-71 years at
baseline allocated into three groups based on the use of HRT. The HRT-EVP group
(n=26) used sequential estradiol valerate (EV) plus progestin (P), the HRT-EV
group EV alone (n=32), and a control group (n=30) was without HRT. The
atherosclerosis severity score (AS) of the abdominal aorta and carotid arteries
were determined by sonography and the ESR1 PvuII genotypes (P/P, P/p and p/p) by 
PCR.
RESULTS: HRT, time and ESR1 PvuII genotype had a statistically significant or
borderline significant main effect on AS during 5-year follow-up (P=0.004,
P<0.001 and P=0.090, respectively), when analyzed by repeated measures analysis
of variance. There was a significant genotype-by-treatment (HRT-EVP and control
groups) interaction for AS (P=0.034). In response to HRT-EVP, subjects with P/P, 
compared with those with P/p and p/p genotypes, had a less increase in AS
(1.61+/-1.14 vs. 1.71+/-1.27 vs. 2.43+/-1.27). Baseline AS as covariate in
similar model does not change the significant interaction effect between HRT-EVP 
and control groups (P=0.036). But this effect was not found between HRT-EV and
control groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the effect of HRT-EVP in postmenopausal
women on progression of AS may be determined in part by the genotype of ESR1
PvuII.

PMID: 12568733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2002 Nov;139(1):1-8.

Allelic imbalance in selected chromosomal regions in ovarian cancer.

Hansen LL(1), Jensen LL, Dimitrakakis C, Michalas S, Gilbert F, Barber HR,
Overgaard J, Arzimanoglou II.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, The Bartholin Building, University of Aarhus,
DK-8000 C, Aarhus, Denmark. lotte@humgen.au.dk

Ovarian cancer (OC) is often asymptomatic at the initial stage. When diagnosed,
up to 75% of the patients present grade III or IV tumors with metastasis in
nearby organs of the abdomen. Genetic imbalance is abundant in OC, and allelic
loss (AL) of specific chromosomal regions is considered an early event. To
establish association between genetic markers for early diagnosis/prognosis of
OC, our target was to define narrow specific regions of AL. We analyzed 65
ovarian carcinomas by using 19 microsatellite markers located in three different 
chromosomes. First, a 7.6-Mb region containing the estrogen receptor (ESR1) and
the tumor suppressor gene LATS1 was analyzed. Several chromosomal breakpoints
flanking ESR1 affecting the region harboring LATS1 were found. Second, we found
chromosomal breakpoints on 13q13.1 approximately q13.3 that defined two narrow
regions flanking the BRCA2 locus. Third, our ovarian tumors exhibited a very high
frequency of AL on 16q and chromosomal breakpoints defining two narrow regions
within 16q22.2 approximately q24.3. In this article, we report three new
polymorphic microsatellite markers and strong evidence of AL of narrow
well-defined regions in hot spots on 6q, 13q, and 16q in ovarian tumors.

PMID: 12547149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Acta Neurol Scand. 2002 Sep;106(3):128-30.

Lack of association between an estrogen receptor 1 gene polymorphism and
Parkinson's disease with dementia.

Mattila KM(1), Rinne JO, Röyttä M, Laippala P, Lehtimäki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Centre for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere
University Hospital, Finland. kari.m.mattila@uta.fi

OBJECTIVE: To test for an association between an estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene 
polymorphism and Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD) in Finnish subjects.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Forty-one clinically demented and pathologically confirmed 
PDD patients and 59 cognitively intact aged individuals with normal
neuropathology were genotyped for the ESR1 PvuII polymorphism.
RESULTS: We found no significant differences in the genotype or allele
frequencies when the PDD patients were compared with the controls. Nor were there
any significant differences in these frequencies when the PDD patients with
coexisting Alzheimer's disease pathology were compared with the control group.
CONCLUSION: We failed to demonstrate an association between dementia-associated
PD and the ESR1 PvuII polymorphism in Finnish subjects.

PMID: 12174171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2002 Aug;41(8):930-6.

Neuroendocrine gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to juvenile idiopathic
arthritis.

Donn RP(1), Farhan A, Stevans A, Ramanan A, Ollier WE, Thomson W; British
Paediatric Rheumatology Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research Campaign Epidemiology Unit (ARC/EU), Stopford Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the involvement of neuroendocrine candidate genes in
the aetiopathogenesis of juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA).
METHODS: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms and intragenic microsatellite markers
within five neuroendocrine candidate genes (CRH, CBG, CYP19, ESR1, PRL) were
investigated in 463 clinically characterized UK Caucasian JIA patients and a
panel of 276 unrelated, healthy UK Caucasian controls.
RESULTS: None of the polymorphisms investigated showed any statistically
significant associations with JIA.
CONCLUSIONS: The lack of association with polymorphisms of these neuroendocrine
genes suggests that they are not involved in susceptibility to JIA.

PMID: 12154211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Neurosci Lett. 2002 Jul 19;327(2):115-8.

Lack of association between estrogen receptor 1 gene polymorphisms and multiple
sclerosis in southern Italy in humans.

Savettieri G(1), Cittadella R, Valentino P, Manna I, Andreoli V, La Russa A, La
Porta G, Ruscica F, Ragonese P, Pirritano D, Bonavita S, Tedeschi G, Quattrone A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Estrogen receptor 1 gene polymorphisms (ESR1) have been found to be associated
with multiple sclerosis (MS) in both Japanese and Finnish populations. We
investigated the association between ESR1 polymorphisms (PvuII and XbaI) and MS
in a study of 132 MS patients and 129 controls from the same geographic
background (southern Italy). Allelic and genotypic frequencies were not different
between MS patients and population controls for either the PvuII or XbaI
polymorphism. This result suggests that the association between a given disease
and a genomic characteristic must be confirmed by separate investigations in
different populations.

PMID: 12098649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Eur J Clin Invest. 2002 Jun;32(6):400-4.

Oestrogen receptor gene variation is a determinant of coronary reactivity in
healthy young men.

Lehtimäki T(1), Laaksonen R, Mattila KM, Janatuinen T, Vesalainen R, Nuutila P,
Laakso J, Jaakkola O, Koivula T, Knuuti J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical hemistry, Centre for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere
University Hospital and Tampere University Medical School, Tampere, Finland.
bltele@uta.fi

BACKGROUND: Oxidised low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL) is a determinant of
impaired coronary function and oestrogens inhibit its formation probably
throughout genetically-variable oestrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) in artery wall. We
hypothesized that the ESR1 polymorphism might influence coronary function and
reactivity as measured by positron emission tomography (PET), which allows the
detection of coronary dysfunction before appearance of angiographic lesions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty-one healthy young men (aged 35 +/- 4 years), with
normal or slightly-elevated serum cholesterol, underwent PET with intravenous
adenosine. ESR1 PvuII genotypes P/P, P/p, and p/p in addition to the plasma
autoantibody titre against ox-LDL, a marker of in vivo oxidation, were
determined.
RESULTS: The ESR1 genotype persisted as the only significant predictor of
adenosine stimulated coronary flow (P = 0.035) after adjustment for other
coronary risk factors. Subjects with P/P genotype had 33.4 and 41.8% lower
adenosine-stimulated flow values than subjects with P/p and p/p genotypes (P =
0.030). Furthermore, plasma levels of ox-LDL titre were on average 59 and 77%
higher in subjects with P/P genotype than in subjects with P/p or p/p genotypes
(P = 0.049).
CONCLUSIONS: These tentative findings from our pilot study provide evidence that 
genetic variation in ESR1 may modify coronary reactivity and LDL oxidation and
reflect differences in the early pathogenesis of coronary dysfunction in these
healthy young men.

PMID: 12059984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cancer Res. 2002 Jun 1;62(11):2993-8.

Microarray-based copy number and expression profiling in dedifferentiated and
pleomorphic liposarcoma.

Fritz B(1), Schubert F, Wrobel G, Schwaenen C, Wessendorf S, Nessling M, Korz C, 
Rieker RJ, Montgomery K, Kucherlapati R, Mechtersheimer G, Eils R, Joos S,
Lichter P.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Abteilung Molekulare Genetik (H0700), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Sixteen dedifferentiated and pleomorphic liposarcomas were analyzed by
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) to genomic microarrays (matrix-CGH),
cDNA-derived microarrays for expression profiling, and by quantitative PCR.
Matrix-CGH revealed copy number gains of numerous oncogenes, i.e., CCND1, MDM2,
GLI, CDK4, MYB, ESR1, and AIB1, several of which correlate with a high level of
transcripts from the respective gene. In addition, a number of genes were found
differentially expressed in dedifferentiated and pleomorphic liposarcomas.
Application of dedicated clustering algorithms revealed that both tumor subtypes 
are clearly separated by the genomic profiles but only with a lesser power by the
expression profiles. Using a support vector machine, a subset of five clones was 
identified as "class discriminators." Thus, for the distinction of these types of
liposarcomas, genomic profiling appears to be more advantageous than RNA
expression analysis.

PMID: 12036902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Am J Med Genet. 2002 May 8;114(4):426-8.

Estrogen receptor 1 gene (ESR1) variants in panic disorder.

Sand PG, Schlurmann K, Luckhaus C, Götz M, Stöber G, Lesch KP, Riederer P, Franke
P, Maier W, Nöthen MM, Propping P, Fritze J, Deckert J.

PMID: 11992565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Biol Psychiatry. 2002 Apr 15;51(8):677-82.

Estrogen receptor 1 polymorphisms and risk of cognitive impairment in older
women.

Yaffe K(1), Lui LY, Grady D, Stone K, Morin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California-San Francisco, Box 111G,
4150 Clement Street, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

BACKGROUND: Several genes associated with sporadic Alzheimer's disease have been 
identified; however, approximately 50% of genetic factors remain unidentified. We
investigated whether estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) polymorphisms are associated with
risk of developing cognitive impairment in older women.
METHODS: A total of 2625 women > or = 65 years of age completed a modified
Mini-Mental Status Exam (mMMSE) at baseline and at 6-8 years of follow-up. We
defined cognitive impairment as a mMMSE decline of > or = 3 points, follow-up
score < or = 20, or a history of physician-diagnosed dementia. The ESR1
polymorphisms, PvuII (P or p) and XbaI (X or x), were coded so that the capital
letter signifies the absence of the restriction site.
RESULTS: Women with a p allele had a greater age, education, and baseline-score
adjusted decline in mMMSE (for PP, Pp, and pp, respectively:.6 +/-.1,.8 +/-.1,
and.9 +/-.1 points, p for trend =.01); women with at least one x allele also had 
greater score decline (XX, Xx, and xx:.7 +/-.1,.7 +/-.1, and.9 +/-.1 points, p
for trend =.02). Six percent (n = 166) of the women developed cognitive
impairment. Compared to those who did not develop impairment, more women who
developed cognitive impairment had a p allele (62% vs. 56%, p =.03; adjusted odds
ration (OR) = 1.33; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.03-1.72) or an x allele (70% 
vs. 64%, p =.03; adjusted OR = 1.38; 95% CI, 1.06-1.81). There was no interaction
with current estrogen use, or with serum estradiol level and ESR1 polymorphisms
(p >.10).
CONCLUSIONS: Estrogen receptor 1 polymorphisms are associated with risk of
developing cognitive impairment. More research is needed to determine the
mechanism whereby ESR1 polymorphisms or linked genes influence cognitive function
in older women.

PMID: 11955468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2001 Nov;18(5):458-72.

Notch signaling can inhibit Xath5 function in the neural plate and developing
retina.

Schneider ML(1), Turner DL, Vetter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City
84132, USA.

Neuronal differentiation is regulated by both positive and negative regulatory
factors; however, precisely how these factors interact to regulate retinogenesis 
is still unclear. We have examined the ability of the Notch pathway to modulate
the function of the basic helix-loop-helix factor Xath5. Overexpression of Xath5 
by RNA injection into cleavage-stage blastomeres promotes ectopic neurogenesis at
neural plate stages and ganglion cell differentiation in the developing retina.
We found that these activities of Xath5 could be inhibited by coexpression of
activated Notch. Notch inhibition of Xath5 function was reversed by coexpression 
with the zinc finger protein X-MyT1. The Notch effector enhancer-of-split related
1 (ESR1) also blocked Xath5 activity but efficient inhibition by ESR1 required
the DNA binding basic domain and the conserved WRPW motif. In addition, ESR1
inhibited the ability of Xath5 to directly activate the expression of XBrn3d, a
transcription factor involved in retinal ganglion cell development. Xath5 could
upregulate expression of X-Delta-1, ESR1, and ESR3, suggesting that Xath5
participates in a regulatory loop with the Notch pathway.

PMID: 11922138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2002 Mar;11(3):291-7.

Hierarchical clustering of lung cancer cell lines using DNA methylation markers.

Virmani AK(1), Tsou JA, Siegmund KD, Shen LY, Long TI, Laird PW, Gazdar AF,
Laird-Offringa IA.

Author information: 
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research and Department of Pathology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9593, USA.

Recent analyses of global and gene-specific methylation patterns in cancer cells 
have suggested that cancers from different organs demonstrate distinct patterns
of CpG island hypermethylation. Although certain CpG islands are frequently
methylated in many different kinds of cancer, others are methylated only in
specific tumor types. Because distinct patterns of CpG island hypermethylation
can be seen in tumors from different organs, it seems likely that histological
subtypes of cancer within a given organ may exhibit distinct methylation patterns
as well. The goal of our study was to determine whether the patterns of CpG
island hypermethylation could be used to distinguish between different
histological subtypes of lung cancer. We analyzed the methylation status of 23
loci in 91 lung cancer cell lines using the quantitative real-time PCR method
MethyLight. Genes PTGS2 (COX2), CALCA, MTHFR, ESR1, MGMT, MYOD1, and APC showed
statistically significant differences in the level of CpG island methylation
between small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non-small cell lung cancer cell lines
(NSCLC). Hierarchical clustering using a panel consisting of these seven loci
yielded two major groups, one of which contained 78% of the SCLC lines. Within
this group, a large cluster consisted almost exclusively of SCLC cell lines. Our 
results show that DNA methylation patterns differ between NSCLC and SCLC cell
lines and suggest that these patterns could be developed into a powerful
molecular marker to achieve accurate diagnosis of lung cancer.

PMID: 11895880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Mol Med (Berl). 2002 Mar;80(3):176-80. Epub 2002 Jan 17.

Coronary artery wall atherosclerosis in relation to the estrogen receptor 1 gene 
polymorphism: an autopsy study.

Lehtimäki T(1), Kunnas TA, Mattila KM, Perola M, Penttilä A, Koivula T, Karhunen 
PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Atherosclerosis Genetics, Department of Clinical Chemistry,
Center for Laboratory Medicine and Medical School, Tampere University Hospital,
P.O. Box 2000, 33521 Tampere, Finland. bltele@uta.fi

Comment in
    J Mol Med (Berl). 2002 Mar;80(3):133-4.

Estrogen receptors (ESR) 1 and 2 are expressed in the normal and atherosclerotic 
arteries mediating the atheroprotective action of estrogen to artery wall cells. 
Whether variants of these receptor genes associate with autopsy-verified coronary
artery wall atherosclerosis is not known. This study investigated whether
variants of the ESR1 gene are associated with autopsy-verified coronary artery
wall atherosclerosis and thrombosis. Coronary arteries were taken from 300 white 
Finnish male autopsy cases aged 33-69 years included in the Helsinki Sudden Death
Study. Areas of coronary wall covered with fatty streaks, fibrotic, calcified,
and complicated lesions were measured using computer-assisted planimetry and
related to ESR1 PvuII genotypes (P/P, P/p, and p/p) determined by PCR. The mean
area of complicated lesions of three major coronaries and the presence of
coronary thrombosis were significantly associated with the ESR1 genotype in men
aged 53 years or older (median age as a cut off point). No such association was
found in men aged under 53 years. After adjusting for age and body mass index the
men aged 53 years or over with P/p and P/P genotype had areas of complicated
lesions on average two- and fivefold larger than subjects with the p/p genotype. 
The age and body mass index adjusted odds ratios for coronary thrombosis were 6.2
for P/p and 10.6 for P/P compared to men with the p/p genotype. After additional 
adjustment for diabetes and hypertension the ESR1 genotype persisted as an
independent predictor of complicated lesions ( P=0.007) and coronary thrombosis. 
In conclusion, the ESR1 gene is a potential candidate behind the pathogenesis of 
acute coronary events.

PMID: 11894143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Med Sci Monit. 2002 Mar;8(3):CR180-4.

Further studies of genetic susceptibility to Graves' disease in a Russian
population.

Chistiakov DA(1), Savost'anov KV, Turakulov RI, Petunina N, Balabolkin MI,
Nosikov VV.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U36, College de France, 121 rue Saint-Jacques, 75231 Paris Cedex 05,
France. dimitry.chistiakov@eudoramail.com

BACKGROUND: Graves' disease (GD) is a polygenic autoimmune thyroid syndrome. Some
of the genes implicated in its pathogenesis may encode thyroid-stimulating
hormone receptor (TSHR) and estrogen receptors 1 (ESR1) and 2 (ESR2). We examined
dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms in the ESR1 and ESR2 genes and D727E amino acid
substitution in the TSHR gene for possible association with GD in a Russian
population.
MATERIAL/METHODS: The polymorphic regions of the target genes were amplified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on the basis of genomic DNA isolated from blood
of 78 unrelated Russian patients with GD and 93 control subjects. To detect the
D727E TSHR polymorphism, the PCR product was additionally digested with Eco72I
restriction endonuclease. The genotype and allele frequencies in the groups
studied were compared by c2 test. The odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals
(CI) were calculated to assess the strength of the relationship between the
polymorphisms tested and GD.
RESULTS: For polymorphic dinucleotide microsatellites at ESR1 and ESR2, no
significant difference was observed in allele frequencies between affected and
nonaffected patients. For the D727E TSHR polymorphism, the E allele and the DE
genotype were significantly more frequent (p<0.0001) in patients with GD than in 
control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: The D727E variant of the TSHR gene is associated with Graves'
disease in a Russian population. The E727 allele and the heterozygous D727E
genotype are related to higher risk of the disease. No association with GD was
found for polymorphic microsatellites of the ESR1 and ESR2 gene.

PMID: 11887032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Psychiatry. 2002;7(1):86-9.

Variation in the ESR1 and ESR2 genes and genetic susceptibility to anorexia
nervosa.

Eastwood H(1), Brown KM, Markovic D, Pieri LF.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, University of Leeds, St James's University Hospital, 
Leeds LS9 7TF, UK. medhg@stjames.leeds.ac.uk

There is significant evidence for genetic factors in the susceptibility to
anorexia nervosa (AN). Previously genetic variation in the estrogen receptor 2
gene (ESR2) has been studied, however no strong evidence of association with AN
has been found. In the present study variation in the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) 
and ESR2 genes was examined. Estrogen receptors have been localised to areas of
the brain involved in behaviour and regulation of food intake. The anorexic
effects of estrogen are accentuated by stress and thus it is postulated that
variation in the estrogen receptors may contribute to the genetic susceptibility 
to AN in females. A cohort of 170 female, Caucasian AN sufferers and 152 female
controls were typed for dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms in both ESR1 and ESR2
and two further SNPs at each locus. Variation at ESR1 was not associated with AN.
However an association was found at the ESR2 locus with the heterozygous genotype
of the G1082A polymorphism and AN but not with any of the other ESR2
polymorphisms analysed. Analysis of haplotypes at ESR1 and ESR2 showed no
significant evidence of association with AN suggesting that the variability in
ESR2 alone may contribute to the genetic susceptibility to AN.

PMID: 11803451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Plant Cell. 2001 Dec;13(12):2609-18.

Overexpression of Arabidopsis ESR1 induces initiation of shoot regeneration.

Banno H(1), Ikeda Y, Niu QW, Chua NH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York 10021-6399, USA.

Functional screening of an Arabidopsis cDNA library enabled the identification of
a novel cDNA, ESR1 (for Enhancer of Shoot Regeneration), that can confer
cytokinin-independent shoot formation when overexpressed in Arabidopsis root
explants. Neither callus induction nor root formation was affected by ESR1
overexpression. ESR1 encodes a putative transcription factor with an AP2/EREBP
domain. Surprisingly, ESR1 overexpression also greatly increased the efficiency
of shoot regeneration from root explants in the presence of cytokinin, with a
shift in the optimal cytokinin concentration required for this process. The
effects of ESR1 overexpression on shoot regeneration are synergistic with those
of cytokinin. Overexpression of ESR1 cannot induce callus formation or root
formation, suggesting that its effects are specific to shoot formation. In
wild-type Arabidopsis plants, ESR1 expression was induced by cytokinin. ESR1
transcript levels also increased transiently during shoot regeneration from root 
explants, most probably in response to cytokinin in the shoot-inducing medium.
This transient increase occurred after the acquisition of competence for
regeneration and before shoot formation, which is consistent with the
physiological effects of ESR1 overexpression. Our results suggest that ESR1 may
regulate the induction of shoot regeneration after the acquisition of competence 
for organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC139476
PMID: 11752375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Oct;7(10):3092-6.

Allelic variants of aromatase and the androgen and estrogen receptors: toward a
multigenic model of prostate cancer risk.

Modugno F(1), Weissfeld JL, Trump DL, Zmuda JM, Shea P, Cauley JA, Ferrell RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. fm@cs.cmu.edu

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether polymorphisms in the 
CAG repeat in exon 1 of the androgen receptor (AR), two intronic restriction
sites in the estrogen receptor (ESR1 XbaI and ESR1 PvuII), and an Arg264Cy5
substitution in the aromatase gene (CYP19) contribute to prostate cancer risk.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A case-control study was performed with 88 Caucasian
prostate cancer patients and 241 Caucasian male controls. Logistic regression
models were used to assess individual and joint contributions of genotypes to
prostate cancer risk.
RESULTS: For single polymorphisms, only the AR repeat number was significantly
related to increased prostate cancer risk [age- and body mass index
(BMI)-adjusted odds ratio (OR), 1.14; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.04-1.25],
suggesting a 14% increase in risk for each missing CAG repeat. When subjects were
classified as either long (> or =23 AR CAG repeats) or short (<23 repeats)
carriers, a significant increase in risk was also observed (age- and BMI-adjusted
OR, 1.75; 95% CI, 1.05-2.95; P = 0.04). The aromatase C/T was associated with an 
increase in risk of borderline significance (age- and BMI-adjusted OR, 2.50; 95% 
CI, 0.99-6.28). When examining the effects of two polymorphisms on prostate
cancer risk, homozygosity for the ESR1 XbaI restriction site together with a
longer AR was more frequent among controls (32%) than cases (18%; age- and
BMI-adjusted OR, 0.39; 95% CI, 0.19-0.78). The aromatase C/C genotype together
with a longer AR was also more frequent among controls (55%) than cases (41%;
age- and BMI-adjusted OR, 0.51; 95% CI, 0.30-0.89).
CONCLUSIONS: Estrogen and aromatase may play a role in prostate cancer. A
multigenic model of prostate cancer susceptibility is also supported.

PMID: 11595700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2001 Jul;10(7):799-803.

Mismatch repair deficiency and CpG island hypermethylation in sporadic colon
adenocarcinomas.

Xiong Z(1), Wu AH, Bender CM, Tsao JL, Blake C, Shibata D, Jones PA, Yu MC, Ross 
RK, Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, University of Southern California, Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA.

Many studies have documented CpG island hypermethylation in human colon
adenocarcinomas. Several of these reports have additionally found such CpG island
hypermethylation to be more extensive in tumors with a mismatch-repair
deficiency, as revealed by microsatellite instability (MSI+). Because the source 
of samples used in these prior studies may not have been representative of the
general population, we have reinvestigated this issue using samples from a
population-based study. A total of 15 MSI+ tumors were identified, and they were 
compared with 47 MSI- tumors that were similar in distribution by age, sex, and
race. Microdissected tumor and normal adjacent mucosal DNA samples from each
patient were subjected to a quantitative DNA methylation analysis at 13 separate 
CpG dinucleotides located in five CpG islands in four different genes [APC, ESR1 
(ER), CDKN2A (p16; promoter and exon 2), and MLH1]. Four of five CpG islands
showed a statistically significantly increased level of methylation in tumor
tissue compared with adjacent normal mucosa. In contrast to previous studies, we 
did not find any statistically significant correlations between MSI status and
methylation levels of any of the CpG islands other than MLH1. Furthermore, we
observed a positive correlation between MLH1 methylation and CDKN2A methylation
(P = 0.03), whereas no association was noted between MSI positivity and CDKN2A
methylation (P = 0.95). The latter results suggest a possible defect in the
protection against CpG island hypermethylation shared between CDKN2A and MLH1 and
do not support the notion of a functional association between CDKN2A methylation 
and the phenotype of mismatch repair deficiency.

PMID: 11440966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Eur J Hum Genet. 2001 Jun;9(6):437-44.

Lack of replication of association findings in complex disease: an analysis of 15
polymorphisms in prior candidate genes for sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Prince JA(1), Feuk L, Sawyer SL, Gottfries J, Ricksten A, Nägga K, Bogdanovic N, 
Blennow K, Brookes AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics Research, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
Jonathan.Prince@cgr.ki.se

There is considerable enthusiasm for the prospect of using common polymorphisms
(primarily single nucleotide polymorphisms; SNPs) in candidate genes to unravel
the genetics of complex disease. This approach has generated a number of findings
of loci which are significantly associated with sporadic Alzheimer's disease
(AD). In the present study, a total of 15 genes of interest were chosen from
among the previously published reports of significant association in AD.
Genotyping was performed on polymorphisms within those genes (14 SNPs and one
deletion) using Dynamic Allele Specific Hybridization (DASH) in 204 Swedish
patients with sporadic late-onset AD and 186 Swedish control subjects. The genes 
chosen for analysis were; low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein
(LRP1), angiotensin converting enzyme (DCP1), alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2M),
bleomycin hydrolase (BLMH), dihydrolipoyl S-succinyltransferase (DLST), tumour
necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 6 (TNFRSF6), nitric oxide synthase
(NOS3), presenilin 1 (PSEN1), presenilin 2 (PSEN2), butyrylcholinesterase (BCHE),
Fe65 (APBB1), oestrogen receptor alpha (ESR1), cathepsin D (CTSD),
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), and interleukin 1A (IL1A). We found 
no strong evidence of association for any of these loci with AD in this
population. While the possibility exists that the genes analysed are involved in 
AD (ie they have weak effects and/or are population specific), results reinforce 
the need for extensive replication studies if we are to be successful in defining
true risk factors in complex diseases.

PMID: 11436125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Neurology. 2001 May 8;56(9):1246-7.

Interaction between ESR1 and HLA-DR2 may contribute to the development of MS in
women.

Mattila KM(1), Luomala M, Lehtimäki T, Laippala P, Koivula T, Elovaara I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Centre for Laboratory Medicine, University
of Tampere, Finland. kari.m.mattila@uta.fi

PMID: 11342704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cancer Res. 2001 Apr 15;61(8):3410-8.

Epigenetic patterns in the progression of esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Eads CA(1), Lord RV, Wickramasinghe K, Long TI, Kurumboor SK, Bernstein L, Peters
JH, DeMeester SR, DeMeester TR, Skinner KA, Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Southern California, Keck School of
Medicine, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA.

Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) arises after normal squamous mucosa undergoes
metaplasia to specialized columnar epithelium (intestinal metaplasia or Barrett's
esophagus), which can then ultimately progress to dysplasia and subsequent
malignancy. Epigenetic studies of this model have thus far been limited to the
DNA methylation analysis of a few genes. In this study, we analyzed a panel of 20
genes using a quantitative, high-throughput methylation assay, METHYLIGHT: We
used this broader approach to gain insight into concordant methylation behavior
between genes and to generate epigenomic fingerprints for the different
histological stages of EAC. Our study included a total of 104 tissue specimens
from 51 patients with different stages of Barrett's esophagus and/or associated
adenocarcinoma. We screened 84 of these samples with the full panel of 20 genes
and found distinct classes of methylation patterns in the different types of
tissue. The most informative genes were those with an intermediate frequency of
significant hypermethylation [ranging from 15% (CDKN2A) to 60% (MGMT) of the
samples]. This group could be further subdivided into three classes, according to
the absence (CDKN2A, ESR1, and MYOD1) or presence (CALCA, MGMT, and TIMP3) of
methylation in normal esophageal mucosa and stomach, or the infrequent
methylation of normal esophageal mucosa accompanied by methylation in all normal 
stomach samples (APC). The other genes were less informative, because the
frequency of hypermethylation was below 5% (ARF, CDH1, CDKN2B, GSTP1, MLH1,
PTGS2, and THBS1), completely absent (CTNNB1, RB1, TGFBR2, and TYMS1), or
ubiquitous (HIC1 and MTHFR), regardless of tissue type. Each class undergoes
unique epigenetic changes at different steps of disease progression of EAC,
suggesting a step-wise loss of multiple protective barriers against CpG island
hypermethylation. The aberrant hypermethylation occurs at many different loci in 
the same tissues, suggestive of an overall deregulation of methylation control in
EAC tumorigenesis. However, we did not find evidence for a distinct group of
tumors with a CpG island methylator phenotype. Finally, we found that normal and 
metaplastic tissues from patients with evidence of associated dysplasia or cancer
had a significantly higher incidence of hypermethylation than similar tissues
from patients with no further progression of their disease. The fact that the
samples from these two groups of patients were histologically indistinguishable, 
yet molecularly distinct, suggests that the occurrence of such hypermethylation
may provide a clinical tool to identify patients with premalignant Barrett's who 
are at risk for further progression.

PMID: 11309301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;21(3):755-64.

Pie1, a protein interacting with Mec1, controls cell growth and checkpoint
responses in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Wakayama T(1), Kondo T, Ando S, Matsumoto K, Sugimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-0814, Japan.

In eukaryotes, the ATM and ATR family proteins play a critical role in the DNA
damage and replication checkpoint controls. These proteins are characterized by a
kinase domain related to the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, but they have the
ability to phosphorylate proteins. In budding yeast, the ATR family protein
Mec1/Esr1 is essential for checkpoint responses and cell growth. We have isolated
the PIE1 gene in a two-hybrid screen for proteins that interact with Mec1, and we
show that Pie1 interacts physically with Mec1 in vivo. Like MEC1, PIE1 is
essential for cell growth, and deletion of the PIE1 gene causes defects in the
DNA damage and replication block checkpoints similar to those observed in
mec1Delta mutants. Rad53 hyperphosphorylation following DNA damage and
replication block is also decreased in pie1Delta cells, as in mec1Delta cells.
Pie1 has a limited homology to fission yeast Rad26, which forms a complex with
the ATR family protein Rad3. Mutation of the region in Pie1 homologous to Rad26
results in a phenotype similar to that of the pie1Delta mutation. Mec1 protein
kinase activity appears to be essential for checkpoint responses and cell growth.
However, Mec1 kinase activity is unaffected by the pie1Delta mutation, suggesting
that Pie1 regulates some essential function other than Mec1 kinase activity.
Thus, Pie1 is structurally and functionally related to Rad26 and interacts with
Mec1 to control checkpoints and cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC86667
PMID: 11154263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Gen Genet. 2000 Sep;264(1-2):119-26.

Characterization of Ce-atl-1, an ATM-like gene from Caenorhabditis elegans.

Aoki H(1), Sato S, Takanami T, Ishihara T, Katsura I, Takahashi H, Higashitani A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Ecology, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

An ATM-like gene was identified in the genome of Caenorhabditis elegans. The
putative product of the gene, termed Ce-atl-1 (C. elegans ATM-like 1) consists of
2514 amino acid residues. The C-terminal sequence, which contains a PI-3
kinase-like domain, showed good homology with the products of the gene MEC1/ESR1 
from budding yeast, the rad3+ gene of fission yeast and mammalian ATM
(ataxia-telangiectasia and rad3+ related) genes. The results of RNA-mediated
interference indicated that the major phenotype associated with repression of
Ce-atl-1 was lethality (approximately 50-80%) during early embryogenesis. Among
the surviving progeny, males (XO animals) arose at a high frequency (2-30%). In
addition, 5% of oocyte chromosomes demonstrated aneuploidy due to a defect in
pre-meiotic chromosomal segregation. Gene expression analyses indicated that
Ce-atl-1 mRNA was expressed in all larval stages and that its level increased
about fivefold in the adult stage. The adult expression level was decreased in
the glp-4 mutant, which is defective in germ line proliferation. Ce-atl-1 was
strongly expressed in both the mitotic and meiotic cells of adult gonads. In
summary, Ce-atl-1 appears to be important for early embryogenesis, and loss of
its function results in a defect in chromosome segregation, similar to what has
been observed for AT-related proteins.

PMID: 11016841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cancer Res. 2000 Sep 15;60(18):5021-6.

Fields of aberrant CpG island hypermethylation in Barrett's esophagus and
associated adenocarcinoma.

Eads CA(1), Lord RV, Kurumboor SK, Wickramasinghe K, Skinner ML, Long TI, Peters 
JH, DeMeester TR, Danenberg KD, Danenberg PV, Laird PW, Skinner KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Southern California, Keck School of
Medicine, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles 90089- 9176, USA.

Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is thought to develop through a multistage
process in which Barrett's metaplasia progresses through low- and high-grade
dysplasia to invasive cancer. Transcriptional silencing of tumor suppressor genes
by promoter CpG island hypermethylation has been observed in many types of human 
cancer. Analysis of CpG island hypermethylation in EAC has thus far been limited 
to the CDKN2A (p16) gene. In this study, we extend the methylation analysis of
EAC to include three other genes, APC, CDH1 (E-cadherin), and ESR1 (ER, estrogen 
receptor alpha), in addition to CDKN2A. Molecular analysis can provide insight
into the complex relationships between tissues with different histologies in
Barrett's esophagus and associated adenocarcinoma. Therefore, we have mapped the 
spatial distribution of methylation patterns in six esophagectomy cases in
detail. Hypermethylation of the four CpG islands was analyzed by the MethyLight
technique in 107 biopsies derived from these six patients for a total of 428
methylation analyses. Our results show that normal esophageal squamous epithelium
is unmethylated at all four CpG islands. CDH1 is unmethylated in most other
tissue types as well. Hypermethylation of ESR1 is seen at high frequency in
inflammatory reflux esophagitis and at all subsequent stages, whereas APC and
CDKN2A hypermethylation is found in Barrett's metaplasia, dysplasia, and EAC.
When it occurs, hypermethylation of APC, CDKN2A, and ESR1 is usually found in a
large contiguous field, suggesting either a concerted methylation change
associated with metaplasia or a clonal expansion of cells with abnormal
hypermethylation.

PMID: 11016622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Genet Metab. 2000 Sep-Oct;71(1-2):19-31.

Molecular heterosis: a review.

Comings DE(1), MacMurray JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte,
California 91010, USA.

Molecular heterosis occurs when subjects heterozygous for a specific genetic
polymorphism show a significantly greater effect (positive heterosis) or lesser
effect (negative heterosis) for a quantitative or dichotomous trait than subjects
homozygous for either allele. At a molecular level heterosis appears
counterintuitive to the expectation that if the 1 allele of a two-allele
polymorphism is associated with a decrease in gene expression, those carrying the
11 genotype should show the greatest effect, 12 heterozygotes should be
intermediate, and 22 homozygotes should show the least effect. We review the
accumulating evidence that molecular heterosis is common in humans and may occur 
in up to 50% of all gene associations. A number of examples are reviewed,
including those for the following genes: ADRA2C, C3 complement, DRD1, DRD2, DRD3,
DRD4, ESR1, HP, HBB, HLA-DR DQ, HTR2A, properdin B, SLC6A4, PNMT, and secretor.
Several examples are given in which the heterosis is gender-specific. Three
explanations for molecular heterosis are proposed. The first is based on an
inverted U-shaped response curve in which either to little or too much gene
expression is deleterious, with optimal gene expression occurring in 12
heterozygotes. The second proposes an independent third factor causing a hidden
stratification of the sample such that for in one set of subjects 11 homozygosity
is associated with the highest phenotype score, while in the other set, 22
homozygosity is associated with the highest phenotype score. The third
explanation suggests greater fitness in 12 heterozygotes because they show a
broader range of gene expression than 11 or 22 homozygotes. Allele-based linkage 
techniques usually miss heterotic associations. Because up to 50% of association 
studies show a heterosis effect, this can significantly diminish the power of
family-based linkage and association studies.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11001792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Clin Genet. 2000 Jul;58(1):31-40.

Multivariate analysis of associations of 42 genes in ADHD, ODD and conduct
disorder.

Comings DE(1), Gade-Andavolu R, Gonzalez N, Wu S, Muhleman D, Blake H, Chiu F,
Wang E, Farwell K, Darakjy S, Baker R, Dietz G, Saucier G, MacMurray JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010,
USA. dcomings@coh.org

In a previous study (Comings DE et al. Comparison of the role of dopamine,
serotonin, and noradrenergic genes in ADHD, ODD and conduct disorder.
Multivariate regression analysis of 20 genes. Clin Genet 2000: 57: 178-196) we
examined the role of 20 dopamine, serotonin and norepinephrine genes in attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), and
conduct disorder (CD), using a multivariate analysis of associations (MAA)
technique. We have now brought the total number of genes examined to 42 by adding
an additional 22 candidate genes. These results indicate that even with the
inclusion of these additional genes the noradrenergic genes still played a
greater role in ADHD than any other group. Six other neurotransmitter genes were 
included in the regression equation - cholinergic, nicotinic, alpha 4 receptor
(CHNRA4), adenosine A2A receptor (ADOA2A), nitric oxide synthase (NOS3), NMDAR1, 
GRIN2B, and GABRB3. In contrast to ADHD and ODD, CD preferentially utilized
hormone and neuropeptide genes These included CCK, CYP19 (aromatase cytochrome
P-450), ESR1, and INS (p = 0.005). This is consistent with our prior studies
indicating a role of the androgen receptor (AR) gene in a range of externalizing 
behavors. We propose that the MAA technique, by focusing on the additive effect
of multiple genes and on the cummulative effect of functionally related groups of
genes, provides a powerful approach to the dissection of the genetic basis of
polygenic disorders.

PMID: 10945659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Bone Miner Res. 2000 Jun;15(6):1076-84.

The association between heel ultrasound and hormone replacement therapy is
modulated by a two-locus vitamin D and estrogen receptor genotype.

Giguère Y(1), Dodin S, Blanchet C, Morgan K, Rousseau F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche de l'Hôpital Saint-François d'Assise du CHUQ, and
Département de Biologie Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval,
Québec,Qué Canada.

Evidence supports the role of estrogen deprivation in the process of bone
remodeling and increased risk of fracture in postmenopausal women but little is
known about the genetic basis of individual differences in response to therapy.
In a cross-sectional study, 425 ambulatory postmenopausal French-Canadian women
from Quebec (age range, 42-85 years old) were genotyped for a common Bsm I
polymorphism at the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene as well as a Pvu II
polymorphism in the estrogen receptor (ESR1) gene. Heel ultrasound was determined
by right calcaneal quantitative ultrasound (QUS) and results were expressed as an
age-and-weight-adjusted stiffness index (heel SI z score). Our aim was to
investigate the interaction between hormone-replacement therapy (HRT) and
receptor genotypes in an effect on heel SI. Notably, a two-locus genotype
(VDR-bb/ESR-PP) present in 9.5% of women was responsible for over 30% of the
total HRT-related heel SI difference in the whole sample. Women bearing this
combined VDR/ESR1 genotype who received HRT for more than 5 years had a 21% (1.25
SD) greater heel SI (p = 0.002) than those bearing the same genotype but who
received HRT for <5 years. This may translate into a 2- to 3-fold difference in
the risk of fracture. Although follow-up studies are needed, our findings suggest
that QUS of the heel in postmenopausal women taking HRT is affected by variation 
in VDR and ESR1 loci, jointly.

PMID: 10841176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Biofizika. 2000 Mar-Apr;45(2):360-1.

[Effect of inorganic phosphate on photosynthesis in bean leaves].

[Article in Russian]

Dovyd'kov SA, Baulin AM, Trubitsyn BV, Karavaev VA, Tikhonov AN.

It was shown that raising pod seedlings by the hydroponics method on KH2PO4
solutions at concentrations between 10(-7) and 10(-5) M leads to an increase in
the rate of oxygen release (delta O2/delta t), with the chlorophyll content in
leaves being unchanged. The values of the parameters FM/FT of slow fluorescence
induction and B/A of photoinduced changes in ESR1 signals from pod leaves
correlate with the delta O2/delta t value.

PMID: 10776552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Gene. 2000 Apr 4;246(1-2):219-27.

Esr genes show different levels of expression in the same region of maize
endosperm.

Bonello JF(1), Opsahl-Ferstad HG, Perez P, Dumas C, Rogowsky PM.

Author information: 
(1)RDP, UMR 5667 INRA-CNRS-ENSL-Lyon1, ENS-Lyon, 46 Allée d'Italie, F-69364,
Lyon, France.

Esr genes share high homology among each other, code for small hydrophilic
proteins, and are expressed in a restricted region of maize endosperm surrounding
the embryo. We show here that not only Esr2 but also Esr1 and Esr3 are expressed 
in maize, and that the relative contribution of Esr1, Esr2 and Esr3 to total Esr 
mRNA is 17%, 55% and 28%, respectively. DNA sequence analysis of putative
promoter fragments ranging from 0.53 kb to 3.54 kb revealed the presence of
retrotransposons related to the Zeon and Cinful families in the distal parts of
the promoters. The proximal parts show high homology that extended over 504bp
between Esr2 and Esr3, and 265bp between Esr1 and the other two genes. The most
conspicuous potential cis element is a fully conserved tandem repeat of the
sequence CTACACCA close to the respective open reading frames (ORFs). By the
analysis of transgenic maize plants carrying promoter-Gus fusions, it was shown
that all three cloned upstream fragments contain functional promoters, that the
spatial activity of all three Esr promoters is identical, and that the cis
element(s) responsible for the expression in the embryo surrounding region reside
in the 265 bp upstream of the respective ORFs.

PMID: 10767543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Neurosci Lett. 2000 Mar 17;282(1-2):45-8.

Interaction between estrogen receptor 1 and the epsilon4 allele of apolipoprotein
E increases the risk of familial Alzheimer's disease in women.

Mattila KM(1), Axelman K, Rinne JO, Blomberg M, Lehtimäki T, Laippala P, Röyttä
M, Viitanen M, Wahlund L, Winblad B, Lannfelt L.

Author information: 
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Centre, KFC, Novum, Karolinska Institutet,
S-14186, Huddinge, Sweden. klkama@uta.fi

Estrogens may be implicated in the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Most 
of their effects are mediated via receptors whose function and expression may be 
modified by DNA polymorphisms. Here the estrogen receptor 1 gene (ESR1)
polymorphisms XbaI and PvuII were analyzed in 214 AD patients and 290 controls.
In logistic regression analysis, a significantly increased risk of familial AD
due to interaction between the ESR1 xx genotype and the apolipoprotein E epsilon4
allele was observed in women in a Swedish clinic-based sample, taking subjects
who had neither the xx genotype nor epsilon4 as reference (OR 11.3, 95% CI
2.9-43.8). The risk of AD was more pronounced in early-onset (OR 22.0, 95% CI 3. 
7-132.7) than in late-onset (OR 6.0, 95% CI 1.2-29.7) female patients. For women 
carrying the pp genotype together with epsilon4 the risk of AD was similarly
elevated. Likewise in a Swedish community-based set of women, an increased risk
of familial AD was observed in subjects who had either the ESR1 xx or pp genotype
together with epsilon4. Furthermore, the Pp genotype frequency was found to be
significantly increased in Finnish women with sporadic AD. We, thus, conclude
that the ESR1 gene may have a role in the development of AD in females.

PMID: 10713392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Bone Miner Res. 1999 Dec;14(12):1993-9.

Suggestive linkage of the parathyroid receptor type 1 to osteoporosis.

Duncan EL(1), Brown MA, Sinsheimer J, Bell J, Carr AJ, Wordsworth BP, Wass JA.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Headington, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Bone Miner Res. 1999 Dec;14(12):2000-1.

We have investigated the role of 23 candidate genes in the control of bone
mineral density (BMD) by linkage studies in families of probands with
osteoporosis (lumbar spine [LS] or femoral neck [FN] BMD T score < -2.5) and low 
BMD relative to an age- and gender-matched cohort (Z score < -2.0). One hundred
and fifteen probands (35 male, 80 female) and 499 of their first- or
second-degree relatives (223 males and 276 females) were recruited for the study.
BMD was measured at the LS and FN using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry and
expressed as age- and gender-matched Z scores corrected for body mass index. The 
candidate genes studied were the androgen receptor, type I collagen A1 (COLIA1), 
COLIA2, COLIIA1, vitamin D receptor (VDR), colony-stimulating factor 1,
calcium-sensing receptor, epidermal growth factor (EGF), estrogen receptor 1
(ESR1), fibrillin type 1, insulin-like growth factor 1, interleukin-1 alpha
(IL-1alpha), interleukin-4 (IL-4), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-11 (IL-11), 
osteopontin, parathyroid hormone (PTH), PTH-related peptide, PTH receptor type 1 
(PTHR1), transforming growth factor-beta 1, and tumor necrosis factors alpha and 
beta. Sixty-four microsatellites lying close to or within these genes were
investigated for linkage with BMD. Using the program MapMaker/Sibs there was
suggestive evidence of linkage between BMD and PTHR1 (maximum LOD score obtained 
[MLS] 2.7-3.5). Moderate evidence of linkage was also observed with EGF (MLS
1.8), COLIA1 (MLS 1.7), COLIIA1/VDR (MLS 1.7), ESR1 (MLS 1.4), IL-1alpha (MLS
1.4), IL-4 (MLS 1.2), and IL-6 (MLS 1.2). Variance components analysis using the 
program ACT, correcting for proband-wise ascertainment, also showed evidence of
linkage (p </= 0.05) at markers close to or within the candidate genes IL-1alpha,
PTHR1, IL-6, and COLIIA1/VDR. Further studies will be required to confirm these
findings, to refine the location of gene responsible for the observed linkage,
and to screen the candidate genes targeted at these loci for mutations.

PMID: 10620056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1999 Nov;71(1-2):21-7.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the estrogen receptor gene and breast
cancer susceptibility.

Schubert EL(1), Lee MK, Newman B, King MC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics University of Washington, Seattle 98195-7720,
USA. schubert@u.washington.edu

In order to evaluate the role of inherited variation in the estrogen receptor
(ESR1) gene in human breast cancer, we determined intronic sequences flanking
each ESRI exon; identified multiple SNPs and length polymorphisms in the ESR1
coding sequence, splice junctions and regulatory regions; and genotyped families 
at high risk of breast cancer and population-based breast cancer patients and
controls. Of 10 polymorphic sites in ESR1, four are synonymous SNPs, two are
nonsynonymous SNPs and four are length polymorphisms; five are novel. No ESR1
polymorphisms were associated with breast cancer, either in the high-risk
families or the case-control study. We therefore conclude that inherited genetic 
variation is not a mechanism by which the estrogen receptor is commonly involved 
in breast cancer development.

PMID: 10619354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Psychiatry. 1999 Jul;4(4):374-7.

Potential role of the estrogen receptor gene (ESR1) in anxiety.

Comings DE(1), Muhleman D, Johnson P, MacMurray JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010,
USA.

In addition to neurotransmitters, hormones, acting through the blood stream, also
play a role in behavior. To test the potential contribution of genetic variations
in hormone receptors we have examined the association between the alleles of the 
dinucleotide repeat of the estrogen receptor 1 gene (ESR1) and the nine subscores
and total score of the SCL-90 in a group of 179 adult males treated for substance
abuse. Based on our prior hypothesis that the length of repeat polymorphisms may 
play a direct role in gene regulation, the alleles were divided into two groups, 
short (S) and long (L). ANOVA of the SS, LS, and LL genotypes showed a
significant association at alpha </=0.05 for three of the SCL-90 scores: anxiety,
phobic anxiety, and total symptoms. Of these the anxiety score remained
significant at a Bonferroni corrected alpha of </=0.005. By regression analysis, 
the ESR1 gene accounted for 7% of the variance of the anxiety score (P </=
0.0004). These results are consistent with a role of the ESR1gene in human
behavior. Since estrogen levels are much higher in women than men, this could
account for the increased frequency of anxiety in women.

PMID: 10483055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Cancer Res. 1999 May 15;59(10):2302-6.

CpG island hypermethylation in human colorectal tumors is not associated with DNA
methyltransferase overexpression.

Eads CA(1), Danenberg KD, Kawakami K, Saltz LB, Danenberg PV, Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Southern California, School of Medicine, 
Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles 90033, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res 1999 Nov 15;59(22):5860.

The molecular basis of aberrant hypermethylation of CpG islands observed in a
subset of human colorectal tumors is unknown. One potential mechanism is the
up-regulation of DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferases. Recently, two new mammalian
DNA methyltransferase genes have been identified, which are referred to as DNMT3A
and DNMT3B. The encoded proteins differ from the predominant mammalian DNA
methyltransferase DNMT1 in that they have a substantially higher ratio of de novo
to maintenance methyltransferase activity. We have used a highly quantitative 5' 
nuclease fluorogenic reverse transcription-PCR method (TaqMan) to analyze the
expression of all three DNA methyltransferase genes in 25 individual colorectal
adenocarcinoma specimens and matched normal mucosa samples. In addition, we
examined the methylation patterns of four CpG islands [APC, ESR1 (estrogen
receptor), CDKN2A (p16), and MLH1] to determine whether individual tumors show a 
positive correlation between the level of DNA methyltransferase expression and
the frequency of CpG island hypermethylation. All three methyltransferases appear
to be up-regulated in tumors when RNA levels are normalized using either ACTB
(beta-actin) or POLR2A (RNA pol II large subunit), but not when RNA levels are
normalized with proliferation-associated genes, such as H4F2 (histone H4) or
PCNA. The frequency or extent of CpG island hypermethylation in individual tumors
did not correlate with the expression of any of the three DNA methyltransferases.
Our results suggest that deregulation of DNA methyltransferase gene expression
does not play a role in establishing tumor-specific abnormal DNA methylation
patterns in human colorectal cancer.

PMID: 10344733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;82(1-2):110-1.

Assignment of the horse progesterone receptor (PGR) and estrogen receptor (ESR1) 
genes to horse chromosomes 7 and 31, respectively, by in situ hybridization.

Lear TL(1), Adams MH, Sullivan ND, McDowell KJ, Bailey E.

Author information: 
(1)M.H. Gluck Equine Research Center, Department of Veterinary Science,
University of Kentucky, Lexington KY, USA.

PMID: 9763674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. EMBO J. 1996 Dec 2;15(23):6641-51.

The Schizosaccharomyces pombe rad3 checkpoint gene.

Bentley NJ(1), Holtzman DA, Flaggs G, Keegan KS, DeMaggio A, Ford JC, Hoekstra M,
Carr AM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Cell Mutation Unit, Sussex University, Falmer, UK.

The rad3 gene of Schizosaccharomyces pombe is required for checkpoint pathways
that respond to DNA damage and replication blocks. We report the complete rad3
gene sequence and show that rad3 is the homologue of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
ESR1 (MEC1/SAD3) and Drosophila melanogaster mei-41 checkpoint genes. This
establishes Rad3/Mec1 as the only conserved protein which is required for all the
DNA structure checkpoints in both yeast model systems. Rad3 is an inessential
member of the 'lipid kinase' subclass of kinases which includes the ATM protein
defective in ataxia telangiectasia patients. Mutational analysis indicates that
the kinase domain is required for Rad3 function, and immunoprecipitation of
overexpressed Rad3 demonstrates an associated protein kinase activity. The
previous observation that rad3 mutations can be rescued by a truncated clone
lacking the kinase domain may be due to intragenic complementation. Consistent
with this, biochemical data suggest that Rad3 exists in a complex containing
multiple copies of Rad3. We have identified a novel human gene (ATR) whose
product is closely related to Rad3/Esr1p/Mei-41. ATR can functionally complement 
esr1-1 radiation sensitivity in S. cerevisiae. Together, the structural
conservation and functional complementation suggest strongly that the mechanisms 
underlying the DNA structure checkpoints are conserved throughout evolution.

PMCID: PMC452488
PMID: 8978690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Science. 1996 Jan 19;271(5247):357-60.

Regulation of RAD53 by the ATM-like kinases MEC1 and TEL1 in yeast cell cycle
checkpoint pathways.

Sanchez Y(1), Desany BA, Jones WJ, Liu Q, Wang B, Elledge SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Verna and Mars McLean Department of Biochemistry, Department of Molecular and 
Human Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 1996 Jan 19;271(5247):314-5.

Mutants of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)
homolog MEC1/SAD3/ESR1 were identified that could live only if the RAD53/SAD1
checkpoint kinase was overproduced. MEC1 and a structurally related gene, TEL1,
have overlapping functions in response to DNA damage and replication blocks that 
in mutants can be provided by overproduction of RAD53. Both MEC1 and TEL1 were
found to control phosphorylation of Rad53p in response to DNA damage. These
results indicate that RAD53 is a signal transducer in the DNA damage and
replication checkpoint pathways and functions downstream of two members of the
ATM lipid kinase family. Because several members of this pathway are conserved
among eukaryotes, it is likely that a RAD53-related kinase will function
downstream of the human ATM gene product and play an important role in the
mammalian response to DNA damage.

PMID: 8553072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Aug 11;22(15):3104-12.

An essential gene, ESR1, is required for mitotic cell growth, DNA repair and
meiotic recombination in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Kato R(1), Ogawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Osaka University, Japan.

A new mutant, which was sensitive to both methyl-methanesulfonate (MMS) and
ultra-violet light (UV) and defective in meiotic recombination, was isolated from
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The gene, ESR1, was cloned by complementation of the
MMS sensitivity of the mutant and found to be essential for cell growth, as the
deleted haploid strain was lethal. The ESR1 gene was adjacent to the CKS1 gene on
chromosome II and encoded a putative 2368-amino acid protein with a molecular
weight of 273 k. The ESR1 transcript was 8.0 kb long and was induced during
meiosis. The predicted Esr1 protein had a mosaic structure composed of homologous
regions and showed amino acid sequence similarities to Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
rad3+ protein, which monitors completion of DNA repair synthesis, and cut1+
protein, which is required for spindle pole body (SPB) duplication. The Esr1
protein was also similar to phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinases, including
Saccharomyces cerevisiae TOR2 (and DRR1), which are involved in G1 progression.
These results suggest that ESR1 is multi-functional throughout mitosis and
meiosis.

PMCID: PMC310282
PMID: 8065923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


